                                                                     8. AGNI  PURANA   
Preliminaries  
 
In the forest that is known as Naimisharanya, Shounaka and the other rishis (sages)  were 
performing  a yajna  (sacrifice)  dedicated  to the Lord  Vishnu.  Suta had also come  there,  on his 
way to a  pilgrimage.  
 
The sages  told Suta,  "We have  welcomed  you. Now  describe  to us that which  makes  men all- 
knowing. Describe to us that which is the most sacred in the whole  world".  
 
Suta replied,  "Vishnu  is the essence  of everything.  I went  to a hermitage  named  Badrika  with 
Shuka,  Paila  and other  sages  and met Vyadeva  there.  Vyasadeva  described  to me that which  he 
had learnt from the great sage Vashishtha, Vashishtha having learnt it from the  god  Agni 
himself.  The Agni  Purana is sacred  because  it tells us about  the essence  of the Brahman  (the 
divine essence). I learnt all this from Vyasadeva and I will now tell you all that I have  learnt."  

Avataras  
Do you know  what  an avatara  is? An avatara  is an incarnation  and means  that a god adopts  a 
human  form  to be born on earth.  Why  do gods  do this. The purpose  is to destroy  evil on earth 
and establish righteousness. Vishnu is regarded as the preserver of the universe and it is  therefore 
Vishnu's incarnations that one encounters m ost often. Vishnu has already had nine  such 
incarnations  and the tenth  and final incarnation  is due in the future.  These  ten incarnations  of 
Vishnu are as  follows.  
 
(1) Matsya  avatara - fish incarnation  (2) Kurma  avatara - turtle  incarnation  (3) Varaha  avata ra- 
boar incarnation  (4) Narasimha  avatara - half-man lion incarnation  (5) Vamana  avatara - dwarf 
incarnation (6) Parashurama (7) Rama (8) Krishna (9) Buddha (10) Kalki -this is the  incarnation 
that is yet to  come.  
 
The Agni Purana now describes these ten  incarnations.  
 
The Fish 
Agni told Vashishtha the story of the fish  incarnation.  
Many years ago, the whole world was destroyed. The destruction in fact extended to all the  three 
lokas  (worlds)  of bhuloka,  bhuvarloka  and svarloka.  Bhuloka  is the earth,  svarloka or svarga  is 
heaven and bhuvarloka is a region between the earth and heaven. All there worlds were  flooded 
with water.  
Vaivasvata  Manu  was the son of the sun-god. He had spent  ten thousand  years  in prayers  and 
tapasya  (meditation)  in the hermitage  Badrika.  This hermitage  was on the banks  of the river 
Kritamala.  
Once Manu came to the river to perform his ablutions. He immersed his hands in the water to  get 
some water for his ablutions. When he raised them, he found that there was a small  fish 
swimming  in the water in the cup of his  hands.  
Manu was about to throw the fish back into the water when the fish said, "Don't throw me back.I am scared of alligators and crocodiles and big fishes.Save me."  
 
Manu found an earthen pot in which he could keep the fish. But soon the fish became too big  for 
the pot and Manu had to find a larger vessel in which the fish might be kept. But the fish  became 
too big for this vessel  as well and Manu  had to transfer  the fish to a take.  But the fish grew  and 
grew and became too large for the lake. So Manu transferred the fish to the ocean. In the  ocean, 
the fish grew until it became  gigantic.  
By now, Manu's wonder knew no bounds. He said, "Who are you? You must be the  Lord 
Vishnu, I bow down before you. Tell me, why are you  tantalising me in the form of a fish?"  
The fish replied, "I have to punish the evil and protect the good. Seven days from now, the  ocean 
will flood  the entire  world  and all beings  will be destroyed.  But since  you have  saved  me, I will 
save you. When  the world  is flooded,  a boat will arrive  here.  Take  the saptarshis  (seven  sages)  
with that boat.  Don't  forget  to take the seeds  of foodgrains  with you. I will arrive  and you will 
then fasten the boat to my horn with a huge  snake."  
 
Saying this, the fish  disap peared.  
 
Everything  happened  as the fish had promised  it would.  The ocean  became  turbulent  and Manu 
climbed  into the boat.  He tied the boat to the huge  horn that the fish had. He prayed  to the fish 
and the fish related the Matsya Purana to him. Eventually,  when the water receded, the boat  was 
anchored to the topmost peak of the Himalayas. And living beings were created once  again.  
 
A danava (demon) named Hayagriva had stolen the sacred texts of the Vedas and the  knowledge 
of the brahman. In his form of a fi sh, Vishnu also killed Hayagriva and recovered the  Vedas.  
 
 
 The Turtle  
Many years ago there was a war between the devas (gods) and the daityas (demons) and the  gods 
lost this war. They prayed to Vishnu to rescue them from the oppression of the demons.  Vishn u 
told Brahma  and the other  gods  that they should  have  a temporary  truce  with the demons.  The 
two sides  should  get together  to churn  the ocean.  Vishnu  would  ensure  that the devas  benefited 
more from this churning of the ocean than the daityas  did. 
 
The tr uce was agreed upon and the two sides got ready to churn the ocean. The  mountain 
Mandara  was used as a churning  rod and great  sake Vasuki  as the rope for churning.  The devas 
grasped  Vasuki's  tail and the daityas  grasped  Vasuki's  head.  But as the churning  began,  the 
mountain Mandara which had no base, started to get immersed in the ocean. What was to  be 
done?  Lord  Vishnu  came  to the rescue.  He adopted  the form  of a turtle  and the peak  was 
balanced on the turtle's  back.  
 
As the churning continued, terrible po ison named kalkuta emerged from the depths of the  ocean 
and was swallowed  by Shiva.  Shiva's  throat  became  blue from  this poison  and he is therefore 
known as Nilakantha, blue of throat. The goddess Varunai, the goddess of wine (sura), came  out 
next.  The gods readily  accepted  her and thus they came  to be known  as suras.  But the demons 
rejected  Varunai  and were  therefore  known  as asuras.  She was followed  by the Parijata  tree, a 
beautiful tree that came to occupy the pride of place in Indra's garden. A jewel na med koustubha 
emerged and was accepted by Vishnu as his adornment. Three wonderful animals came out  next 
- the cow Kapila,  the horse  Ucchaishrava  and the elephant  Airavata.  They  were  followed  by the 
apsaras,  beautiful  women  who became  the dancers  of heave n. They  were  known  as apsaras 
because  they emerged  from  ap (water).  The goddess  Lakshmi  or Sri came  out next and was 
united with  Vishnu.  
 
Finally, Dhanvantari emerged with a pot of amrita (the life - giving drink) in his  hands. 
Dhanvantari was the originat or of medicine (ayurveda). The daityas led by Jambha gave half  of 
the amrita to the devas and departed with the remaining  half. 
 
But Vishnu quickly adopted the form of a beautiful woman. So beautiful was the woman that  the 
demons  were  charmed.  "Pretty  lady," they said. " Take  the amrita  and serve  it to us. Marry  us." 
Vishnu  accepted  the amrita,  but he had no intention  of giving  it to the demons.  He served  it to 
the gods instead. There was only one demon who was somewhat clever. His name was Rahu.  He 
adopte d the form of Chandra, the moon -god, and succeeded in drinking some of the amrita.  The 
sun-god and the moon -god noticed what was happening and reported it to Vishnu.  Vishnu 
thereupon cut off Rahu's head with a  sword.  
 
But Rahu  had drunk  the amrita,  so he could not die. He prayed  to Vishnu  and Vishnu  granted 
him a boon. The boon was that occasionally Rahu would be permitted to swallow up the sun and 
the complained  about  him. You can see this happening  at the time of the solar  and the lunar 
eclipses. People w ho give alms during such eclipses are  blessed.  
 
The gods obtained the amrita and the demons did not. Thus, the gods became more  powerful 
than the demons. They defeated the demons and regained  heaven.  
   
 
The Boar  
Vishnu's next incarnation was in the form of a boar.  
 
The sage Kashyapa  and his wife Diti had a son named  Hiranyaksha.  He became  the king of the 
asuras.  Hiranyaksha's  meditation  pleased  Brahma  and Brahma  granted  him the boon  that he 
would  be invincible  in battle.  Thus  armed.  Hiranyaksha  went  out to fight  with the devas.  He 
comprehensively defeated the gods and conquered heaven. He also defeated Varuna, the god  of 
the ocean. Thus, Hiranyaksha became the king of the heaven, the earth and the  underworld.  
 
But the asura  was not particularly  fond of the earth. He himself  had begun  to live in Varuna's 
palace under the ocean. So he hurled the earth into the depths of the  ocean.  
 
The gods went to Vishnu and prayed that something might be done about Hiranyaksha.  They 
wished  to be restored  to heaven  and they wished that the earth  might  be brought  back  from  the 
depths of the ocean. In response to these prayers, Vishnu adopted the form of a boar and  entered 
the ocean. Who should he meet there but Hiranyaksha  himself?  
 
Hiranyaksha of course did not know that this b oar was none other than Vishnu. He thought that  it 
was an ordinary  boar and attacked  it. The two fought  for many  years.  But finally,  Hiranyaksha 
was gored to death by the boar's tusks. The boar raised the earth up once again with its  tusks.  
 
Vishnu thus sa ved the gods and the principles of righteousness or  dharma.  
   
 
Man -Lion  
Hiranyaksha had a brother named Hiranyakashipu. Hiranyakashipu was furious to learn that  his 
brother  had been  killed  and the resolved  to kill Vishnu.  But this could  not be done  unless  h e 
himself  became  powerful  land invincible.  Hiranyakashipu,  therefore,  began  to pray to Brahma 
through difficult meditation. Brahma was pleased at these prayers and offered to grant a  boon.  
"I want  to be invincible,"  said Hiranyakashipu.  "Please  grant  me the boon  that I may not be 
killed  by night  or day; that I may not be killed  by man or beast;  and that I may not be killed  in 
the sky, the water or the  earth."  
 
Brahma granted the desired boon. And Hiranyakashipu was happy. He thought that he had  taken 
care of all possible  eventualities.  And since  he had become  so powerful,  he conquered  all the 
three worlds and kicked the gods out to  heaven.  
 
Hiranyakashipu  had a son named  Prahlada.  You no doubt  remember  that Hiranyakashipu  had 
resolved to kill Vishnu. But s trangely enough, Prahlada became devoted to  Vishnu. 
Hiranyakashipu tried to persuade his son. That did not work. He tried to kill his son. That too  did 
not work since each time, Vishnu intervened to save  Prahlada.  
 
Meanwhile,  the gods  had been  driven  off from heaven.  They  had also been  deprived  of their 
shares in yajanas by Hiranyakashipu. These shares now went only to the asura king.  In 
desperation,  they went  and prayed  to Vishnu  and Vishnu  promised  them  that he would  find a 
solution.  
 
One day, Hiranyakash ipu called Prahlada to him. "How is it that you escaped each time I tried  to 
kill you?" he  asked.  
 
"Because Vishnu saved me," replied Prahlada. "Vishnu is  everywhere."  
 
"What do you mean everywhere?" retorted Hiranyakashipu. He pointed to a crystal pillar  inside 
the palace and asked, "Is Vishnu inside this pillar as  well?"  
 
"Yes," replied  Prahlada.  
 
"Very well then. I am going to kick the pillar," said  Hiranyakashipu.  
 
When Hiranyakashipu kicked the pillar, it broke into two. And from inside the pillar,  Vishnu 
emerged in his form of half -man and half -lion. He caught hold of Hiranyakashipu and placed  the 
demon  across  his thighs.  And with his claws,  he tore apart  the demon's  chest  and so killed  him. 
Brahma's  boon  had been  that Hiranyakashipu  would  not be killed by man or beast.  But then 
narasimha was neither man nor beast it was half -man and half -beast. The boon had said that  the 
asura  would  not be killed  in the sky, the water  or the earth.  But Hiranyakashipu  was killed  on 
Vishnu's  thighs,  which  were  not the sky, the water  or the earth.  And finally,  the noon  had 
promised that Hiranyakashipu would not be killed by night or day. Since the incident took  place 
in the evening, it was not night or  day. 
 
After Hiranyakashipu died, the gods were restored to their right ful places. Vishnu's  made 
Prahlada the king of the  asuras.   
The Dwarf  
Prahlada's  grandson  was Bali and Bali became  very powerful.  When  he was the king of the 
asuras,  there  was a war between  the devas  and the asuras.  The gods  were  defeated  and were 
driven  off from  svarga.  As always,  the gods  fled to Vishnu  and began  to pray to him to save 
them. Vishnu assured the gods that he would do something about  Bali.  
 
Accordingly, Vishnu was born as the son of Aditi and Kashyapa. The son was a  dwarf.  
 
King  Bali had arranged  for a huge  sacrifice  and had announced  that, on the occasion  of the 
sacrifice,  he would  not refuse  anyone  a boon.  The dwarf  arrived  at this sacrifice  and began  to 
recite the Veda's. Bali was so pleased at this that he offered the dwarf a bon. Bali's  guru (teacher) 
was Shukracharya  and Shukracharya  thought  that there  was something  fishy  about  the way the 
dwarf had arrived. So he tried to restrain  Bali.  
 
"No," said Bali. "I have offered a boon and I shall stick to my word." What boon do you desire?  I 
will give whatever you  want."  
 
Before a boon was actually granted, a small rite had to be performed with holy  water. 
Shukracharya was still trying to do his best to prevent the boon from being given. So he  entered 
the vessel in which the holy water was kep t to seal the mouth of the vessel and prevent the  water 
from  being  taken  out. To get at the holy water,  the vessel  was pierced  with a straw.  This straw 
also pierced  one of Shukracharya's  eyes.  Ever  since  that day, the preceptor  of the demons  has 
been one  eyed. 
 
"Give me as much of land as may be covered in three of my steps," said the dwarf. "I need this  as 
Dakshaina (fee) for my guru."  
 
Bali agreed.  But the dwarf  adopted  a gigantic  form.  With  one step he covered  bhuloka.  With 
another step he covered bhuvar loka. And with the last step he covered svarloka. The three  worlds 
were  thus lost to Bali and Vishnu  returned  them  to Indra.  Bali had no option  but to go down  to 
the underworld (patala). But so pleased was Vishnu at Bali's generosity that he granted the  asura 
the boon that he would bear the title of Indra in the  future.  
   
 
Parashurama  
The kshatriyas  were  the second  of the four classes.  It was their job to wear  arms  and protect  the 
world. And rule. The brahmanas were the first of the four classes. It was their  job to pray,  study 
the sacred texts and perform religious rites. But the kshatriyas became very insolent and began  to 
oppress  the world  and the brahmanas.  Vishnu  was then born as the son of the sage Jamadagni 
and his wife Renuka.  Since  this was the line of the sage Bhrigu,  Parashurama  was also called 
Bhargava. Parashurama's mission was to protect the brahmanas and teach a lesson to  the 
kshatriyas.  
 
There was a king named Kartavirya who had received all sorts of boons from the  sage 
Dattatreya. Thanks to th ese boons, Kartavirya had a thousand arms and conquered and ruled  over 
the entire  world.  One day, Kartavirya  went  on a hunt to the forest.  He was very tired after the 
hunt and was invited  by the sage Jamadagni  had a Kamadhenu  cow.  This meant  that the cow 
produced whatever its owner desired. Jamadagni used the Kamadhenu to treat Kartavirya and all 
his soldiers to a sumptuous  feast.  
 
Kartavirya  was so enamoured  of the Kamadhenu  that he asked  the sage to give it to him. But 
Jamadagni refused. Kartavirya then abducted the cow by force and a war started  between 
Kartavirya  and Parashurama.  In this war, Parashurama  cut off Kartavirya's  head  with his axe 
(parashu) and brought the Kamadhenu back to the  hermitage.  
 
After  some  time,  Parashurama  was away  when  Kartaviry a's sons arrived  at the ashrama  and 
killed Jamadagni. On the death of his father, Parashurama's anger was aroused. He killed all  the 
kshatriyas in the world twenty -one times. On the plains of Kurukshetra, he built five wells  which 
were  filled  with the blood of kshatriyas.  Eventually,  Parashurama  handed  over the world  to 
Kashyapa and went and lived on Mount  Mahendra.  
   
 
Rama  
Brahma came out of Vishnu's navel. Brahma's son was Marichi's son Kashyapa, Kashyapa's  son 
Surya, Surya's son Vaivasvata Manu, Manu's so n Ikshvaku, Ikskhvakku's son  Kakutstha, 
Kakutstha's  son Raghu,  Raghu's  son Aja, Aja's  son Dasharatha,  Dasharatha's  sons were  Rama, 
Bharataa,  Lakshmana  and Shatrughna.  Since  Rama  was descended  from  Kakutstha  and Raghu, 
he was also called Kakutstha and Ragha va. Since his father's name was Dasharatha, he was  also 
called Dasharathi. Rama's story belongs to the solar line (surya vansha), since one of  his 
ancestors was  Surya.  
 
Vishnu himself wished to destroy Ravana and the other Rakshasas (demons). He  therefore 
divided  himself  into four parts  and was born as Ramas,  Bharataa,  Lakshmana  and Shatrughna. 
Rama  was Koushalya's  son, Bharataa  Kaikeyi's.  Lakshmana  and Shartrughna  were  the sons of 
Sumitra.  
 
The sage Vishvamitra came to Dasharatha and pleaded for Rama's hel p in defeating  the 
Rakshasas who were disturbing his yajanas. Rama killed these demons and Vishvamitra was  so 
pleased that he taught Rama the use of all divine weapons. Rama broke a bow of Shiva's that  had 
been  in the possession  of the king of Mithila,  Janaka. This was the task that had been  appointed 
for marrying  Sita, Janaka's  daughter.  Rama  married  Sita, Lakshmana  married  urmila,  Bharataa 
married Mandavi and Shatrughna married Shrutakirti. On the way back to Ayodhya, Rama  also 
beat Parashurama in a duel.  Dasharatha resolved that Rama should be made yuvaraja, that is,  the 
heir apparent to the  kingdom.  
 
But Kaikeyi  had a servant  named  Manthara  who plotted  otherwise.  When  he was young,  Rama 
had pulled  at Manthara's  feet and ever since  that day, Manthara  had not been  kindly  towards 
Rama. She reminded Kaikeyi of the two; boons that had been promised to her by  King 
Dasharatha.  Years  ago, the gods  had been  fighting  with the demon  Shambara  and had asked 
Dasharatha  for his help.  In fighting  with Shambara,  Dasharath a had been  injured.  He had been 
nursed  back  to health  by Kaikeyi.  Dasharatha  had promised  two boons  to Kaikeyi  as a reward 
and Manthara's  suggestion  was that Kaikeyi  should  now ask for these  two boons.  By the first 
boon Rama would be banished to the fores t for fourteen years and by the second boon  Bharataa 
would become  yuvaraja.  
 
Kaikeyi listened to Manthara. At Manthara's instance, she asked for these two boons.  Dasharatha 
was very angry,  but Rama  insisted  that he would  indeed  go to the forest  for fourtee n years. 
Rama, Lakshmana and Sita first went to the banks of the river Tamasa. From there they went  to 
the kingdom  of Guha,  the king of the hunters  (nishadas).  They  crossed  the river  Jahnavi  and 
arrived in Prayaga, where the sage Bharadvaja had his hermita ge. Their final destination was  the 
mountain range of Chitrakuta, on the banks of the river  Mandakini.  
 
Meanwhile,  back  home  in Ayodhaya,  King  Dasharatha  who could  not bear to be parted  from 
Rama, died. Bharataa and Shatrughna had gone on a visit to their uncle's house  and  were 
recalled. But Bharataa refused to be king. He went to the forest to try and persuade Rama  to 
return,  but Rama  insisted  that he would  not return  before  the fourteen  years  were  over.  So 
Bharataa brought back Rama's sandals. He placed these sandals on the throne as a token  of 
Rama's  kingship.  And he began  to rule the kingdom  in Rama's  name  from  Nandigram,  rather 
than from  Ayodhya.  Rama, Lakshmana and Sita then went to the forest that is known as the Dandaka  forest, 
Dandakaranya.  This forest  was on the banks  of the river  Godavari  and there  was a beautiful 
lgrove inside the forest known as Panchavati. They built a hut there and resolved to live  there.  
 
There  was a Rakshasa  woman  named  Shurpanakha.  She happened  to come  to the place  where 
Rama Lakshmana and Sita had built their hut. Shurpanakha liked Rama so much that she  wanted 
to marry Rama and eat up Lakshmana and Sita. But Lakshmana cut off Shurpanakha's nose  and 
ears with his  sword.  
 
Shurpanakha  fled to brother  Khara  and demanded  reven ge. Khara  and fourteen  thousand  other 
demons (Rakshasas) attacked Rama, but they were all killed by Rama. Shurpanakha then went  to 
her other brother Ravana, the king of  Lanka.  
 
Ravana asked the rakshasa Maricha to adopt the form of a golden deer and roam a round in  front 
of Rama's  hut. Sita was so charmed  by the deer that she asked  Rama  to capture  it for her. Rama 
was long in returning  and Lakshmana  went  to look for him. Taking  advantage  of Rama  and 
Lakshmana's  absence,  Ravana  kidnapped  Sita. Jatayu,  the king of the birds,  did try to stop 
Ravana, but he met his death at Ravana's  hands.  
 
Rama and Lakshmana were greatly distressed to find Sita missing and they looked for  her 
everywhere. Rama made friends with the monkey Sugriva. He killed Sugriva's brother Bali  and 
made  Sugriva  the king of monkeys.  The monkeys  were  sent off in all the four directions  to for 
Sita. 
 
The monkeys  who had gone  towards  the south  learnt  that Sita was in Lanka,  across  the ocean. 
One of these  monkeys  was Hanuman.  Hanuman  leapt  over the ocean and arrived  in Lanka.  He 
discovered  the lonesome  Sita in a grove  of ashoka  trees,  the ashokavana.  Hanuman  introduced 
himself and assured Sita that he would soon be back with Rama. Hanuman caused some   general  
havoc  in Lanka  and was captured  by Meghn ada or Indrajit,  Ravana's  son. Ravana  ordered  that 
Hanuman's  tail should  be set on fire. But Hanuman  used his burning  tail to set fire to all the 
houses of Lanka. He then returned to Rama with the news that Sita had been  found.  
 
Rama, Lakshmana and the arm y of monkeys arrived at the shores of the ocean. There they built  a 
bridge over the ocean so that they could cross over into Lanka. There was a terrible war in  which 
Rama  killed  the giant  Kumbhakarna,  Ravana's  brother.  Lakshmana  killed  Indrajit.  Rama  killed 
Ravana with a powerful divine weapon, the  Brahmastra.  
The fourteen  years  were  by now over and Rama,  Lakshmana  and Sita returned  to Ayodhya. 
There, Rama was crowned king and he treated his subjects as his own sons. He punished the 
wicked and followed the  path of dharma. During Rama's rule there was no shortage  of 
foodgrains anywhere and the people were righteous. No one died an untimely  death.  
On Rama's  instructions,  Shatrughna  killed  the asura  Lavana  and built the city of Mathura  in the 
place where Lav ana's kingdom had been. Bharataa was sent by Rama to kill a  wicked 
Gandharva, a singer of heaven named Shailusha, who lived on the banks of the river Indus  with 
his sons. Bharataa killed them and built two cities there, Takshashila and Pushkaravati.  In 
Takshashila  Bharataa  established  his son Ataksha  as king and in Pushkaravati  he made  his son 
pushkara  the king.  Rama  and Sita had two sons named  Kusha  and Lava.  Rama  ruled  for eleven 
thousand years before he  died.  
This is the story  of the Ramayana  as recoun ted in the Agni  Purana.  It was written  by the sage 
Valmiki after he had heard the story from the sage  Narada.  
 
Rama was the seventh avatara of Vishnu, Krishna was the  eighth.   
The Harivamsha  
As you have  already  been  told, Brahma  emerged  from  Vishnu's  navel . Brahma's  son was Atri, 
Atri's  son Soma,  Soma's  son Pururava,  Pururava's  son Ayu,  Ayu's  son Nahusha  and Nahushja's 
son Yayati. Yayati had two wives, Devayani and Sharmishtha. Devayani had two sons, Yadu  and 
Turvusu. And Sharmishtha had three sons, Druhya,  Anu and Puru. The descendants  of  Yadu 
were known as the  Yadavas.  
 
Vasudeva  was a Yadava.  His wife was Devaki.  Vishnu  was born as sthe son of Vasudeva  and 
Devaki in order to remove the wicked from the world. The seventh son of Vasudeva and  Devaki 
was Bala deva. And the eight son was Krishna himself. Krishna was born in the month of  Bhadra 
in the thick  of the night.  Scared  that the wicked  Kakmsa  might  kill the newly  born child, 
Vasudeva left him with Yashoda, the wife of  Nanda.  
 
Nanda  was the king of the cowherds  and he brought  up Baladeva  and Krishna.  Kamsa  sent a 
Rakshasa  woman  named  Putana  to kill Krishna  but Krishna  killed  her instead.  In Vrindavana, 
Krishna  subdued  the terrible  snake  known  as Kaliya.  He killed  several  other  rakshasas  named 
Arishta, Vrish abha, Keshi, Dhenuka and Gardhabha and made the country safe from  the 
attacksof  these  demons.  He also stopped  the worship  of Indra.  This led to a fight  between  Indra  
and Krishna,  Indra  tried to destroy  the inhabitants  of Gokula  by sending  down  torrents  of rain. 
But Krishna held aloft the mountain Govardhana and saved the inhabitants of  Gokula.  
 
Kamsa's  capital  was in Mathura,  Baladeva  and Krishna  went  there.  Kamsa  let loose  a mad 
elephant named Kuvalayapida on Krishna. But Krishna killed Kuvalayapida. Bala deva  and 
Krishna also killed two strong wrestlers, Chanura and Mushtika, whom Kamsa had instructed  to 
kill Baladeva  and Krishna.  Finally,  Krishna  killed  Kamsa  and made  Ugrasena  the king.  Kamsa 
was Jarasandha's son -in-law and Jarasandha became furious when he learnt of Kamsa's death.  He 
attacked the Yadavas and laid siege to the city of Mathura. After a prolonged war,  Krishna 
managed  to defeat  Jarasandha.  Krishna  also defeated  another  evil king named  Poundraka.  On 
Krishna's instructions, the Yadavas built th e beautiful city of Dvaraka or Dvaravati. The  Yadavas 
began to live in  Dvaraka.  
 
There  was an asura  named  Naraka  who was killed  by Krishna.  Naraka  had imprisoned  sixteen 
thousand daughters of the devas, Gandharvas and Yakshas (guards of Heaven's treasury).  These 
women were freed by Krishna and Krishna married all of them. Amongst Krishna's  other 
exploits  were  defeating  the daitya  Panchajana,  killing  Kalayavna,  seizing  the parijata  tree from 
Indra and bringing back to life the sage Sandipani's dead  son. 
 
Krishna  had several  sons.  Shamba  was born of Krishna's  wife Jambavati  and Pradyumna  was 
born of Krishna's wife Rukmini. As soon as Pradyumna was born, he was abducted by the  asura 
Shambara.  Shambara  threw  the baby  into the sea, but a fish swallowed  the baby . A fisherman 
caught  the fish and brought  it to Shambara's  house.  When  the fish's  stomach  was cut open,  the 
baby came out. There was a woman named Mayavati who lived in Shambara's house  and 
Shambara handed over baby Pradyumna to Mayavati so that he might b e brought up well.  When 
he grew  up, Pradyumna  killed  Shambara  and married  Mayavati.  They  returned  to Dvaraka  and 
Krishna was very happy to see his lost  son. 
 
 
 Pradyumma  and Mayavati  had a son named  Aniruddha.  Aniruddha  secretly  married  Usha,  the 
daughter  of King  Vana,  Vana  himself  being  the son of Bali.  Vana's  capital  was in a city named 
Shonitapura.  Vana  had pleased  Shiva  through  hard and difficult  tapasya,  so that sometimes  he 
was called  the son of Shiva.  Vana  loved  to fight  and he had wanted  a boon  from  Shiva that he 
might get the chance to fight with someone who was his equal in battle. A flag with a peacock  on 
it used to fly from  the ramparts  of Vana's  palace.  Shiva  told him the day this flag fell down. 
Vana's desire for with an equal would be  satisfied.  
 
With the help of a friend of Usha's, Anuruddha and Usha used to meet secretly in Vana's  palace. 
Vana's guards informed him about this and there was a fierce battle between Vana  and 
Aniruddha At the same time, the flag with the peacock on it fell down. K rishna got to know  from 
Narada about the fight between Vana and Aniruddha and he, Baladeva and Pradyumna arrived  in 
Vana's capital. Shiva came to fight on Vana's side, accompanied by Nandi and Skanda  or 
Kartikeya.  But after a duel that lasted  for a long time, Krishna  triumphed  over these  enemies. 
Krishna's  arrows  also cut off the thousand  arms  that Vana  had. But at Shiva's  request,  Krishna 
spared Vana's life and gave two arms with which to make  do. 
All of these  stories  about  Krishna  are related  in detail  in the Harivamsha.  The Agni  Purana 
merely gives a brief summary of the Harivamsha. But stories about Krishna, the eight avatara  of 
Vishnu,  also crop up in the Mahabharataa.  The Agni  Purana,  therefore,  next summarises  the 
Mahabharataa.  
   
 
The Mahabharataa  
The Pandavas  were  merely  a pretext.  Krishna  used the Pandavas  to rid the world  of evil men. 
You have  already  learnt  that one of Yayati's  sons was Puru.  In Puru's  line were  born Bharataa 
and Kuru.  One of Kuru's  descendants  was the king Shantanu.Shantanu married Ganga and Bhishma was born from this marriage.  
But Shantanu  also married  Satyavati  and had two more  sons,  Chitrangada  and Vichitravirya. 
Bhishma never married. Chitrangada died young. When Vichitravirya grew up,  Bhishma 
defeated  the king of Kashi  and brought  two of the king's  daughters,  Ambika  and Ambalika,  as 
brides for Vichitravirya. Vichitravirya as also quite young when he died of tuberculosis.  
 
Since Vichitravirya had left no children, Vyasadeva was brought to Hastinapura. Vyasadeva  and 
Ambalika had a son named Dhritarashtra and Vyasadeva and Ambalika had a son named  Pandu. 
Dhritarashtra  married  Gandhari  and they had a hundred  sons,  of whom  the most  important  was 
Duryodhana. Pandu had two wives, Kunti and Madri. Kunti's sons were Yudhisthira, Bhima  and 
Arjuna  and Madri's  sons were  Nakula  and Sahadeva.  But Yudhisthira  was really  the son of the 
god Dharma  and not Pandu's  son. Similarly,  Bhima  was the son of the god Pavana,  Arjuna  the 
son of Indra  and Nakula  and Sahadeva  the sons of the two Ashvinis.  Earlier,  Kunti  had a son 
named Karna from the  sun-god. 
 
This was before she had god married to Pandu. Karna became a friend of Duryodhana's.  Because 
of a curse imposed on him by a sage, Pandu died in the  forest.  
 
Duryodhana  tried his best to kill the Pandava s. He set fire to a house  of lac (jatugriha)  in which 
Kunti and the five Pandavas were staying. But the Pandavas were saved and fled to a city  named 
Ekachakra.  There  they lived,  disguised  as brahmanas.  In Ekachakra,  they destroyed  a rakshasa 
named  Vaka.  They then won the hand  of the daughter  of the king of Panchala.  Her name  was 
Droupadi and all five Pandava brothers married her. When Duryodhana learnt that the  Pandavas 
were alive, he handed over half the kingdom to  them.  
 
Meanwhile,  the forest  Khandava  had to be burnt  and Krishna  and Arjuna  did this together. 
Krishna had befriended Arjuna. When Arjuna successfully defeated the god Agni at the  burning 
of the Khandava forest, Agni gave him several divine weapons. Arjuna had also obtained  divine 
weapons from h is guru  Dronacharya.  
 
On the Pandava  side, Yudhisthira  had become  king.  The Pandavas  organised  a rajasuya  yajna 
(royal sacrifice) in which they conquered several kingdoms and accumulated lot of wealth.  This 
made Duryodhana  envious.  He arranged  a game  of dice (aksha)  between  Yudhisthira  and Duryodhana's  uncle  Shakuni. 
Shakuni did not play fairly and Yudhisthira lost the game. As penalty for the loss, the  Pandavas 
were to spend twelve years in the forest and one additional year without being  detected. 
Droup adi went with them to the forest, as did the Pandava's priest,  Dhoumya.  
 
After  the twelve  years  were  over,  the Pandavas  came  to the kingdom  of King  Virata  where  they 
proposed to spend the additional year that had to be spent in disguises. Yudhisthira prete nded  to 
be a brahmana,  Bhima  a cook,  Arjuna  a dancer,  Nakula  and Sahadeva  stable -hands.  Droupadi 
became  the queen's  maid.  The queen's  brother  Kichaka  tried to molest  Droupadi,  but was killed 
by Bhima.  When  the year was over,  the Kauravas  attacked  King  Virata to rob him of his cattle. 
But Arjuna defeated all the Kauravas and saved Virata's cattle. After this success, the identity  of 
the Pandavas could no longer be kept a secret. But thankfully, the one year during  which 
identities had to be kept a secret, wa s over.  
 
King  Virata's  daughter  Uttara  was married  to Abhimanyu,  Arjuna's  son. Abhimanyu's  mother 
was Subhadra, whom Arjuna had married. Subhadra also happened to be Krishna's  sister.  
 
The Pandavas  now demanded  their rightful  share  of the kingdom,  but Duryodhana  refused.  A 
war was imminent.  A huge  battalion  of soldiers  was known  as an akshouhini.  Duryodhana 
collected eleven akshouhinis for the war and Yudhisthira collected seven. Krishna was sent as  a 
messenger  to Duryodhana  to try and preserve  the peace.  Krishna  told Duryodhana  that the 
Pandavas  would  be satisfied  with a mere  five villages.  Duryodhana  refused  to give them  even 
this without a  fight.  
 
So the armies gathered for a war on the plains of Kurukshetra. Noticing that elders and  relatives 
like Bhish ma and Dronacharya were fighting on the side of the Kaurvas, Arjuna was reluctant  to 
fight. But Krishna gave Arjuna lessons which have come down to us as the Gita. He taught  there 
was no reason for sorrow if Bhishma or Dronacharya died, that was only a dea th of their  physical 
bodies. The true identity of a person was his atman (soul) which never died, but passed from  one 
body  to another.  True  bliss was obtained  when  the atman  united  with the Brahman  (divine 
essence)  or Paramatman  (supreme  soul).  This was always  the goal of a yogi,  that is, a person 
who sought union with  God.  
 
Thus  instructed  by Krishna,  Arjuna  started  to fight.  With  the help of Shikhandi,  he defeated 
Bhishma. This happened on the tenth day of the fighting. Bhishma did not however die. He  had 
earlier  received  the boon  that he would  only die when  he actually  wished  to do so. For many 
days,  he lay there  in the battlefield  on a bed of arrows.  After  Bhishma's  defeat,  Dronacharya 
became  the general  on the Pandava  side. Dronaharya  killed  Virata,  Drupada  and several  other 
kings and soldiers on the Pandava side. Dhrishtadyumna also killed many Kaurava soldiers.  On 
the fifteenth day of the fighting, a rumour gained currency that Ashvatthama, Dronacharya's  son, 
had been killed. Dronacharya abandoned his weapons on hearing this bad news  and 
Dhrishtadyumna faced no problems in killing him. Karna now became the Kaurava general  and 
lasted  for two and a half days before  he was killed  by Arjuna.  Shalya  was the last Kaurava 
general. He fought for only half a day  and was killed by  Yudhisthira.  Bhima  and Duryodhana  fought  the last duel of the war with maces.  Bhima  broke  Duryodhana's 
thighs and killed him. Ashvatthama had been fuming ever since his father Dronacharya had  been 
killed  by unfair  means.  In the dead  of the night,  he entered  the Pandava  camp  where  he killed 
Dhrishtadyumna and the five sons of Droupadi. Droupadi was disconsolate and  demanded 
revenge.  Arjuna  and Ashvatthama  let loose  divine  weapons  at each other.  Since  this might 
destroy the world, they wer e asked to withdraw these weapons. Arjuna could withdraw  his 
weapon, but Ashvatthama could not. Ashvatthama's weapon killed the baby that was in  Uttara's 
womb, but when the dead baby was born, Krishna brought it back to life. This baby  was 
Parikshita.  
 
Many kings and soldiers died in the course of the Kurukshetra war. The only ones left alive  were 
Kritvarma,  Kripacharya  and Ashvatthama  on the Kaurava  side and Pandava  side. After  the war 
was over, Bhishma taught Yudhisthira the duties of king. It was only af ter this that he  died.  
 
As a king, Yudhisthira performed many yajnas and gave a lot of to brahmanas.  When 
Yudhisthira  learnt  that the Yadvas  had been  destroyed,  he no longer  wished  to rule. He handed 
over the kingdom to Parikshita and the Pandavas left on  a pilgrimage, in the course of which  they 
died.  
 
It was Krishna  who had used the Pandavas  as a tool to rid the world  of evil kings  and establish 
the good ones. Realising that the Yadavas were also evil, Krishna also ensured that the  Yadavas 
would  be destroyed.  He then gave  up his life at the place  of pilgrimage  that is known  as 
Prabhasa. After Krishna died, the city of Dvarka was swallowed up by the sea. This was the  story 
of the eighth avatara of  Vishnu.  
   
 
Buddha  
The ninth avatara of Vishnu was  Buddha.  
 
Many years ago, there was a war between the devas and the asuras in which  the  demons 
managed  to defeat  the gods.  The gods  went  running  to Vishnu  for protection  and Vishnu  told 
them that Mayamoha would be born as Buddha, the son of Shuddhodana. Such were th e illusions 
that Buddha created, that the asuras left the path indicated by the Vedas and became  Buddhists. 
These dastardly creatures performed ceremonies that were a sure ticket to  Naraka.  
   
 
Kalki  
Kalki The tenth avatara of Vishnu will be  Kalki.  
 
Towards  the end of the Kali era, all people  will be dastardly.  They  will oppose  the Vedas, 
become  robbers  and will be concerned  only with wealth.  The disbelievers  will then become 
kings and these kings will also be  cannibals.  
 
Much later, Kalki will be born on eart h as the son of Vishnuyasha. He will take up arms  to 
destroy these  disbelievers.  Kalki's  priest  will  be  the sage  Yajnavalkya.  The norms of he  four 
classes  (varna)  and the four stages  of life (ashrama)  will be established  yet again.  People  will 
honor the sacred  texts  and become  righteous.  It will then be time for the dawn  of a new Satya 
Yuga, a fresh period of righteousness. In every cycle (kalpa) and in every era  (manvantara) 
Vishnu is thus born in various forms. It is a sacred duty to listen to th e stories of the ten  avataras. 
The listener attains his desires and goes to  heaven.  
   
 
Creation  
Agni next told Vashishtha the history of  creation.  
 
Vishnu  is the Lord  of creation,  preservation  and destruction.  Before  creation,  it was only the 
Brahman that wa s everywhere. There was no day, night or  sky. 
 
First Vishnu  created  the waters.  And in the waters  he sowed  the seeds  of brahmanda,  the great 
egg. From  this seed there  developed  a golden  egg which  began  to float on the waters.  From  the 
egg Brahma created hi mself. Since he created himself (svayam sambhuta), Brahma  is  also 
known as Svayambhu. Having created himself, Brahma stayed inside the egg for an entire  year. 
And at the end of the year,  he split the egg into two. One part of the egg formed  the heaven,  the 
other the earth. And in between the two parts of the egg, Brahma created the  sky. 
 
Brahma  next established  the earth  on the waters  and made  the ten directions.  He created  time, 
lightning, thunder, clouds, rainbows, words and anger. To ensure that yajnas  could be  performed, 
texts  of the Rig Veda,  the Yajur  Veda  and the Sama  Veda  emerged  from  his body.  Holy  people 
use the Vedas to perform Ceremonies meant for the  gods.  
 
From  the powers  of his mind,  Brahma  created  seven  sons.  Their  names  were  Marichi,  Atri, 
Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha Kratu and  Vashishtha.  
 
Prithu is recognised as the first king Prithu was descended from Dhruva. And Prithu's  father 
Vena was also a king. But Vena was an evil king; he was simply not interested in protecting  his 
subjects.  The sages therefore  killed  Vena  with a straw  and after Vena  had died,  they began  to 
knead  the dead  body's  right  hand  and it was thus that Prithu  emerged.  He wore  armour  and 
carried  bow and arrows  when  he was born.  He ruled  well,  as per the dictates  of dharma.  He 
looked upon all his subjects as his own sons. From Prithu the earth came to be known as  Prithivi.  
   
 
How To Pray, How To Build Temples And Idols  
The Agni  Purana  next has several  chapters  on how to pray and on how to build  temples  and 
idols.  The techniques  of praying  to Vishnu,  Shiva,  Surya  and the other  gods  and goddesses  are 
described, including the special mantras (incantations) that must be used so as to please  specific 
gods and there are prescribed forms for such bathing as  well.  
 
A person  who builds  templ es is blessed.  Even  if one merely  thinks  of building  temples,  the sins 
of a hundred  lives  are forgiven.  A builder  of a single  temple  goes to heaven  (svarga).  A builder 
of five to shivaloka,  a builder  of eight  vishnuloka  and a builder  of sixteen  temples  is freed  from  
the shackles  of being  born again  and again.  What  is the point  of earning  money  if one does not 
build temples? Money is also meant to be donated as alms to brahmanas, but the punya or  merit 
earned  from  building  a temple  is greater  than the punya  earned  from  donating  alms.  The merit 
earned by builder of temples is greatest for a golden temple, lesser for a stone temple, still  lesser 
for a wooden temple and least from earthen  temple.  
 
More  punya  is acquired  from  building  an idol than from  building  a temple.  Idols  of gods  and 
goddesses should always be set up so that they face the city; they should not face away from  the 
city. The easy is for Brahma's. Vishnu idol can be setup anywhere at  all. 
 
Different  idols  of Vishnu  must  have  different  forms.  Consider,  for example,  idols  or images  of 
the ten incarnations of Vishnu. The Matsya (fish) avatara must naturally look like a fish and  the 
Kurma (turtle) avatara must look like a turtle. But the Varaha (boar) avatara will four arms like  a 
man and will hold a gada  (mace),  a padma  (lotus  flower),  a shankha  (conch  shell)  and a chakra 
(bladed  discuss)  in these  four arms.  The Narasimha  avatara  should  have  two arms  holding  a 
chakra  and a gada  and should  wear  a garland.  The Vamana  (dwarf)  avatara  should  hold an 
umbrella and a stick  in his two hands.  Parashurama  will have  four hands  with a bow.  arrows,  a 
sword  and an axe in these  hands.  Rama's  image  can have  either  two arms  or four.  If there  are 
four arms, the four hands will hold a bow, arrows, a conch shell and a c hakra. Balarama's  image 
may also have either four arms or two. If there are two arms, the four arms the hands will hold  a 
plough,  a conch  shell,  a club and a chakra.  Buddha's  image  should  have  a calm  appearance.  It 
should  be seated  on a lotus.  The ears should be elongated.  Kalki's  image  is that of a brahmana, 
seated on a horse and holding a bow and arrows, a conch shell, a sword and a  chakra.  
 
Krishna's image may be either two -armed or four -armed. Three of the four arms will hold a  gada, 
a chakra  and a shankha. The fourth  palm  will be opened  out in the act of granting  a boon.  On 
either side of Krishna's image, there will be images of Brahma and Shiva. Brahma has four  faces 
and four arms and the image should have a pronounced rides a swan. On either side of  Brahma's 
image, there will be images of Sarasvati and  Savitri.  
 
Vishnu's image has eight arms. Seven of the arms hold a sword, a mace, arrow, a bow, a shield,  a 
chakra  and a conch  shell.  The eighth  palm  is spread  out as if Vishnu  is granting  a boon.  Vishnu 
should  be shown  riding  on Garuda.  Garuda  will also have  eight  arms.  To the right  of Vishnu's 
image, there should be images of Lakshmi and Sarasvati, Lakshmi holding a lotus and  Sarasvati 
holding a veena (a musical instrument). There has also got to be and image of Vishnu  exhibiting 
his universal form (Vishvarupa). The Vishavrupa image has four heads and twenty  arms.  
 
 Chandi's  image  has twenty  arms.  The ten arms  on the right  hold a spear,  a sword,  a shakti  (a 
small  spear),  a chakra,  a pasha  (noose),  a shield , a drum  and any two other  weapons.  The ten 
arms on the left hold snakes a rod, an axe, an amkusha (used for driving elephants), a bow, a  bell, 
a flag, a mace a mirror and a cub. In front of Chandi's image there will be the image of a  buffalo 
with its head  cut off. The image  of an asura  will be shown  emerging  from  the body  of the 
buffalo. The demon's hair, eyes and garland will be red in colour. It will be shown to be  vomiting 
blood and it will hold weapons in its hand, The demon's neck will be on the lion and her left  leg 
will be on the demon's back Images of Chandi may sometimes also have ten sixteen or  eighteen 
arms.  
Shiva's image (linga) may be made out of earth, wood, iron, jewels, gold, silver, copper,  bronze 
or mercury.  
   
 
Places Of  Pilgrimage  
A visit to a place of pilgrimage (tirtha) brings the same punya that is obtained from performing  a 
yajna. It is because people had not gone on pilgrimages or donated gold and cows in their  earlier 
lives that they were born poor in their next  lives.  
 
The best place  of pilgrimage  is Pushkara,  Brahma,  other  gods  and sages  who wish  to go to 
heaven  live there.  The best time to go to Pushkara  is in the month  of Kartika.  In Pushkara  itself 
there are two other places of pilgrimage known as Jambumarga and Tandulik  Ashrama.  
 
It is difficult to go to Pushkara. But there are several other tirthas as well. One such  is 
Kurukshetra,  where  Vishnu  and the other  gods  keep  on coming.  The river  Sarasvati  flows  near 
Kurukshetra. If one bathes in the Sarasvati, one attains  Brahmaloka.  
 
Any region  through  which  the river  Ganga  flows  also becomes  a tirtha.  Even  if one sees the 
Ganga, the punya of per forming yajnas is attained. A person who bears earth from the bed of  the 
Ganga on his head is freed of all  sins. 
 
Prayaga  is another  famous  place of pilgrimage.  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Indra  and the other  gods, 
Gandharvas,  apsaras  and the sages  are always  there  in Prayaga.  This is because  the two holy 
rivers,  Ganga  and Yamuna,  come  together  in Prayaga.  There  are many  tirthas  inside  Prayaga 
itself.  The sages  have  said that, in the month  of Magha,  if one bathes  for three  days in Prayaga, 
that is better than donating crores and crores of cows. If one donates alms in Prayaga, one goes  to 
Svarga  and is born as a king in one's  next life. If one dies in Prayag a, one goes straight  to 
Vishnuloka.  
 
Shiva  himself  had told Parvati  that Varanasi  was a very holy tirtha  and that Shiva  never  left the 
city. Varanasi  is so named  because  it is located  at the junction  of two rivers,  Varana  and Asi. 
Varanasi is also known as  Kashi.  
 
The river Narmada is also  sacred.  
 
There may be several holy tirthas, but Gaya is the holiest of them all. A demon named  Gayasura 
once  started  to perform  and such were  the powers  of his tapasya  that the gods  began  to suffer. 
They went to Vishnu an d asked him to save them Vishnu agreed and appeared before  Gayasura. 
"Accept a boon," said  Vishnu.  
 
"Grant me the boon that I may become the most sacred of all tirthas," replied the  daitya.  
 
The boon  was granted  and Gayasura  disappeared.  The gods  returned  to svarga,  but felt that the 
earth seemed to be deserted now that Gayasura had disappeared. Vishnu then instructed  Brahma 
and the other  gods  to perform  a sacrifice.  He also asked  them  to go to Gayasura  and ask for his 
body  so that the sacrifice  might  be performed  on it. Gayasura  readily  agreed,  and as soon  as he 
agreed, his head fell off from the body. Brahma then proceeded to perform the sacrifice  on 
Gayasura's  headless  body.  But as soon  as the sacrifice  started,  the body  began  to shake.  This 
meant that t he sacrifice could not be properly performed and a solution had to be found.   
 
 The solution was that the gods should all enter a stone which would be placed on Gayasura's 
body  so that  the body  would  not shake.  The sacrifice  could  then be performed.  Vishnu  
himself  also entered the stone. It is because the gods and Vishnu are always there in Gaya that 
Gaya is  sacred.  
 
In fact, there is a story behind this stone as  well.  
 
The sage Marichi was Brahma's son and had married Dharmavrata. One day, Marichi went to  the 
forest to collect wood and flowers and returned extremely tired. He called Dharmavrata and  said, 
"I am very tired. Today you must wash my feet for  me."  
 
Dharmavrata began to wash Marichi's feet when Brahma suddenly arrived. Dharmavrata did  not 
know  what  to do. Should  she finish  washing  her husband's  feet?  Or should  she first attend  to 
Brahma,  since  Brahma -was Marichi's  father?  She decided  to attend  to Brahma  first. At this 
Marichi  became  very angry  and cursed  Dharmavrata  that she would  turn into a stone. 
Dharmavrata was greatly distressed at being cursed for what she thought had not been a fault  at 
all. So she performed  tapasya  for many  years.  When  Vishnu  and the other  gods  were  pleased  at 
Dharmavrata's meditation, they appeared and offered to grant her a  boon. 
 
Dharmavrata  wished  that the curse  imposed  on her by Marichi  might  be waived.  The gods 
explained  that this was impossible,  since  Marichi  was a very powerful  sage.  What  they would 
however,  do was to make  Dharmavrata  a very holy stone  desired  even  by the gods.  The gods 
promised to be always inside this stone. It was this stone that was placed on Gayasura's  body.  
 
Once  the sacrifice  was over,  Gayasura  himself  desired  a boon  from  the gods  and the gods 
granted  him that Gaya  would  become  the most  sacred  of all tirthas.  It was in Gaya  that the 
Pandavas had prayed to  Vishnu.  
   
 
Geography  
The world  is divided  into seven  regions  (dvipas.  Their  names  are Jambu,  Plaksha,  Shalmali, 
Kusha,  Krouncha,  Shaka,  and Pushkara.  The seven  dvipas  are surrounded  by seven  oceans  and 
the names of these oceans are Lavana, Ikshu, Sura, Sarpih, Dadhi, Dugdha and  Jala. 
 
Right in the center of Jambudvipa is Mount Meru. Mountains named Himavana, Hemakuta  and 
Nishada  are to the south  of Meru  and mountains  named  Nila,  Shveta  and Sringi  are to the north 
of Meru. Jambudvipa is known by that name as there are a large number of jambu (jamun)  trees 
in this area. On the top Mount Meru is Brahma's famous  city. 
 
Under the earth is the underworld. This too, consists of seven regions and their names are Atala, 
Vitala,  Sutala,  Talatala,  Mahatala,  Rasatsala  and Patala.  The daityas  and the danavas  live in the 
underworld.  Vishnu  is also there  in the underworld,  in his form  of the great  snake  Shesha.  The 
snake Shesha holds up the earth on its  hood.  
That part of the sky which  is lit up by sun-rays is known  as Nabha.  Above  the earth  is the sun, 
above  the sun the moon,  above  the moon  the stars,  above  the stars Mercury,  above  Mercury 
Venus, above Venus Jupiter and above Jupiter the constellation of the Great  Bear 
(saptarshimandala). Beyond this constellation is the world of  Dhruva.  
   
Astrology  
The Agni  Purana  next gives  a lot of information  on astrology.  It states  when  marriages  should 
take place and when they should not. For example, marriages are never to be h eld in the  months 
of Chaitra  and Pousha  or under  the signs  of Libra  or Gemini.  If one is going  on a trip, then 
Friday  is the best day to start on. Medicine  should  not be taken  if one of the nakshatras  (stars) 
Pushya, Hasta, Jyeshtha, Shravana or Ashvini is  not in the sky. If one wishes to have a bath  after 
recovering from an illness, then Saturday is the best day for such a  bath.  
 
The first time a child's head is shaved should never be on Tuesday or a Saturday. Ears should  be 
pierced on Wednesday or Thursda y. New clothes should not first be worn on  Wednesday, 
Thursday  or Friday.  A new house  should  not be entered  into the months  of Chaitra,  Jyeshtha, 
Bhadra, Ashvina, Pousha or Magha. It is best to reap grain on a  Wednesday.  
   
 
Manvantaras  
Each manvantara (era)  is rule over by a  Manu.  
 
The first Manu was Svayambhuva. Shatakratu held the title of Indra during this  manvantara. 
The second Manu was Svarochisha. Vipashchita held the title of Indra during this  manvantara. 
Third Manu was Uttama and Sushanti was Indra  then. 
The fourth Manu was tapasa and Shikhi held the title of Indra  then. 
The fifth Manu was Raivata and Vitatha was Indra  then.  
The title of Indra was held by Manojava during the sixth manvantara, the Manu  being 
Chakhusha.  
 
Next came Shradhadeva, the seven th Manu Puranadara being the  Indra.  
 
The eighth  Manu's  name  is Savarni  and the eighth  Indra's  Bali.  The eighth  manvantara  has not 
yet come.  
 
The ninth Manu will be Dakshasavarni and the ninth Indra wil be  Adbhuta.  
 
During the tenth manvantara, the Manu wil l be Brahmasavarni and the title of Indra will be  held 
by Shanti.  
During the rule of the eleventh Manu Dharmasavarni, the Indra will be  Gana. 
The twelfth Manu will be Rudrasavarni and the twelfth Indra will be  Ritadhama. 
Rouchya will be the thirteenth Man u and Divaspati will be the thirteenth  Indra.  
The fourteenth Manu will be Bhoutya and the title of Indra will then be held by  Shuchi.  
 
During each of Brahma's days, there are fourteen such manvantaras. After that comes  Brahma's 
night, when all these living  beings are  destroyed.  
   
 
VarnA Ashrama  Dharma  
All the Manus practised the precepts of dharma (righteousness). This meant  non-violence, 
truthfulness, piety, going on pilgrimages donating alms, serving devas and brahmanas,  tolerance 
of all religions  and the following  of the sacred  texts.  It also meant  the practice  of the system  of 
the four classes (varna) and the four stages in life  (ashrama).  
 
The four varnas are brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras. Performing sacrifices,  donating 
alms and studying t he Vedas are duties that brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas must perform.  In 
addition, the kshatriyas must protect the good and punish the evil. The vaishyas must take care  of 
trade,  agriculture  and animal  husbandry.  The duties  of shudras  are to serve  the brahmanas  and 
artisanship.  When  brahmanas  take up the upavita,  the sacred  thread  that is the mark  of the first 
three classes, it is like a second birth for them. So brahmanas are known as dvijas (born  twice).  
 
An anuloma marriage is a marriage where the hu sband is from a higher class than the wife.  The 
offspring  of such a marriage  belong  to the mothers  class.  A pratiloma  marriage  is a marriage 
where  the wife is from  a higher  class  than the husband.  Chandalas  were  born this way from 
brahmana women, Sutas fr om kshatriya women, Devalas from vaishya women, Pukkashas  from 
kshatriya women and Magadhas from vaishya women. Chandalas are executioneers,  Sutas 
charioteers, Devalas guards, Pukkashas hunters and Magadhas bards. Chandalas should  live 
outside the villages  and should not touch those belonging to any other  class.  
 
The best name  for a brahmana  is that which  ends in Sharma.  Similarly,  the best name  for a 
kshatriya  ends in Varma,  for a vaishya  in Gupta  and for a shudra  in Dasa.  The sacred  thread 
ceremony  is to be held at the age of eight  years  for brahmanas,  eleven  years  for kshatriyas  and 
twelve  years  for vaishyas.  No sacred  a thread  ceremony  should  be held beyond  sixteen  years  of 
age. 
 
The first stage in life is that of brahmacharya (studenthood). A student sh ould never eat honey  or 
meat and should never indulge in singing or dancing. He should completely give up violence  and 
speaking to women. His duties are to discuss the shastras (holy texts) and associate with  learned 
men. Apart from that, he will meditate in solitude on the true nature of the  brahman.  
 
The next stage of life is that of Grihastha (household stage). A brahmana may have four wives,  a 
kshatriya  three,  a vaishya  two and a shudra  only one. The husband  and the wife should  be from  
the same varna. Marriage across varna is to be avoided. A woman can marry again provided  that 
her husband has disappeared, is dead. has become a hermit or is such a sinner that he is  expelled 
from  his own varna.  If her husband  dies, a widow  is permitted  to marry  her late husband's 
younger  brother.  
 
A householder  should  get up at dawn  and pray to the gods.  He should  always  bathe  in the 
morning. He should not talk impolitely. He should not bite his nails. He should not laugh at  those 
who are inferior.  And he should  never  reside in a place  where  there  is no king,  no doctor  or no 
river.  He must  not insult  his elders.  He should  never  criticise  the Vedas,  the shastras,  the devas, 
the sages and the king. And he must never travel without a light at  night.  
 
 
 The third ashrama is vana prastha (forest - dwelling stage). Such a person should always sleep  on 
the ground  and wear  skins  as clothes.  He should  wear  his hair matted  and give up the company 
of other people. He has to serve gods and guests and live on fruit and  roots.  
 
In the final stage  of life (sannyasa)  a person  becomes  a hermit.  In this ashrama,  a person  attains 
true knowledge and is completely freed. But he should become a hermit only when he  is 
convinced  that he has completely  lost all interest  in material  pursuits.  Such  a person is not 
affected  by birth  or death.  He realises  that the physical  body  is transient,  that it is of no concern 
at all. It is the knowledge of the atman (soul) that is the best form of knowledge. When one  gains 
this knowledge,  one realises  the identifica tion of the atman  with the brahman,  one understands 
that the brahman is  everywhere.  
   
 
Sins And Their  Atonement  
If one commits  a sin, one has to atone  for it. This is known  as prayashchitta.  If one does not 
atone for the sins that one has committed, it is th e king's duty to punish the  sinner.  
 
If one drinks from a well where the dead body of an animal has been floating, one has to fast  for 
three  days.  The worst  possible  sins are the killing  of brahmana,  the drinking  of wine  and theft. 
Other  sins are criticisi ng the Vedas,  the bearing  of false  witness,  killing  a friend,  killing  a cow, 
forsaking  one's  parents  or sons,  the selling  of ponds,  murder,  lying,  killing  animals  and the 
cutting down of green trees for  fodder.  
 
A killer  of a brahmana  has to build  a hut in the forest  and live there  for twelve  years.  He has to 
beg for a living  and give up all that he possesses  to another  brahmana.  A killer  of cows  has to 
live on just coarse  grain  for a month.  He has to live with cattle  and follow  them  around  during 
the day. All his possessions have to be given up to a brahmana and he has to bathe in cow's  urine 
for two  months.  
 
If a brahmana  steals  gold,  he should  go and report  his crime  to the king.  The king will then hit 
him with a club and this will be the brahmana's  praya shchitta.  
 
The sin of killing kshatriya is one -fourth the sin of killing a brahmana. If one kills a vaishya,  the 
sin is one -eighth the sin of killing a brahmana. And if one kills a shudra, the sin is   one-sixteenth  
of the sin of killing a brahmana. Killi ng a cat, a mongoose, a frog, a dog, a lizard or a crow is  as 
sinful as killing a  shudra.  
   
 
Vratas  
Depending  on the tithi (lunar  day),  the day of the week,  the nakshatras  (stars),  the month,  the 
season and the position of the sun, certain specific religious  rites and ceremonies have to  be 
performed. These are known as  vratas.  
 
The first day of the lunar fortnight is known as pratipada. The day of pratipada in the months  of 
Kartika,  Ashvina  and Chaitra  are Brahma's  tithis.  It is then that the worship  of Brahm a must  be 
done.  
 
On the second  day of the lunar  fortnight  (dvitiya),  one should  eat only flowers  and pray to the 
two Ashvinis. This makes the supplicant handsome and lucky. Shuklapaksha is that  lunar 
fortnight in which the moon waxes and Shuklapaksha dviti ya in the month of Kartika  is 
earmarked for the worship of Yama. If one performs this vrata, one does not have to go to  naraka 
(hell). This is also the day for praying to Balarama and  Krishna.  
 
It was on the third day of the lunar fortnight (tritiya), in shuklapaksha and in the month  of 
Chaitra, that Shiva married Parvati or Gouri. Rites performed on this day are thus known  as 
gourivrata. Shiva and Parvati have to be given offerings of fruit. The eight names of Parvati  have 
to be recited. These are Lalita,  Vijaya, Bhadra Bhavani, Kumuda, Shiva, Vasudevi and  Gouri.  
 
Chaturthi  vrata  is performed  on the fourth  day of the lunar  fortnight,  is shuklapaksha  and in the 
month of Magha. This is the day for worshipping the common gods (gana devata). The  offerings 
on this occasion are to be wine and fragrant  perfumes.  
 
On the fifth day of the lunar fortnight, one performs panchami vrata. This grants good health  and 
takes care of bad omens. Particularly auspicious for panchami vrata are the shuklapakshas in  the 
months of  Shravana, Bhadra, Ashvina and  Kartika.  
 
On the sixth day of the lunar fortnight one performs shashthi vrata. One has to live only on  fruit 
and if one performs  this vrata,  the fruits  of any action  that one performs  live forever.  Shashthi 
vrata should be ob served especially in the months of Kartika and  Bhadra.  
 
Surya is to be worshipped on the seventh (saptami) day of the lunar fortnight. If saptami vrata  is 
observed  in shuklapaksha,  all sorrow  disappears.  Sins are stoned  for and all one's  desires  are 
attain ed. Women who have no children can have sons if they observe these  rites.  
 
The eight day of the lunar fortnight (ashtami) is very significant. Krishna was born on this tithi  in 
the month of Bhadra when the nakshatra Rohini was in the sky. Ashtami is theref ore auspicious 
in the month  of Bhadra.  If one fasts on that day and prays  to Krishna,  the sins of one's  earlier 
seven lives are atoned for. But this vrata is to be observed in krishnapaksha and not  in 
shuklapaksha, since Krishna was born in Krishnapaksha. Together with Krishna, Rohini and  the 
moon,  Devaki,  Vasudeva,  Yashoda,  Nanda  and Balarama  are also to be worshipped  on the 
occasion.  Since  Krishna  took birth  (janma)  on this ashtami  tithi, this particular  day is known  as 
janmashtami.  
 
 
 The eighth day of th e lunar fortnight can be important even if it is not the month of Bhadra.  For 
example,  the eighth  day of the lunar  fortnight  might  be a Wednesday  (budha  vara)  in both 
shuklapaksha and krishnapaksha. Irrespective of the month, such an ashtami is important a nd is 
known  as budhashtami.  On that day one has to live only on molasses  and rice and perform  the 
vrata.  
 
There  used to be a brahamana  named  Dhira  whose  wife was named  Rambha.  Dhira's  son was 
Koushika,  his daughter  was Vijaya  and Dhira's  bull was named  Dhanada.  Koushika  would  go 
with the other  cowherds  to graze  the bull. Once  when  Koushika  was having  a bath in the river 
Bhagirathi  and the bull was grazing,  some  thieves  came  and stole  the bull. Koushika  and his 
sister Vijaya looked everywhere for it, but co uld not find it. In searching for the bull, they  came 
to a lake where some women were bathing in the course of performing a vrata. Brother and  sister 
were tired and hungry and they craved for some food. The women agreed to give them food,  but 
only after Ko ushika and Vijaya had also performed the budhashtami vrata. And as soon  as 
Koushika perfomed the ritual, the bull was miraculously returned to him. Such were the  powers 
of the vrata  that Koushika  could  get his sister  Vijaya  married  off to Yama  and himself  became 
the king of Ayodhya. After their parents Dhira and Rambha had died, Vijaya discovered that  her 
father  and mother  were  in naraka.  When  she asked  Yama  as to how her parents  might  be 
delivered  from  naraka,  Yama  told her that Koushika  and Vijaya  should  perform  budhashtami 
vrata again. And immediately after they did so, the parents attained  Svarga.  
 
The ninth  day of the lunar  fortnight  is navami  and navami  in shuklapaksha,  especially  in the 
month  of Ashvina,  is earmarked  for the worship  of Gouri.  An anima l has to be sacrificed  and 
offered to the goddess on this  occasion.  
 
The brahmanas  become  all powerful  if they observe  dashami  vrata  on the tenth  day of the lunar 
fortnight and donate ten cows. The eleventh day of the lunar fortnight (ekadashi) is for fast ing. It 
is also the tithi for praying  to Vishnu.  The observance  of ekadashi  vrata  grants  sons and wealth 
and atones for one's  sins. 
 
The twelfth  day of the lunar  fortnight  is dvadashi.  Any dvadashi  in shuklapaksha  is auspicious 
for worshipping Vishnu. Duad ashi in the month of Bhadra is for praying to cows and calves  and 
in the month  of Chaitra  it is for praying  to the god of love (Madana).  If one observes  dvadashi 
for an entire  year,  one never  has to go to naraka.  An especially  good  conjunction  is dvadashi  in 
shuklapaksha in the month of Bhadra when the nakshatra Shravana is in the sky. if one fasts  and 
observes  a vrata  then,  one earns  greater  punya  than from  bathing  in the confluence  of sacred 
rivers. If Budha (Mercury) is also in the sky, the punya is mult iplied  severalfold.  
 
Trayodashi vrata is on the thirteenth day of the lunar fortnight and this ritual was first  performed 
by the god of lover when he wanted to please Shiva. This is the tithi on which Shiva  is 
worshipped.  In the month  of Ashvina,  Indra  is also revered  on this tithi. And in the month  of 
Chaitra, the god of love is worshipped in shuklapaksha on the same  tithi. The fourteenth  day of the lunar  fortnight  (chaturdashi)  is also earmarked  for Shiva,  particularly 
in the month  of Kartika.  One fasts and donates  to brahmanas  and thereby  attains  svarga.  The 
chaturdashi in krishnapaksha that comes between the months of Magha and Falguna is known  as 
Shivaratri. Then one has to fast and stay awake the whole night. Earlier, there used to be an  evil 
hunter  named  Sundarasena.  But because  he performed  a vrata  on Shivaratri,  all his sins were 
forgiven.  
 
NARAKAS  (HELLS)  
 
If one worships Vishnu with flowers, one never goes to  hell. 
 
There are several such hells. Although people do not wish to die, they are bound t o die once  their 
predestined  time span on earth  has been  exhausted.  One then has to pay for whatever  sins one 
might have committed. The sinners suffer and those who have performed good deeds  are 
naturally rewarded. There are in fact two gates that lead int o Yama's abode. The  good  are 
brought  by yamadutas  (Yama's  servants)  through  the western  gate and are then taken  to svarga. 
Yama's servants bring the evil to him through the southern gate and Yama then despatches  them 
to the various  hells.  
 
If one kills a  cow, one has to spend one lakh years in a naraka known as mahavicha. If one kills  a 
brahmana  or steals  land,  there  is a burning  naraka  named  Amakumbha  that one goes to. There 
one suffers till the day when the world is destroyed. A killer of women, childre n or old men  stays 
in Rourava naraka for the span of fourteen manavantaras. An arsonist is sent to Maharourava  and 
burnt  there  for an entire  kalpa.  A thief goes to Tamisra,  were  he is continuously  pierced  with 
spears  by Yama's  servants  for several  kalpas.  After  that, a thief is taken  to Mahatamisra  to be 
bitten by snakes and  insects.  
 
If you kill you father or mother, you will be sent to the hell Asipatravana. There you will  be 
continuously sliced into pieces with swords. If you burn someone to death, you w ill go  to 
Karambhavaluka where you will be placed on burning  sands.  
 
A person  who eats sweets  alone  goes to Kakola  and is fed only worms.  A person  who does not 
perform yajnas goes to Kuttala and is fed blood. An oppressor is sent to Tailapaka and is  crushe d 
like an oilseed  there.  A liar is sent to the naraka  named  Mahapata.  There  are several  other 
narakas for those who encourage inter -class marriages, those who kill animals, those who  cut 
trees,  those  who eat too much  meat,  those  who criticise  the Vedas,  those who bear also witness 
and those who criticise their  teachers.  
   
 
Giving  Alms  
Giving alms is extremely important as means for achieving punya. Alms always have to  be 
donated when one goes to visit a temple or a place of pilgrimage. The giver must always f ace the 
east and the receiver must always face the north when alms are being given. Such donations  have 
to be made after one has had a  bath.  
The best objects  for donations  are gold,  horses,  oilseeds,  snakes,  maids,  chariots,  trees,  houses, 
daughters and c ows. If one promises to give something but later goes back on one's promise,  one 
is sure to be destroyed. It should be remembered that the entire object of donation alms is lost  if 
one expects  gratitude  or friendship  in return.  It is better  to give somethi ng to a brother  than to a 
daughter, it is better to give to a father than to a  mother.  
 
The entire concept of donation alms is different in the four different eras. In  Satya Yuga,  the 
giver  went  out in search  of recipient  to whom  he could  give something.  In Treta  Yuga,  the 
recipient had to come to the giver's house before he would be given anything. In Dvapara  Yuga, 
the giver never gave anything without being asked for it by the recipient. And in Kali Yuga,  the 
giver gives only to those who are servile to  him. 
   
 
Gayatri  Mantra  
Gayatri mantra is a very powerful  incantation.  
 
The human  body  has many  veins.  Out of these,  ten veins  are important  and their names  are Ida, 
Pingala, Sushumna, Gandhari, Hastijihva, Pritha, Yasha, Alambusha, Huha and Shankhini.  These  
veins bear the breath of life. The breath of life is called prana vayu. Apart from prana vayu,  nine 
other  major  breaths  course  through  the human  body.  Their  names  are Apana,  Samana,  Udana, 
Vyana, Naga, Kurma, Krikara, Devadatta and  Dhananjaya.  
 
Gayatri  is a goddess  worshipped  even  by Vishnu  and Shiva.  This goddess  is there  everywhere, 
even  in every  individual's  heart  in the form  of a swan.  Gayatri  mantra  is an incantation  to the 
goddess.  If one chants  the mantra  seven  times,  one's  sins are forgiven.  Chanti ng it then times 
means  that one attains  svarga.  To attain  worlds  (lokas)  which  are even  more  desirable  than 
svarga,  one has to chant  gayatri  mantra  twenty  times.  If one chants  the mantra  a hundred  and 
eight  times.  If one chants  the mantra  a hundred  and eight times,  one does not have  to be born 
again. The severest of sins, like killing cows, brahmanas or parents, are forgiven if one chants  the 
mantra a thousand times. Gayatri mantra has always to be preceded by the chanting of the  sacred 
word  Om. 
   
 
The King  
The king's  duties  are many.  He has to punish  his enemies,  ensure  the prosperity  of his subjects 
and arrange  that his kingdom  is ruled  well.  He has to protect  the sages  who perform  tapasya 
inside the boundaries of his  kingdom.  
 
A king should  appoint  a wise brahmana  as his priest.  His ministers  should  also be wise and his 
queen  should  be a woman  who follows  the path of dharma.  When  a king dies, time must  not be 
wasted.  The priest  must  immediately  find an auspicious  occasion  so that a new king can be 
appointed and crowned. A kingdom can never be without a  king.  
 
Before  the coronation,  a prospective  king has to purify  himself  by rubbing  his body  with mud. 
Mud  from  a mountain  peak is  used for the ears,  from  a Krishna temple  for the face,  from  an 
Indra  temple  for the back,  from  a palace  for the chest,  mud raised  by an elephant's  tusks  for the 
right  hand,  mud raised  by a bull's  horns  for the left hand,  mud from  a yajna  for the things  and 
from a cowshed for the feet. After the king has thus rubbed himself wi th different forms of  mud 
and purified himself, he is ready to be anointed. Four types of ministers will appoint  him. 
Brahmana  ministers  with golden  vessels  full of clarified  butter  will stand  of the eastern  side. 
Kshatriya ministers with silver vessels fu ll of sweet and thickened milk will stand on the  eastern 
side. Vaishya  ministers  with copper  vessels  full of curds  will stand  on the western  side. And 
shudra  ministers  with earthen  vessels  full of water  will stand  on the northern  side. The priests 
will then use material  from  all four directions  to anoint  the king.  Water  from  all the places  of 
pilgrimage will be poured on the king's head and throat. There must be songs and  musical 
instruments must be  played.  
 
The king will next pray to Brahma,  Vishnu,  Indra  and the other  gods.  He will look at a mirror, 
some  clarified  butter  and the various  signs  of good  omen  that have  been  placed  all around.  The 
king will then be crowned and introduced to his ministers, advisers and guards. The priest will  be 
given  cows,  goats, buffaloes  and houses  by the king.  He will also bow before  the brahmanas. 
After  all these  ceremonies  have  been  completed,  he truly becomes  the king.  He circles  the fire, 
touches  his guru's  feet and with all his soldiers,  goes out on a procession  through  the streets  so 
that his subjects  can see him. At that time,  the king must  be seated  either  on an elephant  or a 
horse. After the procession is over, the king may return to his  palace.  
 
The king has to appoint many officials. The general has got to be a bra hmana or a kshatriya.  The 
charioteer  must  know  about  horses  and elephants,  and treasurer  must  be familiar  with different 
jewels.  There  has to be a doctor,  a keeper  of elephants,  a keeper  of horses,  a captain  for the 
palace and another captain for looking a fter the women of the royal household. Each person  must 
be appointed to the job which suits his expertise and temperament  best. 
 
Anyone  thus appointed  by a king has to stick  to certain  rules.  He must  always  obey  the king's 
orders  and must  never  do anything  that is contrary  to the king's  commands.  In public  he must  
always  say pleasant  things  to the king.  If there  are any unpleasant  utterances  to be made,  they 
have  to be made  in a private  audience  with the king.  Those  who serve  the king must  not be 
thieves,  nor must  they ever insult  the king.  They  will not dress  like the king,  nor will they 
become too intimate with the king. They must not divulge royal  secrets.  
 
 For a fort, the king should  choose  a place  that cannot  readily  be attacked  by enemies.  The king 
must ensure  that the gods  are worshipped,  the subjects  are protected  and the evils  are punished. 
He should  never  steal form  the temples,  instead  he should  build  temples  and set up idols  of the 
gods there. The brahmanas must also be protected and the king has to make sure that  no 
brahmanas  are killed  in his kingdom.  For a queen,  he has to choose  a woman  who subscribes  to 
these  beliefs.  
 
The king will appoint an official to look after every ten villages and another official to look  after 
every  hundred  villages.  Spies  must  be appointed  to find out all that is going  no in the kingdom. 
The king is entitled to one -sixth of all the punya that accrues in his kingdom through his  subjects. 
But he is also credited with one -sixth of all the sins that are committed in his k ingdom. The  taxes 
will be levied as per the dictates of the sacred texts. From whatever is received as taxes, half  will 
go into the royal  treasury  and the remaining  half will be distributed  amongst  the brahmanas.  If 
there is a liar, the king will impose a  penalty on him to the extent of one -eighth of the liar's  total 
wealth. If the owner of any property is not known, the king will keep the property is not  known, 
the king will keep  the property  is safe custody  for a period  of three  years.  Once  the owner  is 
identified  within  a period  of three  years,  he can claim  the property.  But beyond  three  years,  he 
becomes entitled to the  property.  
 
The property rights of any minor orphan are to be protected by the king. If there is a theft in  the 
kingdom,  the king must  immediately  replace  what  has been  stolen  with wealth  taken  from  his 
own royal  treasury.  If the thief is caught  and the stolen  goods  recovered,  they are used to 
replenish the treasury. One -twentieth of profits made form trade are to be paid to the king as 
taxes. One -fifth or one -sixth of foodgrains are to be paid as taxes. One day every  month, 
craftsmen will work free of charge for the king. They will only be gives food from the  royal 
kitchen.  
 
The king has to pay proper attention to the princes. They have t o be taught four types of  shastras. 
The first is dharma  shastra,  which  teaches  what  is right  and what  is wrong.  The second  is artha 
shastra,  economics.  The third  is dhanurveda,  the art of fighting.  And the last subject  that has to 
be taught  to princes  is shilpa,  arts and crafts.  The king has to assign  bodyguards  to take care of 
the princes. He must ensure that the princes associate with honorable and learned people and  not 
with undesirable  characters.  In instances  where  the princes  do not grow  up properly  despite  the 
king's  best efforts,  the king is free to keep  them  imprisoned.  But they should  be comfortable  in 
the prison and should not be made to suffer  there.  
 
The king should  give up hunting,  drinking  and the playing  of dice.  He must  not unnecessarily 
waste time in travelling  around.  He must  first win over his servants  through  his behaviour  and 
then do the same for his subjects. It is only after this has been achieved that he attains a  position 
to conquer  his enemies  through  the use of arms.  Anyone  who brings harm  to the kingdom  must 
immediately  be killed.  If the king delays  in doing  that which  has to be done,  the purpose  of the 
action  is completely  lost. Nor must  the king inform  others  in advance  about  what  is going  to be 
done.  No one must  get to know  abou t the king's  intended  actions.  Once  the actions  have  been 
completed,  the fruits  of the actions  performed  are information  enough  for everyone  to see. This 
does not mean that the king will not consult his ministers. Of course he will, that is why they  are 
ministers. Before sleeping or eating, the king must check whether the bed or the food is  safe. 
 
There  were  seven  techniques  that kings  were  supposed  to use in ruling  their kingdoms.  These 
were  known  as sama,  dana,  danda,  bheda,  maya,  upeksha  and indrajala.  Of these,  the first four 
are the most famous. Sama means the art of gentle persuasion. Dana means the usage  of 
donations  or money  to achieve  one's  purpose.  Danda  is punishment.  And bheda  is the art of aggravating  dissension  amongst  parties  opposed  
to each other. Maya  means  to use illusions  or deceit  and upeksha  is to deliberately  ignore  
people  so as to achieve  one's  purpose.  Indrajala literally  means  jugglery.  In this context,  it 
would  mean  to perform  a balancing  act amongst opposing pulls and opposing  parties. 
 
What sort of punishment the king should mete out is also laid down. If anyone lies and says  that 
his possessions  have  been  stolen,  he is to be fined  an amount  equal  in value  to that of the 
possessions  which  have  supposedly  been  stolen.  A brahmana  who bears  false  witness  is to be 
banished from the kingdom. A person who kills cows, elephants, horses or camels will have a  leg 
or a hand  cut off. A thief who steals  gold or silver  or an abductor  of women  will be executed. 
Execution is also prescribed in cas es of arson and poisoning. A wife who does not obey  her 
husband shall be torn to death by dogs. A woman who does not obey her husband or  brahmanas 
may also have  her nose,  ears or arms  chopped  off. She will when  be set astride  a cow and 
banished from the  kingdom.  
   
 
Dreams  
Some  dreams  are bad omens.  In fact, they are nightmares.  Examples  are: dreams  about  grass  or 
trees  growing  on one's  body,  dreams  in which  the dreamer  is shaven -headed  or is wearing 
shabby clothes or dreams in which one is falling form above.  It is also bad to dream  of 
marriages,  singing,  the killing  of snakes  and the killing  of chandalas  or animals.  If you dream 
that you are drinking oil or eating bird meat, that is also a bad omen. Other examples are:  where 
the dreamer  dreams  that he is playing with monkeys  or chandalas,  when  he dreams  that devas, 
brahmanas, the king or the guru is angry or when he dreams that his house had  collapsed.  
 
Remedies have to be found if one dreams such evil dreams. Brahmanas have to be worshipped,  a 
yajna  has to be performed  and the dreamer  has to pray to Vishnu,  Shiva,  Brahma,  Ganesha  or 
Surya.  Dreams  dreamt  in the first quarter  of one's  sleep  normally  come  true over the next one 
year.  Dreams  from  the second  quarter  come  true over the next six months  and dreams  from the 
third  quarter  over the next three  months.  Dreams  from  the last quarter  come  true over the next 
fortnight and dreams dreamt right at dawn come true within the next ten days. If one first  dreams 
a good  dream  and then an evil one, it is the evil dream  the will come  true. Therefore,  if one 
dreams a good dream, one should not sleep anymore. One should immediately  arise.  
 
There are many dreams that are good dreams. For example, dreams that involve  mountains, 
palaces  or snakes.  Or the dreamer  might  dream  that he is riding  on a horse  or a bull. It is also 
good to dream of white flowers in the sky or to see trees in a dream. Especially good dreams  are 
those of the dreamer's possessing many arms or many heads or of grass and bushes  sprouting 
form his navel. Wh at if you dream of wearing white garlands or clothes? That too is good. If  you 
dream  of eclipses  of the sun, the moon  or the stars,  by all means  rejoice.  And if in a dream  you 
see that you have  caught  hold of the enemy's  flag, that surely  means  that you will triumph  over 
the enemy. And if you actually dream of defeating the enemy, the interpretation is clear  enough.  
 
Strangely  enough,  a dream  where  the dreamer  sees that he is eating  rice pudding  is a good 
dream. As is the case with dreams of drinking wine o r blood. Or even of eating wet meat. A clear 
sky in a dream  is good.  Dreaming  of milking  a cow or a buffalo  with one's  own mouth  is also 
good. The dream continues to be a good one if one dreams of milking a lioness or a  she-elephant 
thus.  Other  dreams  whic h have  good  interpretations  are, for example,  dreams  of the dreamer's 
receiving blessings form devas or brahmanas or of being anointed with  water.  
 
The dreamer who dreams of his coronation is blessed. And he is doubly blessed if he dreams  that 
his head  has been  cut off or that he has died or even  that his house  has been  burnt  down.  The 
relatives  of such a dreamer  increase  in number  and he also prospers.  It is good  to dream  of 
musical instruments being played. Or of riding a bull or climbing a tree. Wet clo thes, trees  laden 
with fruit and clear blue skies in dreams are especially  good.  
   
 
Omens and  Signs  
If one is about to go out of the house, one should take care of any bad omens that there might  be. 
Such  bad omens  are cotton,  dried  grass,  cowdung,  coal,  mola sses, leather,  hair, a lunatic,  a 
chandala,  a widow,  a dead  body,  ashes,  bones  and a broken  vessel.  If one comes  across  these  as 
one is about  to leave,  one should  not start without  pacifying  the elements  through  prayers  to 
Vishnu.  The sound  of musical  instruments  is not an auspicious  sound  at the beginning  of a 
journey.  If the means  of transport  by which  one is travelling  breaks  down,  that too, is a bad 
omen.  If weapons  break,  perhaps  you should  postpone  the journey.  The same  is the case if an 
umbrella held  over one's head happens to fall. If one hits one's head against the lintel of the  door 
as one is about too cross the threshold, prayers are again indicated. And never call back  someone 
who has just left. That is a bad omen and bodes ill for the success of  the journey.  
 
There are good omens for a departure and if one sees these good omens, the journey is bound  to 
be successful.  Good  omens  are white  flowers,  full vessels,  meat,  distant  noises,  an old goat,  a 
cow,  a horse,  an elephant,  fire, gold silver,  a sword,  an umbrella,  fruit,  clarified  butter,  curds,  a 
conch shell, sugarcane, the sound of thunder, lightning and a dead body with no one crying  over 
it. 
 
Omens  are important  even  if one is not going  on a journey.  A peacock  crying  on the left means 
that something  is going  to be stolen.  If a donkey  brays  with a broken  voice,  that is good  omen 
and something good will happen. If a boar or a buffalo crosses over from the left to the right,  that 
is a good omen. But if they cross over from the right to the left, t hat is a bad omen. One's  desires 
will be attained  if horses,  tigers,  lions,  cats or donkeys  cross  over from  the right  to the left. 
jackals,  moles,  lizards,  pigs and cuckoos  are good  omens  or the left and monkeys  are good 
omens  on the right.  If a jackal  calls once,  twice,  thrice  or four times,  that is a good  omen.  It is a 
bad omen if a jackal calls five or six times. It is a very good omen if a jackal calls seven  times.  
 
If crows  caw on the left of an army,  the soldiers  will not be able to win. If a crow  can be seen 
near the door a house, this means that there will soon be a guest. A crow looking at the sum  with 
one eye signifies great danger. A crow covered with mud means the attainment of one's  desires. 
A dog barking inside the house leads to the death of t he householders. A person whose left  limbs 
are sniffed by a dog, will attain riches. If the right limbs are sniffed, there will be danger. A  dog 
blocking  one's  path signifies  theft.  A dog with a bone  or a rope in its mouth  means  the loss of 
property. But i t is a good omen to see a dog with meat in its  mouth.  
 
Cows  mooing  irregularly  mean  threats  to the master  of the house.  If this happens  at night,  there 
will be a theft or a death  in the house.  If the cows  have  horns  that are wet or daubed  with mud, 
that is  a good sign for the householders. A cow that plays with cranes or doves is bound to die.  A 
cow that licks its feet is also destined to die. If an elephant strikes its right foot with its left,  that 
is a good sign. Prosperity comes if an elephant rubs its right tusk with its  foot. 
There is great danger if an umbrella falls just as one is about to leave on a trip. Journeys are to  be 
avoided if the stars are not  favourable.  
   
 
Battle  
Once a king decides to go out to battle, seven days are needed for preliminar ies. On the first  day, 
Vishnu, Shiva and Ganesha have to be worshipped. On the second day the dikpalas (guardians  of 
all the directions)  are worshipped,  the Rudras  on the third  day, the planets  and the stars on the 
fourth  day and the two Ashvinis  and the rivers  on the fifth day. On the sixth  day, the king has 
ceremonial  bath in honor  of the victory  that is to come.  And on the seventh  day, the king leaves 
to do  battle.  
 
Prior to the marching, the army must always assemble to the east of the capital city. The  start of 
the march  must  be accompanied  with the playing  of musical  instruments.  Once  the army  has 
begun  to march,  it must  never  look back.  After  having  travelled  for a couple  of miles,  it must 
stop to rest any pray to the gods and the  brahmanas.  
 
The kin g must never directly fight. Because if the king is killed, the battle is lost. The king  must 
be right behind his army, not too far away from it. An elephant will be guarded by four  chariots, 
a chariot by four horses and a horse by four infantrymen. The in fantry will also be at the front  of 
army, followed by archers and then by the horses. The chariots and the elephants come last of  all. 
The cowards  in the army  must  not be in the front,  they must  be at the back.  The front  is for the 
brave soldiers. To the e xtent possible, one should fight with the sun behind one's  army.  
 
If a soldier dies in the course of battle, he goes straight to heaven. The blood of brave men  wash 
away  all sins. To be struck  with a weapon  is better  than to perform  many  sacrifices.  A person 
who flees form the field of battle performs a sin that is worse than that of killing a  brahmana.  
 
The fight  should  be between  equals.  Those  who are running  away  should  not be killed.  Nor 
should spectators and those who are unarmed be killed. An enemy ca ptured in battle should  not 
be kept imprisoned. He should be released and treated like a  son. 
   
 
Rama  Precepts  
Rama had once taught Lakshmana about the duties of a king. The Agni Purana now relates  these 
precepts of  Rama's.  
 
The duties  of king are fourfold.  Firstly,  he has to earn wealth.  Secondly,  he has to increase  it. 
Thirdly, he has to protect it. And fourthly and finally, he has to donate it. The king must also  be 
polite and politeness comes through the conquering of the senses. The king must be humble.  The 
senses  are like mad elephants.  If the senses  are pampered,  like mad elephants,  they trample 
politeness and humility  underfoot.  
 
The king must also be non -violent, truthful, clean and forgiving. He should take care to  observe 
all the rituals.  He should  give food to those  who are poor.  He should  protect  those  who seek 
royal  protection.  He should  always  use words  that are pleasant  to hear.  The body  is here today 
and gone tomorrow. Stupid is the king who deviates form the path of righteousness to  give 
pleasure to a body  that is transient.  The curses  of unhappy  people  are enough  to bring  down  a 
king.  
 
There is only one difference between gods and animals. Gods use pleasant word, while  animals 
use rough words. The king must use pleasant words like a god. And he must use pleasant  words 
not only for those  who are his friends  or are good,  but also for those  who are his enemies  or are 
evil. With obeisance the king pleases his guru, with good behaviour the righteous, with duties  the 
gods, with live the servants and  with alms those who are  inferior.  
 
The kingdom has seven components. These are the king, the ministers, the friends, the  treasury, 
the army,  the forts and the state itself.  Of these,  the most  important  is the state and it has to be 
preserved  at all costs.  The king must  be extremely  careful  in the choice  of the ministers  and the 
royal priest. The king must not choose or consult ministers who are  stupid.  
 
The king's  signs  are his golden  rod or sceptre  and an umbrella  that is held over his head.  The 
umbrella  should  be made  of the feathers  of swans,  peacocks  or cranes,  but the feathers  of 
different types of birds should not be mixed in the same umbrella. The throne should be made  of 
wood and should be embellished with gold. A bow can be made of iron, horn or w ood. The  best 
bow is one that extends over four armlengths. The king can spend upto one year's tax revenue  on 
armaments and  flags.  
   
 
Dhanurveda  
The section on Dhanurveda is on arms and  weapons.  
 
There  are five types  of weapons  that are used in war. The first category  is that of yantramukta 
weapons, released from a machine (yantra). This machine may be a launcher or even a bow.  The 
second category is that of panimukta weapons, weapons that are flung by the hand  (pani). 
Examples  are spears  and stones.  The third category  is known  as muktasandharita.  These  are 
weapons  that can be flung  and also withdrawn.  The fourth  category  consists  of weapons  like 
swords that are never released from the hand during  battle.  
 
These  are known  as amukta  weapons.  And the last catego ry of weapons  consists  of brute  force 
and strength. This is of use in bouts of  wrestling.  
 
The best form  of fighting  is that with bows  and arrows.  Next  comes  fighting  with spears, 
followed by fighting with swords. Wrestling is the worst form of  fighting.  
 
Before  aiming,  the bow (dhanusha)  should  be held with the arch pointing  down  towards  the 
earth. The arrow (vana) should be placed against the bow with the head pointing down. The  bow 
should now be raised and the lower end of the bow should be in line with the archer's navel.  The 
quiver  should  be at the back.  Before  releasing  the arrow,  the bow should  be held firm with the 
left hand and the arrow with the fingers of the right hand. The string of the bow should be  pulled 
back  such that the tassel  of the arrow  is between  the archer's  ear and right  eye. The body  should  
not be bent when one is releasing an arrow. Nor should on get excited. The archer has to be  still 
as a pillar. The target has to be in line with the left fist and the archer's posture has to be l ike that 
of a triangle. It is best to pull back the string of the bow upto the right  ear. 
 
A noose  (pasha)  is ten arms  in length,  with both ends of the weapon  being  circular.  The main 
body  of the weapon  is made  of rope.  There  are eleven  different  ways  in which a noose  may be 
held. A noose must always be flung with the right  hand.  
 
A sword  (asi) must  hang  to the left of the waist.  When  a sword  is to be taken  out, the scabbard 
should  be grasped  in the left hand  and the sword  should  be taken  out with the right  hand.  There 
are thirty -two different way in which a sword and a shield may be  held.  
   
 
Property  
What  happens  to a person's  debts  when  he dies?  If he does not have  any sons,  the person  who 
inherits the property also inherits the debts and had to pay them off . If there is a son, the son  pays 
the debts  off. But a woman  is not to be held responsible  for debts  contracted  by her husband  or 
her son. Nor is a man responsible for debts contracted by his wife or son. Exceptions  are 
instances where a husband and a wife  contract a debt  jointly.  
 
If there are no witnesses to a contracted debt but the king feels that the debt was  indeed 
contracted, the king must arrange for the debt to be repaid within a period of sixty -four days.  In 
cases  of a dispute,  the person  who b rings a false  suit will be punished  by the king.  And a false 
witness will be given twice the punishment that is meted out to the one who brings a false suit.  A 
brahmana  who bears  false  witness  will be banished  from  the kingdom.  A person  who agrees  to 
be a w itness, but later withdraws, will be punished eight times as much as the bringer of the  false 
suit. A brahmana who does this will be banished from the  kingdom.  
 
It is better that the details of a debt contracted be written down, with the names of the two  parties 
and the witnesses clearly indicated. If the debtor pays in instalments, the details of all  such 
payments  must  be recorded  on the written  document.  Debts  made  in the presence  of witnesses 
should  also be repaid  in the presence  of witnesses.  If a witne ss has to take an oath,  the oath 
should  be administered  after cotton,  fire, water  or poison  has been  placed  on the head  of the 
witness.  
 
Fire or water  can be used to find out if a person  is lying  or not. If fire is used,  seven  banyan 
leaves  are placed  on the accused's  hand.  A red hop lump  of iron is then placed  on the hand  and 
the accused  had to go around  a fire seven  times.  If it is found  that the hand  has not been  burnt, 
the person has been telling the truth. And if the hand has been burnt, he had  been  lying. 
Similarly, an accused person can be immersed in the water and if he does not drown, he has  been 
telling  the truth.  Alternatively,  the accused  can be made  to drink  poison.  If the poison  does him 
no harm, he is  truthful.  
 
If the father  makes  a will, the property  will be divided  amongst  the sons in accordance  with the 
provisions of the will. But if all the sons get an equal share of the property, the wife should  also 
be given  an equal  share,  otherwise,  the father  can leave  all his property  to the eldest  son. The 
sons and the father obtain equal shares to any property or debt that has been left by  the 
grandfather. But the sons are not necessarily entitled to any property that has not been left by  the 
grandfather, but been earned by father. If a son is bor n after the property has been divided, he  too 
will be entitled  to an equal  share  of any property  left by the grandfather.  Daughters  are not 
entitled to property. But sons who have go married will use one -fourth of their inherited  property 
to get their sist ers married.  
   
Donating the  Puranas  
The Agni Purana now describes the benefits of giving alms along with the Puranas. The  Puranas 
are to be donated  together  with cows.  And in talking  of the mahaPuranas,  the Agni  Purana  also 
mentions most of their length, in  terms of the number of shlokas (couplets) that each has. This  is 
worth  stating.  
 
The Brahma Purana - is twenty -five thousand. The Padma Purana - is twelve  thousand. 
The Vishnu Purana - is thirteen thousand. The Vayu Purana - is fourteen  thousand.  
The Bhagava ta Purana -is eighteen thousand. The Narada Purana - is twenty -five thousand 
The Markandeya Purana - is nine thousand. The Agni Purana - is twelve  thousand.  
The Brahmavaivarta Purana - is eighteen thousand. The Linga Purana - is eleven  thousand. 
The Varaha Puran a- is fourteen thousand. The Skanda Purana - is eighty -four thousand.  
The Vamana Purana - is ten thousand. The Kurma Purana - is eight  thousand. 
The Matsya Purana - is thirteen thousand. The Garuda Purana - is eight  thousand. 
The Brahmanda Purana - is twelve  thousand.  
The only mahaPurana  which  is missing  from  the above  list is the Bhavishya  Purana.  You now 
have  a pretty  good  idea of how long the Puranas  are. The Skanda  Purana  is the longest  and the 
Kurma  and Garuda  Puranas  the shortest.  But unfortunately,  the numbers in the Agni  Purana  are 
not terribly accurate. The Padma Purana has fifty -five thousand couplets and  not  twelve  as 
stated.  The Varaha  Purana  has twenty -four thousands  couplets  and not fourteen  thousand.  The 
Agni  Purana  itself  has slightly  over fiftee n thousand  couplets  and not twelve  thousand.  But at 
least you have some approximate idea about the lengths of the various  Puranas.  
 
The Brahama  Purana  is to be given  in the month  of Vaishakha.  The Padma  Purana  is to be 
donated  in the month  of Jyaishtha.  The Vishnu  Purana  is to be donated  in the month  of Ashada 
and the Vayu Purana in the month of Shravana. The Bhagavata Purana is to be given in  the 
month  of Bhadra,  the Narada  Purana  in the month  of Ashvina,  the Markandeya  Purana  in the 
month  of Kartika,  the Agni  Purana  in the month  of Margashirsha  and the Bhavishya  Purana  in 
the month of Pousha. The Brahmavaivarta Purana in the month of Pousha. The   Brahmavaivarta  
Purana  is for the month  of Magha,  the Linga  Purana  for the month  of Falguna  and the Varaha 
Purana for the month of  Chaitra.  
 
The Skanda  Purana  is to be given  to brahmanas.  The Vamana  Purana  is to be given  in the 
autumn. The Kurma Purana is to be given together with a golden urn. The Matsya Purana is to  be 
donated together with a golden swan. The B rahmanda Purana is to be given to  brahmanas.  
 
Great benefits are also to be derived from hearing the Puranas recited. The reciter has to be  given 
alms  and the brahmanas  must  be given  cows,  rice and land at the time of the recitation.  If one 
arranges for a recitation of the Puranas, one lives long, stays healthy and attains  heaven.   
Dynasties  
Brahma was born from Vishnu's navel. Brahma's son was Marichi, Marichi's son Kashyapa  and 
Kakshyapa's son Vivasvana. From this line was descended Pururava and Pururava' s descendants 
were the kings of the surya (solar)  dynasty.  
 
Brahma also had a son named Atri and Atri had a son named Soma. Soma performed a  rajasuya 
yajna (royal sacrifice). Having performed the sacrifice, Soma became the ruler of all the  worlds. 
This made him very arrogant  and he abducted  the sage Brihaspati's  wife Tara.  This led to a 
terrible  war between  the devas  and the asuras.  Tara was eventually  restored  to Brihaspati,  but 
Soma  and Tara had a son named  Budha.  From  Budha  were  descended  the kings  of the chandra 
(lunar)  dynasty.  
 
There were twelve major wars between the devas and the asuras. The first of these was known  as 
the Narasimha  War.  This took place  when  Hiranyakashipu  was the king of the asuras.  Vishnu 
adopted  the form  of Narsismha  and killed  Hiranyakashipu.  He then made  Prahlada  the king of 
the demons.  The second  war was the Vamana  war and it took place  when  Bali was the king of 
the demons.  Vishnu  adopted  the form  of a dwarf  (Vamana)  to subjugate  the demons.  The third 
war was the Varaha  war and this took place  when  Hiranyaksha  was the king of the demons. 
Vishnu adopted the form of a wild boar (Varaha) and killed Hiranyaksha. The fourth war was  the 
Amritamanthana  war and this took place  over the manthana  (churning)  of the ocean  for amrita 
(nectar ). 
 
The fifth war between  the devas  and the asuras  took place  over the abduction  of Tara and this 
came  to be known  as the Tarakamaya  war. The sixth  war was known  as the Ajivaka  War.  The 
seventh  war took place  when  Tripura  led the asuras  and this was known  as the Tripuraghatana 
war. It was Shiva  who killed  the demon  Tripura  in this war. The eighth  war, the Andhaka  war, 
took place  when  Andhaka  led the asuras.  It was Vishnu  who engineered  that Andhaka  be killed 
when Andhaka expressed a desire to abduct Shiva's  wife.  
 
The ninth  war was known  as Vritrasamhara  and took place  when  Vritra  led the demons.  The 
tenth war was simply known as Jita. In this war, Vishnu killed Shalva and the other demons,  and 
Parashurama  killed  the evil kshatriyas.  The eleventh  war was known as Halahala.  An asura 
named Halahala  (poison) had  invaded  Shiva's  body and  flooded it  with poison. But     Vishnu  
managed  to destroy  the demon.  In the twelfth  war, known  as Kolahala,  Vishnu  destroyed  an 
asura named Kolahala  (tumult).  
   
 
Medicine  
Dhanvantari was the physician of the gods and he taught Sushruta the art of ayurveda  (medicine). 
The Agni  Purana  now describes  what  the sage Ssushruta  had learnt,  that is, the treatment  for 
various diseases. This does not simply mean the treatment of human i llnesses. There is a  section 
known as vriksha ayurveda, which describes what trees are to be planted where. It describes  how 
a garden is to be constructed and  maintained.  
 
The chapters on medicine also describe the treatment of elephants, horses and cattle . The  mantras 
(incantations) which are the remedy for snake poison are also  related.  
   
 
LITERATURE AND  GRAMMAR  
 
Thereafter, the Agni Purana has many chapters on literature and  grammar. 
It describes the different types of chhanda (metres) that are used in  poetry. 
Next  it discusses  the alphabet.  There  are sixty -four letters  (varna)  in the alphabet,  of which 
twenty -one are vowels  (svara  varna).  There  are three  tones  (svara)  in which  the letters  of the 
alphabet  may be uttered.  Their  names  are udatta,  anudatta  and svarita.  There  are eight  places 
from  which  the letters  may be pronounced.  These  are the chest,  the throat,  the head,  the back  of 
the tongue,  the teeth,  the nose,  the lips and the palate.  Pronunciations  should  be clear  and 
audible. They should not be nasa l and  mumbled.  
 
The Agni Purana then discusses the alamkaras (rhetoric) that are used in poetry and plays.  Poetry 
is entirely different from the shastras (sacred texts) and itihasa (history). The sacred texts are  full 
of words  and historical  texts  are full of narrations  of incidents  that took place.  But that does not 
constitute  poetry.  Real men are difficult  to find on this earth.  Amongst  these  real men,  it is 
difficult to find men who are learned. Amongst the learned men, it is not easy to find some  who 
have a poetic  sense.  And amongst  those  who have  poetic  sense,  it is difficult  to find a few who 
can compose  poetry.  Poetry  is impossible  without  a knowledge  of the rules  of poetry  and even 
more important, without a sense of  feeling.  
 
Sanskrit is the language  of the gods. The language of humans is Prakrita. Poetry can be either  in 
Sanskrit  or in Prakrita.  There  are three  types  of poetry.  These  are gadya  (prose),  padya  (poetry) 
or mishra (a mixture of the two). Genuine poetry is, however, only  padya  
 
Gadya  can be of three  types -churnaka,  utkalika  and vrittagandhi.  Churnaka  prose  is easy on the 
ears, it has very few compouond words. Utkalika prose is hard on the ears, it is full of  compound 
words. Vrittagandhi prose is some where between churnaka and  utkalika.  
An epic must  always  be split up into sections  (sarga).  It has to be written  in Sanskrit,  although 
some  mixture  of Sanskrit  words  with Prakrita  ones is permissible.  The theme  of an epic must 
always be good and historical elements may be introduced if the aut hor so  desires.  
 
Literature  is useless  without  the flavour  of sentiments  (rasa).  There  are nine sentiments  that are 
used.  The first is hasya  (humour).  The second  is karuna  rasa (pathos).  The third  is roudra  rasa 
(that which  is wrathful  and awe-inspiring).  The fourth  is vira rasa (heroic  themes).  The fifth is 
bhayanaka rasa (horror). The sixth is bibhatsa rasa (vulgar and obscene themes). The seventh  is 
adbhuta  rasa (that which  is strange).  The eighth  is shanta  rasa (placidity).  And the ninth  is 
Sringara ras a (amorous  themes).  
 
But the sentiments  must  be used with feeling.  Without  feeling,  all literature  becomes  mediocre. 
Particularly in a play, sentiments can be supplemented with skills (kalal). These skills  are 
normally associated with women and there are s ixty-four of them. The more important ones  are 
singing, playing musical instruments, dancing, acting, drawing, making garlands,  sewing, 
hairdressing and using  magic.  
 
 
 
 Grammatical rules of sandhi and samasa (rules for forming compound words) are next  descr ibed. 
The difference between the two is that in sandhi, the two words that are being joined retain  their 
original senses in the compound word. The case of samasa is different. Sandhi occurs when  two 
varnas  (letters)  met. Samasa  is a condensation  or convers ion of two or more  words  into one. 
Sandhi does not create any new word. Samasa leads to the formation of a third word which refers 
to something related to but distinct from either or any of the words combined. Pita (yellow)  and 
ambara (cloth) combined by w ay of sandhi are pronounced pitambara and mean cloth that  is 
yellow.  The same  two words  combined  by way of samasa  result  in the third  word  pitambara 
which means "the one dressed in yellow", that is,  Krishna.  
 
There are several possible declensions of words , depending on the vachana and the vibhakti.  The 
vachana  refers  to the number.  Eka-vachana  is when  there  is only one (phalam,  a fruit)  dvi- 
vachana when there are two (phale, two fruits) and vahu -vachana when there are more than  two 
(phalani, more than two  fruits). There are three genders, pumlinga (masculine),  strilinga 
(feminine)  and klivalinga  (neuter).  Deva,  asura,  Vishnu  are, for example,  masculine  in gender. 
Devi, Kalika or maya are feminine. Pushpa (flower) or phala (fruit) are  neuter.  
 
There  are six karakas  (cases)  and seven  vibhaktis  (case -endings).  The agent  who performs  the 
action indicated by the kriya (verb), is the kartri or doer. To the kartri karaka or nominative  case, 
the prathama  vibhakti  or first case-ending  is attached.  The object  of the action  is karma  and to 
the karma  karaka  or objective  case,  the second  (dvitiya)  case-ending  is attached.  The means  or 
instruments  by which  the action  is performed  takes  on the karana  karaka  or instrumental  cases 
and the third  (tritiya)  case-ending.  When  a gift is given  irrevocably,  the recipient  takes  on the 
sampradana karaka or dative case and the case -ending in question is the fourth (chaturthi).  That 
which  is the source  of something  takes  on the apadana  karaka  or ablative  case and the fifth 
(panchami)  case-ending.  When  there  is a relation  of possessions,  the possessor  takes  on the 
shashthi  vibhakti  (sixth  case-ending).  There  is no counterpart  of the possessive  case of English 
grammar  because  the  relation  of  possession  is  not  directly  related  to  the  verb  (kriya)  and 
therefore to the doer (karaka). In case of the location in which the action takes place, the  karaka 
is adhikarana (locative case) and the case -ending the seventh  (saptami).  
   
 
Destruction  
Periodically Pralayas (destructions) take pl ace. A destruction comes at the end of four  thousand 
yugas on earth. For a hundred years there are no rains and there is widespread  drought. 
Thereafter,  Vishnu  uses the rays of the sun to drink  and dry up all the waters  that there  are on 
earth.  Seven  diffe rent suns appear  in the sky and they burn up the three  worlds  of heaven,  the 
earth  and the underworld.  The earth  becomes  as flat as the back  of a turtle.  The breath  of the 
great snake (Shesha) also serves to burn up the three  worlds.  
 
After the three world s have been burnt up, dark clouds full of thunder and lightning appear in  the 
sky. For a hundred  years  it continue  to rain. The rain puts out the fires that have  been  raging. 
From Vishnu's breath are created tremendous winds and these drive away the clouds . But there  is 
water  everywhere.  And Vishnu  sleeps  on these  waters.  For an entire  kalpa  he sleeps.  The sages 
then pray to Vishnu for the three worlds to be created yet  again.  
   
 
Yama And Hell 
When human beings die, their physical bodies are given up. But th ey acquire new bodies that  are 
known as ativahika bodies. In these bodies, they are brought to Yama's abode by  Yama's 
servants. Living beings other than human are not brought to Yama. Yama then decides whether 
the dead person should go to heaven or to hell . After he has served his time in heaven or in  hell, 
he is born again. Yama further decides what living being the person should be born  as, 
depending on the actions in his past life. And so the cycle of birth death and rebirth goes on  and 
on. 
 
Since  he keeps tally of all good  deeds  and all sins, Yama  is also known  as the god Dharma. 
Those  who have  done  good  deeds  are rewaraded  by Yama  and those  who have  committed  sins 
are punished. Chitragupta is Yama's accountant, he keeps the account of all punya and  papa. 
 
There are twenty -eight circles of hells with many hells located in each circle. A sinner may  have 
to go to more than one hell depending on the sins that he has committed. Some sinners are  boiled 
in oil, others  are pierced  with spears  and still others  are whipped.  Some  sinners  are fed heated 
iron balls,  others  are fed blood  and rubbish.  There  are also machines  for torturing  sinners. 
Terrible birds eat up some sinners. Other sinners have their heads cut  off. 
 
When  it is time to be reborn,  the killer  of a brahamana  is born as a deer,  dog, pig or camel.  A 
drunkard is born as a donkey. A stealer of gold is born as a worm or an insect. A killer of  a 
brahmana may also suffer from tuberculosis. A drunkard will have teeth like a dog and a  stealer 
of gold will malformed  nails.  A stealer  of food is born dumb.  A person  who has stolen  the 
property  of brahmanas  is born as a rakshasa  and lives  alone  in the forest.  A stealer  of fragrant 
scents  is born as a mole.  One who steals  foodgrains  is born as a rat. One who steals  animals  is 
born as a goat,  one who steals  milk as cow,  one who steals  fruit as monkey  and one who steals 
meat as a vulture. A stealer of clothes is born as a crane and a stealer of salt as a  cricket.  
   
 
Yoga  
Yoga  is the way to circumvent  the miseries  of life. True  knowledge  is that which  informs  one 
about the true nature of Brahman or Paramatman. The atman or jivatman is that  which 
characterises an individual. Yoga means union, it is the union of the jivatman with  the 
Paramatman. Yoga concentrates one's mind  on the  Paramatman.  
 
The first prerequisites  of yoga  is non-violence.  A non-violent  person  is always  righteous.  The 
second  requirement  of yoga  is truthfulness.  The third  prerequisite  is celibacy.  The fourth  is 
controlling one's senses and the last is the w orship of god. One who practices yoga should not  go 
around  collecting  material  possessions.  A piece  of cloth,  a covering  against  the cold,  and a pair 
of sandals are possessions enough for  him. 
 
Before meditating on the true nature of the Paramatman, one h as to seat oneself in a proper  asana 
(posture). The piece of cloth on which one is to sit should be placed in a clean place. One sits  on 
such a seat and tries to purify  one's  atman  by controlling  one's  mind  and senses  through  yoga. 
The head  and the neck  should be held straight  up, motionless.  The point  of vision  should  be 
directed  towards  the tip of one's  nose.  One should  not look in any direction.  The arms  should 
lightly  rest on the folded  thighs  and the right  hand  should  be placed,  palm  upwards,  on the left 
palm. Padmasana (lotus position) is one such recommended  posture.  
 
The breath of life (prana vayu) has to be controlled. This process of control is known  as 
Pranayama.  A finger  is placed  on the nose when  the breath  is being  exhaled.  The entire  breath 
should be exhaled  from  the body.  Since  rechana  means  exhalation,  this process  of control  is 
known as rechaka. When the breath is inhaled, the inhalation should be such that it fills the  entire 
body.  Since  puraka  literally  means  'that which  fills',  this proce ss of control  is known  as puraka. 
When  the breath  is neither  being  exhaled  nor inhaled,  one sits completely  still like a kumbha 
(pot)  and this is known  as kumbhaka.  Pranayama  makes  one healthy,  swift,  enthusiastic,  strong 
and collected.  Since  the senses  are controlled,  one goes to heaven  and avoids  going  to hell. 
Material pursuits are like the strong current of a river. The atman drowns in  it. 
 
Pranayama  alone  is not enough.  It has to be supplemented  with dhyana  of japa (meditation  and 
contemplation). One c ontemplates the true nature of the Paramatman. The body is like a  chariot. 
The senses  are its horses,  the mind  is the charioteer  and Pranayama  is the bridle.  An individual 
who dies while performing dhyana is immediately assimilated with  Vishnu.  
 
Dhyana inv olve four different things, all of which must be in complete harmony. The first is  the 
meditator,  the second  is the act of meditating,  the third  is the object  that one is meditating  upon 
and the fourth  is the reason  why one is performing  the mediation.  One does not have  to; sit in a 
rigid  posture  for dhyana  to be possible.  It can be done  while  one is walking,  sitting  or even 
sleeping. The important aspect is to establish the object of one's meditation in one's  heart.  There are different ways of establishin g one's concentration. As an object of meditation, one  can 
meditate on three concentric circles which are black, red and white. In the center of the circles  is 
a divine lotus. The lotus has eight petals. One thinks that detachment is the stem of the lotus  and 
praying to Vishnu its stamen. Right in the center of the lotus is a pure spark of fire and that is  the 
Paramatman. Alternatively, one can visualise the Paramatman in a blaze of light, in the center  of 
the lotus. Dhyana is far far superior to any yajna that one might  perform.  
 
One particular  form  of deep  and intense  meditation  is known  as samadhi.  The meditator  is then 
completely  still, as calm  as the ocean.  He loses  all track  of the outside  world.  He does not hear, 
smell, see or touch. His mind has no w ishes and feels nothing. He is completely united with  god. 
Such  a meditator  automatically  gets to know  all the knowledge  that can be gleaned  from  the 
Vedas  or the shastras.  He can obtain  all the material  possessions  that he wants,  but he regards 
them all a s no more important than a blade of  grass.  
 
Such  a meditator  attains  supreme  knowledge.  If you look at various  pots full of water,  you will 
find that the same sky is reflected in them all. Supreme knowledge tells one that,  exactly 
similarly, it is the same  atman that is everywhere. It is the atman which is the same as  the 
Paramatman,  it is this atman  that is in the water,  in energy,  in water,  in the earth  and in metals. 
The atman is  everywhere.  
   
 
The Knowledge Of The  Brahman  
Brahma  jnana  is the knowledge  of Brahman.  This knowledge,  which  gives  the ultimate  bliss,  is 
nothing but the sense that the individual atman is identical with the universal Brahman  or 
Paramatman. The physical body is not the atman. Nor are the senses the atman. The mind  or 
intelligence i s not the atman. Life itself is not the  atman.  
 
The atman  is different  from  all the objects  that have been  mentioned  above.  The atman  is in an 
individual's  heart.  It sees everything  and senses  everything,  but is different  from  the physical 
body. It is this  that sages contemplate when they meditate. The sky was created from  the 
Brahman,  from  the sky came  wind,  from  wind  fire, from  fire water,  from  water  the earth  and 
from the earth the five elements. One has to meditate on the physical body  gradually 
disappe aring and merging into the  Brahman.  
 
The Brahman is neither true nor untrue. It has neither form nor is it without form. The  Brahman 
has several parts, but at the same time it is an integral whole. The Brahman cannot be  described. 
It cannot  be achieved  through  the power  of action.  The Brahman  is always  pure.  It has no ties 
and it is the true form  of happiness.  What  is required  is the sense  that it is I, the individual,  who 
am the Brahman.  I am nothing  but the atman  and the atman  is nothing  but the Brahman.  This 
sense  is true knowledge.  The Brahman  is the Lord  who is the origin  of everything  and the 
individual  is part of the Brahman.  It is this knowledge  that frees  one from  the ties of the world 
and this is what Brahman jnana is all  about.  
 
The Brahman  is not the earth;  it is beyond  the earth.  The Brahman  is not the wind,  nor is it the 
sky. The Brahman  has no beginning;  it is independent  of all action.  The Brahman  is huge;  it is 
everywhere.  The Brahman  not only has no form,  it is beyond  all form.  The Brahman  cannot  be 
heard.  It cannot  be touched.  The Brahman  has neither  intelligence  nor mind.  It has no sense  of 
ego or vanity. It does not have life, birth, old age or  death.  
 
The Brahman is neither happy nor unhappy. It does not feel hungry or thirsty. It cannot  be 
measured. At the same time, it is both nothing and  everything.  
 
Life has five possible ends. By performing yajnas one can attain heaven. By performing  tapasya 
one can become  an ascetic.  By performing  actions  one can attain  Brahmaloka.  By detachment 
from material pursuits (vairagya) one can merge oneself into nature. And by true knowledge  the 
individual  gets absorbed  into the divine  essence.  This is known  as kaivalya.  Detachment  means 
to withdraw oneself from the effects of all actions. And knowledge mea ns the knowledge that  the 
atman is no different from the Brahman. This is known as jnana yoga (the yoga of  knowledge).  
 
There are few people who attain this knowledge. One of those was Bharataa. Bharataa had  done 
a lot he became very attached to a deer and  when he died, he died thinking of the deer. The  result 
was that in his next life, Bharataa  was born as a deer.  But the deer happened  to be a jatismara, 
that is, it remembered  its earlier  life. The deer eventually  died and Bharataa  was again  born as 
jatism ara human.  
 
 
 
 The king of Soubira was once travelling on a palanquin and he wanted someone who would  bear 
his palanquin  free of charge.  The king's  servants  caught  hold of Bharataa  to bear the palanquin. 
But Bharataa moved slowly and could not keep up with t he other bearers. The palanquin did  not 
progress  and the king asked  Bharataa.  "Why  are you so tired?  You have  not been  bearing  my 
palanquin for long. Can't you some toil? You look fairly strong to  me."  
 
Bharataa  replied,  "I am not strong.  Nor am I bearing  your palanquin.  I am not tired,  nor am I 
lazy. I am my atman and feet are and my body is balanced on my thighs. My shoulders are on  my 
body and your palanquin rests on my shoulders. But I am not my feet, thighs, body or  shoulders. 
I am the atman. The atma n is not carrying you. So why do you say that I am beating  you?"  
 
Bharataa then instructed the king on the mysteries of true knowledge. The atman was pure,  ever- 
lasting, calm, without traits and beyond natural characteristics. Since the atman had no trait s and 
since an individual was the atman and not the body, it was meaningless to say that an  individual 
was strong  or weak.  The physical  body  was made  of the elements  and so was the palanquin. 
What was the point therefore in saying that the physical body wa s bearing the  palanquin?  
 
Heating  these  words  of wisdom,  the king fell at Bharataa's  feet. "Forgive  me," he said, "and let 
go of the palanquin. Who are  you?"  
 
"Who am I?" asked Bharataa. "That is not a question that can easily be  answered."  
 
The king answe red, "I fail to understand.  Surely  the form  in which  you are now existing  is who 
you are."  
 
"No," said Bharataa. "I am the atman and the atman is the same as the Paramatman.  The 
Paramatman  is everywhere  and therefore,  the atman  is also everywhere.  I am everywhere.  I am 
in all physical bodies. It is meaningless to ask who you are and who I am. We are all one and  the 
same.  Wood  has come  from  the trees  and this palanquin  is made  of wood.  But is the palanquin 
wood  or tree?  When  you ride on the palanquin,  does anyone  say that you are riding  on a tree? 
Men, women, cows, horses, elephants, birds and trees, these are all meaningless names. They  are 
all illusions.  Everything  is one and the same.  I am everywhere.  If there  had been  a place  or an 
object  where  I do not exist,  I could  have  everywhere,  I do not know  how to answer  your 
question.  Tell me king,  are you your head  or your stomach?  Or is all of it, you?  But then,  what 
will you call that which is distinct from your physical body? Think about what I have  said."  
 
Bharataa's words were so profound that the king immediately accepted Bharataa as a  teacher. 
And Bharataa told the king the story of Ribhu and  Nidagha.  
 
The sage Ribhu was Brahma's son. He was also extremely learned. Nidagha was Ribu's  disciple. 
After Ribhu had taught Nidagha what there was to be taught, Nidagha went to the city to see  how 
Nidagha  was getting  on. Nidagha  worshiped  his teacher  and gave  him all sorts  of things  to eat. 
After Ribhu had eaten, Nidagha asked him, "Are you  satisfied?"  
 
"What do you  mean?", asked Ribhu. "The question of satisfaction would have arisen had I  been 
hungry or thirsty. I am my atman and the atman is always satisfied. So what is the Brahman  that 
is omnipresent and so are you. You are not distinct from me, we are both part o f the same  whole. 
I came  to teach  you this knowledge.  Now  that you have  learnt  that the Brahman  is everywhere, 
let me  leave."  
 
 After  another  thousand  years  had passed,  Ribhu  came  to the city again  and discovered  that 
Nidagha no longer lived in the city. He  had begun to live on the outskirts of the  city. 
 
"Why have you given up living in the city?", Ribhu asked  Nidagha.  
 
"Because I do not like to live in the city, where there is a king, " replied  Nidagha.  
 
"Who  is the king?"  asked  Ribhu.  "Point  him out to me in this procession  that is passing.  And 
point out to me the  subjects."  
 
Nidagha said, "The king is the one who is as tall as a mountain peak. He is the one who is  riding 
the elephant. The ones who are walking are the  subjects."  
 
"What  do you mean?",  asked  Ribhu.  "The  Brahman  is in the king and the Brahman  is in the 
elephant.  How  do you distinguish  one from  the other,  how do you say that one is riding  the 
other?  Is the king the physical  body  or the atman  and is the elephant  the physical  body  or the 
atman? W ho is riding on whom? I do not  understand."  
 
This knowledge,  that the atman  is the same  as the Brahman,  is known  as Advaita  (unified) 
Brahma -jnana.  Ribhu  taught  this to the king of Soubira.  This is the knowledge  that all elements 
are one and the same. It i s only those who suffer from illusions who think that different  elements 
and different beings have different  identities.  The Gita 
Krishna had taught Arjuna the lessons of the Gita on the plains of Kurukshetra. The Agni  Purana 
now relates the essence of th e Gita.  
 
If physical body is alive, that is no reason for rejoicing. Just as, if the physical body is dead,  that 
is no reason for mourning. The atman does not die. It does not decay, it cannot be destroyed  and 
it is immortal.  The atman  does not warrant  any tears  that might  be shed over it. People  who are 
addicted  to sensual  pleasures  cannot  realise  this. The person  who is addicted  to the atman  alone 
has no desire  for anything  else. He had no action  to perform.  He had neither  gains  nor losses. 
The knowledge of this is like a raft that rescues one from the flood of  illusions.  
 
This knowledge frees one from the shackles of all actions (karma), since all actions are vested  in 
the Brahman. A person with this knowledge is as pure as a drop of water on a lotus flow er. Such 
a person  sees himself  in everything  and everything  in himself.  There  are four types  of people 
who worship Vishnu. The first category consists of people who are in trouble. The  second 
consists of people who desire wealth. The third consists of peop le who are merely curious,  while 
the last consists of people who hanker after true knowledge. It is the last category of people  who 
realise the union and identity of the atman and the  Brahman.  
 
The Brahman is there in the smallest blade of grass. It is there in the most powerful and sacred  of 
people. The physical senses mean nothing, they merely further the Brahman extends beyond  all 
these senses. The Brahman has neither traits, nor is it without  traits.  
 
The Brahman creates and destroys, it is the most po werful of all energies. Some realise  the 
identity of the atman and the Brahman through meditation, others through  actions.  
   
 
Yama  Gita 
There was a king named Vajashrava. His son was Nachiketa. Vajashrava arranged for  a 
wonderful sacrifice at which he gave a way all his  wealth.  
 
Nachiketa asked, "Father, whom have you given me  to?" 
 
His father did not reply, but Nachiketa kept asking again and again. At this, Vajashrava  became 
angry and said, "I have given you to  Yama."  
 
Faithful  to his father's  word,  Nachiket a decided  to go to Yama's  abode.  The road was difficult, 
but Nachiketa  got their and waited  for three  days to see Yama.  No one return  to the earth  from 
Yama's  abode.  But Yama  was so pleased  to have  met Nachiketa  that he granted  him the boon 
that Nachiketa could return to the earth. Nachiketa however, had no desire to accept such a  boon. 
Instead, he wanted to know from Yama the true nature of the atman. The instructions that  Yama 
gave to Nachiketa have come to be known as the Yama  Gita.  
The Agni  Purana  now recapitulates  the essence  of the Yama  Gita.  Yama  said that it was indeed 
strange  that men craved  after positions,  possessions,  houses  and clothes.  The sages  have  all 
taught that one should not get addicted to these sensual pleasures. And yet, man did not  learn.  
 
The Brahman is that which possesses nothing and everything. It cannot be seen and yet it  is 
everywhere.  The atman  is like a warrior  on a chariot,  the physical  body  being  the chariot,  the 
intelligence the charioteer and the mind the bridle. The sense s are the horses and the warrior's  job 
is to control  the horses  and target  his arrow  at the knowledge  of the Brahman.  Those  who are 
truly  learned  know  of the identity  between  the atman  and the Brahman.  Samadhi  is nothing  but 
the recognition of this union. When the physical body comes to an end, the atman is free and  can 
merge with the  Brahman.  
   
 
The Agni Purana's  Virtues  
The last chapter of the Agni Purana describes three virtues of the  Purana.  
 
The Agni  Purana  is most  holy.  It gives  health  and ends nightma res. It spreads  happiness.  Ill 
omens vanish from house where the Agni Purana is kept. A man who listens to the recital of  the 
Agni  Purana  every  day, had no need  of pilgrimages,  alms,  sacrifices  and fasts.  Reading  one 
chapter  of the text yields  the same  punya as may be obtained  from  donating  a cow.  Even  if one 
only wishes  to hear a recital  of the Agni  Purana,  the sins committed  over the duration  of a day 
are forgiven. Reading the whole of the text gives one the punya that can be obtained by donating 
hundred  cows  at a sacred  place  of pilgrimage.  Enemies  and thieves  dare not frequent  a house 
where there is a text of the Agni Purana. Ghosts give such a house a miss. A brahman  who 
listens to a recital of the Purana becomes learned in the Vedas. A kshatriya becom es the ruler  of 
the world,  a vaishya  becomes  rich and a shudra  attains  good  health.  Nothing  is so sacred  as 
writing down the text of the Purana and donating it to  brahmanas.  
 
 
 