 
 
 
10. BHAGAVAT  PURANA  
CHAPTER  FIRST  
OBESISANCE TO THE SUPREME  BEING  
 
We meditate  to that Paramatma  (Supreme  Being)  who is the eternal  truth;  and who creates  the universe,  
holds  it and causes  Pralaya.  He is the light independence  and from of  knowledge  in himself.  He causes  
illusions  even  for the most  knowledgeous  ones.  Yet, He is far beyond  all the illusions.  
In Srimad  Bhagavat,  created  by the great  sage Vyasa,  There  is a description  of the supreme 
religion, which is free from desire. There is also a descri ption of Paramatmatatva  (the 
metaphysical entity) that every pious people with holy spirit must know about. Srimad  Bhagavat 
is a delicious  and relishing  fruit of Vedas.  Because  of a touch  of Sri Shukacharya's  lips, it is 
impregnated  with blissful  nectar.  So, as long as there  is life in his body,  a devotee  keeps  on 
relishing this nectar of divine scripture. It is easily available right here on the earth  itself.  
   
 
PERFORMANCE OF JNANA -YAGYA  
In the beginning of the Kali Yuga, sages like Shaunak et al organiz ed a vast Jnana Yagya in  the 
holy region  of the Naimisharanya.  The purpose  of the yagya  was the benefit  of the common 
people  and it was to last for a millennium.  To quench  the spiritual  curiosity  of the sages,  Suta, 
the orator  of Puranas,  also arrived  there. Felicitating  him, the sages  asked  Suta,  " O great  sage, 
by the grace  of Vyasa,  you have  learned  all the Puranas,  history,  religion  etc. You also know 
about  all the other  subjects  as well.  So kindly  narrate  the tale which  could  surely  benefit  the 
common people so that they too can experience the real spiritual  joy."  
 
Pleased by the curiosity of the sages, Suta said, " O great sages, it is extremely auspicious to  talk 
about Lord Krishna. Only by discussing about the God, can the mind of the people be freed  from 
illusions.  Love  then begins  to emerge  in it for God and it begins  to detach  itself  from  physical 
comfort and experience the blissful  joy. 
   
 
LORD VISHNU - THE SOURCE OF WHOLE  CREATION  
Driven by the desire, the Adi Purusha (primitive being) Narayan t ook the help of his  Prakriti 
(nature's  female  creational  force)  and generated  himself  in Chaturbhuj  (four -armed)  from.  And 
from  His navel  appeared  Lord  Brahma,  the creator.  That form  of God was full of pure truth  and 
from  the parts  of His body,  all the Lokas (worlds)  got extension.  Metaphysicists  saw the God 
with innumerable heads, eyes, arms and legs. That endless, eternal Supreme Being was  the 
source of all the Avatars (incarnations) and from the parts of His body was created Gods,  human 
beings, birds ani mals and all other  creatures.  
 
From  the ages,  twenty -four incarnations  of that Supreme  being,  like Sanakadi  Kumar,  Varaha, 
Narada, Nar -Narayana, Kapila, Dattatreya, Rishabhdev, Prithu, Matsya,  Kachchhap, 
Dhanvantari, Mohini, Narasinha, Vamana, Parshurama, Vyasa, Sri Rama, Balarama, Krishna  and 
Buddha have appeared to guard the people and to remove the burden from the earth, and to  save 
their devotees  and gentlemen.  Suta says,  " Blessed  are those  who have  unconditional  love for 
Lord  Vasudev,  the lord of the universe.  Such  people  don't  fall again  and again,  in the cycles  of 
life and death.  Bhagavat  Mahapurana  is such a scripture  in which  the great  sage Veda  Vyasa 
describes the holy and pious tales of the God. For the benefit of the people,  Veda  Vyasa 
compiled  this great scripture taking extracts of all the Vedas, and other ancient  treatises. 
Reading, hearing or reflecting on which, the human being inclines to devotion and  finds 
salvation.  
Shaunk  asked,  " When  that tale was compiled  in scriptural  form,  that was later on related  by 
Shukadeva. Where was it created? For what purpose and by whose inspiration, that scripture  was 
compiled  and how did Shukadeva,  who was congenital  wandered,  came  to study  this scripture, 
and how he came to see the king Parikshit? What discussion took place between  them?"  
 
What Suta narrated to the sages, forms the main body of the great scripture Srimad  Bhagavat. - 
   
 
VEDA VYASA THE PARTIAL  INCARNATION  
Veda Vyasa had appeared in Dwapar Yuga. He was the son of Maharshi Parashar and  Satya wati 
then known as Matsyagandha. Vyasa was a partial incarnation of the God. Veda Vyasa effected  a 
division of Vedas, created Puranas conceptualized history (Mahabharataa -which was  actually 
jotted down by none other than Lord Ganesha.) He also established different faculties  for 
teaching his disciples. Yet staying in his hermitage at the banks of the river Saraswati, he was  not 
satisfied with his performance. Something was still writhing within his heart to come out. So  he 
was feelling  upset  and was unable  to find a reason  for his dejection.  Just then,  Devarshi  Narada 
arrived  there,  and saw that Mahatma  Vyasa  was upset.  As nothing  was concealed  from  Narada, 
he told him the reasons for his  moroseness.  
 
Narada told him that though he had created great epics, y et all of them lack a  devotional 
description  of God.  That was why his soul was still writhing.  Narada  also suggested  him to 
describe  the glory  of Hari,  or neither  his voice,  nor his creation  would  ever get pure.  Devarshi 
Narada  then narrated  the tale of God and the glory  of His devotees  to Vyasa  and said, "O great 
soul, look at the effect of devotion and company of the pious people that I have become  Devarshi 
from an ordinary son of a  maid"  
 
After  the departure  of Narada,  Vyasa  sat in meditation  and experie nced  the illusion  that caught 
the life. He also experienced  devotion.  Thus,  his fresh  experience  led Veda  Vyasa  to create  this 
great  scripture.  The virtues  of God had such a strong  attraction  that, lured  by them,  even  self- 
indulgent  Shukdevi  ran back  from  the jungles  to his father  and prayed  to let him read that 
scripture.  
 
Because of their link with Lord Sri Krishna, Suta narrates the stories of Pandavas, their  heavenly 
departure, coronation of Parikshit, his all round victories etc. as per their sequence s in 
Mahabharata. He also narrates the episodes of Ashwatthama the son of Guru Drona, worship  of 
God by Kunti etc. and migration of Lord Krishna to  Dwaraka.  
   
 
KING PARIKSHIT ENCOUNTERS KALI  YUGA  
During his regime, the king Parikshit got untoward reports that Kali Yuga had entered within  the 
limits of his otherwise peaceful kingdom. With a huge army, Parikshit at once setout to the  spot 
where Kali Yuga had arrived. On the way he saw the religion and the earth in the guises of a  bull 
and a cow respectively.  The cow was in death -like condition,  while  the bull was somehow 
dragging himself on one leg only as its three legs were broken. He also saw that a king -like, but 
impolite  man  was  beating them  ruthlessly with  a  stick.  From  a  distance,  the  king  Parikshit  
shouted at the man, "You scoundrel, why are you beating such helpless creatures in  my 
kingdom?" Saying this, the king Parikshit drew his sword to kill the evil Kali. But the clever  Kali 
fell at the feet of the king. For Kali was now in the king's refuge, he did not kill him, but  ordered 
that being  an assistant  of irreligious,  he should  at once  leave  the kingdom.  Kali then asked,  " O 
king wherever I go, I find you ready to kill me with you bow and arrow. You tell me  where 
should  I go and where  shoul d I live?"  The king allowed  Kali to live in five things -- gambling, 
drinking of wine, company of women, violence and the gold. Since then, Kali i.e. the dispute  has 
had a continuous association with these five things. Hence, anybody disirous of  self- 
impro vement must avoid these five things which are governed by  Kali.  
   
 
KING PARIKSHIT DISHONORS SAGE  SHAMIK  
One day, king Parikshit  went  on a hunting  excursion.  Till noon,  he could  not find a game.  He 
was feeling  restless  because  of hunger,  thirst  and fatigue . Searching  water  and shelter  the king 
reached the hermitage of the sage Shamik. Shamik was in deep meditation so he did  not 
welcome the king. For the first time the king Parikshit grew angry with a Brahmin. As a  revenge 
and to show his anger he hanged a dead snake around the sage's  neck.  
 
Maharshi  Shamik's  son Sringi  was also an effluent  person.  When  he came  to know  about  his 
father's  insult  by the king Parikshit,  he cursed  him that on the seventh  day from  that moment, 
Takshak, the Naga would bite the kin g for his violation of kingly glory. There in the capital,  king 
Parikshit  realized  his mistake  and felt sorry  for his deed.  But he welcomed  the curse. 
Transferring  the kingdom  to his son Janamejay,  king Parikshit  reached  the banks  of the river 
Ganges  and sat there  on a fast unto death.  Very  soon  all the great  sages  and kings  began  to 
throng there. King Parikshit welcomed them and begged them to recite the plays of God for  him. 
He also asked what a creature ought to do always, and what were the duties of tho se who face  an 
imminent  death.  
   
 
SHUKHADEVA'S  ARRIVAL  
At that moment  the ever-wandering,  indifferent -natured  sage Shukadeva  also arrived  there.  He 
was self indulgent  and free from  the bondages  of ashramas  (phases  of life).  He was then only 
sixteen years old but appeared quite radiant and  graceful.  
 
Shukadeva was an honorable figure even for the sages who had gathered there as  gust 
themselves. King Parikshit formally welcomed and worshiped Shukadeva and offered him  a 
comfortable seat. King Parikshit then p rayed to him, " O sage, Lord Krishna is definitely  pleased 
with me. That's  why He has sent a great  sage like you to save a wretched  person  like me. So, O 
Mahatma  (the great  soul),  kindly  remove  my doubts  and guide  me regarding  the duties  of a 
human -being? What should one acquire and what should one  drop?"  
   
 
SECOND  CHAPTER  
Sri Shukadeva says 'O King, ordinary people literally waste their lives in petty matters  like 
useless discussions, worry, sleep and feeding themselves. Those who wish to conquer their  fears, 
O Parikshit,  must  listen  to, recite  and remember  the tales that depict  the plays  of Lord  Sri 
Krishna. The human birth can be successful only if by any means one has a remembrance of  God 
in his last moments. All the scriptures also dictate the same  doctrine.  
 
One should remember the huge, macro as well as micro form of the omnipresent God, and  must 
not long for the physical objects. Shukadeva then revealed the kinds of Mukti (salvation) as  told 
in Vedas  and said:  'O King,  there  is no other  way as benefi cial as the means  to achieve  the 
affectionate devotion of Lord Vasudev. Hence, every human being must in all circumstances,  use 
his might in listening to, reciting and remembering the name of Lord Sri  Hari.  
 
Though  as per the interest,  nature,  and the desires of different  people,  and pleased  by their 
worship,  many  gods  oblige  their devotees  within  their powers.  But materialization  of mundane 
desires  of the innocent  people  has disastrous  consequences.  Learned  people,  therefore,  whether 
they have or haven't a ny desire, worship Purushaottam God with fervent  devotion.  
   
 
CREATION OF THE  WORLD  
The king Parikshit felt extreme pleasure when Shukadeva satisfied his queries. He then began  to 
feel submerged in the stream of Bhagavat Katha (tale of the God). His selfi sh worries  regarding 
his own benefits  existed  no more.  He insisted  again:  O Brahmin,  now kindly  explain  how does 
the God create  the universe  out of illusions.  How  does He preserve  the universe?  How  does He 
destroy  it? At the instance  of the king,  Shukadeva  contemplated  on the God and presented  the 
dialogue of Brahma and Narada that illustrates the Maitreya nature of the  creation.  
 
Brahma  had preached  Narada  that because  of Paramatma's  (Supreme  Being)  desire  of creation, 
this universe into existence from the  primitive elements. Lord Brahma also told that  after 
creating  the universe  God himself  entered  it. Hence,  the whole  universe  is a manifestation  of 
God's  infinite  appearance.  His virtues  can not be counted.  But, to show  his presence,  Narayan 
takes  various  incarnations  and appears  on earth  time and again.  Merely,  by listening  to various 
beautiful  and enticing  plays  of God,  the mind,  voice,  thoughts  and the soul of a human  being 
become  holy.  
 
Parikshit again put forth many new queries regarding creation. Shu kadeva related the events  like 
emergence  of Brahamji  on a lotus  that cropped  up from  the navel  of Lord  Vishnu,  sighting  of 
Lord  Vishnu's  abode  by Lord  Brahma,  preaching  of Bhagavat  to Lord  Brahma  by Lord  Vishnu 
and Dashlakshan (ten characteristics) of Bhag avat etc. 
   
 
THIRD  CHAPTER  
 
VIDURA WARNS  DHRITARASHTRA  
Sri Shukadeva says, "O Parikshit, Vidura deserted his homely comforts and luxuries because  he 
had to protest against injustice." When, after losing in the game of dice, the  Pandavas 
successfully passe d the period of their exile and stay in guise, and were denied even then of  their 
rightful  share  in  the  kingdom,  Vidura  was  summoned  for  consultations.  Vidura  had    then 
suggested Dhritrashtra thus "O king, if you wish to save your family, you please  abandon 
Duryodhan who is an embodiment of all the evils. He is jealous of none other than Lord  Krishna. 
That is why you are getting  dull day by day and loosing  your radiance."  These  words  infuriated 
Duryodhan  so much  so that he began  to abusively  insult Vidura.  But, Vidura  didn't  mind  his 
words  even  though  he felt seriously  hurt at heart.  Accepting  his insult  as a play of God,  Vidura 
silently left Hastinapur and went on a  pilgrimage.  
   
 
VIDURA COMES TO KNOW ABOUT  KAURAVA'S 
DESTRUCTION  
Travelling  through  various  pilgrimage  places,  Vidura  reached  Prabhas  region  where  he got the 
news  of total destruction  of the Kaurvas.  The news  deeply  moved  him. In search  of solace,  he 
continued to wander from one place of pilgrimage to another place. During his wander ing, when 
he reached  the banks  of the river  Yamuna,  Vidura  met Uddhava  the selfless  and calm  server  of 
God.  They  both met affectionately  and enquired  about  the wellbeing  of each other.  They  were 
both reflecting  on the plays  of Lord  Krishna  and feeling  extreme joy. Vidura  had also got the 
news of departure of Lord Krishna to his abode and destruction of Yadavas by fierce  infightings. 
So he was extremely depressed also. Uddhava told him that Lord Krishna himself had  bestowed 
His grace  on him and preached  Bhag avat jnana,  which  He had once  preached  to Lord  Brahma. 
By the dictate  of Lord,  Uddhava  was going  to Badrikasharma.  So he suggested  Vidura  to see 
Maitreya  for the metaphysical  knowledge,  for before  departing  to his abode,  Lord  Krishna  had 
dictated him (Mait reya) to preach Bhagavat to Vidura. As per the suggestion, Vidura  reached 
Haridwar and saw the sage Maitreya on the banks of the river  Ganges.  
 
The pious  Vidura  respectfully  greeted  the sage Maitreya  and said, "O lord, the people  in this 
world  perform  various actions  with a desire  to have pleasure.  But neither  do they get pleasure 
nor is their sorrow removed. Their sorrow increases instead. What is good then, is this  context?  
 
O great  among  the sages,  kindly  preach  me the way to peace,  following  which,  one meets  the 
God who then takes abode in the heart of his devotee and instills in him the Santan Gyan  (eternal 
knowledge) that lets the devotee feel the direct presence of  Him.  
 
Thus asked with devotion by Vidura, Mahatma Maitreya illuminated the glory of God  and other 
events  like creation  of universe  by illusion  and origin  of colossus  body,  and said:  No one can 
measure the eternal glory of God and the illusions created by  Him.  
 
In the beginning God created the primitive elements and the flaws associated with them. Then  he 
created the colossus universe and entered  it. 
   
 
DESCRIPTION OF TEN WAYS CREATION  BY 
MAITREYA  
1. By the inspiration  of God and because  of imbalance  in pious  virtues,  creation  of Mahattatva 
(the soul) was the first (Mahattatva the  soul).  
2. From Ma hattatva (the soul) originates Ahankar (the ego) which generates five  primitive 
elements (the earth, the fire, the air, the water and the ether), sense organs and motor  organs.  
 
3. Group  of Tanmatras  (the subtle  forms  of matter)  that generate  the five major  elements,  is the 
third  creation.  
 
4. Creation of organs that have the power of sensing and moving is the fourth  creation.  
 
5. Creation of the mind that governs the senses and was appeared from ego, is the fifth  creation.  
 
6. Appearance of mind and the illusions that  misguide it, is the sixth  creation.  
 
7. The above  mentioned  six creations  are known  as natural  creations  also. Creatures  other  than 
these six have no power of knowledge, they can experience the touch only. These creatures  like 
trees and other vegetables are known as the seventh  creation.  
 
8. Eighth creation is of the birds and  animals.  
 
9. Ninth  creation  is of those  human  beings  who seek pleasure  in action  and luxuries  which  are 
infact the cause of  sorrow.  
 
10. Tenth creation is of the great sages like Sanatkumar etc. Thus at the beginning of the  Kalpa, 
God the creator used Rajas gunas (royal virtues) to create himself in the form of the  universe.  
 
Maitreyaji  says,  " This whole  creation  is a manifestation  of the plays  of God.  That omnipotent 
God created  the universe  just by His wish  and for the sake of His play.  For the extension  of the 
creation, Lord Brahma wished and create four sons - Sanak, Sanandan, Sanatan and  Sanatkumar.  
 
Thereafter, with a desire to create world, Lord Brahma ordered them to produce population.  But 
Lord Brahma's sons had no interest in wordily affairs. Lord Brahma therefore cursed them  to 
remain in children's form forever. Then from Lord Brahma's eyebrows appeared a baby,  blue-red 
in color. The baby appeared in eleven forms and began to cry immediat ely after his arrival.  Lord 
Brahma consoled him! "Don't cry my son, you will be named as Rundra." So the eleven forms  of 
the baby  came  to be known  as eleven  Rundras.  Rundranis  (female  Rundra)  were  also created. 
From Tamas Prakriti (malignant nature) Rundra  created the ghosts, the spooks, the spectres,  the 
devils,  lamias  etc. Afraid  by their appearances,  Lord  Brahma  prayed  Rudra,  " O Mahadeva, 
please stop creating such formidable organisms. They are already enough in number. Now,  you 
please undertake penance  to comfort all the  creatures."  
 
Thereafter, Lord Brahma created ten more sons - Marichi, Bhrigu, Kratu, Pulah, Pulatsya,  Angira, 
Atri, Vashishtha, Daksha and Narada. Nine out of them took permission for the creation of  their 
offsprings,  but Narada  accepted  celibacy  and resolved  to preach  Bhagavat  bhakti  (devotion  for 
God.)   
For the continuation of the creation, Lord himself appeared as a female from the left hand and  as 
a male  from  the right  hand  of Lord  Brahma.  Those  males  and females  forms  were  named  Manu  
and Shatarupa respectively. They were the first in the whole creation to copulate and bring  about 
sexual reproduction. They begot two sons - Priyvrat and Uttanapad, and three daughters - Devhuti, 
Akuti  and Prasuti.  As the primitive  king,  Manu  was the foster er of the earth.  By then a demon 
named Hiranyaksh abducted the earth and hid it under the abyssimal depth of the ocean,  causing 
worries for Lord Brahma. Instantly Lord appeared himself in Varaha (boar) incarnation and to  do 
away  with Lord  Brahma's  worries,  He at once  entered  the depth  of the ocean  and rescued  the 
earth  on His long teeth.  On the way the Lord  had an encounter  with Hiranyaksh  and killed  the 
demon with His  wheel.  
 
Maitreya: says Hiranyaksh represented anger. Those who don't want to discharge th eir duties,  but 
still wish to live with all the comforts are abductors of others wealth. Such people,  who 
continuously interfere with equal distribution of wealth, must be condemned as the  demons.  
 
On the origin  of the demons,  Maitreya  cryptic  said, once  Diti, the wife Maharshi  Kashyapa, 
expressed  her desire  to conceive.  Maharshi  Kashyapa  tried to disuade  her that time was not 
suitable for an auspicious job like conception. But Diti kept on insisting and forced her  husband 
shamelessly to assist her in the p rocess. Consequently she conceived during the dusk.  Kashyapaji 
cautioned  her "you  will give birth  to the demons."  And with the arrival  of the demons  in Diti's 
womb, nature began to manifest herself  adversely.  
 
There  was terror  and famine  all around,  and darkness  prevailed  even  during  day, with stars 
appearing in the sky. Frightened by these manifestations, the gods asked Lord Brahma about  the 
reason of all those disturbances. Lord Brahma informed them that two demons were to take  birth 
from  Diti. Those  two demons,  told Lord  Brahma,  were  the two gatekeepers -- Jay-Vijay,  of the 
Lord's  abode.  Once,  Sanakadi  Kumar  had gone  to Vaikunthdham  (God's  abode)  to see God but 
those two gatekeepers didn't let them in. Sanakadi tried thrice, but only to be stopped every  time 
by those two gatekeepers at the gates. Hence, Sanakadi Kumar cursed them to take birth on  earth 
as demons.  Those  two gatekeepers  of God's  abode  Jay-Vijay  appeared  first as Hiranyakashipu 
and Hiranyaksha,  second  time as Ravana  and Kumbhkuran  and third  time as Duntvakra  and 
Shishupal.  
   
 
SAGE  KARDAM  
Continuing the process of creation, Brahma produced Sage Kardam from his shadow and  asked 
him to observe  penance  first. Thereafter,  Brahma  dictated  Kardam  to acquire  physical  strength 
and the strength  of his sense and undertake  the process  of creating  his offsprings.  As per his 
father's dictate, Kardam observed severe penance. Pleased by his selfless penance, God  asked 
Kardam  to seek a boon.  Karadam  said, "Lord  all the things  in the world  are ephemeral;  only 
you're eternal.  It will be an abuse  of the intelligence  to beg for some  ephemeral  thing  from  an 
eternal  God."  
 
Overwhelmed by Kardam's plain words, God said in benediction 'On the third day from now  you 
will be married to Devhuti, the daughter of Manu. Nine daughters will take birth in your home.  I 
will myself  appear  as your son' Saying  this, God disappeared.  As per the boon  Kardam  got 
married  to Devhuti,  the daughter  of Manu.  Their  formal  marriage  was the first of its kind in the 
creation,  adopted  as  a  r eligiously  accepted  means  for  continuation  of  life.  Donating    their 
daughter  Devhuti  to the sage Kardam,  Manu  and Shatarupa  returned  to their abode.  As Mata 
Parvati used to serve Lord Lord Shiva, similarly Devhuti served Kardam with  dedication.  
 
Once the sage Kardam  noticed  that Devhuti  has aged  and Sriveled  by harsh  living.  Pleased  by 
her dedication, Kardam asked her to seek a boon. Devhuti only begged that there should never  be 
any lethargy in any service on her part towards him. Pleased again by  her pure feelings  Kardam 
provided her with heavenly luxuries. Together they enjoyed those luxuries for many years  during 
which  nine daughters  were  born to them.  All those  daughters  symbolised  the Navadha  Bhakti 
(nine  kinds  of devotion)  and were  married  to nine Prajapatis  like Marichi  etc. Thus  kala was 
married  to Marichi,  Anusuya  to Atri, Shradha  to Angira,  Havirbhu  to Pulatsya,  Gati to Pulah, 
Shanti  to Atharva,  Krita  to Kratu,  Khyati  to Bhrigu  and Arundhati  was married  to the sage 
Vashishtha.  
   
 
LORD  KAP ILA 
Married life of Kardam and Devhuti is a lesson for all the civilized couples of the world.  Abiding 
to the limits  of human  behaviour  in married  life is a guarantee  for the wellbeing  of the couple. 
Without religion and morality, a man is not more than an  animal. Kardam and Devhuti  followed 
strict  rules  to welcome  the arrival  of eternal  God.  Thus,  in due time,  God appeared  as their son. 
With His arrival the gods showered flowers. Lord Brahma alongwith his sons welcomed the  God 
and said 'O pious  daughter  of Manu,  Sri Hari has arrived  as your son. He will destroy  the lust, 
and illusion and will preach his own philosophy. He will be known in the world as  Kapila.  
 
Worshiping  the lord Kapila,  sage Kardam  said 'O lord, by your grace,  I'm free now from  all the 
three obligations and all my desires are now granted.' With these words, Kardam took  to 
asceticism.  
  LORD KAPILA PREACHES  METAPHYSICAL 
KNOWLEDGE TO  DEVHUTI  
Mata  Devhuti  prayed  lord Kapila  to preach  the way for the benefaction  of the soul,  which  is 
attached  with ephimeral  body.  Lord  said 'O mother,  Adhayatma  Yoga  (spiritual  conjugation)  is 
the main  way of benefaction  for the human  beings.  With  devotion  for me, soul becomes  self- 
knowing. Total devotion of the soul in my form and virtues and listening my tales,  unmistakably 
show  devotion.  This leads  to an inseparable  rapport  between  my devotee  and me. This is the 
greatest benefaction for the  humans.  
 The world is like an ocean of death and I cause salvation of those who give up all their lusts  and   
recite my name with fervent devotion. This whole nature has different forms, but it is  ephimeral 
and constantly changing. It has twenty -four divisions -five major elements (ether, air, fire,  water 
and earth); five souls (sound, touch, appearance, fluid and smell); five  sense organs (eyes,  nose, 
ears, tongue  and skin);  five motor  organs  (mouth,  hands,  legs, penis  and bones)  and mind, 
intelligence, conscience and  ego. 
That omnipresent Purusha (an epithet of God) voluntarily accepted Prakriti (an epithet for  female 
force).  From  her various  virtues,  Prakriti  created  various  creatures  that corresponded  exactly  to 
the virtues  that caused  their creation.  In the mess,  the mantle  that covered  the knowledge  also 
caused  illusion  for the Jivatma  (microcosm  of omnipotent  spirit)  whic h thus forgot  his original 
appearance.  
The creature then began to assume the nature as a reflection of his own appearance -- though  she is  
different  from  and opposite  to him-- and himself  as the doer.  Such  an ego regarding  ones 
duties  leads  to his entanglem ent in the cycles  of life and death.  Differentiating  between  the 
Prakriti and Purusha and experiencing their real appearances respectively, introspecting  sages 
have  had a sight  of the Supreme  Being  through  their conscience  and achieve  the unparrlel 
Brahma  Pada.  
Lord  Kapila  says,  "Through  the union  of the sperm  and the ovum,  the human  body  appears  as a 
lump in the womb. His body forms completely within six months. Sense organs  develop 
thereafter.  Twenty  fifth element,  the soul,  then enters  the human  body.  With that, the body 
begins to experience hunger and thirst. Then suffering with many kinds of desires,  the microcosm  
prays  me to save him from  the tortures  of staying  in the womb.  I present  him with a sight of me 
in his  heart.  
 
It then takes  birth  because  of my grace.  But as soon  as it appears  on the earth  the human  being 
begins  to forget  me. Still,  I present  him with my sight  for two to three  months  more,  when  he 
begins to laugh. But people arooound him think that he is laughing for his mother.  Nobody 
remin ds him of me in his childhood.  Youth  of a human  being  passes  in futile  activities.  In old 
age, his organs begin to fail and a human being finds himself unable to recite my name. Thus,  the 
whole life of a human being just passes in the illusion of 'I', 'me'  and 'my' and he reaches his  last 
stage, and begins to realize his mistake. But then it is usually too late for him to do anything  for 
his benefaction. If he has done any good deed in life, he may meet fortune, but  without  a 
devotion for me, no one can be  happy. Only when the soul comes in my refuge, he gets free  from 
the bondages of life and  death.  
 
Maitre says, O Vidura, thereafter Devhuti concentrated her mind in the divine appearance of  Sri 
Hari,  as presented  by Lord  Kapila.  At once,  she got free from  all the sufferings.  She got a sight 
of God in her conscience  and her body  transformed  into a holy river.  The place  where  Mata 
Devhuti received salvation is still known as Siddhi Pada. It is a renowned place of  pilgrimage.  
 
 FOURTH  CHAPTER  
 
DESCRIPTION OF T HE CLANS OF MANU'S  DAUGHTERS  
 
Maitreya  then related  the description  of the Manu's  daughters.  Manu  and Shatarupa  had three  daughters - 
Akuti, Devhuti and Prasuti. Akuti was married to a Prajapati named Ruchi. They begot two children -- a  
son and a daughter. The son later on came to be known as Yagyavatar of Lord Narayana, while  the 
daughter  was named  Dakshaina.  In due course,  Yagya  and Dakshaina  begot  twelve  sons - Tosh,  Pratosh,  
Santosh,  Bhadra,  Shanti,  Indrapati,  Idhm,  Kavi,  Vibhu,  Swanh,  Sudev  and Rochan.  
Manu's  second  daughter  Devhuti  was married  to the sage Kardam.  They  begot  nine daughters 
who were  married,  in due course  to nine Prajapatis.  One of them,  named  Kala,  was married  to 
the sage Marichi. They begot Kashyapa and Purnima. Their offsprings comprise  today's 
population of the entire world. Gati was the wife of Pulah. They begot three sons  Karmshreshtha, 
Variyan and  Sahishnu.  
 
Pleased  by the penance  of Ansuya  and Atri, the Tridevas  (trinity  of Brahma,  Vishnu  and Lord 
Shiva) sent their parts as the sons  to the hermit couple. Among them Chandrama appeared  from 
Brahma's part, Dattatreya from Vishnus part and sage Durvasa appeared from Lord Shiva's  part. 
 
To Shardha  and Angira  were  born four daughters - Simivali,  Kuhu,  Raka  and Anumati.  They 
begot two sons a lso- Utathya and Brihaspati. Havirbhu was married to Pulastya. They begot  two 
sons- Agastya  and Vishrava.  In later course,  sage Vishrava  produced  Yakshraj  Kubera  from 
Idvida, while his second wife Keshini gave birth to Ravana, Kumbhkaran and  Vibhishan.  
 
Vashishtha and his wife Arundhati begot seven Brahmarishis like Chitraketu. Sage Atharva  and 
his wife Chitti  begot  a son Taponishth.  Geat  sage Bhrigu  and his wife Khyati  begot  two sons- 
Dhata and Vidhata, and a daughter - Sri. 
 
Manu's  third  daughter  Prasuti  was married  to Daksha,  the son of Lord  Brahma.  She got sixteen 
daughters. Daksha married thirteen of them to Dharm. Of the remaining three daughters, one was 
married  to Agni,  one to Pitrgana  and one to Lord  Lord  Shiva.  Shradha,  Maitri,  Daya,  Shanti, 
Tushti,  Pushti, Kriya, Unnati, Buddhi, Medha, Titiksha, Hree and Murti are the wives  of 
Dharma. Of these Murti begot the sages Nar -Narayan. Swaha the wife of Agni begot three  sons- 
Pavak,  Pawaman  and Shuchi.  Two daughters  were  born to Swadha  the wife of Pitrgana s. They 
were  named  Dharini  and Vayuna.  These  both daughters  were  Brahma  vadinis  (expounders  of 
vedas.)  Sati, the youngest  daughter  of Daksha  and wife of Mahadeva,  however  could  not begot 
any offspring  because  she had committed  immolation  in her youth  as a protest  against  her 
father's misbehaviour with her husband  Mahadeva.  
   
 
MISBEHAVIOUR OF DAKSHA PRAJAPATI WITH  LORD 
SHIVA  
Vidura  asked  Maitreya:  'Lord  Shiva  is an idol of peace.  He has no enemity  with anyone.  He is 
self indulgent Why did then Daksha Prajap ati misbehave with  Him?  
 
Maitreya  said, " Once  a meeting  of Brahmavadis  (expounders  of vedas)  was organized.  Along 
with all the gods  Lord  Shiva  and Brahma  were  also present  in the meeting.  Because  of being  a 
Prajapati, Daksha was allowed a late entry in th e meeting. Moreover, when Daksha did arrive,  all 
the gods,  except  Brahma  and Lord  Shiva,  stood  up to pay him regards.  Honor  by thousands  of 
gods did not please Daksha as much as he felt insulted the by behaviour of Lord  Shiva.  
 
Brahma was the father of Dak sha, so he didn't mind his behaviour. But seeing Lord Shiva  sitting 
there and not paying due respect to him, Daksha got angry. He said, "He is like my disciple.  I've 
married  my daughter  to him but he is uncourteous  and irreligious.  I committed  a blunder  by 
marrying  my daughter  to him. He smears  ashes  of pyre and roams  at the cremation  sites.  Only 
the ghosts are his companions." Thus, Daksha cursed Lord Shiva. "May this Lord Shiva not  get 
his due share along with the Gods in  oblations."  
 
Nandi, the prominent  among Lord Shiva's servers, cursed Daksha in retaliation: "May the  unwise 
Daksha  lose his mind  and be like an animal  always  bound  to a woman."  Thereafter  indignant 
Lord Shiva at once left the meeting alongwith his followers. But still Daksha didn't put  the 
matter  at rest. To humble  Lord  Shiva,  he organised  a grand  yagya  named  Barhaspati.  All the 
Brahmarishis, devarishis, pitars, gods etc. attended the yagya alongwith their  wives.  
 
From  her abode  on Kailash,  Sati saw all the gods  going  through  air to the grand occasion.  She 
also learned about the grand yagya organised by her father Daksha. Out of curiosity, she  insisted 
her husband Lord Lord Shiva, "O Vamdev, your father -in-law, Daksha Prajapati has organised  a 
grand  feast.  If you wish,  should  we also go there to attend  the feast.  I desire  to see my beloved 
mother, sisters, and other relatives." Lord Shiva replied! "O beautiful, though one  may  go 
without  invitation  to his parents'  home,  may visit teachers  and siblings.  But your father  resents 
me. So it is not good  if we go there  uninvited.  I will not tolerate  if he humiliates  you. So, you 
should not go there, because a humiliation by a near one may cause immediate  death.'  
 
In fact, Sati had a logical mind, while Lord Shiva gave more weightage to faith than  logic.  
 
Sati even had a doubt regarding God's incarnation as Lord Rama, that how could  Parbrahma 
Parmatma,  who is the father  of all, be a son of any human  being.  Moreover,  how could  the 
Supreme Being be in so much sorrow because of his wife's separation. Lo rd Shiva and  Sati, 
therefore, had a sight of Lord Rama in exile. Lord Shiva silently saluted Lord  Rama's 
appearance, while Sati decided to give Rama a test. So taking a guise of Sita, Sati  appeared 
before Rama. Lord Rama knew everything so he regarded her  as Sati. He also showed her  some 
of His  glories.  
 
Now  Sati had firm belief  in Lord  Rama.  She returned  to Lord  Shiva  and gave  her verdict  that 
Lord Rama was indeed an incarnation of the Supreme Being. But Lord Shiva was  much 
disturbed by Sati because of h er taking the guise of  Sita. 
 Lord  Shiva  had, therefore,  acquired  an indifferent  stance  towards  Sati. Thus  she was feeling 
anguished  by Lord  Shiva's  behaviour.  Hence  she prayed  silently:  'O Lord,  may my body  be 
destroyed soon, as this body is not able to s erve Lord  Shiva'  
 
Hence,  when  she heard  about  the grand  feast  organised  by her father,  in abject  violation  of her 
husband's dictate, Sati got ready to attend the feast. Lord Shiva too sent her with a lot of gifts  and 
servants.  There  at Daksha's  palace  Sati found  that all were  ignoring  her because  of her father's 
fear. Even her sisters laughed at her for coming alone. In all, Sati found nothing favourable in  her 
father's home. Only her mother welcomed her that too in isolation. Indignant, Sati went  straight 
to the Yagya Mandap (canopy for performing oblation) and found that no seat had been  allotted 
there for Lord  Shiva.  
With  anger  she said;  'Even  the mere  name  of Lord  Shiva  is enough  to destroy  all the sins of the 
humans.  No one can violate  His dictate.  And you, O father,  feel jealous  of such an auspicious 
figure,  holy,  Lord  Lord  Shiva,  who is soul of every  living  being.  I am ashamed  of having  this 
body produced from an opponent of Lord Shiva, like you.' Saying these words, Sati threw herself 
in the flames  of Yagyagni  (the fire of the Yagya)  Thereafter,  Lord  Shiva's  ganas  (servers) 
destroyed  the Yagya.  They  beheaded  Daksha  and dropped  his head  in the altar.  Other  gods  and 
the sages  were  also punished  for showing  disrespect  for Lord  Shiva.  Ultimately,  Lord  Brah ma, 
accompanied by the gods, went to Kailash and pacified Lord Shiva. Ashutosh  Lord  Shiva 
granted them a boon to carry the Yagya to  completion.  
 
In her next birth,  Sati was born in the home  of Himalayas.  She was named  as Parvati.  Sober, 
cool, and an idol of faith, Mata Parvati dedicated herself fully to Lord Shiva. Narada gave her  a 
talisman to get Lord Shiva as her husband. Lord Narayan himself requested Lord Shiva to  accept 
Parvati as his wife. Lord Shiva accepted to get married with Parvati. Thus, throu gh hard  penance, 
Mata Parvati got Lord Shiva as her husband. In due course the auspicious marriage of  Mata 
Parvati with Lord Shiva took  place.  
   
 
TALE OF DHRUVA  
The self-begotten  Manu  had two sons- Priyvrat  and Uttanpad.  King  Uttanpad  had two queens - 
Suniti and Suruchi.  Uttanpad  loved  Suruchi  more  than he loved  Suniti.  So Suniti  was forced  to 
live outside  the royal  palace  with her son Dhruva,  while  Suruchi  and her son Uttam  enjoyed  all 
the luxuries in the palace. Once the King was playing with his soon Utt am who was siting in  his 
lap. Meanwhile, Dhruva too arrived there and began insisting to sit in his father's lap. But for  the 
fear of Suruchi  the king did not take Dhruva  in his lap. Just then,  Suruchi  too arrived  there. 
Strutting  at her fortune,  she ridiculed Dhruva:  'Though  you are also a son of the king,  but you 
have  no right  to sit on the throne  because  you are not borne  to me. You are the son of queen 
Suniti  who is neglected  by the King,  and now lives  like a mistress.  So your desire  is hard to 
accompli sh. Even then if you wish to have the throne, you begin to worship Lord Narayana,  and 
take birth through me by His grace and then wait for your chance to sit in the King's  lap.' 
 
Hurt by his stepmother's  harsh  words,  Dhruva  came  to his mother  crying.  When  Suniti  heard 
about the incidence, she felt very sorry. Still, with patience she consoled her son Dhruva, 'O  my 
son, don't  wish  ill for the others.  Those  who cause  sorrow  for others,  have  to face the outcome 
themselves one day. Your stepmother is right. You  have been born to me. Even then, if you wish 
to be enthroned like the prince Uttam, give up your jealousy and start worshipping  Lord 
Narayan. Even you're grand father Manu and great grand - father Lord Brahma worshipped  him. 
Only Lord Narayan can remove yo ur sorrow.'  
 
Mother's  words  shook  the conscience  of Dhruva.  He at once  set out with firm determination  to 
please Sri Hari by penance. Leaving the town, while going in search of solitude he met  devarshi 
Narada  in the way.  Dhruva  respectfully  greeted  Narada.  Narada  lovingly  caressed  his head  and 
tried to test his determination.  Narada  tried everything  to convince  Dhruva  to send him back  to 
his home,  but he failed  to shake  the firm determination  of the boy. Then  with kindness,  Narada 
preached Dhruva about Lord 's appearance and gave him a  mantra.  
Thus,  Narada  performed  his duty as Guru  and blessing  Dhruva,  he disappeared.  Dhruva  arrived 
in Madhuvan  and took a seat under  a Kadamba  tree on the bank  of the river  Yamuna.  There  he 
began  to recite  the mantra  and medit ation.  During  the first month  he ate roots  and tubers.  In the 
second  month  he ate dried  leaves.  During  the third  month  he managed  with Yamuna's  water. 
During  the fourth  month  he sustained  himself  on the air only.  Dhruva  even  stopped  breathing. 
Now, standin g on one leg only, he was fully concentrated in Lord Vasudev. At the moment  when 
Dhruva stopped breathing and concentrated in Parbrahma, all the three worlds shook with  fear. 
 
All the gods  ran to the refuge  of Lord.  Because  of stopping  of breath  all the organisms  stood 
still.Assuring them not to be afraid, Lord arrived in Madhuvan to see His beloved  devotee 
Dhruva.  Seeing  the Lord  Himself  arrived  before  him, Dhruva's  eyes filled  with tears.  He said, " 
O Lord,  I don't  know  how to worship  you."  Lord  touched  his cheek  with His conch.  With  that, 
Dhruva came to realize the glory of God. With complete devotion and folded hands,  he 
worshiped  Sri Hari:  "I salute  to such an omnipotent,  omnipresent  and all knowing  Lord,  whose 
power  is present  in everybody,  and who entering  my heart  revived  my speech."  Pleased  by his 
prayer Lord stroked Dhruva's head and said, " Your desire shall materialize. After enjoying  your 
kingdom, you shall come to my abode which is far above the  Saptrishis?  
 
 
 Then  by God's  permission,  Dhruva  returned  to his father's  palace.  There  he was given  a grand 
welcome.  Everyone  wants  to be kind with the one who has God's  grace,  his father  handed  him 
the kingdom  of the entire  earth.  His brother,  Uttam  had gone  to the forest  for hunting  where  the 
Yakshas  killed him. Indignant  by his brother's  death,  Dhruva  at once  launched  an attack  on the 
Yakshas.  But his grandfather  consoled  him that the devotees  of God don't  long for revenge. 
Thereafter  Dhruva  ruled  the earth  for a period  of thirty -six thousand  years.  Even death  bowed 
before him. Indeed, the devotees of God have no fear of death. The death fears them on  the 
contrary.  
   
 
TALE OF  PRITHU  
In the lineage  of the king Dhruva,  had occurred  a king named  Anga.  Anga's  wife was Sumita, 
who was the daughter of Mrityad ev. They had a son named Vena who was evil in nature.  When 
he grew  up and occupied  the throne,  he became  a very cruel  ruler.  Day by day his atrocites 
increased. Then he began to openly insult the greatmen. When his atrocities  became 
uncontrollable, sages k illed him by their curse to save the  people.  
 
Thereafter, the sages churned Vena's dead body and produced a couple - a man and a woman.  The 
man was born by the world -preserving part of Lord Vishnu. He came to be known as Prithu.  He 
got an extremely  pretty  wife Archi.  Prithu  was the Acharya  (master)  of Lord  Archan  Bhakti. 
With  his occupying  the throne,  the subjects  became  religious,  happy  and moral -abiding  people. 
Everything  was going  well in his kingdom,  when  one day the farmers  approached  him and 
complained , "O king,  the earth  has grown  rude.  She does not give us cereals,  even  though  we 
sow a lot of seeds in every season. She eats them all." King Prithu set out at once to chastise  the 
earth who ran in the form of a cow to save herself. Scolding at her king P rithu said, "O  Vasudhu 
(earth) I will kill you. You have violated my rule." The earth then came to his shelter and  begged 
for pardon. " O king it is not my fault my fertility has ended because of the sins of the king  Vena.  
Now,  I'm present  before  you in the form  of a cow.  Now,  you please  exploit  me fully to make 
everybody  happy."  
 
King  Prithu  resolved  then and there  to perform  a hundred  Ashvmedh  Yagyas.  His ninety -nine 
Yagyas completed unabatedly. But during the hundredth Yagya, Indra kidnapped the  horse 
deceitfully. Indra had himself performed one hundred Ashvmedh Yagyas. He could not  tolerate 
anybody equaling him, for then the performer would have equal claim on Indrasana (the seat  of 
Indra.)  
 
Prithu's son was Vijitashva. He had seen Indra stealing the hor se deceitfully. He even  chased 
Indra for some distance, but Indra transformed himself into a hermit. Somehow, the  oblation 
completed, and God appeared and asked the king to seek a boon. King Prithu begged, " O  Lord, 
my soul remains  unsatiated  by your tales. So if you are pleased  with me, kindly  give me a 
hearing equal to the hearings of ten thousand  ears."  
 
Sanakadiks preached knowledge to the king Prithu. Thereafter, fostering his subjects religiously, 
king Prithu  ruled  the earth  for thousand  years.  During  the rule, king's  popularity  spread  in leaps 
and bounds.  At last he got the supreme  position  of god."  Thus  narrating  the tale of Prithu, 
Maitreya says to Vidura: 'those who listen to this tale of Prithu, that shows the glory of God,  get 
a strong affection  for God and receive salvation ultimately, like  Prithu.'  
   
 
FABLE OF  PURANAJAN  
King  Prithu's  son was Vijitashu.  In his lineage  later on occurred  a king named  Prachin  Barhi. 
King Prachin Barhi had many sons. All of them were known as Prachetas, they were a ll devotees 
of God and had been sunk in devotion since their childhood. Pleased by their devotion once  Lord 
Shiva  appeared  before  them.  With  simplicity,  Prachetas  asked,  " O Lord  of the lords,  we have 
been worshipping Narayana, how did you arrive before  us?" 
 
Lord Shiva said, " Those who have devotion for Narayan, are also dear to me." Thereafter  Lord 
Shiva  gave them  Rudra  Geet  which  the Prachetas  continued  to sing for years  immersed  in the 
water.  
 
King Prachinbarhi had a great interest in oblations that in volved sacrifice. One -day devarshi 
Narada  asked  him, "What  are you doing,  O king?"  Miseries  don't  end by action  alone,  nor does 
one get supreme joy. The animals which you have sacrificed for your oblations also feel the  pain 
given by you. They are all wait ing for you in the heaven. When you go there after death they  will 
take revenge one by one." Frightened by these words, King Prachinbarhi took shelter at  Narada 
and said, " Devarshi,  my mind  is caught  in the actions.  You kindly  show  me the way to the 
supre me salvation."  
 
At the request  of the king,  Narada  narrated  him the tale of Vigyat  and Avigyat.  At the behest  of 
Avigyat,  Vigyat  migrated  to and settled  in a beautiful  city. There  he met the queen  Puranajani 
and got married  to her. He was so much  indulged  in sensual  pleasures  with Puranajani  that he 
became  a woman  in the next birth.  As a woman,  Vigyat  got married  in due course,  but was 
widowed soon. She wanted to commit Sati (self -immolation) but people prevented  her. 
One-day she was travelling  on an elepha nt, when  she spotted  some  swans  in the sky. She asked 
the mahout  to look at them.  As soon  as the mahout's  attention  diverted,  the elephant  got out of 
control and both of them fell on the ground and died. As she was looking at the swans at her  last 
time,  she became  a swan  in her next birth.  As a swan  she reached  the lake Manasarovar,  where 
she met her old friend Avigyat who consoled the swan. "You are neither a man nor a woman.  We 
are both swans  now.  You are same  as me, no different  from  me. It means  that there is no 
difference  between  the living  beings  and the God.  There  is only one soul.  Its because  of non- 
knowledge that one sees the God and the living beings differently." Thus cautioned by his  friend 
Avigyat, Vigyat realized and accepted his incarnation a s a swan.  
 
But, the king Prachinbarhi  didn't  get the meaning  of the spiritual  tale. Narada  then revealed. 
"God is Avigyat while microcosm is Vigyat. Avigyat has established eighty -four lakhs cities  and 
asked Vigyat to select any one of them. After sorting lakhs of cities the microcosm selects a  city 
like the human  body.  That city has a lake in the center -the belly  from  where  the whole  city is 
controlled. Again it has nine gates -two eyes, two nostrils, one mouth, two ears, one  reproductive 
organ  and one anus. It is such a highway,  treading  which  no one returns.  It has two courtiers - 
mind and ego. The living being passes his life caught between  them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Queen  Puranajani  is the intellect  in this body.  Because  of this intellect  or non-knowledge  the 
living  being or microcosm  begins  to feel in terms  of 'I', 'My' and 'Me' for his body  and organs. 
All the ten organs  are his friends,  through  which  the living  being  experiences  the sensation  and 
performs  action.  Inclinations  of the organs  are his friends.  All the five Pranas  (breaths)  are the 
five-hooded  serpent  that guards  the body.  Old age is Kal Kanya  who launches  an attack  on the 
city (human body). Shoka and Moha (sorrow and attachment) are the two brothers of Kal  Kanya. 
Kal Kanya is married to Chandveg who is als o known as Varsh (year). It has three hundered  and 
sixty Gandharvas (days of year). Twelve months are his twelve commanders and seven days  are 
the ministers. They all together plunder the human body like the city of Puranajan. Thus,  covered 
by Ajnana  (non-knowledge),  the living  being,  which  has a great  pride  on his body,  virtually 
wastes  his life suffering  different  kinds  of pains.  From  this mystical  preaching  Prachinbarhis 
inclination  for Vedic  Karmkands  (action)  and temptation  for mundane  luxuries  were  removed. 
By the grace  of Devarshi  Narada,  the king got a perception  of God and living  being.  He at once 
abdicated his attachment for the body and concentrated his mind in  God.  
   
 
FIFTH  CHAPTER 
TALE OF  PRIYVRATA  
Hearing  the tale of Prachetas'  devotion  and receiving  God's  grace  by them,  a curiosity  arose  in the mind  
of the king Parikshit  about  self-knowledge  and Grihasth  Dharma  (duties  of a married  person).  He asked  
Shukdev,  "O Brahmin,  Priyvrat  was a supreme  devotee  and self-indulgent.  Why did he then live in 
Grihasthi  (married  life)?  Married  life is binding  from all sides.  Greatmen  never  long for married  life. Even  
then the king Priyurata  lived a married  life yet he regularly  prayed  to God.  This is an intriguing  subject  for 
me, kindly remove my doubts.  
 
Seein g Parikshits curiosity and doubts, Sri Shukdev said, "O king you are right that  once 
receiving  God's  grace  one can't leave  it. No attachment,  no love remains  in him for life. The 
prince  Priyurata  was a great  devotee  of God (Bhagavat  Bhakta).  By the grace  of Narada  he had 
instinctively become aware of Parmarth tatva (knowledge that leads to salvation). He  had 
dedicated all his actions into the feet of Lord Vasudev. Thus, an intense inclination  for 
detachment developed in Priyvrata since his childhood. So, Lo rd Brahma tried to admonish  him. 
"Son, you are too young yet to be an ascetic. Since the moment you've acquired the human  body, 
enemies  like Kama  (sex),  Krodh  (anger)  Moha  (affection),  Lobh  (greed),  Mada  (ego),  Matsar 
(jealousy)  etc. have  been  continuously  chasing  it. We're  all bound  to follow  the path laid down 
by God. We should serve Him by our action, accepting our body, which the God has given to  us 
and the merits associated with it. Hence, you first enjoy the luxuries given by God, thereafter  you 
will be free to do what you  wish."  
 
Thus,  as per the dictate  of Lord  Brahma,  the king Priyvrata  accepted  two wives.  His first wife 
was Prajapati Vishwkarma's daughter Barhismati. She begot ten sons - Agnidhra,  Idhmjihv, 
Yagyabahu, Mahavir, Miranyreta, Savan, Med hatithi, Dhriprishth, Vitihotra and Kavi.  Priyvrat's 
second  wife begot  three  sons- Uttam,  Raiwat  and Tamas.  Out of these  ten sons,  three  became 
celibate. All the three sons from the second wife became the lords of different  Manvantaras. 
Despite leading mar ried life, the king remained an ascetic. In his chariot, he travelled around  the 
land and divided it into seven parts and appointed each of his seven sons as the lord of  one 
island. Agnidhra, the eldest son was given Jambu Dweep. He was married to an  apsar a 
Purvchitti. She had begotten nine sons who became the ruler of the nine parts of Jambu  Dweep. 
Merudevi  was the wife of Agnidhra's  eldest  son Nabhi.  As a gift of Yagya,  Lord  had taken  an 
incarnation in his home. That incarnation of Lord is known as  Rishab hdev.  
  TALE OF  BHARATA  
Rishabhdev  was married  to Jayanti,  the daughter  of Indra.  Jayanti  gave  birth  to one hundred 
sons. Bharata was the eldest among them. The youngest nine sons became Yogeshwars.  Eighty - 
one sons accepted Brahaminism. Remaining nine bro thers followed their elder brother  Bharata. 
One day Rishabhdev called a meeting of his sons and preached them about the well being  of 
human beings. "Sons" he said, "Never misuse this human body. You have got this human life  by 
great  luck and God's  grace.  He does not deserve  to be called  as a friend,  teacher  or father  who 
does not preach his friend, disciple or son about the welfare of the self." Preaching  that 
Rishabhdev enthroned Bharata and himself departed for his supreme  abode.  
 
The king Bharata  was a great devotee.  By his father's  permission  he had married  to Panchjam, 
the daughter of Vishurupa. They begot five sons. Bharata dedicated his religious actions to  Lord 
Vasudev. Thus by the purification of his actions, his conscience was also purified. So  he 
transferred  the kingdom  to his son and himself  took an abode  in Pulahashrama  (hermitage  of 
Pulaha) on the banks of the river Gandaki. There he passed his time in the worship of  God.  
 
One fine morning, when he was performing libations in the river, a pregna nt Doe arrived on  the 
opposite  bank  to drink  water.  At that time a lion roared  somewhere  in the forest  behind  her. 
Frightened  by the roar, the doe jumped  into the river  to save her life. But the doe lost her life in 
the action while her foetus fell in the  river.  
 
Feeling  pity for the fawn,  Rajarshi  Bharata  took it and began  to foster  it. Day by day Bharata's 
affection  grew  for the fawn.  Slowly  he became  irregular  in his daily  routine.  But Bharata  loved  
the fawn  more  than his routine.  When  the fawn  grew  into a deer,  by its natural  instinct  it joined 
its mates.  On his return,  Bharata  did not find the deer and grew  so restless  that he died out of 
depression.  As his mind  was fixed  on the deer at death,  he was born in his next birth  as a deer. 
Bharata was a prude nt man. But affection did not spare even  him. 
 
What  would  be the fate of common  people  then?  They  are easy targets  of the feelings  and are 
more  vulnerable  to fall prey to attachment  and affection.  When  a derangement  occurs  in the 
intellect  of man,  he begin s to conduct  irreligiously,  but thinks  that his behaviour  is religious. 
Realizing  his mistake,  Bharata  as a deer,  came  to his hermitage  and once  again  began  his 
penance before God. Even in deer incarnation Bharata had a strong feeling of  detachment.  
 
When  Bharata's  deer incarnation  ended,  he took his next birth  in a Brahmin's  home.  Sometime 
after the birth,  his mother  died.  By God's  grace  Bharata  had remembrance  of his previous  birth. 
So he always remained immersed in reflection on Hari (God). To avoid atte ntion he  posed 
himself  as an insane  stupid,  blind  and deaf person.  Even  his brothers  neglected  him seeing  his 
inertia.  Now  he was free to wander  at will. He was satisfied  with what  he got and doing  menial 
jobs.  
 
During  that period,  a thief,  who had no son, wanted  to offer  a human -sacrifice  to Bhadrakali  in 
desire of a son. Searching a right person for the sacrifice, his men found and caught  JadaBharata 
(In Brahmin  incarnation,  Bharata  was known  by this name  because  of his inactivity),  who was 
guarding  his farms  then.  Jada Bharata  remained  quite  indifferent  and did not even  resist  his 
kidnapping. The thieves took him into the temple. There as soon as the chief of the thieves  raised 
his sword to kill Jada Bharata, Bhadrakali appeared from the idol and beheaded  all the thieves.  It 
shows  that one has to bear the fruit himself  of the crime  committed.  But Jada Bharata  did not 
experience this and remained quite unmoved as  before.   
In another incidence, the king Rahugana of Sindhu was riding a palanquin to the hermit age of  the 
sage Kapila.  On the way,  he fell short  for one Kahar  (carrier  of the palanquin).  His men found 
Jada Bharata  who was wandering  nearby  and yoked  him also in carrying  the palanquin.  Jada 
Bharata  was walking  cautiously  so as not to tread  on even  little creatures.  Hence,  the king was 
getting jerks and a bumpy ride. He scolded at the Kahars. The Kahars informed him that the  new 
recruit was causing him those jerks. The king Rahungana then scolded at Jada Bharata. "Hey,  are 
you so frail that you can't balance  the palanquin  properly.  Don't  you know  that your master  is 
riding in it? Wait, I'll teach you a  lesson."  
 
Jada Bharata  stood  fearlessly.  The king was stunned  to see him. It was then that Jada Bharata 
opened his mouth to utter is first words. He felt that he had carried the king on his shoulders,  and 
though  the king was a haughty  man,  '...but  my life will be a sheer  wastage  if I don't  preach  the 
king a way to salvation...' So with a desire of benefiting the king Jada Bharata said, " O king,  life 
and de ath, strength and weakness are the virtues of the body. But the soul is sinless. I have put  all 
my burden  on the shoulders  of the God.  You too have  great  burden  on your head.  Lord  of 
everyone is one. Even your senses are not in your control how then will y ou control  your 
subjects? O king only knowledge is the form of the soul. By knowledge alone you can  recognize 
the soul.  Union  with one homogenous  and holy Supreme  Being  is the true introspection.  But as 
long as you don't bear the dust of great men's feet o n your head, you will not recognize the  God.  
Hearing these words, the king Rahungana fell at the feet of Jada Bharata and begged his  pardon. 
Jada Bharata then preached the king about the metaphysical knowledge. "Listening to the tales of 
the God continuous ly is the only way to concentrate one's mind in Sri Hari. In my previous  birth. 
I was the king of Bharatavarsh. But because of my attachment for a deer, I was deviated from  the 
path of supreme  knowledge.  Hence,  I had to take birth  in deer form.  But by the grace  of Lord 
Krishna, memory of my previous birth persisted in a deer incarnation also. So in my present  birth 
I prefer to stay away from the people and wander secretly. So, from now on drop  your 
attachments  and start reciting  God's  name.  By the virtues  of His tale alone  you will easily  get 
Him. O King, the body is like a merchant, who is roaming on the earth borrowing this wealth  of 
age. It has lost its wealth in useless worldly affairs. One -day arrow of the Kal will  snatch 
everything from it. So, the hum an being must utilise their invaluable moments in the training  of 
the supreme  knowledge."  
   
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE EXTENT OF THE  LANDMASS  
Hearing  the tale of the king Priyvrat's  lineage,  Parikshit  asked  Shukdev:  "O great  sage,  what  is 
the expanse of the land mass? I wish to hear a description of it alongwith its islands, because  this 
world is a tangible idol of God alongwith his virtues. Hence, knowing it intangible,  infinitesimal 
form of God can also be  known.'  
 
Shukdev  said:  'O King,  illusions  created  by God are so vast that nobody  can find their end. 
Therefore,  I will describe  main  features  of the world  with the help of name,  appearance,  extent 
and symptoms. King Priyvrata has divided the earth into seven islands. These islands  are: 
(1)Jambudweep, (2)Plukshd weep, (3)Shalmalidweep (4)Kushdweep,  (5)Kronchdweep, 
(6)Shakdweep and (7)Pushkardweep. All these islands are surrounded by seven seas,  which 
comprise of saline water, sugarcane juices, and wine, ghee, milk, whay and sweet  water 
respectively. Extent of each  island is double than that of its preceding  one. 
 
Jambudweep:  - Shukdev  says,  'Situated  in the center  of the world  is Jambudweep.  It has an 
extent  of one lakh Yojan.  It has a round  shape  like a lotus  leaf. It has nine zones  each with an 
extent  of nine thousand  Yojan.  These  zones  are called  Varsh.  Eight  mountain  ranges  mark  the 
boundaries  of these  Varsh  which  are arranged  in circular  fashion.  At the center  of the Varsh,  is 
the tenth Varsh named Illavrit. In the center of Illavrit is Meru. Names of other nin e Varsh are  - 
KinPurusha, Harivarsh, Kamyak, Hiranmaya, Kuru, Bhadrashwa, Ketumal and Bharata. Such  as 
the mount Meru is surrounded by Jamudweep, similarly Jamudweep is surrounded by a vast  sea. 
Because of a majority of Jamun (black berry) trees, this isla nd is named as  Jambudweep.  
 
Plukshdweep: - As there is a huge Jamun (black berry) tree that is eleven hundred Yojan high  in 
Jambhudweep, similarly there are innumerable Pluksh (Pakur -Ficus pinctoria) trees  in 
Plukshdweep hence its name. Agni (fire) is the venerable God in this island. Priyvrata's  son, 
King  Idhmjihv  was the ruler  of this island.  He divided  it into seven  parts  and made  his seven 
sons the ruler  of these  divisions.  These  seven  divisions  were  named - Shiv,  Yavas,  Subhadra, 
Shant, Kshem, Amrit an d Abhay. These divisions have seven mountains, and seven rivers. 
Plukshdweep has an extent of two lakh Yojans. It is surrounded by an ocean of sugarcane  juice.  
Shalmalidweep:  - Just double  in extent  than Plukshddweep,  is Shalmalidweep.  It has a majority 
of Shalmali  (silk cotton)  trees,  which  comprise  the abode  of Garuda,  the King  of the birds. 
Priyvrata's son Yagyabahu was the ruler of this island. He too made seven divisions in the  island 
as per his sons - Surocham, Devvarsh, Paribhadra, Ramanak, Saumanasya , Apyayan and  Avigyat. 
This island too has seven mountains and seven rivers. Four classes of people inhabite this  island. 
They  worship  Vedmay  Chandrama  (the moon  with vedas)  This island  is surrounded  by a sea of 
wine.  
 
Kushdweep:  - This island  is surrounde d by a sea of the Ghee.  It has an extent  of eight  Yojans, 
and a majority  of Kush  shrubs.  From  the light of their tips, Kush  shrubs  illuminate  this island. 
Priyvrata's son Hiranyarata was the ruler of this island. Dividing the island into seven  divisions, 
he too appointed his seven sons as the ruler of each of these divisions. These divisions are - Vasu, 
Vasuddana,  Drirhruchi,  Nabhigupta,  Stutyavrata,  Vivikt  and Vamaddev.  People  of Kushdweep 
worship the  fire. 
 
 
 Kraunchdweep: - With an extent of sixteen lakh Yojan, Kraunchdweep is surrounded by the  sea 
of milk.  There  is a gigantic  mountain  named  Kraunch  on the dweep.  After  this mountain  the 
island is known as Kraunchdweep. Priyvrata's son, King Ghritprishtha was the ruler of  this 
island.  He too divided  the island into seven  divisions  and distributed  them  between  his seven 
sons, one to each son. The names of these seven sons are - Am, Madhuruh,  Meghprishth, 
Sudhama, Mrajishth, Lohitarn and Vanaspati. Inhabitants of the island worship  Varunadev 
(Neptune) the lord of water.  
 
Shakadweep:  - Surrounded  by the sea of whey  is Shakadweep  with an extent  of thirty -two lakh 
Yojans.  It has a huge  tree of Shaka,  hence  its name.  With  a sweet  fragrance  of this tree, the 
whole  island  emits  a pleasant  scent.  The ruler  of this island, Medhatithi  was also a son of 
Priyvrata. He too had seven sons - Purojav, Manojav, Pawamana, Dhumranik, Chitraref,  Bahurup 
and Vishwdhar.  They  were  made  the rulers  of the seven  divisions  of the island.  People  of the 
island  use Pranayama  to weaken  their Rajoguna  and Tamoguna,  and worship  Hari (Vishnu)  in 
Vayu (form) through  meditation.  
 
Pushkardweep:  - Pushkardweep  has an extent  of sixty -four Yojans.  It is surrounded  by a sea of 
sweet  water.  There  is present  a huge  lotus  flower  with a million,  golden  petal s. This lotus  is 
regarded  as a seat of Brahma.  Priyvrata's  son Vitihotra  was the ruler  of this island.  He divided 
the island  into two divisions,  and made  his sons Ramanak  and Dhataki  the rulers  of these 
divisions. Inhabitants of this island worship Brahma appearance of Sri Hari  (Vishnu).  
   
SIXTH  CHAPTER  
 
TALE OF  AJAMIL  
The king Parikshit  requested  Shukdev,  "O preacher,  so far you have  related  about  the way how 
to overcome attachment for wordily things. Inadvertently, the lliving beings commit some  kinds 
of sins or crimes. O great soul, now kindly tell me the way by which humans can get  rid 
themselves of the tortures, they are supposed to be subjected to in the  hells."  
Shukdev  said, "A sinner  is sure to be tortured  in hell, unless  and until he had observed  penance 
for his sins in his present  birth.  But even  penance  is no guarantee  of his salvation  if the person 
indulges  again  in sins thereafter.  It is all because  of ignorance,  that desires  to commit  sin does 
not end. Spiritual ways are, thereafter necessary . Adopting spiritual ways like penance,  celibacy, 
tranquility,  self-restraint,  abdication,  truthfulness,  holiness,  restraint  of passions  and discipline, 
even the most serious sins are destroyed. Alternatively, taking refuge at the God or developing  a 
devot ion for Him, all the sins can be destroyed. O Parikshit, such a sanctification of the sinner  as 
achieved by dedication to God, is rare even by observing  penance."  
 
Shukdev narrated the tale that was once related by Muni Agastya. In the town of Kannauj,  lived 
a Brahmin  named  Ajamil.  He had married  to his mistress.  Being  with an unchaste  woman  his 
Brahminical  virtues  had been  destroyed.  Now,  Ajamil  earned  his living  not by performing  holy 
tasks, but instead he restored to petty tricks like plundering, deceiv ing and even killing people  to 
feed his  family.  
 
Once,  a group  of Mahatmas  (ascetics)  came  to the town.  People  greeted  and offered  them  with 
edible  items.  But the ascetics  refused  to accept  anything.  They  said that they would  accept  the 
food only from  the household  where  holy food is cooked  for the Lord.  Irritated  people  showed 
the ascetics the way to Ajamil's home. From Ajamil, the ascetics accepted the alms  and 
themselves  cooked  the food,  and offered  it to God and ate themselves.  Now  the heart  of Ajamil 
and his wife were filled with  expiation.  
 
The ascetics  wished  to cause  some  benefit  for Ajamil.  They  said to him, "If you get a son now, 
please  name  him Narayana.  Ascetics  words  did materialize  and Ajamil  got one more  son, the 
tenth one. As per ascetics adv ice, Ajamil named him Narayana. Being the youngest  son, 
Narayana was very dear to Ajamil. He used to remember Narayana always. Everything  was 
passing as usual, when the time of Ajamil's departure arrived suddenly one day.  Yamadutas 
(agents  of Yama -the God of death)  began  to take him for his last journey.  Not seeing  his 
youngest son Narayana before him, Ajamil began to call out loudly:  'Narayana -Narayana.'  
 
Hearing  the calls,  servers  of Lord  Vishnu  too arrived  there  and challenged  Yamadutas.  The 
frightened  Yamadutas  said, " We are the servants  of Dharmraj.  Why  are you stopping  us?" 
Servers  of Lord  Vishnu  said, "If you are the servants  of Dharmaraj  define  Dharma  (religion) 
then."  Yamadutas  said, "Actions  dictated  by Vedas  are Dharma  (religion)  in true sense,  and the 
actions forbidden by Vedas are Adharma (irreligious) and Veda is Narayana  Himself."  
 
The servers  said, "You're  unaware  of Param  Dharma  (Supreme  religion).  This sinner  has called 
out the name of God, so his sins, from the past crores of births, have been washed away. Now  he 
is no more  a sinner.  Wise  men say that recitation  of God's  name  by any means - as a name  of someone  else, in derision  or derogation - automatically  does away  with all the sins. This is the 
bounty  of God's  name  that a mere  remembrance  of it- whether  wittingly  or unwittingly,  does 
destroy all sins." Hearing this dialogue, Ajamil awakened, as if from a long  slumber.  
 
Yamdutas  had returned  to Yamaloka  by then.  But, the abject  sinner  Ajamil  had recovered  from 
the snare  of death.  Without  losing a moment,  Ajamil  went  to the banks  of the Ganges.  There,  
drinking  the holy water  of the Ganges  he left his body  and went  and found  a place  in Vaikunth 
Loka -the abode of Lord  Vishnu.  
   
 
DIALOGUE OF YAMA AND  YAMADUTS  
Shukdev says, "Parikshit, when the servers of Lord Vishnu failed the attempt of Yamadutas,  they 
returned  to Yamaloka  and complained  Yama  about  the event."  "O Yamadev,  we had so far 
known  that you are the sole authority  of punishing  the people  as per their deeds.  No body  had 
dared  so far to violate  your rule. But today  those  four servers  of Lord  Vishnu  openly  caused 
violation  of your dictate."  Yamaraja  silently  prayed  Lord  Vishnu  and said, " Lord  Narayana  is 
the Lord of all living things. He is the Lord of me also, and I myself keep an accoun t of the  sins 
and pious  deeds  of the living  beings  by His order  only.  All the God's,  Digpals  (guardian  of the 
direction),  Shiva  and Brahma  etc. all of them  follow  His dictates.The  greatest  duty of all the 
living beings is that they should achieve a dedicat ed devotion for the Lord. Sons just look at  the 
bounty of Lord that even the sinner like Ajamil escaped the noose of death simply by calling  out 
the names  of the God just once.  So, from  now on you never  go near those  people  who are 
reciting Lord's name or are his devotees. Bring only the sinners to  me."  
   
 
BIRTH OF DAKSHA FROM  PRACHETAS  
Shukdev  says,  "Ten  sons of the King  Prachinbarhi  were  known  as Prachetas.  They  observed 
severe penance under the sea. When they re -emerged, Chandra (the moon -the ruler of  the 
vegetation) calmed them and presented a beautiful daughter of the apsara Prabhlocha, to them  as 
their wife.  From  her, Prachetas  begot  prachetas  Daksha.  In due course  the subject  of Daksha 
spread  all over the world  and populated  far off places.  Daksha  created, first of all the gods,  the 
demons and the human beings who inhabited the heaven, the earth and the waters  respectively.  
 
But Daksha  was not still satisfied.  He therefore  went  to Vinddhyachal  and started  a severe 
penance  there.  Pleased  by his penance  God appeared  before  him. By the permission  of God, 
Daksha Prajapati married with Ashinki the daughter of Panchama Prajapati. From  Ashinki 
Daksha got ten thousand sons named Haryashva. In due course Daksha asked his sons  to 
reproduce.  But instead  of reproduc ing they all reached  Narayana  Sarovar  on the banks  of the 
river Sindhu (Indus) to a place of pilgrimage beguiled by the preaching of Narada  about 
Bhagavat Dharma. Daksha again produced one thousand sons named Shavlashva and asked  them 
to reproduce.  But they too followed  the footsteps  of their elder  brothers,  and took no interest  in 
worldly affairs. Narada preached them also about Bhagavat  Dharma.  
 
When Daksha came to realize that Narada had converted his sons into ascetics by his  preaching 
he angrily  cursed  Narada  to be a wanderer  forever  with nowhere  a place  to stay on. Narada 
accepted Daksha's curse and blessed him with a boon to have sixty daughters for the  continuation 
of his subject. By the virtue of the boon, sixty daughters were born in the home of Da ksha in  due 
course. When they grew up, Daksha got ten of them married to Dharma. Then ten to  Kashyapa, 
twenty -seven  to Chandrama,  two to Angira  and Krishashva  each and remaining  four daughters 
were  married  to a Kashyapa  named  Tarkshya.  The entire  world  came to be populated  by the 
offsprings of these sixty daughters of  Daksha.  
Shukdev says, "Parikshit the names of Dharma's ten wives were Bhanu, Lamba, Kakubhi,  Jami, 
Vishwas, Sadhya, Marutvati, Vasu, Muhurta and Sankalpa. Daksha's daughters Sarupa  and 
Bhoota  were  the wives  of Bhoot.  Sarupa  begot  uncountable  Rudragans,  eleven  of them  are 
prominent. Bhoot's second wife Bhoota gave birth to formidable spooks and Ganas like  Vinayak 
etc. Angira's first wife Swadha gave birth to pitragans while his second wife Sati  accepted a  Ved- 
Atharvanigra  as her son. Krishashva's  wife Archi  begot  Dhumrakesh,  while  Dhishana - 
Krishashva's second wife gave birth to four sons - Vedshira, Deval, Vayun and Manu.  Kashyapa 
named Tarkshya had four wives - Vinata, Kadru, Patangi and Yamini . Birds were born to  Patangi, 
while  Yamini  gave  birth  to moths.  Vinata's  son is Garuda  who is the vehicle  of Lord  Vishnu. 
Arun  was her second  son who became  the charioteer  of surya.  Nagas  (snakes)  were  born to 
Kadru.  
 
Twenty -seven daughters of Daksha were married to Chandrama (the moon). These are  the 
twenty -seven  Nakshatras  like Kritika  etc. But Chandrama  had particular  love for Rohini,  so he 
got tuberculosis  and hence  could  not produce  a child.  Names  of Kashyapa's  thirteen  wives  are 
Aditi,  Diti, Danu,  Kashtha,  Ariha,  Surasa,  Illa, Muni,  Krodh,  Varsha,  Tamra,  Surabhi,  Sarama 
and Timi.  These  are the mothers  of the whole  world.  All the gods,  demons,  animals,  giants  etc. 
were born to  them.  
 
 
 INSULT OF BRIHASPATI BY THE  GODS  
Shukdev  says,  "O Parikshit,  Indra  had become  very haughty  by the luxuries  he received  as the 
king of the gods.  One day, Devraj  Indra  was sitting  on his throne  alongwith  his queen  Shachi. 
His court  was full of courtiers.  Forty -nine Marudganas,  eight  Vasus,  eleven  Rudras,  Aditya, 
Ribhuganas  Vishvedev,  Shadhyaganas  and both Ashwini  Kumaras  were  present  in the court. 
Groups of Siddhas, Charaus, Gandhavas, Vidyadhars, apsaras, Kinnars, Nagas etc. were  singing 
in his praise  and programs  of dance  and music  was on. Acharya  Brihaspati,  the revered  teacher 
of the gods arrived there. But, despite having seen him, Indra did not show any respect  for 
Brihaspati. Indignant Brihaspati he at once deserted Devaloka (the abode of the  gods.)  
 
When Acharya Brihaspati had gone, Indra realized his mistake. He at onc e launched an  extensive 
search  for Guru  Brihaspati.  But no one could  locate  Brihaspati.  Feeling  of insecurity  in the 
absence  of their Guru,  strongly  agitated  the gods.  On the other  hand,  when  the demons  came  to 
know  about  Brihaspati's  missing,  they began  to intimidate  the gods.  By the permission  of their 
teacher  Shukracharya,  the demons  launched  an attack  on the Devaloka.  Feeling  sad by the 
pitiable state of the  gods.  
 
Indra  went  to the refuge  of the Brahma  who told the gods  that they were  suffering  because  of 
their wrong  policies  and disregarding  their learned  Guru.  Brahma  also told the gods  that the 
demons  had strengthened  their position  because  of their loyalty  to their teacher  Shukarcharya. 
Brahma  advised  the gods  to request  Vishwarup,  the son of the sage Tvashta,  to become  their 
teacher.  "He is a sound  scholar  of Vedas,  great  ascetic  and abstentious  person."  "Serving  him," 
Brahma  said, "You  will be free from  all the crisis."  Following  Brahma's  advice,  the gods  made 
Vishwarup  their teacher  by request.  Ascetic Vishwarup  used his Vaishnavi  Vidya  to annihilate 
the wealth  and power  of the demons  and endowed  Indra,  with those  powers.  Vishwarup  also 
preached  Indra  about  the infallible  Vaishnavi  Vidya.  Thus  securing  himself  under  the shield  of 
this knowledge Ind ra defeated all the demonic  forces.  
   
 
Preaching of Narayana Kavach (shield) to Indra  by 
Vishwrup  
The king Parikshit asked, " O Lord, kindly relate to me the knowledge (Vaishnavi Vidya) by  the 
power of which Devraj Indra easily defeated the  demons."  
 
Shukdev  says, " Parikshit now I am telling you about the knowledge that was once taught to Indra  by 
Vishwrup.  So listen  to it carefully  with concentration.  Whenever you  feel yourself  haunted  with fears, you 
must  guard you  body  with this Narayana  Kavach  (shield).  But before  that it is necessary  to purify  oneself  
by bath, meditation, libations, Pranayama (control of breaths) and eight -lettered and  twelve -lettered  
mantras  of God.  The Hymnal  Kavach  (shield)  must  be then recited  facing  north  while  reflecting  on the 
divine appearances of  God.  
 
May the God,  who rides  Guruda  and holds  conch,  wheel,  mace  and lotus,  protect  me from  all 
sides. May all the incarnations of God protect me from all the lusts, affection and desires and  in 
all the circumstances.  Thus  may I be protected  in water  by Matsyavatar,  on land by 
Vamanavatar, in sky by Trivikrama, from Kamapida (sexual desire)by Sanakadit, from  Kupathya 
(diseases) by Dhanvantri, from ignorance from Veda Vyasa, from the hells by Kachchhap  avatar 
(tortoise  incarnation),  in the war by Narsinha  Avatar,  in the way by Varaha,  on the top of the 
hills by Parashurama,  during  exile  by Lord  Rama  along  with Lakshmanaji,  from  Maranmohan 
Abhichar  (death)  by Lord  Narayana,  from  ego by Nara,  from  obstacles  by Dattatreya,  from  the 
bondage of  actions by Kapila, from disregarding the God by Haygreev Mutri, from the crimes  by 
Narada,  from  the imposters  by Buddha  and from  the faults  of Kali Kal may I be protected  by 
Kalkidev.  
 
May I be protected  in the morning  with mace  by Keshav,  with flute by govind  in the day, by 
Narayana Shakti before the noon and may I be protected with Sudarshan chakra by Lord  Vishnu 
in the noon time. May the all knowing omnipotent Lord protect me in every circumstances.  May 
the name,  appearance,  vehicle,  weapons,  and all the services  of Sri Hari protect  my mind, 
intellect, organs and life from all the calamities. This Narayana Kavach (shield) saves one  from 
all kind of calamities and  fears.  
   
 
Killing of Vishvarup and MAKING Vajra with  DADHICHI 
bones  
Vishrupa  became  the second  Acharya  (teacher)  of the gods.  He also saw over indulgence  of 
Indra in luscious objects. Vishwarup's mother belonged to demon clan, so he had  some 
inclination  for the demons  also. Stealthily,  he supplied  parts  of offerings  of the oblations  to the 
demons.  Very  soon,  Indra  too came  to learn  that their teacher  Vishvarup  was stealthy  nurturing 
their enemies, the demons. So, indignantly Indra severed the head of Vishvarup and to get rid  of 
the sin of Brahmahatya (killing of Brahmin) Indra distributed his sin am ong the land, water,  tree 
and the woman folk, and himself escaped the  sin. 
To take revenge of his son's murder, sage Tvashta organized a yagya with the purpose of  having 
a son who could kill Indra. The Yagya finished successfully and as soon as the offeri ng's  ended, 
a formidable  demon  appeared  from  the altar.  The demon  was named  Vritrasur.  Very  soon, 
Vritrasur defeated Indra and other gods and conquered all the three worlds. Terrorized by  his 
power  and gallantry,  all the gods  ran into the refuge  of Lord  Narayana.  Pleased  with their faith 
and prayers, Lord Narayana advised them to please the great sage Dadhichi and ask for his  bones 
to build a Vajra (mace). From that Vajra Vritrasur could be killed, God assured  them.  
 
Thus,  all the gods,  headed  by Indra,  reached  the hermitage  of sage Dadhichi.  There  they very 
humbly and respectfully begged for his bones. For the benefit of the world, sage Dadhichi  gladly 
accepted  to donate  his bones.  With  those  bones,  Vishvakarma  built a massive  Vajra  which  had 
thousand edge s. Thus by the power of the Lord and aquiring a divine Vajra, Indra felt  extremely 
strong.  He at once  launched  an attack  on the demon's  armies  and drove  them  away  from  the 
battlefield.  
   
 
KILLINGS OF VRITRASUR BY  INDRA  
 
Sri Shukdev  says,  "O Parikshit,  from  the gallantry  of the gods  the demon  army  began  to fled. 
Seeing his army running away in panic, Vritrasur got infuriated. Charging ahead he stopped  the 
gods' army from advancing. He roared loudly. Many of the gods fainted from the  frightening 
thunder of the  roar. Advancing Vritrasur routed the fallen fighters. Even the earth began to  shake 
because of his momentum. Devaraj Indra could not bear it. He made a powerful blow  on 
Vritrasur with his mace. Vritrasur held his mace in the way and hit Airavat, Indra's  elephant, 
with it. Feeling the pain of the blow, Airavat moved  back.  
 
Then  Vritrasur  scolded  Indra  who had killed  Vishvarupa  the brother  of Vritasur,  "O Indra,  you 
have  killed  my brother  Vishvarup  without  any reason.  Now,  I will gore you with my powerful 
trident. Or you may behead me by your vajra. Your vajra has the power of the sage Dadhichi  and 
the glory of Sri  Hari.  
 
But, Indra with you vajra, I will get rid of the bondage's of my body and get salvation at the  feet 
of Lord Vishnu. So kill me with your v ajra." Thus, even in the battlefield, Vritrasur  experienced 
direct  existence  of God.  He prayed  God!  " O Lord,  may my mind  reflect  constantly  on your 
auspicious  virtues,  may my voice  always  recite  your virtues,  may my body  always  be in your 
service. I don't  want salvation without serving you. My mind is writhing for your  sight." 
Shukdev  says,  " Thus,  O Parikshit,  Vritrasur  had wished  to leave  his body  in the battlefield  and 
get the God. He did not want to enjoy the luxuries of the heaven defeating  Indra."  
 
Calling  out these  words,  Vritrasar  hit Indra  with trident.  But Indra  cut that hand  of Vritrasur, 
which  was holding  the trident,  by his vajra.  Losing  his one hand  Vritrasur  was very outrageous 
and hit Indra's chin and Airavat's forehead with his elbow. Beca use of the blow Indra dropped  his 
vajra,  which  fell near Vritrasur's  feet. Indra  was now feeling  too ashamed  to pick up the vajra. 
Vritrasur  said, " O Indra,  pick up the vajra  and kill your enemy.  It is not the time to be gloomy. 
Indra  showed  his respect  to Vritrasur  for his truthfulness  and undeceitful  words,  and said " O 
great  demon  you are really  great.  Your  patience,  determination  and devotion  for God are really 
remarkable.  You have  surmounted  the illusion  of God that confuses  ordinary  ones.  You are a 
great man born in demon family. Vritrasur again raised his wheel to hit, but Indra cut his  second 
hand.  
 
Now,  having  lost both his hands,  Vritasur  shook  the earth  with his heavy  steps  and swallowed 
Indra  along  with his elephant.  Everyone  was beginning  to feel sorry  for Indra  but because  of 
Narayana Kavach, Indra remained unhurt even in the belly of Vritrasur. Thereafter,  Indra 
lacerated  the demon's  belly  and came  out. Then  he cut Vritrasur's  head  also. At that moment, 
soul of Vritrasur  annihilated  in the Supreme  Being.  All the gods  then greeted  Indra  for his 
victory.  
 
Vritrasur  was a religious  king Chitraketu  in his previous  birth.  Because  of the grace  of Narada  and Angira,  
he had received  detachment  and supreme  devotion  and began  to roam  everywhere  as a Siddha Purusha  
(one who achieves perfection). Once he was travelling on the aircraft gifted to him by the gods, he  saw 
the Ardhnarishwar  (half male -half female)  appearance  of Lord Shiva  and said something  in derogation.  
Indignant  of his discourtesy,  Mata  Parvati cursed  Chitraketu  to take birth in a demon  clan.  Because  of that 
curse,  Chitraketu  appeared  as demon.  But even  in demon  incarnation,  his devotion  for the Lord's  feet 
persisted as  before.  
 
 SEVENTH  CHAPTER  
 
REMOVAL OF DOUBT ABOUT GOD'S  PARTIALITY  
 
The king Parikshit  asked,  " O fortunate  one, God is said to have  an equal  view  for everybody. 
Why  then does He favor  the gods  alone.  Why  does He kill the demons  only?  Thus  I have  some 
doubts regarding God's impartiality. Kindly remove  them."  
 
Shukdev says, " Pa rikshit, God's sketches are so vivid that even the great sages can't  comprehend 
them fully. Even then just by reciting these surprising sketches of God, one receives the  supreme 
position. Accepting the virtues of this illusion, God acquires the opposing fo rms of killer  and 
killed  occasionally.  Virtues  like Satya  (chastity),  Rajas  (royalty)  and Tamas  (darkness)  are of 
nature,  and not of God and hence  keep  rising  and falling  with time.  When  Satguna  (chastity) 
rises,  God adopts  the gods  and the Sages  and cause s a surge  in their number.  A rise in Rajas 
(royal) virtues sees a surge in demons number. While a rise in Tama (darkness) virtues leads to  a 
surge  in the population  of the Yaksh  and Rakshasas  (ogres  and other  super  natural  beings).  But 
God is in fact impar tial. Shukdev says, " O king once Devarshi Narada had related an incident  to 
your grandfather Yudhisthira. I'm narrating it to you right now. Your doubts will be  removed."  
   
 
TALE OF  JAY-VIJAY  
During the Rajsuya Yagya in Yudhisthira's court, Lord Krishna had  beheaded Shishupal with  His 
wheel. Everyone, including Yudhisthira saw Shishupal's soul annihilating in Lord  Krishna. 
Surprised Yudhisthira had asked Narada then, " O Devarshi, isn't it surprising that Shishupal  who 
was so jealous of Lord Krishna, got mer ged in Him? Such fortune is even rare for the  great 
Yogis (ascetics). How did then this rival of God get such a supreme  fortune?"  
 
Narada  said, "O king criticism,  praise,  serving  or negligence  are all confined  to the body  only. 
When the soul is identified  with the body, people suffer from the impact of scolding and abusing.  
God has no ego like ordinary  beings,  because  He is the supreme  soul and ultimate.  If He 
punishes  someone  it is for one's  benefit  and not for any anger  or jealousy.  Therefore  one must 
concentrate his mind in God no matter what his feelings are - enmity, devotion, fear,  affection.  
 
In God's  view  these  feelings  don't  make  any difference."  Narada  said, " Yudhisthira,  in my 
opinion it is certain that the concentration achieved through a feeli ng of enmity is rare to  achiev 
otherwise,  even  with devotion.  This is the reason  why uncountable  number  of sinners,  who had 
strong enmity for Lord Krishna, merged with Him. Your cousins - Shishupal and Dantavkra  were 
fortunate. They both were the gatekeeper s of the Lord. It was by curse of Brahmin, that they  had 
to be relegated and take birth as sinful  demons."  
 
Narada said, "O king, Brahma's Manasputras (sons begotten by thoughts) Sanakadikumars  were 
freely  roaming  all over the universe.  Once  they reached  Vaikunth  (the abode  of Lord  Vishnu). 
But assuming them to be ordinary boys the gatekeepers Jay -Vijay did not allow them  in. 
Indignant  by the behaviour  of the Gatekeepers,  Sanakadi  Kumars  cursed  them:  "Fools  both of 
you don't deserve a presence near God. Bot h of you are endowed with Rajaguna and  Tamoguna 
(royal  and dark virtues),  so go and take birth  as the demons."  When  both the gatekeepers  were 
falling  from  Vaikunth,  the kind Sanakadi  Kumars  said, " O.K.  the effect  of our curse  shall  long 
for your three bir ths only, thereafter you shall return to Vaikunth  again."  
   
 
TALE OF HIRANYAKSH AND  HIRANYKASHIPU  
By the curse  of Brahmins,  the gatekeepers  of the God,  Jay-Vijay  took their first birth  as the 
demons - Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksh. Diti was their mother. Hir anyaksh had stolen the  earth 
and hidden  it in Sutala  Loka,  causing  worries  for Brahma.  To remove  the worries  of Brahma, 
Lord appeared as Varaha avatar (the boar incarnation) and killed Hiranyaksh. After the killing  of 
Hiranyaksh  his elder  brother  Hiraykash ipu developed  enmity  with Lord  Vishnu.  He avowed  to 
other demons: "I will kill that tricky Vishnu with my trident. Thus no one will be able to  protect 
the gods. All of you go out and bring havoc on them." Then Hiranykashipu cremated his  younger 
brother Hir anyaksh, condoled mother Aditi and wife of his younger brother and himself  went 
away to observe penance in order to acquire strength and  gallantry.  
 
In the Valley  of Mandarachal  Mountain,  Hiranykashipu  stood  on one toe only and raised  his 
hands towards sky . He continued to stand in the same position. Ultimately fire began to  emerge 
from  his head.  That fire caused  burning  of all the three  lokas  (worlds.)  Panicked  by the fire the 
gods reached to Brahma and prayed to put the fire off. Brahma at once appeared  before 
Hiranykashipu  and said, "Son  Hiranykashipu,  your penance  is over now.  Now  seek a boon  of 
your wish.'  
 
Worshipping  Brahma,  Hiranykashipu  said:  'May  I not be killed  by any living  being  created  by 
you, may I be killed  neither  in day nor in night,  neithe r by humans  nor by animals,  neither  by 
weapons  nor by arms,  neither  on earth  nor in sky. May no one match  me in war. May I be an 
undisputed emperor of all the living beings.' Pleased by his penance, Brahma  granted 
Hiranykashipu that rare  boon.  
By the virtue of Brahma's  boon,  Hiranykashipu  grew  extremely  strong.  Now  he had no fear of 
death,  so his atrocities  increased  day by day. He defeated  all the gods,  human  beings,  demons, 
demigods.  Everyone  accepted  his superiority.  Now,  Hiranykashipu  began  to reside  in heaven 
itself.  He also made  an all round  declaration:  'all the people  who worship  or even  remember 
Vishnu,  shall  be put to death  in my kingdom.  Nobody  else is God except  me.' Thus  all the gods 
and demons began to worship Hiranykashipu and presented him w ith gifts to please  him. 
Gandharvas, Siddhas, sages, apsaras etc. all began to sing in his  praise.  
 
Narada  says:  'O Yudhisthira,  Hiranykashipu  had such a brilliance  that he began  to receive  the 
offerings  himself  of the Yagyas  performed  by Brahmins.  On all the seven  islands  and upto the 
heaven, it was his dominion. Now he was freely and lavishly enjoying all the luxuries.  Maddened 
by the luxuries, he even began to violate the rulings of the scriptures. Perplexed by his harsh  rule, 
all the gods  went  into the refuge  of the Almighty.  Through  a celestial  voice,  God comforted 
them: 'Don't be afraid O gods. I am aware of havoc caused by this demon. I will destroy him,  you 
wait for some  more  time.  When  he will begin  to torment  his calm  and devotee  son Prahlada,  I 
will definitely kill  him.'  
 
The demon king Hiranykashipu had four sons. Prahlada was youngest of them. Prahlada was  the 
greatest lover and devotee of God. Hiranykashipu had declared such a pious son like Prahlada  a 
criminal of the state. Thus he tried his be st to kill  Prahlada.  
   
 
STORY OF PRAHLADA THE GREAT  DEVOTEE  
Pious  virtues  of Prahlada:  - The youngest  son of the demon  king Hiranykashipu,  Prahlada  was 
very virtuous.  He used to serve  the sages  with love.  He treated  all the beings  equally  and did 
never  differentiate  them  as separate  from  him. He had a respect  for the elders.  Despite  having 
knowledge,  wealth,  beauty,  and nobility,  Prahlada  didn't  have  any ego. He never  lost patience 
even  in most  adverse  conditions.  He also regarded  the world  as false  and worthless.  He had no 
desire  for anything,  but had full restraint  on his mind,  organ,  breath,  and body.  Despite  having 
born in demon  family,  he didn't  have  any demonic  virtues.  Narada  says:  'O Yudhisthira,  as the 
virtues  of the God are endless,  similarly  the virtues  of Prahlada  had no limit.  But a natural  and 
congenital love for Lord Sri Krishna was his greatest  merit.  
 
Since  his childhood,  Prahlada  had no inclination  for childish  plays.  Often  he used to meditate 
silently. During his meditation, he used to becom e quite motionless. More than often he felt as  if 
God himself  was fondling  him taking  him in His lap. At times  when  he experienced  an absence 
of God,  Prahlada  would  cry loudly,  and at other  times  he would  laugh  with joy seeing  God 
before him. He also used to sing, shout and even dance whenever he felt God  nearby. 
Occasionally,  Prahlada  used to mimic  God,  or feeling  the soft touch  of God,  sit peacefully 
without movement. Such was the trance like condition of Prahlada who had a  complete 
submersion in devotion  for God.  
 
Shukracharya  was the teacher  of the demons.  Sukhracharya's  two sons had been  appointed  to 
teach  the boys  of the royal  family.  Staying  at a place  closer  to the royal  palace,  these  two 
brothers  taught  the boys  in politics,  economics  etc. Prahlada  too was sent to them  for formal 
education.  There  he used to listen  to his teachers  carefully  and recite  what  he had been  taught.  
But Prahlada did not like the education, which was based on falsehood. One day  Hiranykashipu 
took Prahlada  in his lap and asked lovingly:  'My son, tell me, what  you like the most.'  Prahlada 
said:  'Father,  in my opinion,  this world  is nothing  but full of sorrow.  Hence  it is just for every 
being  that they should  give up this blind -pit like world  and go to the forests  and take shelt er in 
God,  to be free of miseries.'  Alarmed  by these  words,  Hiranykashipu  warned  the teachers,  the 
sons of Shukracharya, to look after Prahlada well, and to remove that mean thoughts of  devotion 
from  his mind.  He also cautioned  the teachers  to guard  Prahla da against  any possible  approach 
by a god, ascetic or  Brahmin.  
 
Guruputras  (the teacher  of Prahlada)  tried their best and trained  Prahlada  in policies  of Sama, 
Dama, Dand, Bhed (conviction, temptation, fear of punishment and partiality.) Then they  trained 
him in Arth, Dharma and Kama (economic matters, religion and carnal knowledge.) When  they 
felt satisfied with their efforts the Guruputras brought Prahald again to his father, the demon  king 
Miranykasipu.  
 
Hiranykashipu kissed Prahlada's head and took him in his lap and asked, "My son Prahlada,  tell 
me in detail  what  you have  learned  from  your teacher  during  your stay with them."  Prahlada 
said, "Father  there  are nine kinds  of devotion  for Lord  Vishnu.  If one develops  these  nine kinds 
of devotion  with dedica tion, I understand,  it would  be the best education."  Infuriated  by these 
words, Hiranykashipu threw Prahlada on the floor and began to scoff at  Guruputras.  
 
 
 Hearing his father scoffing at Guruputras, Prahlada said, "Father it was not taught to me by  them,  
it is my natural inclination." These words further infuriated Hiranykashipu. Blinded by anger  he 
ordered his soldiers to kill Prahlada at once. Formidable demons hit Prahlada with their arms.  At 
that time Prahlada's  conscience  was focused  in God.  All the blows  of the demons  yielded  no 
result.  Thereafter,  Prahlada  was trampled  by intoxicated  elephants,  bitten  by poisonous  snakes 
thrown  from  the high cliffs  into the sea and even  in fire, buried  under  the mountain  but all in 
vain. None of the attempts could d o any harm to the sinless  Prahlada.  
 
Now, Hirankashipu began to feel worried because of his inability. Seeing him  worried  the 
teacher assured him, "Be free of worries, O king. Keep your son tied in Varunapash (the noose  of 
Varuna) until our father Shukrac harya returns." Then they again took Prahlada to their  hermitage 
to teach him Grihasthdharm (duties of a married man). One day the teachers were away for  some 
urgent work. Prahlada called his classmates and began to preach them about Lord  Vishnu.  
   
 
Preachin g to Demon Boys by  Prahlada  
Prahlada preached, "Friends, human incarnation is a rare thing in this world. So taking shelter  at 
the feet of God in this human  incarnation  is a success  for life. Brothers,  God is the friend, 
beloved  and the soul of each and every being.  Sensual  pleasures  are easily  available  in every 
incarnation, so it is useless to make physical efforts to achieve sensual pleasures. But this  human 
body is a means to get God. So, as long as the body is sound and healthy and it has strength  one 
must work for his  benefits.  
 
Half of the life of a man is simply wasted in sleeping. First twenty years pass in playing,  Young 
age passes  in satisfying  the ego while  during  the twenty  years  of old age human  body  becomes  
crippled.  So friends  don't  waste  your life running  after the physical  pleasures,  luxuries,  wealth 
and all that leads to a certain fall. One needs not work hard to please the God. He is soul of  every 
living being. He is self -achieved. Only do good to every living being, be kind to  them 
uncon ditionally.  
 
God is pleased  with these  actions  only.  Impressed  by the beautiful  preaching  of Prahlada  about 
Bhagavat  Dharma,  the demon  boys  asked,  "O prince,  you have  never  been  away  from  the 
hermitage.  How  then did you get such a knowledge  at such a raw age? Prahlada  told his fellow 
disciples  that when  his father  was away  on Mandarachal  for penance,  Indra  had kidnapped  his 
mother  Kayadhu.  He was taking  her to Devloka  when  Devarshi  Narada  stopped  him in the way 
and asked  why he was taking  such a helpless  woman so forcibly.  Indra  had told then that he 
would destroy her foetus who was going to be a demon and thereafter would let her  go. 
 
Narada had said, "Devaraj there is a great devotee of God in this foetus, you cannot kill him.  But 
you need not fear him." T hus convinced by Narada, Indra had released Kayadhu who then  came 
to stay at Narada's  hermitage  to pass her time.  In the pious  company  of Narada  who,  with a 
desire to benefit my mother and me, had preached us about Bhagavat dharma, and  absolute 
knowledge ( Vishuddha Jnana)." It is that knowledge which I have preached you just now. God  is 
pleased with unconditional love only. So you too develop devotion for  God."  
   
 
 
 
CHAPTER  EIGHT  
DESCRIPTION OF  MANVATARAS  
(1) Swayambhu  Manvantra - King  Parikshit  said to Shukdev,  "Gurudev,  I just heard  that tale of 
self-begotten Manu's lineage. Now kindly describe to me about the others Manus. Also  describe 
the plays of God's different incarnations which occurred during different Manvantaras."  Shukdev 
said, "Parikshit,  during  Tamas  Manvantara,  Lord  Narayana  was born as Hari incarnation  from 
Harini, the wife of a sage. In that incarnation He saved an elephant from the jaws of a  crocodile. 
During  the present  Kalpa  (period  comprising  the sum of all the four yugas),  six Manvantaras 
have  passed. I have described the first one. Now, listen to the description of the  other 
Manvantaras."  
 
(2) Swarochish Manvantara - Swarochi Manu was the son of Agni. He had sons named  Dyumana, 
Sushena and Rochismana. During that Manvantara, Indra's post was occupp ied by  Rochan. 
Scholars of Vedas like Vrajstambh etc. were among the Saptarishi (seven great sages). Lord  had 
taken  incarnation  as Vibhu,  the son of a sage Vedshira  and his wife Tushita.  Vibhu  remained  a 
loyal celibate lifelong. Following His conduct, eigh ty-eight thousand more sages  observed 
celibacy life  long.  
 
(3) Uttam Manvantara - Third Manu Uttam was the son of the king Priyvrata. He had sons  named 
Pawan, Sanjay, Yagyhotra, etc. In that Manvantar, seven sons of the sage Vashisht  were 
Saptarishi  (the seven  great  sages).  Indra's  name  was Satyajit.  Satya,  Vedshrut  and Bhadra  were  
the main Ganas (courtiers) of the God. God had appeared in the incarnation of Satyasen, the  son 
of Dharma and Sunrita. He was accompanied by Devganas named Satyvrata. Lord had  destro yed 
during that period the evil Yakshas, demon and  poltergeists.  
 
(4) Tamas  Manvantara - Tamas,  the fourth  Manu  was the real brother  of Uttam,  the third  Manu. 
He had ten sons. Trishikh was Indra then, with Satyak, Hari, Veer etc. as his main courtiers.  Sage 
like Jyotirdham etc. were the Saptarishi. During that Manvantara Lord had saved Gajendra  from 
the jaws of the  crocodile.  
 
(5) Raiwat  Manvantara:  Raiwas  was the fifth Manu.  He was also the real brother  of Tamas,  the 
third Manu. He had many sons. Vibhu was the name  of Indra. Sages like Hiranyroma,  Vedshira, 
Urdhubahm were among Saptarishi. God had appeared in the incarnation of Vaikunth the son  of 
the sage Shubh  and his wife Vikuntha.  At the request  of Goddess  Lakshmi,  Lord  Vaikunth 
created Vaikunth dham, the best a mong all other lokas  (worlds).  
 
(6) Chakshush Manvantara: Chakshush was the sixth Manu. He had sons named Puru,  Purusha, 
Sadyumn etc. Mantrradruma was Indra then, with Apya etc. as main courtiers. Sages  like 
Havishmana and Veeraka etc. were among the Saptarish i. During that Manuantara, Lord  had 
appeared in partial incarnation as Ajit, the son of Vanraj and his wife Sambhunti. It was he  who 
caused  the churning  of the sea and made  the God's  drink  nectar  and supported  Mandarachal 
Mountain on his back in Kachchhap (tortoise) from during the  churning.  
 
 (7) Vaivasvata  Manvantara:  Sri Shukdev  says,  " Parikshit  in the present  era, the seventh  Manu, 
Shardhdev is the son of Surya. He has ten sons - Ikshvaku, Nabhag, Drisht, Sharyati,  Narishyanta, 
Nabhag,  Disht,  Karush,  Prisha dhra and Vasumana.  Puranadar  is the name  of Indra.  He has 
Aditya,  Vasu,  Rudra,  Vishvadev,  Marudgana,  Ashwini,  Kumar  and Rishi  as his main  courtiers. 
Kashyapa, Atri, Vashishtha, Vishvamitra, Gautam, Jamadagni and Bhardwaj are the  Saptarishi. 
During this Man vantara, God has arrived in Vamana incarnation as the son of Kashyapa and  his 
wife Aditi.  
 
(8) Savarni  Manvantara:  Savarni,  the son of Surya  and Chhaya  would  be the eighth  Manu.  The 
king Surath,  who had occurred  in Swarachish  Manvantara,  had worshiped  Goddess  Bhagavati 
intensely,  and thus received  a boon  of having  an unbroken  empire  on earth.  In later course  he 
will be the son of Surya  and become  the eighth  Manu  also. He would  have  sons like Nirmaka, 
Virajask  etc. Vairochana  Bali would  be Indra,  Amritprabha  etc. as his main  courtiers.  Galava, 
Diptimana, Parashurama, Ashwatthama, Kripacharya, RishySring and Vyasa - these great  sages 
would be the Saptarishi during the eight Manvantara. God would take incarnation as  Sarvbhaum, 
the sons of Devguhya  and his wife Saras wati.  God as Sarvbhaum  would  snatch  the kingdom  of 
Swarga (heaven) from Puranadara Indra and give it to the king  Bali.  
 
(9) Ninth Manvantara: Sri Shukdev says, Varuna's son Dakshasavarni would be the ninth  Manu. 
He would have sons like Bhutaketu, Diptketu, Dyu timana etc. God would take birth as  the 
incarnation  of Rishabh,  the son of sage Ayushmana  and his wife Ambudhara.  A person  named 
Adbhut would be Indra and he would have Para, Marichigarbh etc. as his main  courtiers.  
 
(10) The Tenth Manvantara: Upshloksa's son B rahma Savarni would be the tenth Manu.  He 
would be very pious in nature and have sons like Bhurishen etc. Havishmana, Sukriti, Satya,  Jay, 
Murti  etc. would  be Saptarishi.  Shambhu  would  be Indra,  with Suvasana,  Viruddh  etc. as his 
main  courtiers.  God would  appear  in the incarnation  of Vishwasen  as the son of Vishwasrij  and 
his wife Vishuchi. He would be a friend of  Indra.  
 
(11) The Eleventh Manvantara: The self -restraining Dharmasavarni would be the eleventh  Manu. 
He would  have  ten sons.  Vaidhrita  would  be Indra  with Vihangama,  Kamagama,  etc. as main 
courtiers. Vedic sages like Arun etc. would be the Saptarishi. God would appear as  Dharmasetu, 
the sons of Aryak and Vaidhrita. In this incarnation he would protect Triloki (all the  three 
worlds).  
 
(12) Twelveth Manvantra:  Rudrasavarni would be the twelfth Manu. He would have sons  named 
Devavana,  Updev  and Devshreshth  etc. Ritdhama  would  be Indra  with Hari etc. as his main 
courtiers. As the son of Satyasahay and his wife Sunrita, the God would protect this  Manvantara 
in the  form of  Swadham.  
 
(13) Thirteenth Manvantara: Devsavarni would be the thirteenth Manvantara. He would  have 
sons named  Chitrasen,  Vichitra  etc. Divaspati  would  be Indra  of the gods  like Sukarm,  Sutram 
etc. Sages like Nirmoka, Tatvadarsh etc. would be the Sapta rishi. God would appear  as 
Yogeshwar, the sons of Devhotra and his wife Brihati. He would bestow the designation of  Indra 
to Divaspati.  
 
(14) Fourteenth  Manvantara:  Indrasavarmi  would  be the fourteenth  Manu.  He would  have  sons 
like Uru, Gambhir  Buddhi  etc. Shuc hi would  be Indra  and have  Pavitra  Chakshush  etc. as his 
main  courtiers.  Agni,  Bahu,  Shuchi,  Magadh  etc. would  be the Saptarishi.  God would  appear  in 
the incarnation  of Brihadbhahu  as the son of Satrayana  and his wife Vinata  and cause  the 
extension of Karm akand  (actions)."   
Shukdev says, "O Parikshit, these fourteen Manvantaras had continued in past, are continuing  in 
the present  and they would  continue  in the future  also. It is by them,  that a Kalpa  (a period  of 
thousand Chaturyugas) is completed. Calculat ion of time is also done through  these 
Manvantaras.  
 
Period of a Manvantra is slightly more then seventy one Chaturyugas (all the four yugas  passing 
seventy -one times). A Chaturyugaya (period of all the four yugas taken together) lasts for  about 
3 million  years,  while  a Kalpa  lasts for about  four thousand  three  hundred  and twenty  million 
years. This is equal to a day of Brahma. Brahma's night is Mahapralaya (the great deluge).  When 
that night  is over,  Brahma  again  begins  the work  of new creation  exactly  as per the previous 
Kalpa. Carrying out this responsibility continuously for a century, Brahma goes back  to 
Bhagavat  dham  (the abode  of Lord  Vishnu).  His responsibilities  are taken  over by the next 
Brahma, who carries out the work of creation, by the inspir ation of Lord  Narayana.  
   
 
TALE OF GAJENDRA THE ELEPHANT and GRAH,  THE 
CROCODILE  
King Parikshit asked, "Munivar, God had save Gajendra, in His Hari incarnation. I wish to  hear 
this tale."  
 
Shukdev  says,  " O king,  in Tamas  Manvantara,  God had appeared  as Hari and saved  Gajendra 
from the jaws of Grah the crocodile. I am narrating the tale to you listen to it  carefully. 
Surrounded by Kshirsagar, there was a high mountain named Trikuta. In the dense forest on  the 
mountain  there  lived  Gajendra  along  with his harem of many  cows.  Gajendra  was the king of 
many big and strong  elephants.  
 
One day, Gajendra  was passing  his time playfully  with his family  in the forests.  It was very hot 
that day. So, perplexed  by the sun, Gajendra  descended  down  the mountain  with his family. At 
the foothills, there was a big lake with deep, cold water and many lotuses blooming in  it. 
Gajendra entered the lake and drank water to his fill. Then he took bath and started to play in  the 
water. His activities in the water disturbed the crocodile  who lived there. With anger,  the 
crocodile caught hold of Gajendra's leg. Startled by the sudden attack, Gajendra put all his  might 
to get free but in vain. They only jostled against each other for long. Every moment,  crocodile's 
strengths seemed to be ga ining. At last, because of constant pulling into water,  Gajendra's 
strength gave away. Now, he was very desperate and thought that God has sent the crocodile as  a 
noose of Yama (death) for him. This thought horrified the elephant, so he decided to take  refuge 
at Sri  Hari.  
 
Gajendra had the memory of his previous birth fresh. So concentrating his mind in the  beautiful 
appearance  of God,  he began  to pray,  "I take refuge  at God,  who is the base of the entire  world, 
who is the ultimate  refuge  for everyone.  It is difficult  to unfold  the mysteries  of His plays.  He 
takes many guises. Not even the sages and the gods know His appearance and glory. May such  a 
Lord protect me. O Lord, your powers are unending. You are gracious to those who take  refuge 
in you. Illusion ed by you, this humble  creature  does not recognize  you. O Lord,  I am in your 
refuge."  
 
Shukdev says, "Parikshit, Gajendra had prayed God impartially and unspecifically so other  gods 
did not come  to save him. Being  the soul of everyone,  Lord  Sri Hari appear ed Himself  and saw 
Gajendra in deep crisis. When Gajendra saw that Lord Sri Hari had arrived on his vehicle  Garuda 
from  the sky, he picked  a lotus  from  the lake and raised  it in his trunk  and said, "O Jagadishwar 
(God of all world) Narayana, here is a salu tation for you." By then Lord jumped down from  the 
Garuda  and dragged  both of them  out of water.  Then  He tore the jaws of the crocodile  by his 
wheel and saved Gajendra. All the gods, Brahma and Lord Shiva worshiped God and showered 
flowers on  Him.  
   
 
Previou s Births of Gaja and  Grah  
Killed  by the God,  the crocodile  at once  acquired  a divine  appearance.  He was a good -natured 
Gandharva  (demigod)  named  Huhu,  in his previous  birth.  By the curse  of Mahatma  Deval,  he 
had to take birth  in crocodile  form.  But now,  by the grace  of God he was saved  and went  to his 
heavenly  abode.  Gajendra  too received  salvation  by mere  touch  of God.  He too went  to the 
heavenly abode of  God.  
In his previous  birth,  Gajendra  was a king of Pandya  dynasty.  His name  was Indradyumna.  He 
was a  fervent devotee of God. So he had abandoned his kingdom and taken to penance on  Malay 
Mountain.  One day he was engrossed  in his worship  when  sage Agastya  arrived  there  with his 
disciples.  For not getting  due welcome  from  the king,  Agastya  cursed  him, "You  with a dull 
mind, who neglect his guests will be born as an elephant." But even in elephant incarnation,  and 
by the virtues of his devotion, Gajendra retained the memory of his previous birth.  God 
appointed him as his courtier and departed to his divine abode riding on  Garuda."  
   
 
CHURNING OF THE  SEA 
King  Parikshit  asked,  "O great  sage,  how did God cause  churning  of the sea. What  was the 
purpose  behind  it? Kindly  tell me?"  Shukdev  says,  "Parikshit,  in the sixth  Chakshush 
Manvantara, the demons king Bali had  defeated the  gods.  
 
Indra had also lost his glory by insulting the garland which sage Durvasa had presented to him  as 
a God's  gift. Indra  had put the garland  in elephant's  neck  and then got it crushed  under  its feet. 
But now having  lost his kingdom  and struck by misfortune,  Indra  and other  gods  with Brahma 
prayed to the Lord. Melted by their prayers, God appeared before them. All the gods laid  before 
Him and worshiped. The omnipotent God inspired the gods to churn the  sea. 
 
Lord  asked  the gods  to churn  the sea and produce  nectar.  He also advised  them  to take the help 
of demons  in that great  task. Drinking  the nectar  one becomes  immortal.  God asked  the gods  to 
put various medicinal plants and vegetations in Kshirsagar (sea of milk) and churn it  by 
Mandarach al Mountain  moving  it with the help of Vasuki  the naga.  God promised  them  of all 
help from His  part. 
 
Thereafter,  Indra  and other  gods  went  unarmed  to the demon  king Bali and told him of their 
intention.  Demons  too liked  the idea.  With  a friendly  attitude  then the gods  and the demons 
together uprooted the mount Mandarachal. But they could not carry it to the sea. Lord  appeared 
on Garuda and carried the mountain to the  sea. 
 
The gods and demons had promised Vasuki, the Naga his due share in the nectar. So  Vasuki 
allowed  them  to use him as a rope,  wound  around  Mandarachal  as a means  to move  it. In the 
incarnation  of Ajit, Lord  told the gods  to hold the head  of Vasuki.  But the demons  suspecting 
some  mischief  said they would  hold the head  and asked  the gods  to hold the Naga  from  the tail 
for churning. Thus the gods held the tail while the demons took hold of Vasuki's  head.  
 
Thus  they began  the churning.  But as soon  as the churning  began  the mountain  started  sinking 
for not having  a firm base.  Lord  then took Kachc hhap  (tortoise)  incarnation  and supported 
Mandarachal  on His back.  On the mountain  also Lord  appeared  in Sahastrabahu  form,  and held 
it. The gods and the demons churned the sea for long but nothing emerged. So, Lord Ajit  himself 
began  to churn  the sea. First of all, it was Halahal,  the deadly  poison  to emerg.  The intensity  of 
the poison  began  to torment  every  being.  To save their subjects  from  it, Prajapatis  prayed  Lord 
Lord  Shiva.  The life-giver,  Lord  Bholenath  (an epithet  of Lord  Shiva)  drank  all the poison. By 
the impact of the poison, Lord Lord Shiva's throat turned blue in color. Hence Lord Shiva got  the 
name  Nilakantha.  
Emergence  of Gems  and Nectar:  After  Lord  Shiva  drank  the poison,  the gods  and the demons 
began to churn the sea again with greater en thusiasm. Now, Kamadhenu, the divine  cow 
emerged. She was useful for Yagya etc. so the sages received it. Then a horse  named 
Uchchaishrava,  emerged  and taken  up by Bali the king of demons.  The horse  was followed  by 
Airavat  the elephant.  Indra  took it. The divine  gem,  Kaustubh  Mani,  emerged  then.  Lord  Ajit 
took it on His chest.  Then  emerged  the Kalpavriksha,  the divine  tree that reached  the heavens. 
Then the apsaras emerged. They all accepted to serve Indra in  Heaven.  
 
 
 Goddess Lakshmi emerged after the apsar as. All the azimuths were lighted because of  her 
brilliance. Everyone was attracted towards her beauty, generosity, youthfulness, appearance  and 
glory.  Devaraj  Indra  presented  a throne  for her to sit. Rivers  brought  water  for her ceremonial 
bath. The earth  presented medicinal bath. Cows gave Panchganyas and Vasant (spring)  presented 
many kinds of fruits and flowers. The sages welcomed Lakshmi with Rigsuktas (hymns  of 
Rigveda). Gandharvas sang in her praise. Then taking the lotus in her hand, Lakshmi took a  seat 
on the throne. Sea donned her with a beautiful silk saree. Varuna presented a garland.  Saraswati 
gifted her with a necklace of pearls. Brahma presented lotus while Nagas presented two  earrings.  
 
After  the singing  by Brahmins  in her praise,  Lakshmi  took lotus  garland  in her hand  and put it 
around Lord Vishnu's neck in a gesture of accepting Him as her husband. Jagatpita, Lord  Vishnu 
too gave  Lakshmi  a supreme  position  in His heart.  Lakshmi  was followed  by Varunai  who was 
taken up by the  demons.  
 
The go ds and the demons began to churn the sea again. At last lord Dhanvantari emerged with  an 
urn of nectar. It was Dhanvantari who developed Ayurved, the ancient Indian system  of 
medicine.  As soon  as the demons  saw the urn, they snatched  it and ran away.  A row then began 
among  the demons  over the drinking  of nectar.  Consoling  the gods,  Lord  appeared  among  the 
demons in the guise of an extremely pretty woman,  Mohini.  
 
Distribution  of Nectar  by Lord  as Mohini:  The demons  who were  fighting  over the potions  of 
nectar forgot everything when they saw Mohini, who was actually a guise of Lord Vishnu.  Lured 
by her prettiness  the demons  came  to Mohini  and requested  her to solve  the dispute  for them. 
Illusioned  by God,  the demons  even  gave the nectar  to Mohini  and sat peacefully  showing  their 
confidence  in her. In Mohini's  guise,  Lord  thought  that the demons  were  congenitally  cruel  and 
giving nectar to them would be akin to feeding sakes with milk. Their evils would  increase.  
 
So, Mohini  offered  the nectar  to the gods  only while  offered  wine  to the demons.  When  the 
nectar  was being  distributed,  a demon  named  Rahu  took the guise  of a god and sitting  among 
them drank the nectar. Suurya and Chandra spotted him and revealed his identity to God, who  at 
once beheaded him. But, by then Rahu had drunk enough  nectar.  
   
 
CONQUERING OF HEAVEN BY KING  BALI  
Shukdev  says,  "Parikshit  by the virtues  of the ambrosia,  the gods  had become  invincible.  They 
began to take revenge and the demon king Bali met his death in the battle. When Brahma saw  the 
imminent  extermination  of the demons,  he sent Devarshi  Narada  in the battlefield  to make  the 
gods abstain from the war. The survivng demons carried the dead Bali towards Astachal.   There,  
Shukracharya,  the teacher  of the demons,  resurrected  all the demons  with his Sanjivani  Vidya 
(knowledge that resurrects the dead). Thus obligated the demon -king Bali dedicated  all  his 
wealth to Shukracharya and began to serve him and other Brahmins of Bhirgu  clan.  
 
By the service of the Demons the Brahmins of Bhrigu clan got very much pleased. King Bali  had 
a long cherished  desire  of conquering  the heaven.  So the Brahmins  organized  a Vishvjit  Yagya 
for Bali.  At the completion  of Yagya,  first emerged  a beautiful  chariot,  all covered  with gold. 
Then green coloured horse s, inexhaustible quiver and a divine shield emerged in sequence  from 
the altar. Bali's grandfather Prahlada presented him a garland while Shukracharya gave a  conch. 
Thus receiving all the weaponaries, king Bali took oath and circumambulated  Brahmins. 
There after,  greeting  them  he boarded  the chariot  followed  by powerful  demons  and their huge 
armies. Thus fully prepared Bali launched a massive attack on the  heaven.  
 
When Indra saw that Bali had come with full preparation and that his armies had  surrounded 
Ama ravati, he went to his teacher Brihaspati and asked about the reason for the demons'  sudden 
uprising.  Devguru  said, "Indra,  blessing  of Bhrigu  Brahmins  is the main  reason  of the demons 
uprising.  You can't face the demon  armies  yet, because  Kal himself  is in their favor.  So you all 
abandon  the heaven  and hide somewhere."  After  the abdication  of the heaven  by the gods  Bali 
captured  it. Then  he conquered  all the three  worlds.  With  advice  of his priests,  Bali organized 
one hundred  Ashvmegh  Yagyas.  Thus  by the grace of Shukracharya  and other  Brahmins  of 
Bhrigu clan, king Bali got the domain of the heaven and began to rule it  generously.  
 
Preaching  of Payovrata  to Aditi  by Kashyapa:  Sri Shukdev  says,  "O Parikshit,  Aditi  (mother  of 
the gods)  felt very sorry  for the gods  and capture  of the heaven  by the demons.  When  Sage 
Kashyapa  visited  Aditi's  hermitage,  he saw his wife in desperate  mood.  On enquiring  about  the 
reason,  Aditi  said, " Lord  by your grace  my married  life is running  well.  But I am sorry  for the 
pitiabl e condition of my sons, the gods. Strong demons have snatched their abode. So kindly  tell 
me the remedy."  At her request  Kashyapa  preached  Aditi  about  a worship  named  "Payovrat"  to 
seek the blessing  God.  
 
This worship,  Payovrat  is carried  out during  the waxing phase  of the month  Phalgun  (that 
correspond to February -March months in Gregorian calendar) for twelve days continuously.  One 
must  drink  milk only during  the worship.  One-day before  starting  the Vrat,  that is on the day of 
Amavasya  (moonless  night)  one must  smear  his body  with the earth  dug out by the boars  and 
take bath in the river.  Then,  one must  worship  God with Shodushopchar  (sixteen  treatments) 
while following the rules prescribed for daily routine. He must recite Dwadashakshari  Mantra 
(hymn cont aining twelve letters), perform Havan with Kheer (rice cooked in milk) and  distribute 
Naivadya (remaining food from Havan) among the devotees. Reciting the twelve -lettered  hymn, 
one must  tell the rosary -string  at least once  about  the wish.  Thus,  the same  worship  must  be 
performed for twelve days continuously. If one feeds a Brahmin daily during the Vrat, he can  be 
sure of God's  grace.  
 Mother  of the gods,  Aditi  performed  Payovrat  as per the advice  of her husband  Kashyapa. 
Pleased  by her Vrat,  the Lord  appea red before  her in Chaturbhuj  (four -armed)  form.  Mother 
Aditi  laid flat on the ground  to greet  the God.  She prayed,  "O Lord  you are the God of Yagya, 
and Yagya yourself. Those, who take refuge at your feet are saved when you are pleased,  nothing  
remains  ungettable."  Lord  said, " O mother  of the gods,  I know  about  your desire.  You have 
worshipped  me for your sons,  But it is difficult  yet to defeat  the demons.  But because  of your 
worship, I will protect your sons by becoming your  child."  
   
Vamana incarnation o f God  
When the Lord arrived in Aditi's womb, Brahma prayed to Him. By Brahma's prayers,  the 
unborn God appeared before Aditi. Shukdev says, " O Parikshit, on the twelfth day of the  waxing 
phase  of Bhadrapada  month  (corresponding  to September)  Lord  tok birth in Abhijit  Muhurta. 
Everywhere,  everybody  celebrated  the arrival  of God with joy. The gods  showered  flowers  on 
Him. The God had arrived in Vamana (dwarf) form. His continence appearance  caused 
tremendous joy for the sages. During Upnayan consecration of  Lord, the ruling deity of  the 
Gayatri mantra, Savitri (an epithet for Surya) preached Him the hymn. Guru gave  him 
Yagyopavit, Kashyapa gave neck -kerchief, the earth gave black buck skin, Chandra gave  scepter, 
Mother  gave  loin cloth,  the sky gave umbrella,  Brahma  gave  Kamandalu  (coconut  shell  bowl) 
Saptrishi gave kush (sacred grass) while Goddess Saraswati presented God with a string  of 
Rosaries.  Yakshraj  (king  of Yakshas)  Kubera  gave  him the alms  bowl  and mother  Annapurnna 
gave  him alms.  Thus  everyone  paye d due respect  to God in Vamana  (dwarf)  incarnation  who 
was radiating with divine  glory.  
 
Lord Vamana was intimated that the king Bali was performing many Ashvamegha Yagyas  with 
Bhrigu  Brahmans.  He at once  left for the Yagya  site, at a place  named  Bhrigu  Kachch  on the 
banks  of the river  Narmada.  As soon  as Lord  Vamana  reached  the site, all the sages,  hosts  and 
others  present  there  became  dull before  the radiance  of God.  They  felt as if Surya  himself  had 
arisen  there.  Everyone  stood  up to welcome  God.  Host  Bali offered  Him the best seat and 
washed His feet with affection. Then Bali requested God for his  service.  
 
Demanding three steps of land by Vamana: King Bali requested, "O Brahmin, now tell me how  I 
can serve  you. You are the tangible  representation  of the penance  of Brahmarishis.  By your 
arrival, all my ancestors are saved, my clan is blessed, my Yagya has succeeded. Ask  me 
whatever you wish. I am ready to give you your desired  object."  
 
Hearing the pious talk of the king Bali, Lord Vamana blessed him and  said, "O king, no one have 
been  impatient  and frugal  in your clan.  Reputation  of your grandfather  Prahlada  is still alive. 
You great  grandfather  Hiranykashipu  had chased  the illusionary  Vishnu  who had hid in your 
great grandfather's heart itself. When the  infuriated Hiranykashipu could not find  Vishnu 
anywhere in all the three worlds, he presumed that Vishnu had died because of his fear  alone."  
 
"O king"  continued  Lord  Vamana,  " You are excellent  among  the religious  people.  O demon 
king,  you can fulfill  any great  desire.  But I demand  only as much  land as could  be covered  in 
three steps of mine. I need nothing else." King Bali said, " O Batu, (dwarf Brahmin) you talk  like 
aged persons but your mind is childish. I am the ruler of all the three worlds, and you  are asking 
for three  steps  of land only,  you can still ask for anything  else. Lord  Vamana  replied,"  O king, 
greedy  ones are not sated  even  if they get whole  of the earth.  But I don't  want  more  than my 
requirement."  King  Bali agreed  to donate  Vamana  the Land as per his demands  and picked  up 
the water pot to make  resolution.  
When Guru Shukracharya, saw that Bali had agreed to donate land, he tried to persuade him,  "O 
Bali,  this Vamana  is none  other  than indestructible  Lord  Vishnu.  He has taken  incarnation  of 
Vamana  as a son of Aditi,  Kashyapa's  wife,  in the interest  of the gods.  Unknowingly  you have 
made  a promise  to fulfil  His desire.  But He will snatch  everything  from  you and hand  it over to 
Indra.  This illusionary  Batu  will measure  whole  of your empire  in all the three  worlds  with his 
two steps, so you will not be able to keep your promise also. Hence, show your inability to  make 
donation as per His demand, send Him  back."   
Measuring  of Earth's  heaven  by Vamana:  Shukdev  says,  "Parikshit  with,  politeness  king Bali 
asserted to his teacher, " Gurudev, your words are true. But I am the grandson of great  Prahlada. 
Now I cannot reverse my promise. No religion is greater than truth. I'm not afraid  of  any 
calamity except of deceiving a Brahmin." When, Shukracharya  saw that his disciple Bali  was 
determined to violate his dictate, he cursed, " O king, soon you will be devoid of the wealth  you 
have been  enjoying."  
 
But despite having been cursed by his teacher, Bali stayed firm to his promise.  Worshipping 
Vamana form ally, he took some water on his palm and made the promise to donate land. As  soon 
as Bali made the promise, Lord Vamana assumed a gigantic appearance and measured  Bali's 
entire  empire  in his steps.  In first He measured  the whole  of the earth.  In the next He measured 
the heaven. The second step itself reached Satyaloka, where Brahma had once washed Lord's  feet 
and kept the water, in a Kamandalu (a bowl of coconut shell) that came on earth later as the  river 
Ganges.  Now  there  was no room  for God to put His third step. Lord  ridiculed  Bali for not 
keeping his promise fully, "Your everything is mine now, but your promise is still  incomplete.  
 
Shukdev  says Lord  ridiculed  Bali but he remained  unmoved  with patience.  He said:  'O Lord,  I 
keep  my promise  fully,  you put your third  step on my head.  I don't  want  a blemish  on my 
reputation.'  Lord  said:  'I snatch  all the wealth  from  people  who are bestowed  with my grace. 
They  then become  an inseparable  devotee  of me, free from  every  blemish.'  Thus  Lord  Vishnu 
gave Bali the e mpire of Sutal Loka (hades) that was even richer than the heaven and said: 'I  will 
protect you there from all the obstacles.' Your hundredth Ashvamudh Yagya shall be  completed. 
In due course  of time you shall  be the king of the heaven.'  This way,  without  fighting  a battle, 
Lord took the empire of heaven from the demons and gave it to His brother  Indra.  
   
 
TALE OF  MATSYAVATAR  
King  Parikshit  asked:  'O Gurudev,  Lord  is omnipotent.  Why  did He then take Matsyavatar  like 
an ordinary being bound by karma? I want to hear the tale of God's Matsyavatar.' Shukdev  said: 
'O Parikshit, God is one. Still for the preservation of His devotees, He takes various  incarnations. 
He also shows  His plays  by being  present  in all the creatures.  But He remains  unaffected  by the 
merits a nd demerits of those living  beings.'  
 
'Parikshit,  at the end of last Kalpa,  Brahma  had fallen  asleep,  causing  a Pralaya.  All the worlds 
had been inundated then. When Brahma had fallen asleep, Vedas fell out from his open mouth.  A 
demon  Hayagreeev  abducted  the Vedas  by his illusionary  powers.  Omnipotent  God had known 
the action of the demon. So he had to take Matsyavatar  (fish-incarnation).'  
'There was a King named Satyavrat during that time. He was very generous and great devotee  of 
God. Sustaining himself  on water only, the King was observing severe penance. The same  King 
Satyavrat has come to be known as Shradhadev, the son of Surya (Vaivashvat) in the  present 
Kalpa.  One day, Satyavrat  was taking  a bath in the river,  when  a small  fish came  in his folded 
palms. The fish requested the King to save her. So the King put the fish in Kamandalu  (coconut 
shell  bowl).  But in no time the fish grew  too big to be accommodated  in the Kamandalu.  So the 
King transferred the fish into another, bigger pot, but again it gre w too big to be  accommodated 
in the pot. The sequence continued till the fish outgrew even the big lake. So the King decided  to 
put the fish in the  sea. 
 
The fish, which  was actually  an incarnation  of God,  requested  the King  not to put it in a sea 
inhabite d by fierce  monsters.  King  Satyavrat  grew  suspicious.  So with folded  hands,  the King 
requested  the fish to appear  in its real form.  Instantaneously,  Lord  Narayana  appeared  and told 
the King:  'Exactly  on the seventh  day from  now,  Pralaya  will inundate  all the three  lokas.  But I 
will send a boat for you. You will board  the boat and tether  it to my horns  with Vasuki,  the 
Naga.'  Having  received  the information  of deluge,  the King  began  to wait for its arrival  while 
reflecting  on God's  virtues.  On the seventh  day, dense  clouds  gathered  in the sky and began  to 
rain torrentially. Soon whole of the earth was inundated. The King Satyavrat found the boat  sent 
by Lord.  Boarding  the boat,  Satyavrat  began  to pray to God.  At his prayers,  Lord  preached  him 
the knowledge of  metaphysical. Thereafter, the God killed the demon Hayagreev and  recovered 
the Vedas. When Brahma awoke from his sleep, Lord handed the Vedas to  him.'  
   
 
CHAPTTER  NINE  
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE DYNASTY OF VAIVASVAT  MANU  
 
King Parikshit  requested  Shukdev  to descr ibe about  the dynasty  of his contemporary  Manu,  Shradhadev.  
Shukdev  said:  'Parikshit,  I describe  about  the dynasty  of Manu  in short  because  if I go in detail,  it will not 
be completed in hundreds of years.' Manu Shradhadev was the son of Surya and Sandhya.  Name  of 
Manu's wife  was Shradha.  They  did not have  any child initially,  so they organised a  Putrayeshti  Yagya  
under the auspices of their family teacher Vashishtha. But right amidst the proceedings, the  queen  
Shradha  prayed  the Brahmins  to bless  her for a female  child.  The Brahmins  made  offerings  as per her 
wish.  Consequently  a girl, instead  of a boy, was born to them.  She was  named  Ila. But the King requested  
Vashishtha  to transform her  into a boy. Vashishtha  did the same,  and the boy thus obtained  was named 
as Sudyumn.  
   
 
TALE OF  SUDYUMN  
One day Sudyumn had gone on a hunting excursion. Riding the horse with his  ministers, 
Sudyumn reached a forest at the foothills of Meru Mountain. The forest was the nuptial abode  of 
Lord Shiva and Mata Parvati. As soon as S udyumn and his companions entered the forests,  they 
all, even horses, got converted into females. Relating its reason Sukhdev said:  'Once,  Mata 
Parvati was sitting naked in the lap of Lord Shiva when suddenly some great sages arrived  there 
to have  a sight  of Lord.  Mata  Parvati  sank with shyness  and ran to don some  cloth.  When  the 
sages saw that Gauri and Lord Shiva were enjoying intimacy, they moved at once to  the 
hermitage  of Nar-Narayana.  Right  at that moment,  in order  to please  Mata  Parvati,  Lord  Shiv 
said: 'Except  me, any man who enters  here,  shall  become  a women.'  It was because  of these  
words  of Lord  Lord  Shiva,  that Sudyumn  and his companions  were  transformed  into females. 
While Sudyumn was roaming as woman, Budh, the son of Chandra, fell in love wi th her and  they 
agreed  to get married.  From  their marriage,  a son, Pururawa  was born,  who founded  the town 
named  Pratishthanpur.  
 
Sudyumn,  in female  form,  prayed  Lord  Shiva  to free him from  woman  incarnation.  Lord  Shiva 
blessed Sudyumn that he would be a m an for a month and a woman for another. Thus this  cycle 
would  continue  life long.  Thereafter  Sudyumn  returned  to the kingdom  and began  to rule it 
religiously.  He got three  sons in due course - Utkal,  Gaya  and Vimal.  In the twilight  of his life, 
Sudyumn gave  his kingdom to Pururava and he took  exile.  
   
 
TALE OF  PARISHADHRU  
After  the exile  of Sudyumn,  Manu  took to penance  with a desire  to have  son. Pleased  by his 
penance  Sri Hari blessed  him to have  ten sons.  Parishadhru  was the eldest  of them.  He was 
appointed  in the service  of the cows.  One night  in darkness,  a tiger broke  into the cowshed 
causing  a panic  among  the cows.  Hearing  the panicky  noise  of the cows,  Prishadhru  ran to the 
cowshed.  There  he saw that the tiger had caught  a cow,  and she was bellowing  in pain and fear. 
Prishadhru  at once  ran to help and with a powerful  blow  of the sword  he beheaded  the tiger.  It 
was pitch dark in the cattleshed, so Prishadhru could not see whom he had killed. In the morning 
he realized  that he had killed  the cow and not the tiger.  He felt extremely  sorry.  Their  family 
teacher  cursed  him to lead a life of a shudra.  Prishadhru,  thereafter  passed  his life as a celibate 
and mingled with the Supreme Soul at  last. 
   
 
TALE OF  SHARYATI  
Sharyati  was the second  son of Vaivasvat  Manu.  He was a great  scholar  of Vedas.  He had an 
extremely beautiful daughter named Sukanya. One day, king Sharyati was in the forests with  his 
family. Thus roaming, they reached the hermitage of the sage Chyavan. Chyavan was  immersed 
in deep meditation. His whol e body was covered with termite's nests; only eyes were shining  like 
fireflies.  Out of curiosity,  the princess  Sukanya  pricked  those  shining  eyes of the sage with 
thorns.  All the king's  army  fell in crises  by this incidence.  When  the king learned  about  the 
princess'  crime,  he begged  pardon  of the sage Chyavan  and gave the princess  in his service  and 
himself returned to his  palace.  
 
In the forest Sukanya served Chyavan with dedication. Chyavan received youth and vigor by  the 
grace of Ashwini Kumar. Pleased b y Shukanya's dedication, sage Chyavan provided her with  all 
queenly luxuries. After many days, king Sharyati again visited the forests. There he saw Sukanya 
talking  to a beautiful  young  prince.  At first Sharyati  scolded  at Sukanya  for violating  the norms 
of a chast  woman.  But Sukanya  told him about  the transformation  of the sage Chyavan  by the 
grace of Ashwini Kumar. Learning the reality the king felt overjoyed to see his  son-in-law 
Chyavan in youthful  state.  
   
 
TALE OF  AMBRISH  
Shukdev  says,  " Parikshit,  Sharyati was the king Nabhag.  His son was Nabhag.  He was a great 
devotee of his parents. As a result of his service for his parents, Nabhag was very  much 
comfortable. He had a son Ambarish who was a great devotee of Vishnu. Even the great  wealth 
on earth had no value for Ambarish.The king Ambarish served the God with his own hands  and 
remained immersed in His love. Once, Ambarish followed Nirjala Ekadashi Vrat (waterless  fast 
observed on the eleventh day of each phase of lunar month) for a year. During one suc h fast,  on 
the twelfth  day, king Ambarish  was about  to break  his fast, when  sage Durvasa  arrived  there 
along  with his ten thousands  disciples.  Welcoming  him, the king requested  Durvasa  to accept 
food.  But the sage turned  down  the request  saying  that it was prayer  time for him, so he would 
first go to take bath, then worship and take alms (food) ultimately. But the sage Durvasa did  not 
return for long. Thus by the dictate of Brahmins, king Ambarish broke his fast with basil  leaves 
and water.  
 
Just then sage Durvasa returned and saw Ambarish breaking his fast. So taking it as an insult,  the 
infuriated Durvasa invoked Kritya in order to kill the king. King Ambarish stood unmoved,  and 
begged  pardon  with folded  hands.  Lord  Narayana  saw His devotee  in trouble  and inspired  His 
Sudarshan Chakra (wheel) to save the  king.  
 
Sudarshan  Chakra  first incinerated  Kritya,  then aimed  at sage Durvasa.  When  Durvasa  saw 
Sudarshan  aimed  at him, he ran for his life. First he reached  Brahma.  But Brahma  told him that 
he was not able to protect  the person  who had done  harm  to a devotee  of God.  Then  Durvasa 
reached  to Rudra.  Lord  Shiva  also said, " Durvasa,  by the wish  of Lord,  Rudras  are engaged  in 
the service of the universe. This Chakra is unstoppable by me. So you go to His refuge,  only He 
can save  you."  
 
From  Lord  Shiva's  abode  Durvasa  reached  Vaikunthdham,  the supreme  abode  of Lord  Vishnu. 
He was feeling  intense  heat of the wheel.  So, shivering  with fear, he felt at the Lord's  feet and 
said, "O endless,  you are the only venerable  of all the saints.  O Lord,  I have  committed  a great 
crime  against  your devotee.  O Lord  please  save me". Seeing  sage Durvasa  in his refuge,  Lord 
Vishnu said, " Durvasa. I am bound to my devotee. I am not independent. As the  devotees 
abdicate their everythin g to receive me. Similarly I am also devoted to my devotee. So I too  can't 
protect you. Go to the person who you wanted to hurt, and pray him. Only he can save you  from 
the Chakra.  
 
Thus, by the dictate of God, aggrieved Durvasa returned to the king Ambari sh and fell at his  feet. 
Ashamed of the sage act, king Ambarish prayed God, "O Lord if I had done any pious deed,  may 
it be enough  to calm  you and may the heat that torments  this Brahmarishi  quenched."  Thus  by 
the prayers of king Ambarish, Sudarshan was qu ietened and returned to its position on Lords 
finger and sage Durvasa recovered from his sufferings. He blessed the king and  left. 
   
DESCRIPTION OF IKSHVAKU  DYNASTY  
Shukdev says, " Once Shradhadev Manu sneezed violently. From his nostrils, a son was born.  He 
was named  Ikshvaku.  Ikshvaku  had one hundred  sons.  Vikukshi,  Nimi  and Dandak  were  the 
eldest three of  them.  
1.)Vikukshi  :- Once,  Ikshvaku  sent his eldest  son Vikukshi  to collect  tubers  for the offerings  to 
be made to their ancestors. Vikukshi collected sacred Shash tubers. But, he himself was  feeling 
tired and hungry,  so he ate one of them.  He gave  the remaining  tubers  to his father.  King 
Ikshvaku gave those tubers to Guru Vashishtha for offering to the ancestors.  Vashishtha 
informed the king that the tu bers were defiled and not fit for offerings. Thus told by  Vashishtha, 
Ikshvaku  learned  the deed  of his son and expelled  him out of his kingdom  in anger.  Vikukshi 
passed his life in exile and returned home only after the death of his father. He became famou s as 
Shashad.  
 
2.)Puranajay : - Puranajay was the son of Vikukshi. He is also famous as 'Indravah'  and 
'Kakutsth.'  A fierce  battle  had taken  place  between  the gods  and the demons.In  the battle,  the 
gods had sought the help from Puranajay. But Puranajay stip ulated that he would fight only  when 
Indra  agreed  to become  his vehicle.  From  God's  inspiration,  Indra  took the guise  of a big and 
heavy ox and bore Puranajay on his back. When Puranajay rode on the ox and trained his  divine 
bow and arrows, all the gods pr ayed to him. Since, Puranajay had taken seat near ox's hump,  he 
came to be known as Kakutsth. Puranajay fought a fierce battle with the demons. Thus in no  time 
Puranajay defeated the demons and captured their towns, wealth, luxuries and every other  thing 
and gave  them  to Indra.  Since,  Indra  had acted  as his vehicle,  hence  Puranajay  is also known  as 
Indravah.  
 
3.)Yuvnashva  :- In the lineage  of Puranajay,  had occurred  a king named  Yuvnashva.  He had no 
son, so in desperation  he gave up his kingdom  and, accomp anied  by his queens,  came  to stay in 
the forest. There he organized a grand Yagya, Indrayag with a desire of a son and in the  auspices 
of the great sages. The Yagya lasted day and night. But during the Yagya, Yuvnashva  felt 
extremely  thirsty  and without  giving a thought  he drank  some  of the water  from  urn that had 
been sanctified with mantras. Since, the water was meant to produce a child, Yuvnashva begot  a 
child with auspicious signs. Immediately after birth the child began to cry for milk. So to  quiten 
him Indra put his index finger in the child's mouth. Since then, the child got the name  Mandhata. 
Mandhata  became  a great  emperor.  He was also known  as Trasdasyu  because  big robbers  like 
Ravana  had an inherent  fear of him. Mandhata  had deep  self-learnings,  still he organized  many 
grand  Yagyas.  Mandhata  had three  sons- Purykuts,  Ambarish  (second)  and Muchkund.  He had 
fifty daughters also. All of them were married to the sage  Saurabhi.  
 
4.)Trishanku  :- In this lineage  of Mandhata  there  occurred  a king named  Satyvrat.  He was 
renamed  as Trishanku.  Though  by the curse  of his father  and the teacher,  he had become  a 
Chandal  (an untouchable  person)  yet by the power  of his penance,  sage Vishvmitra  helped  him 
reach  heaven  with the body.  But the jealous  gods  pushed  down  poor Satyvrat  from  the heaven. 
He was falling headlong while Maharishi Vishumitra supported and fixed him in mid sky,  hence 
he got the name  Trishanku.  
 
5.)Harishchandra  :- He was the son of Trishanku.  For him, two great  sages  Vishvmitra  and 
Vashishtha  had cursed  each other  and acquired  bird forms  and kept on fighting  for many  years. 
Harishchandra had no son. With a desire to have a son, Harishchandra worshiped Varunadev.  By 
the grace  of Varuna,  he got a son named  Rohit.  Caught  in the love for his son, Haris hchandra forgot to organize Yagya to pay his thanks to Varuna. Rohit too had fled to the forest to save  his 
life when he learned that his father wished to sacrifice him. He stayed there for long. Back   there  
in the kingdom Harishchandra acquired a deadly  disease of Dropsy as a result of Varuna's  anger. 
Having learnt about his father's illness, Rohit tried five times to return to the kingdom, but  every 
time Indra  forebode  him. Thus  he stayed  in the forest  for six years.  But in the seventh  year he 
bought  the middle  son of Ajigart  and took him to the kingdom  to be used as a votive  animal. 
There  he handed  the boy over to his father.  Thereafter,  king Harishchandra  organized  a grand 
Yagya  and pleased  Varuna.  Pleased  by their unshakable  faith in truthfulness  sage Vishvamitra 
blessed Harishchandra and his wife and preached them about metaphysical  knowledge.  
 
6.)Sagar : - In the lineage of Rohit later on, had occurred a King Bahuk. Unfortunately, he met  an 
untimely  death.  One of his widowed  wife got ready  to be immol ated with her husband's  pyre. 
She was pregnant  then,  so the sage Aurv  prevented  her from  getting  Sati. When  her fellow 
queens  learnt  about  her pregnancy,  they fed her with poisoned  food.  But the poison  proved 
ineffective  on the unborn  baby.  The baby  was born in due course  with poison,  so he came  to be 
known  as Sagar.  Sagar  had a great  reputation  as the King.  He had sixty  thousand  sons.  He had 
also resolved to organize one hundred Ashvmamegh Yagyas. His ninety -nine Yagyas  completed 
without  hassles,  but durin g the hundredth  Yagya,  Indra  stole  the horse  and tethered  it in the 
hermitage of the sage Kapila. Sagar's sixty thousand sons set out in search of the horse, but  could 
not find it anywhere on  earth.  
 
At last, they reached  the hermitage  of the sage Kapila.  Before  that, with their enormous  power, 
they had dug out huge pits, which filled with water and formed the sea. The sea derived its  Hindi 
Synonym  Sagar  from  Sagar.  When  those  sixty  thousand  princes  saw that the Yagya  horse  was 
Tethered  in Kapila's  hermita ge, they began  to abuse  the sage.  Disturbed  by the noise,  the sage 
Kapila opened his eyes, and instantaneously all the sixty thousand princes got incinerated. It  was 
Anshumana,  the grandson  of Sagar,  who pacified  sage Kapila  with his politeness  and brought  
back  the horse.  He also discovered  the ashes  of his ancestors.  Sage  Kapila  told Anshumana  that 
the salvation of his ancestors would be possible only if touched by Gangaji, (the sacred  Ganges). 
Since then, all the kings in Sagar's lineage observed severe p enance to bring the Ganges on  earth 
for the salvation of their  ancestors.  
 
7.)Bhagirath  :- First of all, king Anshumana  observed  hard penance.  But even  after many  years 
of penance  he could  not succeed  in his efforts.  His son Dileep  also observed  sever  pena nce, but 
his efforts  too, could  not succeed.  Bhagirath  was the son of Dileep.  After  Dileep,  Bhagirath 
started severe penance. After many years of penance, Bhagirath succeeded in pleasing  the 
Ganges.  She appeared  before  him and asked  him to seek a boon.  Bhagiratha  requested  the 
Ganges  to arrive  on earth.  The Ganges  accepted  his wish,  but put a question  as to who would 
support her when she fell on earth from the heaven. Bhagiratha then began his penance again  to 
please Lord Shiva so that He could support the Ganges on earth. Lord Shiva accepted  Bhagirath's 
prays and supported the Ganges on his head. Thereafter He moved on the path shown  by 
Bhagirath with sacred Ganges following. Thus, the sacred Ganges reached at the place  where 
ashes of Bhagirath's ancestors were lying. The holy waters of the Ganges washed the ashes to  the 
confluence  at Ganga  Sagar.  By the mere  touch  of Ganges'  holy water,  Bhagirath  ancestors 
received  salvation.  
After  Bhagirath  many  great  kings  like Michsah,  Khatvang,  Dhirghbahu,  Raghu  etc. occurred  in 
the Ikshvaku dynasty. Raghu's son was Aja and his son was Dashrath. It was in the home of  King 
Dashrath, and by the prayer of the gods, that Lord Sri Hari took birth as four sons of  Dashrath.  
 
 8.)Description of Lord Rama's Plays : - Shukdev says,  " Parikshit, to keep the words of his  father, 
Lord Rama abdicated the entire kingdom and took exile in the forest. Staying in the forest  Lord 
Rama  protected  many  sages,  and helped  them  complete  their religious  rituals  successfully.  He 
slayed  many  formidab le demons  there.  But, for cutting  the nose and ears of Shupanakha,  the 
sister of demon king Ravana, He had to bear the separation of his wife  sita. 
 
Rama had won Sita as his wife in a swayamvar in Janakapur. In his teenage, sage Vishmatria  had 
taken Rama a nd Lakshmana with him to his hermitage to guard his religious proceedings  against 
the demons.  Rama  and Lakshmana  had killed  many  demons  then.  It was during  this period  that 
the swayamvar was organized in Janakapur. Lakshmi, the better half of Lord Vishnu, had herself 
appeared  as Sita in Janakapur.  Sage  Vishvamitra  himself  taken  Rama  and Lakshmana  to the 
swayamvar. Many more brave and strong kings and princes had gathered there. But no one  could 
train the Bow  of Lord  Shiva  as per the condition  of the swyamva r. It was only Rama,  who not 
only lifted the bow but trained it also. In the process of training, the bow broke with a loud  noise. 
Thus Lord Rama won Sita as His  wife.  
 
But during the exile the demon king Ravana deceitfully abducted Sita to avenge the ins ult of  his 
sister Shurpanakha. Thereafter, the circumstances favored Lord Rama and He soon found out  the 
whereabouts of Sita. With a huge army of monkeys and bears, Lord Rama reached the  seashore 
there  He prayed  to the sea to make  way for Him.  But the sea did not pay heed  to his prayers,  so 
angrily  He got ready  to evaporate  the sea. Thus  frightened,  the sea revealed  to Him the way to 
make a bridge over it. Lord Rama then built a bridge over the sea and landed in Lanka. A  fierce 
battle followed in which Lord  Rama and Lakshman together slayed the demon king Ravana,  his 
brother Kumbhkarn and Megnad, the son of  Ravana.  
 
Thus, they got Sita free from Ravana's captivity. Crowning Vibhishan, the brother of Ravana  as 
the King of Lanka, they returned to Ayodha on Pus hpak Vimana. Brahmrishis crowned Rama  as 
the king of Ayodhya.  All the three  worlds  became  happier,  healthier  and wealthier.  Bharata, 
Lakshmana, Shatrughn and Hanumanji stayed forever in the service of Lord Rama  always 
following  the moral  dictates  and put an example  for the world  of high morals.  As a king,  Lord 
Rama also organized Ashvmegh  Yagya.  
   
 
CHANDRA  DYNASTY  
Shukdev says, "Parikshit, now I narrate about Chandra dynasty. Many great and pious kings  like 
Pururava had occurred in this dynasty. Chandrama was  the son of Atri, the son of Brahma.  Budh 
was the son of Chandrama while Pururava was the son of Budh. Ila was the mother of  Pururava. 
He was very virtuous. Attracted by his virtues, the apsara Urvashi had approached Pururava  with 
a sensual desire. Pururav a welcomed Urvashi, and together they begot six sons - Ayu,  Shrutayu, 
Satyayu, Ray, Vijay and  Jay. 
In the lineage  of Vijay  the son of Pururava,  there  had occurred  a king Gadhi.  Gadhi  had a 
daughter Satyvati. Satyvati was married to the sage Richik. Richik and Satyvati begot  Jamadagni 
who married Renuka, the daughter of sage Renu. Jamadagni and Renuka begot Parashurama.  In 
the same lineage, later on, occurred great kings like Rantidev, Shibi, Yadu, Kuru,  Puru, 
Dushyant  and Bharata.  In this lineage  of Kuru,  king Shantanu  had married  Ganga,  who gave 
birth  to Bhisma.  Satyavati,  the daughter  of Nishad  was the second  wife of Shantanu.  She begot 
Chitrangad  and Vichitravirya.  Chitrangad  had died in an encounter  with a demigod  of his own 
name,  while  Vichitravirya  was married  to Ambika  and Ambalika  the princesses  of Kashi.  But, 
having too much caenal indulgence with his wives, Vichitravirya soon developed  tuberculosis 
and died without producing a  child.  
 
Since,  Bhisma  had vowed  to abide  by celibacy  till death,  so Vyas a was summoned  to produce 
children  from  Ambika  and Ambalika.  From  Vyasa  the two queens  and a maid  gave  birth  to 
Dhritrashtra, Pandu and Vidura respectively. Dhritrashtra had one hundred sons. The  Kuaravas, 
while Pandu's wife Kunti begot Karan, Ydhishthir, Bhima and Arjuna. Pandu's second  wife 
Madri  begot  Nakul  and Sahdev.  Arjuna  had married  Subhadra,  the sister  of Lord  Krishna  also. 
Subhadra  had begot  Abhimanyu  who was married  to Uttra,  the daughter  of Viratraja,  and you 
were born to Uttara, O  Parikshit.  
 
In Yaduvansh,  lineage  of Yadu  a king Shursen  had occurred.  He had a son Vasudev.  Vasudev 
had eight  wives.  Devaki  was the prominent  among  them.  Nine  children  were  born to them. 
Kansa,  the brother  of Devki,  killed  six of them.  Seventh  was Balarama,  eighth  Krishna,  and at 
ninth place was her daughter  Subhadra.  
 
Shukdev  says,  "O Parikshit,  Lord  Himself  had appeared  as the son of Vasudev  and Devaki. 
Whenever the religion and religious virtues fall in the world and sins rises, the omnipotent,  Lord 
Sri Hari takes incarnation to destroy the evils, and protect the pious ones and establish  the 
religion  again.  
 
When the evil demons took the guise of the kings and began to route the earth, Lord Vishnu  then 
took the incarnation as Lord Krishna. Along with Him, Sheshnaga,  His bed, also took  incarnation 
as Balarama, in Yadu Vansh. Together they presented such divine plays that even the gods  could 
not guess  them.  
 
At the same  time,  to benefit  the devotees,  who would  be born in Kali Yuga,  Lord  Krishna 
expounded His pious life  into uncountable incidents. Merely by reciting and hearing the tales  of 
Lord's life, all the sorrows, melancholis and ignorance of the devotees are removed. Through  the 
battle of Mahabharataa between Kauravas and Pandavas, Lord Krishna relieved the earth of most 
of her burdens. He Himself slayed many demons, while got many slain by Balarana.  Ultimately, 
preaching Uddhava about metaphysical knowledge, Lord Krishna departed to His divine  abode.   
CHAPTER  TEN 
Hearing the tales of Royal dynasties from Shukdev, king Parikshit requested "Guruvar, you  have 
just narrated the suprising tale of Suryvansh and Chandravanash (dynasties). Now I wish to  hear 
the tales of Lord  Krishna's  life in detail.  It was because  of God's  grace  that my ancestors  could  
successfully win the Mahabharataa. I to had experienced Lords grace while I was an  unborne 
child  and Ashvathama  had triggered  Brahmastra  to destroy  me. It was the Lord  himself  who 
saved  me from  the heat of Brahmastra  with his wheel.  O sage,  therefore,  kindly  narrate  the tale 
of Krishna's  life who is the soul of every  living  being.  I do not feel thirsty  or hungry  while 
hearing the pious tale of God's life from  you."  
 
Pleased  by the pure devotion  of Parikshit  for God,  Shukdev  says,  "When  the atrocities  of evil 
demons  increase d on earth  beyond  a certain  limit,  the perplexed  earth  reached  to Brahma  in the 
guise  of a cow,  and vented  her sorrows.  Brahma  took her and Lord  Shiva  to Lord  Vishnu  and 
prayed Him through Purushasukta. Lord heard their prayers and said, "I know about  the 
sufferings of poor earth. Very soon, I'll take incarnation in Yaduvansh to elevate her burden.  All 
the gods,  should  take birth  in Yadukul  to assist  me during  my human  incarnation.  And to serve 
my beloved Radha, all the apsaras should appear as the womenfol k of Yudu  community."  
 
Brahma  dictated  the gods  and said that even  Yoga  Maya  (personification  of illusions)  of Lord 
Vishnu would take a partial incarnation to assist the Lord in His plays. Thus consoling the  earth 
Brahma returned to his  abode.  
   
 
MARRIGE OF VASUDEV AND  DEVAKI  
Shursen's son Vasudev was married to Devaki, the daughter of Devak. After the  marriage 
ceremony,  Ugrasen's  son and Devki's  cousin  Kansa  was driving  the chariot  of newly  wedded 
couple. On the way a celestial voice proclaimed " O Fool Kan sa, the eighth son of your  beloved 
sister, whose chariot you are driving so affectionately, shall be the cause of your death.."  Hearing 
the voice Kansa drew out his sword to kill Devaki. But Vasudev prayed to him politely,  "Prince 
Kansa, you are the descen dent of Bhoj dynasty, you are a brave man. It does not fit you  bravery 
that you are yourself  ready  to kill your sister.  She is a woman  and has just got married.  She has 
not done  any harm  to you, she deserves  pity. If you fear her children,  I promise  that I will give 
all her children to you." Thus assured by truth abiding Vasudev's words, Kansa dropped the  idea 
of killing  Devaki.  
 
As per his promise,  Vasudev  gave  his first newborn  child  to Kansa.  Pleased  by Vasudev's 
abidance to truth, Kansa said, "You eight h son will be my enemy, so I will kill only your  eighth 
son. Take the child back." At the same time, singing in Lord's praise, Devarishi Narada  appeared 
there and said, "O Kansa in view of rising atrocities of demons, Lord Narayana himself will  take 
birth in Yaduvansh. Besides Him, all the cowboys and all others who belonged to Yadav clan  are 
none other than the gods in Human guise. The gods are making massive preparations  to 
exterminate  evil kings  and as a lotus  has only eight  petals  and no one can mark  out its eighth 
petal, similarly, Devaki will have eight children and no one would be able to find out who is  the 
eighth." Saying this, Devarishi Narada  disappeared,  
 
Kansa  got firm belief  that all the Yaduvanshis  were  gods  and that Lord  Vishnu  Himself  would 
take birth as Vasudev and Devaki's son to kill him. He, therefore, put Vasudev and Devaki in  the 
prison. Since then Kansa killed the children one by one soon after their  birth,  
Shesh  Narayana  Himself  appeared  as the seventh  son. While  he was still unborn,  Lord  Vishnu 
through  His Yogmaya  (personified  illusion),  transfered  the embryo  in Rohini's  womb.  Lord 
dictated Yogama that she herself should take birth from Yashoda, the wife of Nand, in Gokul.  He 
also blessed her that in future, people would worship her as Durga, Chandika,  Bhadrakali, 
Narayani, Vaishnavi etc. When the seventh fetus was transferred, Kansa got worried how was  it 
destroyed. His fears and melancholy increased since then. A fear gripped him that his death  was 
very near  now.  
   
 
ARRIVAL OF GOD IN UNBORN  BABY  
Kansa had known that during the battle between the gods and demons he was the demon 
Kalnemi, and he was killed by Lord Vishnu. So fearing Lord Vishnu rallying with  Yaduvanshis, 
Kansa cultivated high degree of hostility towards them. He captured  even his father Ugrasen  and 
put him in the prison.  Now  the reign  of the kingdom  was entirely  in his hands.  Kansa  was 
himself very strong and also had the assistance of his father -in-law,  Jarasandh.  Formidable 
demon like Pralamb, Baka, Chanur, Trinavart, Aghasur, Mushtik, Arisht, Dvivid, Pootana,  Kashi 
and Dhenuk  were  his courtiers.  As a result  of Kansa  atrocities  en mass  exodus  of Yaduvanshis 
from Mathura followed. These Yaduvanshis left Mathura and settled in regions like  Kuru, 
Panchal etc. Still some of  them accepted to serve Kansa, but only  superficially.  
 
When all pervasive Lord saw that Yaduvanshis were being tortured without reason,  He 
transferred  his glory  in Vasudev.  Through  Vasudev,  Devaki  received  that brilliant  part of the 
lord. On the other  hand, Kansa  also came  to know  about  Devaki's  eighth  issue.  Since,  then his 
hostility  surged  unprecidently  and he began  to wait for the birth  of Devaki's  eight  son very 
anxiously.  All it means  to say that Kansa  mind  reflected  on God every  moment  day in and day 
out. 
  BIRTH OF LORD KRISHNA  
The long awaited  day also arrived  at last. It was the eighth  day in the waning  (darker)  phase  of 
the lunar month of Bhadrapada (corresponding to August/September). Rohini, the brightest  star 
was rising while dense clouds had g athered in the  sky. 
 
Before actual arrival, Lord manifested Himself before Vasudev and Devaki. They felt as if a  full 
moon had risen in the east. Vasudev saw that an extraordinarily marvellous baby boy  was 
standing  before  them.  His eyes were  as soft as lotus; He had four arms  and held a conch,  mace, 
wheel and lotus. He bore Kaustubh Mani in the neck and wore yellow clothes.  Valuable 
ornaments  adorned  all parts  of his body.  Thus,  seeing  God himself  arrived  as his son, Vasudev 
was overwhelmed. Devaki too was overjoyed but feared Kansa first. Then she joyfully prayed  to 
God.  God said then,  "During  Swayambhu  Manvantar,  both of you had worshipped  me with a 
desire of son. Vasudev was a Prajapati Sutapa while you were his wife Prishni. You  had 
worshipped me with pu re hearts. Pleased by your penance I had asked you to seek a boon, so  you 
had sought a son like me in virtues. I had arrived then as your son Prishnigarbh. In the next  birth 
you were Kashyapa and Aditi and I was Upendra. Now, in the third birth also. I hav e arrived  as 
your son."  
Saying  this, the Lord  transformed  Himself  into an ordinary  baby.  From  the inspiration  of God, 
Vasudev  wished  to move  the baby  out of the prison.  Instantaneously,  all the locks  of the jail 
opened  automatically  and the guards  fell asleep.  Carrying  the baby  in a winnower,  Vasudev  set 
out for Gokul across the river  Yamuna.  
 
It was raining  heavily,  so Sheshnaga  followed  them  shading  the baby  with his hoods.  Vasudev 
entered the river Yamuna. Yamuna too felt overjoyed that her most beloved  lord has come to  her. 
Hence,  she began  to rise in order  to touch  His feet. Dangling  his feet behind  Vasudev,  God let 
Yamuna  touch  them.  Touching  the feet, the swelling  river  receded  at once  and gave  Vasudev  a 
safe passage.  Crossing  the river,  Vasudev  reached Gokul.  There,  he entered  the home  of Nand 
and kept the baby beside Yashoda and took her new born baby girl and brought her to the  prison. 
As soon as Vasudev kept the baby girl in Devaki's lap, the gates locked up again and the  guards 
awakened.  
 
The baby who was actually  Yogamaya  (personification  of illusion)  began  to cry. The guards  at 
once  ran to inform  Kansa  about  the birth.  Kansa  came  running  and snatched  the baby  from 
Devaki  and proceeded  to throw  her on the stone.  But before  he could  throw  her, the baby 
escaped  from  his hands  and assumed  Ashtbhuji  (eight -armed)  Durga  appearance  in the sky and 
reprimanded him: "O fool, why are you trying to kill me, when you can't even harm me, the one 
who will kill you, has already  appearred.  Now  stop killing  the innocent  children."  Kansa  stood 
stunned by the talks and appearance of the goddess. Goddess Bhagavati disappeared and  became 
omnipresent. She is now venerable with different names in different  locations.  
 
After the disappearance of Goddess (Yogamaya) Kansa felt remorse. He at once fell at the feet  of 
his sister  Devaki  and brother -in-law Vasudev  and began  to beg their pardon.  Thereafter,  Kansa 
released both of them. In the morning, Kansa held a discussion with his ministers. The  ministers, 
who were formidable  demons themselves, assured Kansa that they would kill all the babies  born 
within  ten days and destroy  the Brahmins,  cows,  gods,  ascetics  and all those  who could  pose 
potential danger to  him. 
 
 
 Shukdev says: "O Parikshit, the demons were Rajoguni (having ro yal virtues) and  Tamoguni 
(Virtues of darkness) and hence were unable to differentiate good from  evils.  Their 
extermination  was imminent.  That was why they cultivated  hostility  towards  saints  and saintly 
people. O King, those, who disregard saintly people , loose their life, wealth, reputation,  religion 
and everything.  
   
 
FESTIVITIES IN GOKUL OVER LORD'S  BIRTH  
Devaki's seventh baby was transferred before birth into the womb of Rohini. The baby was  born 
as Baldevji. At his birth, Brahmins blessed Nand. But lau ghingly Nand said: "O holy  Brahmins, 
this baby  is not mine.  It is born to my friend's  wife."  Brahmins  said then:  "Okay  Baba,  we will 
return only when your wife bears a child. The Brahmins thereafter organised grand worships.  By 
their blessings Yashoda  conc eived.  
 
It was Wednesday, the eighth day in the darker phase of the lunar month  Bhadrapada 
(August/September),  when  Yashoda  said to her sister -in-law Sunanda:  "Sister,  kindly  wake  me 
up, when the baby takes birth," Sunanda laughed at that. It was in fact the influence of 
Yogamaya. When Yogamaya took birth, all the people around her were fast asleep and continued 
to sleep until Vasudev came there and replaced the baby girl with baby boy. Soon after  Vasudev 
left, Yashoda awakened from slumber and saw an extr emely beautiful baby boy beside her. Nand 
was meditating then in the cowshed. He was informed at once. His heart too filled  with 
supernatural  joy. He took his bath,  and droned  new clothes.  Then  he summoned  the Brahmins 
and got necessary rituals performed. Served the gods and his ancestors and donated  cows, 
clothes, ornaments and cereals to the  Brahmins.  
 
As Nand was the chief of Vraj region, so all the people decided to celebrate baby's birth. All the 
houses, streets and lanes were cleaned and sprinkled wit h scented waters. All the gateways  were 
embellished  with flags,  pylons  and festoons.  All the villagers  began  to gather  in and around 
Nand's home. Ladiesfolk also felt overjoyed by the news of the birth of Yashoda's son. Even  the 
cows,  oxen  and calves  also were  adorned  beautifully.  Brahma,  Narada,  Sanakadi  etc. were  all 
having  the sight  of lord from  heaven.  Even  Lakshmi  appeared  in Gokul,  illuminating  all the 
azimuths. Gopis (ladiesfolk) decorated their palms with henna, anointed themselves with  ubatan 
(a paste composed  of gram  flour  and many  herbs,  supposed  to enhance  beauty)  and took bath. 
Then  they adorned  themselves  from  tip to toes and set out for Nand's  homes  with various  gifts. 
At Nand's home they sprinkled the baby with water containing turmeric and o il and  sang 
auspicious songs  loudly.  
 
Thus,  when  lord appeared  in Braj,  grand  celebration  was organised  in His welcome,  auspicious 
music  was played.  The menfolk  celebrated  the joy spraying  one another  with milk,  curd,  butter 
etc. Nand presented the people  generously with clothes, ornaments and cows. Prisoners,  ascetics 
and beggars were given alms. At the request of Nand, Rohini herself welcomed the  womenfolk. 
Since the arrival of lord, prosperity too came to stay in  Vraj.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  POOTANA  
Shukdev  says: 'Parikshit,  after many  days,  entrusting  other  Gopals  with the onus  of guarding 
Gokul,  Nand  went  to Mathura  to pay annual  taxes  in Kansa's  court.  Vasudev  too learned  about 
his arrival and went to see him. Nand felt overjoyed to see Vasudev and embraced  him 
affectionately.  Vasudev  asked  Nand:  "Your  age is declining  now.  It is very fortunate  now that 
you have  also got a son. My Son Balarama  and wife Rohini  are staying  with you. He would  be 
regarding  you as his parents."  Nand  said:  The evil Kansa  killed  many  of your children.  He did 
not even spare your daughter, No doubt, happiness and sorrow are bound to ones  fate."  
 
Vasudev  said:  "Brother,  now your duties  here are over.  You should  not stay here for long, 
because I fear some disturbances in Gokul in your abse nce. Hearing this, Nand at once set out  for 
Gokul. In the way, he reflected over the words of Vasudev and prayed God: "May  God, 
everything thing be well in Gokul. There in Gokul however a curious incidence took place.  After 
his discussion with evil  ministe rs, 
 
Kansa  had sent a cruel  ogress  Pootana  to kill all the newly  born babies  in his kingdom.  In the 
guise  of an extremely  pretty  woman,  Pootana  entered  Gokul.  She hypnotized  the menfolk  with 
her sweet  smile  and flirting  glances.  She searched  new-born babie s here and there  and entered  
Nand's home eventually. Baby Lord Krishna was sleeping in the cradle. He had known about  her 
arrival; but posed as if He were asleep. Pootana is a form of non -knowledge with an  alluring 
outward appearance. Lord Krishna was onl y six days old  then.  
 
Pootana's breasts were filled with poison. Such as someone lifts a sleeping snake mistaking it  for 
a rope. Similarly Pootana lifted the baby who proved her death. Pootana took the baby  to 
secluded place and began to breast feed him. L ord prayed to Lord Shiva who came to stay in  His 
throat  and drank  all the poison  from  the milk.  Thereafter  the Lord  began  to suck Pootana's  life. 
Perplexed Pootana began to cry loudly and writhe nervously. As her death approached  she 
regained her real, ogr ess appearance. All the men and women were frightened when they saw  the 
huge,  formidable  body  of Pootana.  But when  they saw Krishna  playing  nearby,  their fear gone 
and with joy they lifted the baby and soothed  him. 
 
Meanwhile,  Nand  and his fellow  Gopas  too arrived  from  Mathura.  Pootana's  body  testified  the 
truth  of Vasudev's  words.  Gopas  cut Pootana's  body  into many  pieces  and burnt  them  outside 
Gokul.  When  her body  was burning,  a sweet  smell  of Agar  (a kind of scented  wood  used in 
incense  making)  spread  all around.  Because  Lord  himself  had fed on her milk,  So all her sins 
were destroyed. Lord regarded her as his mother and hence saved  her. 
   
 
KILLING OF  SHAKAT  
When lord Krishna was twenty -seven days old, a festival was organised in Gokul. Mata  Yashoda 
bathed  the baby  while  the Brahmins  recited  hymns.  Yashoda  saw that baby  was feeling  sleepy, 
so putting him in a cradle, she left it under a cart. The cart was loaded with pitchers of milk,  curd 
and butter. After sometime, lord Krishna awoke and began to cry for a feed. But  amidst 
festivities, Yashoda could not hear his  cries.  
 
Meanwhile a demon Shakatasur rode the cart wishing to press the cart and thereby kill the  Lord. 
But before  he could  act, the Lord  touched  the cart with His feet and lo and behold!  The cart 
turned  over and all the utensils  kept on it came  crashing  down.  Even  the demon  was crushed  to 
death under the cart. Other boys, who were playing nearby, informed the Gopis (ladiesfolk)  that 
the little Kanhaiya had turned over the loaded cart, but they did not believe the kids. Yashoda  ran 
in horror  and lifted  the baby  in her lap. The Brahmins  recited  pacifying  hymns  then.  Thereafter 
the baby was bathed again with sanctified water. A feast of Brahmins followed then.  Ultimately 
they were seen off with many  gifts. 
   
 
SALVATION OF  TRINAVART  
Once  Mata  Yashoda  was playing  with the baby  lord in her home.  All of a sudden  she felt as if 
the baby  was getting  disproportionately  heavy.  Soon,  she felt herself  unable  to bear the child 
anymore. So she left the child on the g round and began to pray Purushaottama Lord Rama.  Soon 
afterwards  she forgot  about  the event,  but all was not over yet. Trinavart,  a demon  minister  of 
Kansa, had arrived in Gokul as a fierce cyclone. He covered entire Gokul with dust and  blinded 
the people temporarily. For a moment people could not see anything and during that  moment 
Trinavart  blew  the baby  in air with him. When  the dust settled,  Yashoda  did not find the baby  
Krishna where she had left him. She felt extremely sorry and fell on ground in dep ression.  Other 
womenfolk also gathered round her. They too began to cry not seeing baby Krishna  there.  
 
In the form of cyclone, the demon Trinavart had blown baby Krishna with him; but he too  could 
not bear his heavy  burden.  So he began  to lose his velocit y. Lord  Krishna  caught  him by neck. 
The demon died in a few moments and his dead body fell in Vraj. And Yashoda got a new  lease 
of life when she saw baby Krishna safe and sound. Nand and other Gopas too were  overjoyed.  
   
 
NAMING OF LORD  KRISHNA  
Once, the sup reme ascetic Gargacharya arrived in Gokul. He was the ancestral teacher  of 
Yaduvanshis.  Nand  joyfully  welcomed  and treated  the hermit.  Then  he requested  him to carry 
out the ritual of naming and suggest suitable named for both of his sons. Acharya Garg sai d, "O 
Nand,  everyone  knows  that I am the ancestral  teacher  of the Yadavs.  If I carry  out the naming 
ritual  for these  boys,  people  will understand  that they are Devaki's  sons."  So Nand  requested 
Gargacharya to name his sons secretly. Gargacharya accepted hi s request and carried out  the 
naming rituals secretly in Nand's cattle  shed.  
 
Garg  said:  "This  son of Rohini  will cause  by his virtue,  great  pleasures  for his near and dear 
ones. So his second name will be Rama. And because of excessive strength, people w ill call  him 
as Bala also. Since he will unite the people also, so one of his names would be  Sankarshana."  
 
Thereafter, Garg said pointing to Yashodanandan. He has taken incarnation in every age. In  the 
past ages,  he had taken  white,  red and yellow  complex ions respectively.  This time he has taken 
dark complexion,  so he will be known  as Krishna.  Once  he has been  the son of Vasudev,  so 
people will call him as Vasudev also. He will cause salvation of all of you, and great joy for  the 
fellow  Gopas  and cows.  With his help,  you will overcome  even  the severe  crises.  O Nand,  This 
boy will be equal  to Narayana  in virtues,  wealth,  beauty,  fame  and influence.  Foster  this child 
with care and earnestness."  Thus  naming  the boys  as per their virtues,  Garg  returned  to his 
hermitage.  
   
 
CHILDHOOD OF LORD  KRISHNA  
Shukdev  says:  "O Parikshit,  time passed  in Gokul  as usual.  Balarama  and Krishna  too grew 
normally.  Soon  they began  to walk  on knees  and palms.  With  their childish  plays  they both 
amused  men and women  folk of Gokul.  Ever yone  took special  care of them  and looked  after 
them to save them from any possible danger. Ladiesfolk were specially careful about  them.  
 
Soon afterwards, both the kids began to walk trottingly. Now their movement no longer  confined 
within  the boundary  of their home.  Because  of his special  virtues,  Krishna  began  to lead other 
kids of his age group whereas his elder brother Balarama was somewhat serious in  nature. 
Krishna specially enjoyed teasing the girls and milkmaids of Gokul. Often he would eat  stealin g 
their milk,  curd and butter.  At other  times,  He did not hesitate  even  to break  their pitchers.  In 
such situations  the ladiesfolk  used to gather  in Nand's  home  to complain  against  Krishna.  
Andevery  time Yashoda  promised  them  to punish  Krishna.  But every  time,  when  she 
proceeded  to punish him, she forgot everything before his sweet, innocent  smile.  
 
One day, Balarama complained against Krishna, "Ma, the little Kanhaiya has eaten  mud. 
Worried about Krishna's health, Yashoda scolded at him: "Tell me, O mis chievous Krishna,  why 
did you eat mud".  At that moment,  little Krishna's  eyes were  moving  with fear. He made  an 
excuse:  "No Ma, I have  not eaten  any mud.  They  are telling  yoou  a lie. If you don't  believe,  me 
see yourself."  Saying  this, Krishna  opened  his little mouth.  Yashoda  peeped  into his mouth  and 
what  she saw there  amazed  her. She could  not believe  it. The entire  universe  was visible  in his 
little mouth.  Yashoda  saw strange  places,  entire  Vraj and even  herself  in the little mouth  of 
Krishna. She felt d izzy. With his illusionary powers, Lord wiped out the memory of  this 
incidence from the mind of Yashoda, and she again immersed in love with her  child.  
   
 
UKHAL BANDHAN AND SALVATION  OF 
YAMALARJUNA  
Once,  wishing  to feed Krishna  with butter,  Yashoda  began  to churn  milk in the morning  . Very 
soon,  Krishna  too awakened  and not finding  the mother  on her bed, He set out to search  her. 
Soon  He found  her in the courtyard  where  she was churning  the milk.  He began  to insist  for 
breast feeding at once. So Yashoda stop ped churning and began to breast feed Krishna. Affection 
played on her face. Suddenly the milk kept on the fire pot began to boil. Yashoda left Krishna  in 
order to attend the boiling milk. But the unstiated Krishna filled with anger and broke the  pitcher 
of curd. Then he went inside and began to eat butter, when Yashoda came back, she  understood 
the matter and began to search him with a stick in her hand. After eating butter himself,  Krishna 
was now feeding  the monkeys  with it. Seeing  the mother  come  in hot pursuit,  Krishna  jumped 
over the mortar  and ran away.  Yashoda  chased  him, but soon  felt tired because  of her bulky 
body.  
 
Thereafter,  Yashoda  proceeded  to tie Krishna  as a punishment.  She got a rope and tried to tie 
Krishna. But the rope fell short by two  fingers. She joined many ropes together but the result  was 
same. Every time the ropes fell short by two fingers. Soon, Yashoda was bathing in sweat.  When 
Krishna  saw his mother  in depression,  he himself  tied in the ropes.  Tethering  little Krishna  to a 
heavy mortar, Yashoda engaged in usual household tasks. Tethered to the mortar,  Krishna 
glanced  at the two Arjuna  trees,  which  were  standing  on the gate like two sentries.  He resolved 
to save  them.  
 
King  Parikshit  asked  Shukdev  about  the trees.  Shukdev  said:  "Parikshit,  the lord of wealth 
Kubera had two sons Nalkubar and Manigreev. One day they were enjoying the sweet  company 
of pretty  women  on the bank  of Mandakini  river.  Just by coincidence,  Devarshi  Narada  arrived 
there.  Out of Shyness,  the women  folk at once covered  themselves,  but both the sons of Kubera 
stood boldly without feeling any shame. Indignant Narada cursed them to become trees and  stay 
in that form  for one hundred  years.  Narada  showed  kindness  as well that despite  being  in tree 
forms, they would  have the memory of God alive and would be saved by Lord Sri Krishna.  Thus, 
to keep  the words  of his supreme  devotee  Narada,  Lord  dragged  the mortar  to the two Arjuna 
trees.  He walked  in such a way that the mortar  got stuck  between  the trees.  Krishna  then pulled  
the mortar  and in no time the trees  were  uprooted.  Two divine  men appeared  from  the uprooted 
trees  and bowed  at the feet of Krishna  and prayed  him with pure hearts.  Then  they departed  to 
their heavenly  abode.  
   
 
MIGRATION TO  VRINDAVANA  
The uprooted A rjuna trees fell with thundering sound. All the people shivered with fear and  felt 
as if lightning had struck somewhere. All the elders including Nand met together and  discussed 
the matter. Unanimously they concluded that, of late disturbance had increased  in Gokul and  the 
circumstances  were  no longer  conducive  to raise  the kids like Balarama  and Krishna  there.  So 
they unanimously decided to leave Gokul and migrate to a verdant place named Vrindavana.  In 
their opinion, Vrindavana had ample vegetation and fe rtility to support them and their  cattles.  
 
Thus, on an auspicious day, the entire population of Gokul set out for Vrindavana. They  packed 
their households  on bullock  carts  and drove  their cattles  in herds  and started  in convoy.  In 
Vrindavana they built th eir houses and started their life once  again.  
 
Shukdev says: "O Parikshit, verdant environment of Vrindavana, Govardhan mountain  and 
crystal clear waters and sandy banks of Yamuna river together filled the hearts of Balarama  and 
Krishna with joy. Along wit h the fellow cowherds, they began diverse kinds of plays  there.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  VATSASUR  
One day, Balarama  and Krishna  were  grazing  their cattles  on the bank  of Yamuna  River.  A 
demon, meanwhile, took the guise of a calf and mixed with the herd. Obviously, h e had 
malicious intentions. Lord Krishna had already seen the demon taking calf's guise and mixing  up 
with the herd.  He signaled  Balarama  and they together  reached  near the calf. The calf appeared 
particularly  healthy,  so Krishna  and Balarama  mockingly  saw it with admiring  eyes.  Suddenly 
they held the calf with its hind legs and tail twirling  it in air they threw  it in the sky. When  the 
demon died, they threw him on a Kath (wood -apple)  tree. 
   
 
SALVATION OF  BAKASUR  
One day, all the cowherds  took their cattles  to a large  pond  to let them  drink  water.  There  they 
say a huge  creature  sitting  like a hillock  on the bank.  They  were  frightened  by its appearance. 
The creature was in fact a demon named Bakasur who had arrived there in the guise of a  storke. 
He was himse lf very strong and had a long pointed bill. As soon as the cowherds drew near  him, 
The storke  hastily  picked  up Krishna  and swallowed  him. Other  cowherds  including  Balarama 
were  stupefied.  They  could  not believe  their eyes.  But inside  the beak,  Lord  Krishn a made 
himself  extremely  hot and caused  severe  burning  in demon's  throat.  So the demon  could  not 
swallow Krishna and regurgitated him, and began to hit him with his strong beak. But Lord  held 
his beak with both his hands and tore the demon's mouth apart. A nd as son as the demon died,  a 
ripple of joy surged among the  cowherds.  
  SALVATION OF  AGHASUR  
One day, Krishna planned a picnic near Nandanvan. So rising early in the morning, He  awakened 
his fellow  cowherds  sounding  a horn.  Together,  all the cowherds,  and their cattles  went  to the 
forest. There, on the bank of Yamuna river they began to play  joyfully.  
 
Nandanvana was in fact an abode of the demon Aghasur. He was sent there by Kansa. Seeing  the 
boys  playing,  he felt extremely  jealous.  Knowing  that Krishna  had killed  his brothers  Bakasur 
and sister Pootana. It seemed an ideal moment for the demon to avenge the death of his  siblings. 
Thinking thus, the demon took guise of python and lay in the way and opening his mouth like  an 
opening  of a cave.  The cowherds  too fell in his trap. Thus  driven  by curiosity,  all the cowherds 
entered  the demon  mouth  one by one. When  Lord  Krishna  saw that his friends  had entered 
demon's  mouth.  He too entered  it to protect  them.  Aghasur  wanted  to masticate  the cowherds 
including lord  Krishna; but the lord increased his body and choked demon throat. Now the  breath 
of demon  stopped.  His eyes rolled  over and at last his life left his body  through  Brahmrandhra 
(cosmic pore). With his ambrosial eye, Lord resurrected these dead fellows and their cattles  and 
together they came out of the demon's mouth. As soon as the demon died, a  divine  flame 
emerged  from  the python's  mouth.  It waited  there  sometime  for God.  And when  lord Krishna 
came out, the flame mingled with  him. 
   
 
ATTACHMENT OF BRAHMA,  STEALING OF  CATTLE 
and COWHERDS  
Shukdev  says:  Parikshit,  the cowherds  told the tale of Aghasur's  salvation  to their parents  only 
after a year of the incidence. During that period of one year, Lord Krishna multiplied himself  and 
took the guise of his fello w cowherd and their stock of cattles to remove the Illusion  of 
Brahma,who was the cause of the following  incidence.  
 
After Aghasur's life mingled with God, Lord Krishna came with this fellow cowherd on the  bank 
of Yamuna. They left their cattles to graze f reely and they sat together to take their lunch. All  of 
the cowherds  tasted  one-another's  food,  as they wanted  to feed Krishna  with the tasty  food. 
Meanwhile  surprised  by Aghasur's  salvation,  Brahma  too had arrived  their and saw Krishna 
eating food defiled  by the cowherds. With that sight, Brahma grew suspicious if Krishna  was 
indeed  an incarnation  of lord. Thus  driven  by the illusion  and to test the authenticity  of lord's 
incarnation,  Brahma  kidnapped  all the cattles  first and when  Krishna  went  out to search the 
cattles  Brahma  kidnapped  and concealed  the cowherds  also. Soon  lord Krishna  understood  the 
craftiness of Brahma, so he multiplicated himself into his fellow cowherds and cattles.  Replicas 
resembled  truly  to the cowherds  in appearance,  complexion,  nature, activities,  voice,  sticks  and 
even in costumes. The replicas remain in existence for complete one  year.  
 
Back  there,  when  Brahma  returned  after hiding  the cowherds  and the cattles,  he was stunned  to 
see the cowherds  and cattles  as usual.  Brahma  was feeling  dizzy  when  lord bestowed  his grace 
on him. Brahma  saw Narayana  in every  dust particle.  Brahma  therefore  bowed  his head  at the 
feet of lord and said:  "O lord, I submit  before  you. You can be won only with devotion  and not 
by ego. No one can know  your omnipresent  appearance.  Thus  praying  and worshipping  lord 
Narayana, Brahma returned to his abode. Shukdev says: The cowherds remained separated  from 
God for one year.  But they felt as if only half a second  had passed  because  of the illusionary 
influence of God. That is why they related the incidence of Aghasurs killing to their parents  only 
after a year it took  place.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  DHENUKASUR  
When Krishna and Balarama entered sixth year of their ages, they got the permission to take  the 
cattles out for gr azing. Along with their fellow cowherds the two brothers too began to take  their 
cattle  to Vrindavana.  Thus  they sanctified  the earth  of Vrindavana  with their pious  feet. Seeing 
the beauty  of Vrindavana,  with beautiful,  colourful  flowers  and sweet  fruits,  Lord  Krishna  felt 
overjoyed.  He then used to graze  his cattles  at the foothills  of Govardhan  and on the banks  of 
Yamuna  River.  Playing  flute was his favourite  pass time.  One day Krishna's  beloved  friend 
Sudama said: Kanhaiya, there is a beautiful forest na me Talvana. It has uncountable numbers  of 
trees  laden  with ripe fruits.  But a formidable  demon  Dhenukasur  guards  that forest,  He is very 
strong.  So no one, even  animals  and birds,  doesn't  go there.  But we are tempted  to eat those 
sweet delicious fruits. If  you and Dau (Balarama) wish, we may go there and eat those  delicious 
fruits."  
 
Thus  hearing  this, Krishna  and Balarama  guided  all of them  to Talvana.  There  they shook  the 
trees  and in no time a heap  of ripe, delicious  fruits  gathered  under  the trees.  All the cowherds 
began to eat fruits. While eating, they were also making lot of noises. Disturbed by the sound  of 
fruits  falling  and noise  of the cowherds,  the demon  Dhenukasur  arrived  there  as a donkey.  He 
was braying  loudly  and tried to hit Balarama,  but Balarama  caught  him by his hind legs and 
threw  him in the air. The demon  died in an instance.  Since  that day, everyone  visited  Talvana 
fearlessly and the cattles grazed there  freely.  
   
 
GRACE ON KALIYA THE  NAGA  
One day, Bala-Krishna  arrived  on the banks  of Yamuna  with their friends.  Balarama  was not 
with them  that day. The water  of the river  Yamuna  was toxicated  by the poison  of Kaliya - The 
Naga.  It was exceptionally  hot that day and all the cowherds  and cattles  were  very thirsty.  So 
without  giving  any thought , they all drank  the water  from  Yamuna  and died.  But Lord  Krishna 
resurrected them by his ambrosial  sight.  
 
Then  lord Krishna  decided  to purify  the waters  of Yamuna.  Thus  tying  a cloth  round  his waist, 
Krishna  climbed  a Cadamb  tree and jumped  into the river. In the water  the lord started  playing 
and splashing water. Soon the waves began to rise high. When Kaliya - the Naga heard the  noise. 
He got extremely angry and appeared before Krishna. He saw a beautiful, tender,  dark 
complexioned boy playing joyfully i n the waters. He stung him and tied him in his spirals.  Tied 
in the spirals of Kaliya, lord became absolutely motionless. Seeing Krishna in death  like 
situation,  all the cowherds  and even  the cows  felt very sorry.  Just then lord freed  himself  from 
the hold of Kaliya.  Then  a game  of hide and seek began  between  them.  Lord  dodged  the Naga 
for a long time. Thereafter he rode on Kaliya's hood and began to dance  there.  
The followers  of God,  like Gandharvas  etc. began  to play Mridang,  Dhol  etc. to give him a 
comp any. Tired  from  the blows  of lord's  feet, Kaliya  soon  began  to vomit  blood.  Naga's  wives 
began  to pray God,  "O lord, your incarnation  is to punish  the evil ones for their sins. You have 
shown your grace on us also. We are fortunate to have a sight and touc h of your feet. Pity O  lord. 
This Naga can no longer bear your momentum. He will die. We are all your slaves. Kaliya is  our 
lord. Kindly forgive him." With kindness, lord released Kaliya, who prayed thus: O lord in  your 
creation we snakes represent Tamogun a (dark virtues). We are confused by your illusions."  Lord 
dictated Kaliya to migrate with his family to Ramnakdweep. Since then water  of  Yamuna 
became pure for humans and  animals.  
 
DRINKING OF DAVANAL (FOREST  FIRE)  
 
After defeating Kaliya, Lord Krishna a nd all other people of Vraj felt extremely tired. They  were 
very hungry  and thirsty  also. So they did not go back  to Vrindavana,  but stayed  on the bank  of 
Yamuna in the night. Because of intense heat of summer, surrounding forests had been  Srivelled. 
At mi dnight those Srivelled forests caught fire and the sleeping people were engulfed by it.  They 
awakened  startled  and took shelter  at Krishna.  Seeing  their horrified  appearance,  Lord  Krishna 
drank  the infernal  forest  fire and thus saved  the lives  of innocent  people  who had rested  their 
live's at him with  faith.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  PRALAMBASUR  
One day, Balarama and Krishna were playfully grazing their cattles along with other cowherds in 
the forests.  When  a demon  Pralamb  arrived  there  with an intention  of kidnapping  Krishna  and 
Balarama.  The demon  had come  in the guise  of a cowherd,  but the God easily  recognised  him. 
They accepted his proposal of friendship, but were thinking about the way for his salvation.  God 
thereafter  summoned  all his friends  and said:  "Pals,  today we shall  divide  ourselves  in to two 
teams and play joyfully. Thus the teams were divided and each team chose Krishna  and 
Balarama as its captain respectively. It was stipulated that the members of defeated team would 
carry the members of winner team o n their back up to the place pointed by them. Thus the  game 
began and soon both the teams reached a secluded  place.  
 
At one time, the team headed by Balarama won. So the members of Krishna's team were to  carry 
them on their back. Demon Pralambasur offered Balarama a ride on his back. Balarama agreed  to 
ride on the demon's  back;  but as soon  as he rode on the demon's  back,  the demon  galloped.  But 
he could  not go far for not being  able to bear Balarama's  weight.  Them  the demon  regained  his 
huge formidable size  and tried to escape by flying. First Balarama felt terrorized but soon  he 
realised  his real powers  and hit on the demon's  head  with a powerful  fist. The blow  shattered 
demon's head and he fell on earth dead like a huge  mountain.  
   
 
VENU  GEET  
Sri Shukadeva s ays: "O king, most of the time of Lord Krishna's boyhood passed in  Vrindavana. 
There  he grazed  cattles  and played  flute.  His flute had a divine,  enchanting  sound.The  Gopis 
(girls) gathered around him under the influence of enchanting  tunes."  
They  also heard the enchanting  Venu  geet that fills one hearts  with the memory  of Bhagavat. 
One of the girl said to her friend: "O dear friend, Having the privilege of seeing Lords beauty  and 
receving  his kindness  is the real salvation.  Another  girl said:  "O friend,  what penance  this flute 
had observed  that it has got a closer  contact  with lips of Nandnandan  (an epithet  for Krishna). 
Even  the siblings  of this flute,  trees  and other  vegetation's  are pleased  with its fortune  and are 
hence showering their leaves and flower s on him." One more said: "O friend, look,  even 
Bhagavati Lakshmi has left her luxurious abode in Vaikunth and arrived in Vrindavana to have  a 
look of lord Devakinandan."  A Gopi  expressed  her jealousy:  "Even  this doe is better  than us, O 
friends, look how engrossed is she looking at God, that her eyes are not  blinking."  
 
Hearing  the sweet  enchanting  tunes  of flute even  the heavenly  elves  gather  in the sky over 
Vrindavana. They also see the beauty of lord Krishna and showered the flowers of their braids  on 
him. Even the cows forgot grazing when then heard the enchanting music of flute. The calves  too 
forgot drinking milk and began to look at lord Krishna with joy. This is the real devotion for  lord 
Krishna. You have to forget yourself in order to find him. Co ndition of girls of Vrindavana  was 
exactly the same. After having the sight of lord Krishna they remembered nothing; not even  the 
way back to home. They stood in the forests in a trance, completely tired, unaware of their  self. 
 
A girl said pointing  to the fauna:  "Look  O friends,  look at these  birds.  Do you know  that these 
birds were the saints and sages in their previous births. In this birth also they are sitting in a  state 
of trance.  Look  they have  forgotten  their knowledge  hearing  the sweet  enchanting  music  of the 
flute. And look at Yamunaji. She is also ale to contain her exhilaration. She is eagerly  spalshing 
her waves to wash lords feet. Yet another girl said: "Look friends the clouds cannot see their  lord 
scorching  in the sun. So they have  covered  the sun and shaded  Lord  Krishna.  Now  they are 
drizzling  as if showering  petals."  A girl said:  "Friends,  look,  these  Bheelanis  are better  than us. 
They have such a strong urge of Krishna's sight that when Govind returns home, they smear  their 
body with dusts  of his feet. Blessed is this mountain which has dedicated its entire self in the  feet 
of Brajnandan  and feels  overjoyed.  It is his supreme  devotee.  Kanhaiya  has infused  even  non- 
living things with life by his sweet tunes of  flute.  
   
 
STEALING OF  CLOTHES  
The unmarried  girls of Vrindavana  felt as if their lives  were  dedicated  to Lord  Krishna.  Each  of 
them wished heartly to have lord Krishna as her husband. So in order to get their desire  fulfilled, 
all of the spinster girls of Vraj began to take bath in Yamun a early in morning of Hemant  season 
and worshipped goddess Katyayani. When MadanMohan learned that the spinsters girls  wished 
to marry  him. He went  to see them  at dawn.  The girls were  bathing  naked  in the river;  Their 
clothes were kept on the bank. Lord Kr ishna stealthy took those clothes and climbed  on  a 
Cadamb tree. Lord had not stolen their clothes with malicious intentions. He had stolen them  to 
remove their flaws and make them realize their real appearance that they were not mere girls,  but 
pure souls . Without realization of the real self, one can not experience the  God.  
 
The girl were  in fact the hymns  of Vedas,  Sadhana,  Siddhis,  Sages  and Brahmvidyas  (Vedas) 
themselves,  that took the guise  of girls to enjoy  the vicinity  of God.  God removed  their clothes 
that symbolized  lust. Because  of the lords  grace  they all were  able to enjoy  God's  company. 
Shukadeva  says:  "O Parikshit,  Thus  Lord  Krishna  removed  the shyness  of the girls of Vraj 
through  his sweet  talks.  He derided  at them,  made  them  dance  like pupp ets and even  stole  their 
clothes when they were bathing naked, but they did not deter his actions. Instead they  felt 
overjoyed by the close presence of their beloved  Kanha.  
   
 
LIFTING OF  GOVARDHAN  
Shukhdevji  says:  "O Parikshit  one day, Balarama  and Krishna  saw that many  delicious  kind of 
sweetmeats  were  being  cooked  at home.  With  curiosity  and politeness,  they asked  Nand  and 
other elders: "Father, which festival are you preparing for? Which god will be worshipped? What 
purpose will such worship serve? Nand Ba ba explained: "Sons Devaraj Indra is the god  of 
clouds. It is because of Indra's grace we get rain. So these materials are being prepared  to 
worship  Indra."  
 
Krishna said: Father every creature in the world enjoys comforts or suffers as per his fate.  None 
of the gods  can change  the results.  Action  is prime  in the world.  One gets the results  as per his 
actions. Even Indra is God as a result of his action. Any one who performs one  hundred 
Ashvamegh Yagyas, becomes Indra. But even after performing crores of Ashvmegh Yagyas  one 
can not get a stay in Vraj.  It is the duty of Indra  to cause  rain. So it will rain even  if you don't 
worship Indra. But to feed the poors and satisfy them with clothes and other gifts is real  worship. 
By their blessing,  we shall  be more  happier.  I desire  that with all these  materials  we should 
worship  Giriraj  Govardhan  and distribute  the prasad  among  the poors.  With  which  their souls 
will be sated and will have the grace of  God.  
 
Thus  Lord  Krishna  told his father  that all the people  shou ld worship  unitedly  and unitedly  they 
should  receive  prasad.  If you are ready  to do as per my desire,  its all right,  otherwise  I will not 
worship your haughty god, nor receive his  prasad.  
 
Thus convinced by Kanhaiya's wise reasoning, all the gopas agreed t o him. Nand Baba said,  "O 
Krishna,  we are making  all these  preparation  for you only and we will do as you say. We will 
worship  Govardhan.  For us Govardhan  is also like a god. It gives  us grass,  water,  and fuel etc., 
which  are necessary  for our lives.  Thus  with lords,  consent,  they dropped  their plan to worship 
Indra and resolved to worship Govardhan  faithfully.  
   
 
WORSHIP OF  GOVARDHAN  
On the Purnima  (full moon)  day in the month  of Kartik  (November)  all the Gopas  (people  of 
Vraj region) gathered near mount Gov ardhan. During the night all of them circumambulated  the 
mountain. Lord invoked the Ganges by his wish and bathed Govardhan with her water.Then  they 
put vermilion on it, offered basil -leaves, flowers etc and worshipped it. Brahmins recited  hymns 
in its praise. To make  the people  believe  in their rituals,  Lord  Krishna  himself  appeared  on the 
mountain in huge form and exclaimed: "I am Giriraj (the king of the mountain) and began to  eat 
the offerings.  But he as a child  was still among  the villagers  who faithfu lly bowed  before  the 
mountain.  Among  them,  the child  Krishna  said:  "look,  what  a surprise  Giriraj  has appeared 
himself  and bestowed  his grace  on us. He has accepted  our worship."  There  after all the Gopas 
distributed Prasad among themselves and felt suprem ely satisfied.  ANGRY RETALIATION OF  INDRA  
Shukadeva sayd: Parikshit, when Indra learned that the Gopas had stopped worshipping him,  he 
grew  outrageous.  In anger,  he ordered  the clouds  to rain torrentially  over Vraj and cause  heavy 
flood  in Vraj region.  In no time dense  clouds  gathered  over Vraj.  Soon  there  was lighting 
thunder, darkness and storm all around. Then it rained torrentially. All the people took refuge  at 
Lord  Krishna  and prayed  him to save them  from  the anger  of Indra.  Lord  Krishna  said:  "Those  
who regard me as there, are mine and I am theirs, So there is no need to worry for  you."  
 
Saying  this, Lord  lifted  Giriraj  on his little finger  and called  all the people  of Vraj along  with 
their cattles  under  the lee of Govardhan.  Then  he ordered  his whee l Sudarshan  to absorb  the 
water of the clouds so that not even a single drop could fall on earth. Thus for seven  days 
continuously  Lord  balanced  Govardhan  on the little finger.Thus  Lord  Krishna  also came  to be 
known  as Giridhari.  People  who had gathered  around  him, just kept on seeing  Lords  moon -like 
face and hence  did not feel thirsty  or hungry.In  fact the comforts  those  people  got during  those 
seven  days are beyond  verbal  description.  Lord  held Govardhan  on one hand,  and conch  in the 
other,  while  with the remaining  two hands  He began  to play this flute.  Hearing  the tunes  of his 
flute, all the people of Vraj began to dance with joy. After the rains stopped, all of them  returned 
to their  homes.  
 
When  Indra  learned  about  the happenings  in Vraj,  he soon  realised his mistake.  Indra  himself 
reached Vraj and begged lord for his pardon. Then he gave lord a ceremonial bath with the  milk 
of Surabhi. For protecting the cows, thus the Lord also got one more name  "Govind".  
   
 
RAS  LEELA  
Shukadeva related to Parikshit the tale of Kamadev's humiliation. Sridhar Swami calls  Rasleela 
as Kama -vijay leela (defeating of Kamadeva - Hindu equivalent of cupid). Jagad  guru 
Ballabhacharyaji decribes it as Lords Divy Vihar (divine enjoyment). The purpose of  describing 
this tale is just that common people should reflect on the selfless love of Gopis for Lord  Krishna 
and experience the love of God for them as  well.  
 
Lord is an embodiment of Rasa  (Pleasure):  
 
After  conquering  Brahma  and other  gods,  ego of Kamadev  had surged  to great  heights . He, 
therefore, requested God to quench his thirst for war. God invited Kamadev to visit  Vrindavana 
on the night of Sharad Purnima (Full moon night) in season preceding winter), and told him  that 
on that divine night. He would enjoy the company of crores of Gopis. "If I have slightest  passion 
for any of them, you will win, otherwise you will  lose."  
 
That night Lord Krishna added more divinity, more brilliance to it with a resolution of Ras  with 
the help of Yogmaya  (personified  illusion).  It was a perfect  night for the purpose  - flowers 
bloomed  in Vrindavana,  full moon  shone,  and gentle,  cool breeze  blew  from  the banks  of river 
Yamuna.  Amidst  this stimulating  ambience  Lord  Krishna  began  to play an enchanting  tune on 
his flute.  The tune attracted  Gopis,their  passion  surged  to its zenith  and under  the influence  of 
love for lord Krishna  and as if in trance,  all of them  ran to meet  their beloved  Kanhaiya  leaving 
all their fear, Bondages,  patience  and shyness  behind.  Some  of them  were  intercepted  by their 
husband s and dragged back to home. But only their physical bodies stayed put, their  souls 
reached  Vrindavana.  
 
In Vrindavana on the bank of Yamuna, Gopis saw Vrindavana Vihari (epithet for Krishna)  near 
their familiar  cadamb  tree. Yogmaya  adorned  all the Gopis  from tip to toe. In fact those  Gopis 
were not ordinary  women.  
 
Parikshit  asked:  "Gopis  had not regarded  Krishna  as Parbrahma.  What  was the basis  for their 
passion then? Shukadeva said: "When a wretched person like Shishupal, who always abused  lord 
Krishna co uld find supreme position, there should be no doubt for Gopis who had such  a 
profound passion for Lord." So Gopis arrived and gathered around Lord  Krishna.  
 
To test their devotion and to enhance the honor of Kamadev, Krishna said to them: "O Gopis,  the 
pure ones,  it is not fit for you to stay here at this hour of night.  Go and serve  your husbands. 
Your  duties  must  be first to your husband's  children  and cows.  They  will be waiting  for you 
eagerly. Go and console them. You can gain me by hearing, reciting, se eing etc. You need not  sit 
here. Go to your  homes."  
 
Gopis, however said: "Govind, we have come to you leaving all the mundane lusts behind.  Now 
going back is like ruining over lives.It is the greatest misfortune if someone returns to  mundane 
affairs even  after being at your feet." These words that reflected divine feelings of Gopis  pleased 
Lord.  He began  to enjoy  their company.  But a feeling  of ego began  to creep  in the minds  of 
Gopis  because  of lord's  closeness.  They  began  to assume  themselves  as highly  fortunate.  To 
remove their ego, Lord disappeared right among  them.  
 PITIABLE CONDITION OF GOPIS IN GOD'S  ABSENCE  
After  the disappearance  of God,  Gopis  were  perplexed.  Their  hearts  burned  with desire.  They 
had dedicated  their entire  selves  in the feet of Lord. They  were  entirely  merged  in the love of 
Krishna. Thus driven by passion, Gopis began to search Lord Krishna. They asked  trees, 
creepers,  vegetations  for the whereabouts  of their beloved.  They  then spotted  His footprints  at 
one place.  Footprints  of Radha were  also there.  'Indeed  He would  have  carried  her, that great 
fortunate one, on His shoulders.' They  thought.  
 
Lord  had indeed,  after disappearing  from  amidst  Gopis,  taken  Radha  to an isolated  place.  She 
had then began to think herself superior to oth er Gopis. So at one place, she said: "O Lord, I  can't 
walk  now.  My tender  feet are tired.  Kindly  carry  me on your shoulders  to wherever  you wish." 
At her request, Lord Krishna agreed to carry her on his shoulder. But as soon as she proceeded  to 
ride, Lord  disappeared  from  there  also. Now,  Radhaj  began  to cry and wail and fainted.  At the 
same time, other Gopis also reached there and found Radha lying unconscious on the ground.  All 
of them  including  Radha  then returned  to the bank  of Yamuna  and began  to wait for Krishna's 
appearance.  GOPIKA  GEET  
O Lord, your incarnation has increased the glory of Vrajbhumi. Even the glory of  Vaikunth, 
goddess  Lakshmi  herself  came  to stay in Vraj.  Govind  we have  dedicated  our lives  at your feet. 
Now we are searching you everyw here. O MadanMohan, kindly show your beautiful, face  once. 
Prananath, your eyes, that are even more beautiful than the lotus that bloom in ponds, is  pricking 
our hearts. We are all your slaves. If you kill us by your separation, will not you be criticised.  O 
Purushaottam,  you have  protected  us on many  occasions.  You are the remover  of miseries  of 
Vraj people.  O Lord,  you are not the son of Yashoda  only,  but you are the soul of all the living 
beings.  At the request  of Brahma,  you have  arrived  on earth  to remove her burden.  Why  don't 
you protect us, our lives are in danger because of your  separation.  
 
O Lord,  your tales are like ambrosia.  Your  ambrosial  tales pacify  those  who are inflicted  with 
mundane  obstacles,  and sorrows.  They  are indeed  great  and fortuna te who recite  your tales.  O 
Purushaottam, for the musics of your flute we gave up everything - our husbands, children,  social 
bindings everything. We even dedicated our lives for the sake of your love. Now nothing  amuses 
us except you. We are living, only to have a sight of you; now you are wandering from forest  to 
forest  with your tender  feet, which  even  we did not bear in our hearts  for the fears  of hurting 
them. How much would they be suffering? We are fainting in your worry. O the dearest one,  we 
were  yours,  we are yours  and we shall  be yours  forever."  Saying  these  words  Gopis  burst  into 
tears.  
 
Shukdev says: Parikshit, when the beloved Gopis burst into tears, Krishna's patience gave  away. 
His heart  melted  at their condition  and He appeared  amidst  them.  A sweet  smile  played  on his 
beautiful face. He wore a garland of fresh Vaijayanti flowers and yellow clothes. His  beauty 
could  have  moved  even  Kamadev.  Seeing  their beloved  Kanha  once  again  amidst  them,  Gopis 
got a new lease of life. All of them began to e mbrace Lord and thus quench the fire of  separation 
that was burning their  bodies.  
 
Thereafter,  along  with the beauties  of Vraj,  Lord  came  to the bank  of Yamuna.  Gopis  put their 
queries before him for solution. Lord said: "O beloved Gopis, I do not reciproc ate to the desire  of 
my beloved  ones for physical  love.  Because  of it their conscience  remains  always  engrossed  in 
me. Hence,  I take to hiding  even  after meeting  so that you could  feel complete  imbibement  in 
me. 
   
 
MAHARAS  
From  the words  of the Lord,  Gopis  forgot  the pains  of separation.  From  the closeness  of their 
beloved, their lives were successful now. With those Gopis, Lord Krishna started Maharas on  the 
pious banks of river Yamuna. All the gods gathered in sky to witness that divine festival.  Gopis 
were  even  more  fortunate  than Lakshmi.  But even  amidst  crores  of Gopis,  who were  eager  to 
devote their everything to Him, Lord completely refrained from desires, feelings and  even 
actions. Thus Lord defeated even Kamadev and removed his  ego. 
   
 
SALVATION OF SUDA RSHAN AND  SHANKHCUR  
Shukdev says: O Parikshit, once on the occasion of Lord Shivaratri, Nand Baba and all other  Gopas  
drove  their carts with  families  and reached  Ambikavana  on a pilgrimage  tour. There  they took bath in the 
river Saraswati  and with devotio n worshiped  lord Lord Shiva  and Parvati.  They  also observed  day long 
fast and decided  to pass  their night  on the bank  of Saraswati.  But that place  was inhabited  by a huge  
python.  During  the night:  the python  emerged  and caught  hold of Nand's  leg. Nandbaba  cried  loudly.  All 
the Gopas  gathered  around  him. He cried  again:  "Kanhaiya,  This snake  is all set to strangulate  me. Save  
me." Lord touched  the python  with his feet and instaneously,  the python  vanished.  In its place  appeared  a 
divine -looking  human.  He said: "O Lord,  I was a Vidyadhar  named  Sudarshan.  I was so much  obsessed  
with my beauty,  youth,  luxury  and comforts  that I used  to insult  others.  One day I had derided  at the ugly 
appearance of the sage Angira. So indignantly he cursed me to become a python. But, pleased by  my 
realization  of mistake,  he had told that when  God himself  would  touch  me, I would  regain  my original  
appearance." Thereafter, Sudarshan went round the God, worshiped Him and with his  permission,  
departed to his  abode.  
 
On another occasio n, Lord arrived in Vrindavana during Vasant Ritu (spring Season). There  He 
took part in Vasantik  Ras (Ras of spring  season)  with the Gopis.  During  Ras itself,  a demon 
Shankhchur  tried to escape  away  kidnapping  some  of the Gopis.  A stampede  resulted  among 
Gopis.  Hearing  their noise,  Lord  ran after the demon,  carrying  a huge  Sal (shorea)  tree in his 
hands. In no time He overtook the demon and killed him by just one blow. He picked up the  gem 
from demon's head and handed it to  Balarama.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  ARISHTASU R 
Once,  Kansa  sent a demon  Arishtasur  to Vrindavana.  The demon  arrived  there  in a bull's  guise. 
That huge bull came to Vrindavana and began to terrorize the people with his loud sound.  Seeing 
the bull, Balarama  said to Krishna:  "Kanhaiya,  I have  never  seen such a huge  bull before."  All 
the people  began  to cry for help.  Lord  consoled  them  and challenged  the bull demon:  O fool, 
why are you terrorizing these cows and cowherds? I am going to shatter your ego."  The 
challenge  from  God pinched  the demon.  Tapping  his hooves  angrily,  the demon  attacked  God. 
He wished  to gore Him,  but God held his horns  and pushed  him back.  Then  kicking  the demon 
God killed him in no  time.  
   
 
KANSA SENDS  AKRURA  
After  the killing  of Arishthasur,  Devarishi  Narada  visited  Kansa  and asked:  "O Kansa,  the girl 
who had slipped  form  your hand  was in fact the daughter  of Yashoda.  Krishna  and Balarama, 
who are staying in Vrindavana, are infact the sons of Devaki and Rohini respectively. Because of 
your fear, Vasudev has kept them under the superv ision of his friend Nand. Those two boys  have 
killed the demons sent by you." Hearing these words, Kansa shook with anger and put  Vasudev 
and Devaki in prison  again.  
 
Thereafter  he called  his minister  Akrura  and asked  him to set out at once  for Gokul.  He said to 
Akrura: "Akruraji, you are an old friend and well -wisher of mine, Go to Gokul and bring  the 
sons of Vasudev,  who are staying  at Nand's  home.  Invite  them  to visit Mathura,  to witness  the 
festivities of Dhannsh -yagya." Akrura understood Kansa's inten tions, but feared that if  he 
refused, that demon would kill him. So he decided to visit Gokul, and also have the  oppurtunity 
of seeing God. He was feeling overwhelmed by the mere thought of it. Next day, he set out on a 
grand chariot to meet his supreme Lo rd in Gokul.  
Meditating in the feet of Lord, Akrura was heading towards Vrindavana. He was feeling  himself 
as the most fortunate one for he was sure to have a sight of Lord. Thus obsessed with many  kinds 
of devotional  feelings,  Akrura  alighted  from  the chariot at the border  of Vrindavana  and started 
walking.  He found  it unjust  to ride a chariot  on the land of Vrindavana  where  lord Krishna 
treaded.  By the time,  he reached  Vrindavana,  Lord  Krishna  and Balarama  had returned  home 
after grazing their cattles. S eeing them, Akrura fell at their feet. Both the brothers raised  Akrura 
and addressed him as "Chacha" (uncle),and escorted him into the  house.  
 
Akrura  was given  a warm  welcome  and treatment  there.  After  the dinner,  they assembled  in 
Nand's drawing room. Nan d inquired about the reason of his sudden arrival. Akrura said:  "Kansa 
is organizing  a wrestling  competition  in Mathura.  He has invited  all the big and small  kings  to 
the competitions.  He has invited  you with Krishna  and Balarama  as well.  Beautiful  Mathura  is 
worth seeing. Gullible Nand felt pleased by Akrura's talking and said: "King Kansa has shown  a 
great honor to me. He has sent invitation only to other kings, but has sent his minister to call  me 
and a golden chariot for my kids." So it was announced in  Gokul that all the people would go  to 
Mathura the next day and witness the festivities  there.  
   
 
DEPARTURE OF KRISHNA AND BALARAMA  FOR 
MATHURA  
When the Gopis heard about Krishna leaving Gokul to visit Mathura, they began to wail and  cry. 
They  were  getting  so much  restless  by the news  that, they felt, their lives  would  end before  the 
sunrise. They started imprecating fate that it had no kindness. First it provided them with a  closer 
contact with their beloved Kanha, now it was causing a long separation from him. Some of  Gopis 
even begged for death, they felt it better than living without Kanha. All the Gopis kept on  crying 
and wailing  nightlong.  
 
Mother Yashoda awoke early in the morning next day. She churned out butter and adding  MiSri 
(sugar  candies),  she took it to Krishna  to feed him. But there  she found  that both Krishna  and 
Balarama  were  getting  ready  to set out for Mathura.  They  held mother's  feet and said:  "Pardon 
us, O mother,  we are going  to Mathura."  These  words  disturbed  Yashoda.  She ran and fell at 
Akrura's  feet and said:  "I am your slave.  O Akrura,  please  do not take my beloved  sons to 
Mathura.  They  are inseparable  from  my heart.  Why  Kansa  has summoned  them  to Mathura.  O 
Akrura, go and tell him to take everything from us, but spare our sons. We ar e also ready to  live 
in jail, but can't lose our beloved sons." Akrura consoled Yashoda. "Bhabhi (sister -in-law),  don't 
worry.  These  two brothers  are going  to Mathura  to witness  the festivities  there  and will return 
soon to comfort your heart." Yashoda sai d: "Akruraji, Mathura is a town of gold and both of  my 
sons are too young yet to be needed there for any  reason."  
 
Touching the feet of Nand and Yashoda, both the brothers said: "Father, mother, we  will 
definitely  return.  Presently  we wish  to see the grand eur of Mathura."  Meanwhile  all the Gopis 
and Gopas  had gathered  there.  Crying  and wailing,  the Gopis  said:  "You  are very Cruel,  O 
Akrura,  who named  you as Akrura.  You have  come  here to lacerate  our hearts."  Second  Gopi 
said:  "No friend,  it is not a fault of Akrura.  Our complaints  are with Shyamsundar.  We left 
everything,  our husbands,  children,  our homes  and dedicated  our entire  selves  in your service.  
And now you are deserting  us so ruthlessly.  We have  no support  for our life except  you, O 
Madhusadan." Sa ying this, all the Gopis burst into tears  again.  
 
All the Gopas,  including  Sridama  surrounded  the chariot  and said:  "O Krishna  we had not even 
dreamt that you would desert us so ruthlessly. O Kanhaiya we have seen with our eyes that  even 
Indra,  Varuna,  Sanakadi  and Brahma  bow before  you. But we have  never  regarded  you as God. 
We regarded  you as our friend.  Are you angry  with us? O my childhood  friend  Kanhaiya,  we 
request  you, we will never  abuse  you in future.  If you were  intending  to go, why did you, then 
save us from the infernal forest fire. Why did you save from the deluging rains? We cannot  live 
without you. Tell us O benevolent friend, When will you return." Lord Krishna consoled them  all 
and took many  of them  with Him.  The chariot  began  to move.  As long as the flag of the chariot 
remained  visible,  people  kept on crying  and wailing.  Even  the eyes of Akrura  filled  with tears. 
Lord  asked  him: "Kaka,  why are you weeping?"  Akrura  replied:  "O Lord,  Kansa  is the great 
sinner.  I feel he will try to torment  you by all means.  So, my heart  says,  that I should  take you 
back to Vrindavana, because if Kansa did any harm to you, their spirits will curse me for  ever."  
   
 
AKRURA HAS A SIGHT OF LORD IN  FOUR -ARMED 
FORM  
Hearing Akrura's words, Lord understood that when he h ad arrived in Vraj, he was afflicted  with 
a feeling  of majesty.  But now,  it has been  replaced  by affection  now.  He, therefore  decided  to 
remove his dilemma. Thus, Lord said to him: "Kaka, Mathura is still some distance away. So  you 
take a bath in Yamuna. W e brothers are waiting for you in the  chariot."  
 
As soon  as Akrura  took a dip in Yamuna,  Lord  showed  him a sight  of His abode  Vaikunth  and 
his Narayana's appearance in which, he was holding conch, wheel, mace and lotus in each of  his 
four hands and was lyi ng on the bed of Sheshnaga. With folded hands, Akrura prayed to lord:  "O 
lord, you are the reason for the existence of Brahma and the Universe. O Lord, I pray at your  feet 
again  and again.  Now  I recognise  you. You are the one who took the incarnations  of Matsya, 
Kachchap, Varaha, Narsinh, Vamana, Rama etc. Thus after bath and worship, Akrura returned  to 
the chariot.  Lord  Krishna  understood  that now a devotional  feeling  had arisen  in the mind  of 
Akrura for Narayana. Lord asked: "Your condition seems miserabl e. Did you see anything  extra - 
ordinary under water?" Akrura said: "O Lord, now bestow your grace on me. Kindly come to  my 
home and accept my hospitality."  
   
 
ARRIVAL IN MATHURA AND GRACE ON  KUBJA  
After  the departure  of Akrura,  Nandbaba  too set out for Mathu ra along  with the Gopas.  On the 
way itself, they caught up with Krishna and Balarama. All of them then reached  Mathura 
together. There they stayed in a garden. After sometime, with Nand's permission, both  the 
brothers  set out to see the city of Mathura.  Mathura  was indeed  a beautiful  town.  All the 
residents of Mathura thronged on roads, roofs and attices to have a sight of Krishna  and 
Balarama.  
On the way, they met a pretty but hunched women. She introduced herself as Kubja, the maid  of 
Kansa.  Her duty was to smear  the members  of the royal  family  with sandal -wood  paste.  God 
asked  her if she would  smear  him with sandal  paste.  Kubja  said:  "O Manmohan,  I see no one 
more  fitting  than you for the sandal  paste."  Thus  she smeared  Lord's  forehead  with saffron.  On 
Balaram's forehead she smeared musk containing sandal paste, other Gopas smeared all  the 
remaining sandal paste on their  heads.  
 
Lord  then,  put His feet on Kubja's  and holding  her chin gave  her head  a slight  jerk. And in no 
time, Kubja's hunch was gone and she turned into a pretty woman. She begged lord for His  love. 
The Lord promised her a meeting in future, and proceeded  ahead.  
 
After  saving  Kubja,  Lord  Krishna  and other  Gopas  moved  ahead.  At a place  they saw a huge 
bow kept on a high stage. Many strong me n were guarding it. Lord entered the canopy and  easily 
lifted  the bow and broke  it into pieces.  There  was a big applause  from  all around.  Dau said: 
"Krishna, now the crowd will increase here, so let us escape in time. Thus, both the brothers  and 
their frie nds beat a retreat to their camp. There they rested for night. There in Mathura,  breaking 
of the bow had frightened  Kansa.  He could  not sleep  during  the night.  Even  in his dreams,  he 
saw nothing, but Krishna everywhere around  him. 
   
 
KILLING OF  ELEPHANT  
Early in the morning, Kansa summoned his minister and ordered him to make Kuvalayapeed,  the 
elephant to stand in the center of the main gate. He thought that the elephant would kill both  the 
boys if they dared to enter the fort through main gate. Back there i n the garden, Krishna  and 
Balarama  set out in wrestlers  guise  for the fort. At the gate,  seein  an elephant  blocking  the 
passage,  they asked  mahout  loudly:  "O Mahout,  why have  you made  the elephant  stand  in the 
center  of the gate.  Move  it either  ahead  or back." But instead  of moving  the elephant  out of the 
passage,  the mahout  steered  it right  on them.  But before  elephant  could  attack  them,  Balarama 
caught its trunk, while Krishna caught its tail. Both the brothers then dragged the elephant out  of 
the gate an d lofted it in the air. The elephant fell on the ground with a loud thud and died on  the 
spot.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  WRESTLERS  
Kansa  felt very nervous  by the news  of elephant's  killing.  Before  he could  take stock  of the 
situation,  Lord  Krishna  and Balarama  arrived  in the amphitheatre.  The spectators  present  in the 
amphitheatre  saw Lord  as per their feelings.  The menfolk  saw Lord  as a Jewel  among  the men. 
Womenfolk saw him as an incarnation of Kamadev. Cowherds saw their natural friend in  Lord, 
while to Kansa He app eared as his death. But to his mother and father, Devaki and Vasudev  and 
to Nand, Krishna and Balarama appeared as small kids. Sages and ascetics saw nothing  but 
metaphysical coming in boys' guise. Learned ones sighted His cosmic form while to Yadavas  He 
appeared as their tutelery  God.  
 
As soon  as the Lord  and Balarama  arrived  in the ring, the wrestlers,  who were  already  present 
there, stood up like springs. A wrestler Chanur dragged Krishna and one named Mushtik  dragged  
Balarama into the ring. They said t o them: "Both of you and we are the subjects of the great  king 
Kansa.  It is our duty to please  our king with our art and skill.  More  over we will receive  many 
rewards  also."  
 
Krishna  said:  "O wrestlers,  you please  fight  among  yourselves.  We are boys  yet, so we shall 
witness your fight from a distance." Chanur said: "No you are neither boy nor teenagers. You  are 
stronger  than the strongest.  You have  just killed  an elephant  which  was stronger  than thousand 
elephants." Thus, both the brothers were compelled to  wrestle with the royal wrestlers.  Mushtik 
was beaten on the ground by Balarama so hard that he died at once on the spot. Krishna  similarly 
killed  second  wrestler  Chanur.  All the remaining  wrestlers  met similar  fate one by one. The 
massive crowd present th ere applauded them  joyfully.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  KANSA  
Seeing the shameful defeat of his wrestlers, Kansa infuriated with anger and proclaimed: "Tie  all 
the opponents;  tie Ugarsen,  Devaki,  Vasudev,  Nand  in ropes  and bring  them  before  me."  Lord 
Krishna  could  not tolerate  this and in a single  jump,  He reached  on the stage  where  Kansa  was 
present.  Lord  Krishna  caught  him by hair and said:  "O Kansa,  once  you have  caught  a helpless 
woman  by hair, I have  avenged  that insult.  Now  you will receive  the fruits  for your atrocities." 
Saying this, Lord began to twirl Kansa catching him by hair, and threw him down from the  stage. 
Then Lord jumped once again and landed on the chest of Kansa. Kansa died  instantaneously. 
Thus, Kansa who was an incarnation of the demon Kalnemi rec eived salvation. Lord  Krishna 
then, released his parents from the prison and crowned his maternal grand father Ugrasen as  the 
king of  Mathura.  
   
 
YAGYOPAVIT OF KRISHNA AND  BALARAMA  
After  the successful  completion  of all the royal  ceremonies,  the consecration  of Krishna  and 
Balarama  was carried  out. Thereafter,  they came  to stay at the hermitage  of sage Sandipani  for 
formal education. Extraordinarily brilliant Krishna successfully learned all the  knowledge  in 
short  period  of time.  Then,  as GuruDakshaina  (payi ng respect  to the teacher)  Krishna  brought 
back  his dead  sons from  the abode  of Yamaraj.  Taking  his convocational  bath,  thereafter,  Lord 
Krishna  returned  to Mathura.  There,  though  living  among  royal  luxuries  and grandeur  Lord 
Krishna  remained  indifferent.  Memory  of his sentimental,  beloved  devotees  friend  and other 
people of Vraj kept on pricking  him. 
   
 
SENDING UDDHAVA AS MESSENGER  
Savant Uddhava, the son of Yadava's minister Brihaspati was an intimate friend of Lord  Krishna. 
Only he had the permission to en ter Lord's sanctum. Seeing his friend Krishna in  remorse, 
Uddhava  asked:  "Mathuranath,  you seem  to be upset.  What  is troubling  you?"  Lord  Krishna 
replied: "Uddhava, I feel perplexed. I remember my days in Vrindavana. Please  go  to 
Vrindavana  and get the news regarding  Gopis  there.  Also  give them  my message."  Thus  Lord 
Krishna donned Uddhava in his attire and sent him to Vraj in his  chariot.  
There  he stayed  at Nand's  home.  At night,  Uddhava  enquired  about  Nand  and Yashoda's  well 
being and about Vraj in gene ral. That whole might passed in  chatting.  
   
 
BHRAMAR  GEET  
Next day, when the Gopis got the news of Uddhava's arrival, they thronged in and around  Nand's 
residence.  They  recognized  the chariot  parked  in front  of the gate.  It was the same  chariot  on 
which  Krishna and Balarama  had departed  for Mathura.  First they thought  that their beloved 
Krishna had returned. But their belief did not last long. Some of them opined that Akrura  might 
have come again. But what  for? 
 
But then someone  informed  that it was Uddhava,  Krishna's  Savant  friend,  who had come  to 
preach them about metaphysical knowledge. Soon afterwards, Uddhava came out and spoke  out 
loud: "O Gopis, listen to the preaching of Uddhava." But instead of listening to him,  Gopis 
covered their ears. Feeling insul ted, Uddhava expressed his dissatisfaction over their  behaviour. 
Gopis said to him: O gentleman, firstly we are not familiar with you, secondly we have  no 
capacity  to hear your preaching.  Yes if you wish  to give us a message  of our most  beloved; 
thousand  of ears are eager  to hear that."  Uddhava  then introduced  himself  as the intimate  friend 
of Lord  Krishna.  
 
Knowing his identify Gopis welcome and treated Uddhava warmly. Uddhava then began to  say 
again:  "O Gopis,  the person,  whom  you are declaring  as your beloved  friend,  in fact has no 
mother,  no father.  He has no form,  no colour  and no body.  He is above  all, non-existing  all 
pervasive  and the giver  of joy. He is never  separate  from  his devotee  and beloved  ones.  All of 
you, too, feel the presence of that Sup reme Being and be happy forever." Gopis said:  "Uddhava, 
as long as Ghanashyam  stayed  with us, we saw endless  virtues  in him. But only within  six 
months of his stay in Mathura, you wiped out all of his virtues and turned him  virtueless.  
 
Tell us with which  mouth  did he eat butter,  with which  hand  did he break  our pitchers,  with 
which  feet did he pasture  cows  in the forests  and with which  feet did he dance  on the hood  of 
Kaliya. Was he another  Krishna?"  
 
Harsh reaction of the Gopis startled Uddhava. He began to think where he had been caught.  His 
knowledge  of Vedant  was proving  ineffective  on the Gopis.  Who  are sunk  in so much  love.  On 
the other  hand,  Gopis  too were  feeling  embarassed  for treating  the guest  bitterly.  But they were 
also not prepared  to listen  to such preaching  that condemned  love.  Moreover,  they had let out 
their long accumulating  feeling.  
 
Meanwhile  a bumblebee  perched  at Radha's  feet mistaking  them  for lotus.  Pointing  to it, all the 
Gopis said: "Beware O bumblebee, beware if you dare to touch the feet of our Radha. It  appears 
that you are a disciple  of Krishna.  There  is now no secret  regarding  the virtues  and actions  of 
your friend. But it is good that he and you tied in friendship. You are black and your friend has  a 
black heart. Virtues of bo th of you are  same.  
 
First He imbibed  us in His love;  then left us ruthlessly  forever.  He is not sorry  for us. But why 
does Lakshmi  serves  in those  feet?  She must  be careful,  lest she should  be deceived  like us. O 
bumblebee you also appear to be a polymat h who has come here to preach us. But you won't  get 
an audience in Braj. You should better go to  Mathura.  
 
 
 There  is one Kubja  go and relate  your tale to her. You will receive  ample  donations  from  her. 
What will you get from the Gopis here? They have alread y lost their mental balance, because  of 
their separation  from  the beloved  Krishna.  If you have  come  to ask, why we loved  Krishna.  O 
bumblebee,  we have  no knowledge.  But we know  that our love for Krishna  was not a mistake. 
Even  the goddess  Lakshmi  does not leave  His feet for a moment.  Why  should  we leave  his feet 
then?  But O bumblebee,  have  you really  come  to convince  us. When  He could  not come  out of 
shame, He sent you to console us - the deaf and dumb Gopis, But be careful if you put your  head 
at the feet of Radha.  
 
Get away,  we have  already  seen enough  of flattery  and flirtation  of your friend.  Deserting  our 
affection  for ephemeral  things,  we loved  that eternal  one. but He too abandoned  us. Can you 
guess about our condition? Tell us, O Uddhava, shall we ev er get the sight of Sri Krishna  again?  
 
Hearing the tragic tale of the Gopis, Uddhava too felt very sorry for them. He felt as  if 
Mathuranath,  lord Krishna  was indeed  neglecting  those  Gopis.  Uddhava  stayed  in Vrindavana 
for six months. There he saw every place, every spot where lord Krishna had played once.  When 
he was returning  to Mathura,  mother  Yashoda  presented  him with butter,  Radha  gave  him the 
flute.  Thus  immersed  in the love and overwhelmed  by its feelings,  Uddhava  reached  Mathura. 
He said to Krish na: "Lord, the real appearance of love, that I saw in Vrindavana is the  only 
truth."  Sri Krishna  said:  "Uddhava,  You are weeping.  Just look at me." Uddhava  looked  at him 
with wide, opened eyes. In every single hair of Lord, there existed Gopis. Uddhava wa s indeed  a 
Savant. But Lord had sent him to Braj only to be taught a lesson of  love.  
   
 
BATTLES WITH JARASANDH AND CONSTRUCTION 
OF DWARIKAPURI  
After the death of Kansa his widowed queens Asti and Prapti returned to their father  Jarasandh's 
home and informed him that Krishna and Balarama had killed their husband Kansa. Infuriated  by 
the news, Jarasandh at once launched a massive attack on Mathura. The people of Mathura  were 
frightened  by the strength  of Jarasandh's  army.  Lord  Krishna  too fell in deep  thought.  Just then, 
divine weapons and chariots appeared from the heaven. Both the brothers took the weapons  and 
boarded their chariots. Then they fought a fierce battle and slayed all the army of  Jarasandh.  
 
Balarama furiously caught Jarasandh and was about to kil l him. But Lord Krishna stopped  him. 
They then released Jarasandh and let him go unhurt. Jarasandh felt ashamed that  Krishna 
released him because of his helpless  condition.  
 
Shukdev  says:  O Parikshit,  despite  his shameful  defeat,  Jarasandh  attacked  Mathur a seventeen 
times  with huge  armies.  But every  time,  the Lord  defeated  him and released  him in kindness. 
And every time Jarasandh felt more  humiliated."  
At last, instead  of attacking  Mathura  himself,  Jarasandh  sent Kalyavan  to defeat  Sri Krishna. 
Kalyavan launched an attack on Mathura with one crore strong Malechchh army. This time  Lord 
Krishna decided to vacate Mathura instead of countering the  attack.  
 
He got Dwarikapuri  constructed  by Vishvakarma  and settled  all the people  of Mathura  there. 
Then, unarmed , Lord Krishna walked past Kalyavan. Pointed by Narada, Kalyavan at  once 
recognised Krishna and gave Him a chase. He also challenged Him, but the Lord did not listen  to 
his challenges and kept moving with face turned away. Kalyavan chased Him for long, but  could 
not catch  up. 
 
Ultimately  the Lord  entered  a cave.  Kalyavan  too followed  Him into the cave.  In the cave the 
Lord  saw that someone  was sleeping  there.  So He covered  the man with his yellow  length  of 
cloth  and himself  hid inside  the cave.  Kalyavan  too arrived  there  and saw the sleeping  man.  He 
mistook  him for God and said:  "Krishna,  you might  have  thought  that braves  do not attack  on 
sleeping people. So I will first wake you up and then kill you." Saying thus Kalyavan kicked  the 
sleeping man hard. Howe ver, as soon as the man awakened and glanced at Kalyavan,  Kalyavan 
got incinerated at  once.  
   
 
TALE OF  MUCHKUND  
Parikshit asked: "Gurudev, who was that sleeping  man?"  
 
Shukdev  says:  "O king,  that sleeping  man was Muchkund,  the son of the king Mandhata.  The 
gods had sought his assistance in their war against the demon during the Satya Yuga.  With 
Muchkund's  help,the  gods  had defeated  the demons  and thus pleased  had asked  him to seek a 
boon.  Muchkund  then had sought  a boon  of seeing  God in tangible  form.  The gods had assured 
him that he would have a sight of God in Dwapar Yuga. Since Dwapar Yuga was still far  away, 
so Muchkund  had asked:  "What  should  I do till then?"  The gods  asked  him to sleep  somewhere 
and blessed  him with a boon  that whoever  waked  him up woul d be incinerated  at once,  by his 
glance.  Thus,  in order  to get Kalyavan  incinerated  and show  Muchkund  with his Divine  form, 
Lord had gone to that spot where Muchkund was  sleeping.  
 
Muchkund  got the sight  of God in Chaturbhuj  form;  and seeked  a boon  of continuous  devotion 
for three  births.  Thus,  Lord  defeated  Malechchh  army  and captured  all their wealth.  He also 
defeated Jarasandha and caused great joy for the people of  Dwaraka.  
 
The king of Anart,  Raiwat  got his daughter  Rewati  married  to Balarama  with the blessing  of 
Brahma.  
  MESSAGE OF RUKMANI FOR LORD  KRISHNA  
Shukdev  said:  "O Parikshit,  Bhismak  was the king of Vidarbh.  He had five sons and a daughter 
Rukmani.  Rukmi,  the eldest  son of Bhismak,  had fixed  his sister's  engagement  with Shishupal, 
the prince of  Chaidi. Narada did not like this development. He went to Kundanpur, the capital  of 
Vidarbh and said in the court of Bhismak: O King, I am coming from Dwaraka." Bhismak   said!  
"O great Sage, I have never heard about any city named Dwaraka". Thus, in the  court  of 
Bhismak, Narada narrated about the life of Lord Krishna and the grandeur of Dwaraka.  Bhismak 
heard the tale with full attention. His daughter Rukmani too enjoyed the  tale. 
 
But Rukmi had a strong opposition against lord Krishna. Ignoring the wish  of his father, he  was 
not ready  to get his sister  married  to Lord  Krishna.  On the appointed  day, Shishupal  appeared 
there, in a procession, to get married with  Rukmani.  
 
But Rukmani was determined to marry Lord Krishna. She sent a love letter to Krishna t hrough  a 
loyal  Brahmin  and declared  a fast unto death.  Lord  Krishna  read her letter,  which  said:  "O 
Trilokkinath, since the moment, these ears have heard about your virtues, actions, character  and 
plays,  my soul experiences  divine  peace.  O Achyut,  my mind  is dedicated  in your feet. O great 
among  the men,  this Rukmani  has dedicated  herself  in your feet. Now  it is upto you to see that 
no jackal  could  take away  the lion's  share."  The Brahmin,  the carrier  of the letter,  returned  to 
Kundanpur  with an assurance  from the Lord.  Lord  too called  the charioteer  and set out at once 
for Kundanpur. There in Kundanpur, Rukmani after getting the assurance from the Brahmin,  was 
thus waiting for Lord's  arrival.  
 
Preparations  for Rukmani's  marriage  with Shisupal  were  on with full swing  in Kundanpur.  All 
the houses, streets and lanes were cleaned and sprinkled with scented water. All the men  and 
women folk donned new clothes and ornaments. King Bhismak worshipped his ancestors  and 
gods  and welcomed  the Brahmins  liberally.  Extre mely  beautiful  princess  Rukmani  was given 
ceremonial bath and donned with auspicious clothes and  bracelets.  
 
The king of Chedi,  Damaghosh  got the auspicious  rites for the marriage  of his son Shishupal, 
performed by Brahmins. All the Baratis (people in marr iage procession) were given  grand 
reception.  Many  great  kings  like Shalv,  Jarasandh,  Dantvaktra,  Vidurath  and Paundruk  were 
present in the marriage procession. They had come with their armies with an intention of  fighting 
Krishna and Balarama. After Krishn a's departure, Balarama too set out for Kundanpur  with 
chaturangini (with four wings) army, for he had known about their opponents'  preparedness.  
 
Rukmani was eagerly awaiting Lord's arrival. She had received the news that  Dwarakanath 
(Krishna) had resolve d to take her away. She was feeling overwhelmed in her  heart.  
 
Seeing Lord Krishna arrived intently in the marriage ceremonies of his daughter, king  Bhismak 
welcomed  him. Seeing  him, even  the common  people  of Vidarbh  prayed  "May  our princess 
Rukmani get Sr i Krishna as her husband. At the same time, Rukmani emerged from her palace  to 
go to the temple of Ambikadevi, soldiers were guarding her. In the temple, Rukmani  prayed 
peacefully:  "O Mother  Ambika  I greet  you and Ganapati,  who is sitting  in your lap. I seek your 
blessing that may my wish be fulfilled and may I receive Sri Krishna as my husband."  
On her way back, Rukmani was walking very slowly for she was awaiting Lord's arrival,  which 
was due in any moment.  Just then,  Lord  Krishna  appeared  before  her. Before she could  ride her 
chariot  Lord  lifted  her from  amidst  the crowd.  And in the presence  of hundrerds  of kings, 
Krishna and Balarama eloped away with  Rukmani.  KRISHNA DEFEATS RUKMI AND MARRIES  RUKMANI  
Hearing the news that Krishna has eloped with Rukman i, Rukmi and all other kings present  there 
boiled  with anger.  Accompanied  by their huge  armies,  they decided  to give them  a chase.  Thus 
chased  my them,  Yadnvanishis  stopped  and encountered  the kings  boldly.  With  a true ambition 
to win, brave  Yadav  soldiers  defeated  the enemeies.  All the kings  like Jarasandh  fled for their 
lives.  Rukmi  had resolved  that without  getting  Rukmani  released  from  Krishna's  captivity,  he 
would  not show  his face in Kundanpur.  He chased  Lord  Krishna  for long.  But Dwarakanath 
defeated  him and got his head  shaved.  
 
Thus defeating all the kings, Lord Krishna brought Rukmani to Dwaraka. There they got  married 
formally. All the people of Dwaraka celebrated festivities for many days. People presented  them 
with lot of precious  gifts.  All the people  were  in great  joy to see Lakshmi  as Rukmani  with her 
husband Lord  Krishna.  
   
 
BIRTH OF PRADYUMN, KILLING OF  SHABARASUR  
Shukdev  says:  O Parikshit,  Kamadev  was a part of lord himself.  After  getting  incinerated  by 
Rudra, Kamadev took refuge in the supre me lord to get an incarnation once more.  Thus, 
Kamadev was born as Rukmani,s first son  Pradyumn.  
 
But just after his birth, Pradyumn was kidnapped by a demon Shambarasur. The demon  dropped 
the baby into the sea, where a huge fish swallowed him in whole. C oincidently the fish  was 
caught  by the fishers  and presented  to the kitchen  of Shambarasur.  When  the cooks  cut the fish 
open, an extremely beautiful baby emerged. Mayawati, the governess of the kitchen,  felt 
overjoyed to see the baby. She began to rear the  baby with love and  affection.  
 
Once Narada arrived in the kitchen and said: "Mayawati, do you know who is in your lap? "  "No, 
O Devarishi, I found him from the belly of a fish" said Mayawati. Devarishi Narada said: "He  is 
your husband Kamadev and you are his wife Rati. In this birth, he has appeared as Pradyumn  the 
son of Krishna.  Hearing  this, Mayawati  saluted  Narada  with respect.  Since  then she regarded 
Pradyumn  as her husband  and served  him accordingly.  When  Pradyumn  matured.  Mayawati 
reminded him about  his real appearance. Pradyumn, thereafter, killed Shambarasur and  got 
married with Mayawati. Then the couple arrived in  Dwaraka.  
   
 
TALE OF SYAMANTAK THE GEM AND ITS THEFT  
A person  named  Satrajit  was a great  devotee  of Lord  Suryanarayana.  Pleased  by his devotion, 
Suryadev  presented  him a gem called  Syamantak.  The gem had a radiance  equal  to the sun. 
Bearing that gem, Satrajit arrived in Lord's court. By the radiance of his gem, all the people  and 
the courtiers  mistook  him for Suryadeva  and stood  in his regar d. But the Lord  recognised  him 
and asked  his coutiers  to be calm.  Then  to Satrajit,  Lord  Said:  "Satrajit,  your gem is really  very 
beautiful. Nana (maternal grandfather) Ugrasen is the king of this region. If you present this  gem 
to him, it will be very goo d. But Satrajit refused to present that  gem.  
One day, later on, Satrajits  brother  Prasenjit  went  hunting,  wearing  the gem in his neck.  In the 
forest  a lion killed  him and snatched  the gem.  The lion was in turn killed  by the Ursine  king 
Jambvan.  Jambvan  took the gem to his cave and gave  it to his children  to play with.  When 
Prasenjit  did not return  from  hunting,  Satrajit  felt sorry  and accused  Krishna  that He had killed 
his brother for the  gem.  
 
When  lord Krishna  heard  that he was being  blamed  for the misha p, He himself  went  to the 
forests.  There  he found  the dead  body  of Prasenjit,  but there  was no sign of gem around  the 
cadaver.  He found  only footprints  of a lion leaving  from  there.  Following  the footprints,  He 
discovered the dead lion and the foot prints of a great bear. Following the footprints, He  reached 
in the cave where Jambvan's daughter Jambvati was playing with the  gem.  
 
As soon  as lord Krishna  proceeded  to take the gem,  Jambvan  arrived.  A fierce  duel resulted 
between them. They continued to fight for twenty -six days without truce. On the  twenty -seventh 
day Jambvan  requested  Lord!  "Please  wait O Lord."  Lord  said:  "Do you want  to take rest?" 
"No",  said Jambvan,  "I have  recognised  you. You are non other  than Lord  Narayana  Himself. 
Nobody else has the power to defeat me." Lord appeared before Jambvan as Sri Rama.  Jambvan 
prayed and worshipped Him. He was feeling guilty that he dared to fight Lord. Lord said that  He 
had arrived  there  for the gem only.  Jambvan  gave  him the gem and also his daughter  Jambva ti. 
Lord returned the gem to Satrajit and married Jambvati  formally.  
 
Lord summoned Satrajit to his court and in the presence of the king Ugrasen, related  the 
sequence  of incidents  that took place  in the jungle.  Satrajit  felt ashamed.  With  a feeling  of 
repentance  he took the gem.  He was getting  afraid  also that he made  enemity  with lord Krishna 
without  reason.  Hence  to expiate  his crime,  Satrajit  thought  of presenting  the gem Syamantak 
and his daughter Satyabhama to Lord Krishna. Lord Krishna accepted Saty bhama as his wife  but 
returned  the gem to Satrajit  saying:  "It is a gift of lord Suryadev.  Keep  it with you. You are 
required to deposit the gold that you get from it, in the royal  treasure."  
 
Akrura  and Kritvarma  were  not pleased  with the marriage  of Satyabhama.  So they got Satrajit 
killed  by Shatdanva.  Shatdanva  killed  Satrajit  in his sleep  and absconded  with the gem.  Lord 
Krishna was then away in Hastinapur. Satyabhama too reached there and informed Krishna  about 
her father's assassination. With Balarama , Lord Krishna chased Shatdhanva. But even  after 
killing  him, they could  not trace  the gem.  Shatdhanva  had given  the gem to Akrura  to keep  till 
his return. But after the death of Shatdhanva, frightened Akrura came to stay in Kashi. From  the 
effect  of the gem Akrura  performed  many  grand  Yagyas  there.  Lord  summoned  Akrura  from 
Kashi.  After  welcoming  and treating  him in the court,  Lord  asked  him about  the gem.  Akrura 
showed the gem in the court. But Lord returned the gem to  Akrura.  
 KRISHNA'S OTHER  MARRIAGES  
1.) Once  Lord  Krishna  visited  Indraprasth  to see Pandavas  there.  There  riding  a chariot  with 
Arjuna, He came to the forests. On the bank of river Yamuna a pretty woman was  observing 
penance. By the instinct of God, Arjuna drew near her and asked for her ide ntity. She said: "I  am 
Kalindi,  the daughter  of Suryadev.  I am penancing  here in order  to get married  with Lord 
Krishna." Lord got Kalindi boarded on the chariot and got married to her  formally.  
 
2.) Mitrvinda was the sister of Vind Anuvind the king of Ujj ain. She had a desire to get Lord  as 
her husband.  But her brother,  Vind  Anuvind  was a follower  of Duryodhan.  So he stopped  his 
sister  Mitrvinda  from  getting  married  to Krishna.  But Krishna  eloped  with Mitrvinda  from  the 
his court and got married to her for mally later  on. 
 
3.) Satya  was the daughter  of Nagnjit,  the king of Kaushal.  She was extremely  beautiful  lady. 
The king had resolved that he would marry his daughter only to him who would defeat his  seven 
most  formidable  oxen.  Many  princes  has tried their luck since  then but failed.  When  Lord 
Krishna heard about that, He reached Kaushal with his army. The king of Kaushal welcomed  and 
treated  him well,  and told him about  his resolution.  Lord  then took seven  guises  and in no time 
defeated his seven formidable  oxen. Gladly the king married his daughter Satya to Lord  Krishna.  
 
4.) Shukdev said: "Parikshit, Lord's aunt (father's sister) Shrutkirti was married in the kingdom  of 
Kaikauja. Bhadra was the daughter of Shrutkirti. Bhadra's brothers like Santardan  etc. 
themselves had got their sister married to Lord  Krishna.  
 
5.) Lakshmana  was the daughter  of the king of Madra.  She was very beautiful  and meritorius. 
Lord abducted her all alone from the Swayamvar organised for her marriage. Later, Lord  married 
to her  formally.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  BHAUMASUR  
Shukdev  said:  Parikshit,  Prayjyotishpur  was the capital  of the demon  Bhaumasur.  He was very 
strong and powerful. He had snatched the canopy of Varuna, ear -rings of Aditi the mother of  the 
gods,  and Maniparvat  of the gods  on Meru.  Apart  from  these,  he had also captured  sixteen 
thousand and one hundred princesses as  well.  
 
Devraj Indra himself visited Dwaraka and prayed Lord to get them rid of Bhaumasur's  atrocities. 
With  the dear wife Satyabhama  and riding  his vehicle  Garuda.  Lord  Krishna  arrived  in the 
capital  of Bhaumasur.  But to enter  Pragjyotishpur  was a impossible  task. But with the blows  of 
his mace and arrows, Lord easily broke the hills, destroyed strategic positions and cut the  snares 
with sword.  By his wheel  he destro yed the walls  of fire, water  and air. With  the loud sound  of 
conch, lord renderered the machines, installed there,  useless.  
 
Ultimately,  God destroyed  the rampart  of the citadel.  Disturbed  by the noise,  the five-headed 
demon  Mur ran with a trident  to kill God.  But with a single  shot of his arrow,  Lord  broke  his 
trident and cut his head with his wheel. Soldiers and commanders of Bhaumasur were also  killed. 
Bhaumasur  then came  himself  to fight.  He had donned  a shinning  crown  and was wearing  big 
earrings.  With  his wheel,  Lord  cut the demon's  head.  As soon  as He beheaded  the demon,  the 
gods showered flowers on the Lord and worshipped Him. Even the mother earth came and put a 
garland of five colours around lords neck. She also presented to him the earrings of Adi ti, canopy 
of Varuna,  and a great  gem.  At the request  of earth,  Lord  assured  Bhaumasur's  son Bhagdatt 
freedom from his  fears.  
 
After  slaying  Bhaumasur,  Lord  entered  his palace.  There  he released  the sixteen -thousand  one- 
hundred captive princesses. The pri ncesses were very much impressed by the Lord. They had  all 
accepted  in their mind,  Lord  Krishna  as their husband.  Lord  too bowed  before  their love and 
accepted them as his wives and arranged to send them to  Dwaraka.  
 
Shukdev says: Parikshit, Rukmvati was  the daughter of Rukmi, the brother of Rukmani. When  a 
Swayamvar  was organised  for her, she saw Pradyumn.  She was so impressed  by him that she 
chose  him as her husband.  But it was not acceptable  to other  princes.  They  tried to stop their 
marriage. But defe ating them all, Pradyumn abducted Rukmvati and married her formally.  Then 
to please  his sister  Rukmani,  Rukmi  got his grand -daughter  Rochana  married  to Rukmani's 
grandsons  Anirudh.  
   
 
MARRIAGE OF  USHA -ANIRUDH  
The son of the demon king Bali, Banasur was a gre at devotee of Lord Lord Shiva. Banasur  ruled 
over the kingdom  Shonitpur.  By the grace  of Lord  Lord  Shiva,  he had received  thousand  arms. 
Even all the gods including Indra used to serve him. Thus blinded by his physical  strength, 
Banasur  sought  a boon  from  Lord  to meet  a match  for his strength.  Lord  Shiva  said:  "O fool, 
your thirst for war shall be quenched when your flag is  broken."  
 
Banasur had a daughter named Usha. Once she had a dream in which Anirudh was making  love 
with her. She was very much  perplex ed by the dream.  After  a few days with the help of her 
friend  Chitralekha,  Anirudh  sneaked  into her palace.  He stay there  and enjoyed  the company  of 
Usha for long. But Anirudh's clandestine stay could not remain hidden from the eyes  of 
Banasura.  So he put Anirudh  in prison.  There  in Dwaraka,  everyone  was worried  by Anirudh's 
long absence.  
 
It was Narada,  who ultimately  revealed  the fact that Anirudh  was in the prison  of Banasur. 
Hearing the news, Lord Krishna launched an attack on Banasur. His armies  surrou nded 
Shonitpur.  During  Ghurabandi  the flag of Banasur's  palace  fell. Lord  Shanker  arrived  to assist 
Banasur.  Lord  Krishna  cut all the arms  of Banasur.  At the request  of Lord  Shiva,  he left only 
four of his arms  intact.  Banasur  bowed  his head  before  Lord  Krishna  and brought  Anirudh  and 
Usha  respectfully  before  Him.  With  them  Lord  Krishna  returned  to Dwaraka  where  formal 
marriage of Usha and Anirudh took  place.  
   
 
TALE OF THE KING  NRIG  
Once, Lord Krishna's sons visited the forests. There they saw a huge Chamele on fallen in a  large, 
deep well. They tried to pull it out but in vain. The princes, therefore, returned to the palace  and 
related  this strange  episode  to Lord  Krishna.  Lord  too came  to the well and with His left hand, 
easily pulled the Chamelon  out. 
 
As soon as the chameleon  came  out, it turned  into a divine  god and began  to worship  God.  He 
said: "O Lord, I am Nrig. The king Ikshvaku was my father. In my life, I had donated 
uncountable  numbers  of cows  to the Brahmins.  But once  a cow,  donated  by me, returne d to my 
cowshed.  By mistake  I made  a resolution  to donate  it to another  Brahmin.  My action  led to a 
dispute  between  the  two  Brahmins,  and  my wisdom  failed  to  settle  their  dispute.  Both  the 
Brahmins  went  away  unsatisfied,  but I met this fate after death.  Since  then,  I had been  in this 
well in the form  of a chameleon.  Now,  by the graceful  touch  of your hands,  O Lord,  I have 
received salvation." King Nrig then went around the Lord and returned to his heavenly  abode.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  PAUNDRAK  
Once  Balarama  and Krishna  had gone  to Braj to see Nandbaba  there.  Meanwhile  the king 
Paundrak of Karush sent an envoy to lord Krishna with a message that said: 'I am Lord  Vasudev.' 
Pandrak's envoy arrived in the court and read out the message: "To bestow my grace on the 
people,  I have  taken  an incarnation.  You have  falsely  named  yourself  as Vasudev  and bore my 
insignia. Take my refuge or face the  battle."  
 
Shukdev said: Parikshit, hearing the message of Paundrak, Ugrasen and other courtiers began  to 
laugh. Lord ask ed the envoy to inform Paundrak that He would launch His wheel on him and  his 
army.  
 
Receiving the message Paundrak launched an attack on Dwaraka with two Akshauhini army.  The 
king of Kashi  was a friend  of Paundrak.  He too came  to his assistance  with three Akshauhini 
armies.  Paundrak  had disguised  as Vasudev  and was bearing  artifical  conch,  wheel,  mace  and 
lotus and. He had also adorned Swastik, Kaustubh etc. All the people began to laugh  at 
Paundrak's clown like  attire.  
 
In no time,  the Lord  stripped  him of all his adornments.  His wheel  cut his head.  Then  with an 
arrow  the Lord  cut the head  of the king of Kashi.  His head  fell in front  of his palace's  gate. 
SuDakshain,  the son of the Kashi  king,  organised  a grand  Yagya  to avenge  his father's  killing. 
An ogress, Kritya  emerged  from  the Yagya  and began  to burn Dwaraka.  All the people  prayed 
Krishna  to protect  them.  Lord  assured  them  to be fearless  and ordered  His wheel  Sudarshan  to 
kill Kritya. Sudarshan extinguished the fire, killed Kritya and destroyed Kashi . Then it  returned 
to the Lord's  finger.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  DWIVID  
The king Parikshit expressed his desire to hear about the life of Balarama. Shukdev said:,  "O 
king,  there  was once  a monkey  named  Dwivid.  He was the friend  of Bhaumasur.  When  Dwivid 
heard about Bhaumasur's killing by Sri Krishna, he began to cause large scale destruction in  the 
kingdom. His disruptive activities in the country began to terrorize the subjects of Lord  Krishna. 
Once hearing sweet music, the monkey was drawn towards the Raivtak mount ain. There he  saw 
Balarama amidst beautiful young women. The monkey began to behave indecently. Angered  by 
his indecency, Balarama hit him with his pestel, named Sunand, and killed the  monkey.  
   
 
MARRIAGE OF  SAMB  
Samb  was the son of lord Krishna  and born to Jambvati.  He had kidnapped  Lakshmana,  the 
daughter of Duryodhana from her Swayamvar. Infuriated Kauravas chased them and,  with 
difficulty,  they caught  Samb  and tied him. When  the Yaduvanshis  got the news,  they began  
preparations  to launch  an attack  on Kauravas.  Balarama  pacified  them  and reached  Hastinapur 
alone.  There  he received  a warm  welcome  from  the Kauravas.  Balarama  said to them:  "It is an 
order  of the king Ugrasen  that you should  see Samb  off with his newly  wedded  wife."  Hearing 
Balarama's words Ka uravas got angry and began to deride Yaduvanshis. Infuriated by  Kauravas 
derisions, Balarama trained his pestle and plough. He intended to turn over the town  of 
Hastinapur  into the river  Yamuna.  When  the city began  to shake,  Kauravas  felt perplexed  and 
begged Balarama for his pardon. Balarama assured them to be fearless and returned to  Dwaraka 
with Samb and his newly wedded wife  Lakshmana.  
   
 
THE KINGS IN CAPTIVITY SEEK LORD'S  HELP  
Shukdev says: "Parikshit, once Lord Krishna was holding His court when an emis sary arrived  in 
the court.  The kings  who were  held captive  forcibly  by Jarasandh  had sent him. The emissary 
related the miseries of those kings to Lord Krishna. Through the emissary, the kings  had 
requested:  "O Lord  of the world,  Kindly  get us free from  our miseries.  We are in your refuge. 
We desire  your sight.  Kindly  bestow  us with your grace."  Lord  Krishna  sent the emissary  off 
with assurance of timely  action.  
 
Meanwhile, Devarishi Narada arrived in the court and informed the Lord of  Yudhisthira's 
intent ion to organise  a grand  Rajsuy  Yagya  and his cordial  invitation  for the Lord  to attend  the 
ceremony.  Lord  asked  his friend  Uddhava  for an advice  as to where  He ought  to go first - to 
Indraprastha  in Rajsuy  Yagya  or to liberate  the king from  the captivity  of Jarasandh.  Uddhava 
advised Lord to go to Indraprastha first. There He would be able to serve both the  purposes.  
 
Uddhava's  advise  was in the interest  of all. Everyone  supported  it. Taking  permission  from  His 
priest  and teachers,  Lord  set out on a chariot  with the whole  family  to reach  Indraprastha.  In 
Indraprastha, Pandavas accorded the Lord with warm -hearted felicitations. By the dictate  of 
Lord,  Mayasur  built a divine  looking  court  for Yudhisthira.  The courtroom  was a marvellous 
piece  of architecture.  The shinning,  smooth,  floor  of it appeared  like water,  while  water  bodies 
presented a look like marble  floors.  
   
 
KILLING OF  JARASANDH  
During  Yudhisthira's  Rajsuy  Yagya,  all the Pandavas  set out in all the directions  to conquer  the 
kings and expand the bounda ries of their kingdom. Warriors like Bheem, Arjuna defeated  great 
kings all around and extended the boundaries of Yudhisthira's empire. But to defeat Jarasandh,  - 
Bhima,  Arjuna  and Lord  Krishna  went  in the guise  Brahmins.  They  reached  Jarasandh  capital 
Girivraj and prayed  him for donations.  Jarasandh  promised  to give them  the things  of their 
desires.  Lord  Krishna  then introduced  themselves  and begged  Jarasandh  for a duel with any of 
them.  Jarasandh  accepted  to fight  a duel with Bhima.  He gave  Bhima  a mace  and both of them 
came  out to the outskirts  of the town,  where  they began  their duel.  Both  of them  were  equally 
strong and equally brave and well  pitted.  
 
Twenty -seven days passed, but their duel remained inconclusive. On the twenty -eighth  day, 
during the fi ght, Lord signaled Bhima a way to kill Jarasandh. He took a small twig in his  hands  
and tore it apart into two. Bhima understood the signal and beating Jarasandh on ground, he  tore 
him apart  in two pieces  and threw  them  in opposite  directions.  Thus  came  the end of evil 
Jarasandh. Lord Krishna and Arjuna heartily greeted Bhima for his success. They then  enthroned 
Jarasandh's son Sahdev and also got the captive kings  released.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  SHISHUPAL  
King Yudhisthira had invited great vedic Brahmins and Ach arayas on the occasion. Those  great 
Sages included Ved Vyasa, Bhardwaj, Sumantu, Gautam, Asit, Vashishtha, Chyvan,  Kanv, 
Maitreya, Kavash, Chit, Vishvamitra, Vamdev, Sumati, Jemini, Kratu, Pail,  Parashurama, 
Shukracharya, Asuri, Vitihotra, Madhuchchanda, V eersen and Akritvarn etc. Persons  from 
Kauravas  side like Drona,  Bhisma,  Kripacharya,  Dhritrashtra,  Vidhur  and Duryodhan  etc. were 
too invited to witness the celebrations. Even Brahma, Shiv, Indra, Gandharvas, Vidyadhars  had 
too arrived.  But before  the Yagya could  start a dispute  cropped  up among  the great  sages  as to 
who ought to be worshipped first in the  Yagya.  
 
In the opinion  of Sahdeva  (youngest  of the Pandava  brothers,  not the son of Jarasandh),  Lord 
Krishna deserved the first worship. Every one supp orted him. Only Shishupal could not  tolerate 
the decision.  He stood  up and said:  "In the presence  of such great  ascetics,  savants,  polymaths 
and sages,  how can this cowherd  deserve  the first worship."  Despite  Shishupal  bitter  remarks 
Lord Krishna kept quie t. But Shishupal did not. Encouraged by Lord's silence he began to  attack 
the kings,  who stood  by Lord's  side, with sword.  He was simultaneously  abusing  Lord  Krishna 
also. Lord had assured Shishupal of this forgiveness for up to one hundred sins. But  now 
Shishupal's sins have crossed that permitted number. So, quieting all, Lord cut his head with  His 
wheel.  As soon  as the dead  body  of Shishupal  fell on the ground,  a flame  emerged  from  it and 
merged with Lord Krishna. Shukdev says: "O Parikshit, feelings of hostility had  been 
accumulating  in the heart  of Shishupal  for his past three  births  against  Lord  Krishna.  It was 
because of these intense hostile feelings that Shishupal met salvation  eventually.  
 
After  the salvation  of Shishupal,  ceremonies  and rituals  of Yagya  proceeded  unabated.  At the 
end king Yudhisthira presented all those present there with fitting gifts and took ceremonial  bath. 
At the request of Pandavas, lord Krishna stayed in Indraprastha for many  months.  
   
 
SALVATION OF  SHALV  
Shukdev  says:  "Pariks hit, now listen  to the tale of how Lord  caused  salvation  for Shalv.  Shalv 
was the childhood friend of Shishupal and had attended the marriage of Rukmani as a member  of 
Shishupal's wedding party. At that time, Yaduvanshis had defeated them all including  Jarasandh 
and Shalv. Right at that moment, Shalv had resolved to destroy Yaduvanshis and  began 
worshipping  Gods  of the gods  Pashupati  (Shiva).  Lord  Ashutosh  Lord  Shiva  was pleased  with 
him. As a boon,  Shalv  had got an aeroplane  that was invincible  even  for the gods,  demons, 
humans, nagas, etc and was particularly formidable for Yaduvanshis. By the dictate of Lord  Lord 
Shiva, the demon Maya constructed such an aeroplane of iron. The aeroplane named Saubh  was 
as big as a city and was difficult  to be spotted  or caught.  It could  move  as fast as one's  wishes. 
Soon after getting the aeroplane, Shalv launched an attack of  Dwaraka.  
Surrounding  Dwaraka,  Shalv  began  to destroy  buildings  and houses  there.  Seeing  the people 
terrorized,  Pradyumn  consoled  them  to be fearles s and himself  set out on a chariot  to counter 
Shalv.  He pierced  Shalv  with arrows.  But Shalv's  minister  Dyumana  attacked  Pradyumn  with a 
mace. By the blow of the mace, Pradyumn lost his consciousness. But soon he came around and 
began  to slay Shalv's  force s. The fierce  battle  continued  for twenty -seven  days.  Lord  was away 
then in Indraprastha  Yagya.  But He was sure that in his absence  Kshatriya  kings  of Shishupal 
side would be attacking on  Dwaraka.  
 
Lord reached Dwaraka and saw a fierce battle between Prady umn and Shalv. Seeing Lord  arrive, 
Shalv began to attack Him with sharp arrows. Lord hit Shalv with a powerful blow of mace  and 
he began to spit blood from his mouth. He then tried to show many illusions and showered  Lord 
with weapons.  But Lord  wounded  Shalv with his arrows,  broke  his aeroplane  with his mace. 
Very soon thereafter the aeroplane plunged in to the sea. Shalv then attacked Lord with mace  but 
Lord cut his head with Sudarshan wheel. Seeing his end, all the gods showered flowers on  Lord.  
   
 
SALVATIO N OF DANTVAKTRA AND  VIDURATH  
After  the killing  of Shishupal,  Shalv  etc. Dantvaktra  arrived  in the battlefield  carrying  a mace. 
When  Lord  saw him coming,  He too jumped  down  from  the chariot  and baulked  his movement 
with a mace.  Dantvaktra  tried to humiliat e God with his abuses  and hit him on head  with his 
mace. Lord easily bore the blow of mace and hit Dantvaktra's chest with his mace  named 
Kaumodaki. Dantvaktra's heart tore apart by the blow and he fell  dead.  
 
Vidurath was the brother of Dantvaktra. He cam e in the field with sword and shield to avenge  his 
brother's  death.  Seeing  him ready  to launch  an attack,  Lord  cut Vidurath's  head  with his wheel. 
Thus, Lord Krishna entered Dwaraka only after killing Shalv, Dantvaktra and Vidurath. All  the 
gods and other inhabitants of heaven showered flowers on  Him.  
  SUDAMA: THE LORD'S  FRIEND  
During  his stay as a disciple  at the hermitage  of sage Sandipani,  Lord  Krishna  had a Brahmin 
friend  named  Sudama.  He was very indifferent  in nature  with no desires  for the material  things. 
After their education, Lord Krishna came to Dwaraka while Sudama, who had no any  inclination 
for accumulating  material  wealth,  got married  and began  to pass his life with his wife Susheela 
abject  poverty.  
 
One day his wife Susheela said: "O lord, yo ur friend Krishna is the king of Dwaraka. He is  very 
benevolent to Brahmins and his devotees. If you go to see him, he will understand your  miseries 
and grant you a lot of wealth." But Sudama plainly refused saying: "Devi, I have chosen the path 
of devotio n for self upliftment and not for the wealth." Susheela, however, kept of insisting:  "All 
right,  don't  go for the wealth.  But at least you can go to see your old friend.  Sudama  accepted 
this proposition,  thinking  that only the sight  of Lord  yields  supreme  benefit  to the devotee.  But 
he wanted  something  as a gift to present  to his old friend.  At this, his wife tied four handfuls  of 
raw rice in a  bundle.  
With that humble gift, Sudama set out for Dwaraka. His poverty was at its helm. But he kept  on 
reciting L ord's name all along the way. After walking for some distance, Sudama felt thirsty.  He 
drank  water,  quenched  his thirst  and thanked  God that He at least does give water  to drink. 
Sudama kept on walking the whole day. In the evening, he kept the bundle of r ice under his  head 
as a pillow and  slept.  
 
Now  it was God's  turn to show  His gratitude  for the devotee.  When  Sudama  awoke  in the 
morning,  he found  himself  right  in front  of Lord  Krishna's  palace.  At first he could  not believe 
his eyes; but the people told him that he was in Dwaraka and standing right before the  lord's 
palace. Sudama requested the gatekeeper to inform Lord Krishna that his childhood  friend 
Sudama  had come.  Lord  Krishna  was sitting  in the company  of Rukmani  when  the gatekeeper 
delivered the m essage. As soon as Lord Krishna learned about Sudama's arrival, He stood up  and 
ran helter -skelter  to welcome  his childhood  friend.  At the gate He cordially  embraced  Sudama 
and escorted him into his private chamber and made him sit on the  throne.  
 
Krishna  and queen  Rukmani  both washed  Sudama's  feet one by one. By the mere  touch  of his 
friend,  Krishna  was feeling  overjoyed.  His eyes filled  with tears.  He and Sudama  were  holding 
each other's hands. Their hearts were beating with the memories of their period a s disciples at  the 
hermitage  of Sandipani.  For long,  none  of them  could  uttered  a word.  At last Sudama  said:  "O 
Jagadguru Krishna, I have the fortune of being your friend. What remains for me to  do?" 
 
Lord Krishna said: "Brother, have you brought for me s omething sent by my sister -in-law? I  love 
to accept even the pettiest thing presented with  affection."  
 
Shukdev  says:  'O Parikshit,  at the Lord's  words,  Sudama  felt ashamed  and he did not reveal  the 
four handfuls  of raw rice that he had brought  as gift. With shame,  Sudama  began  to look at the 
ground.  Lord  knew  everything  that his dear friend  Sudama  had never  remembered  him with a 
desire for wealth. This time too he has come at the insistence of his  wife.  
 
'Hence, I will give him the wealth that is rare even  for the gods...' thought Lord Krishna  and 
snatched  the bundle  of raw rice and opened  it with great  respect.  He put one handful  of it in his 
mouth. When Lord proceeded to take next handful, queen Rukmani held his hand and prayed: "O 
Vishvambhar (fosterer o f the world) for the prosperity of entire world this one handful  is 
sufficient."   
Sudama  stayed  that night  in the palace  of Sri Krishna.  There  he experienced  the comfort  of 
Vaikunth (abode of God). Staying there for many days, Sudama at last, took leave of  Sri Krishna 
and set out for his home.  Lord  did not give Sudama  anything  apparently  nor did Sudama  asked 
for His favour. He was travelling overwhelmed by a divine sense of devotion and felt  that 
Krishna might have not given him wealth lest he should forget  Him.  
 
Thus,  sunk  in myriad  kinds  of thoughts,  Sudama  reached  his home.  But at the place,  where  his 
dilapidated  hut stood  once  there  was now a divine  palace  surrounded  by verdant  gardens.  The 
floors of the palace were embedded with precious gems and stones . Standing at the gate,  Sudama 
felt confused, when his wife Susheela came out with scented water to welcome him. Tears  were 
rolling on her cheeks. With love she greeted Sudama and escorted him inside the palace.  Sudama  
was still reflecting over the God's grace and praying: "May I have the friendship of lord in  every 
birth, may my affection increase for Lord's feet. I don't want wealth.' Since  then,  Sudama 
enjoyed  the comforts  of the palace  as the bounty  of Lord  bestowed  upon  him by non other  than 
the Lord  Krishna himself. His devotion increased day by  day. 
   
 
MEETING OF LORD WITH  GOPAS -GOPIS  
Shukdev  says:  "O Parikshit,  Lord  Krishna  was passing  his time with pleasure  in Dwaraka.  A 
total solar  eclipse  happened  to fall during  that period.  People  from  all over India thronged  in 
Kurukshetra  to take a dip in sacred  Ganges  on that great  occasion.  All the Yaduvanshis  too 
arrived there. When Vrajvasis (Inhabitants of Vraj) learned about Krishna and Balarama's  arrival 
in Kurukshetra, they too assembled  there.  
 
During  the festival,  Lord  Krishna  met His foster -father  Nand  and other  cowherds  who were  his 
childhood friends. Lord Krishna met the Gopis also who had been pining for his sight since  long. 
They enjoyed the meeting and kept on chatting for long. Overwhelmed by lov e and joy,  Vasudev 
embraced Nand. Lord Krishna and Balarama respectfully greeted mother Yashoda and  father 
Nand. They too embraced Krishna and Balarama  cordially.  
 
Gopis were specially overwhelmed by Lord's sight. They had no other desire but to have a  sight 
of Lord.  That day their long cherished  dream  had come  true. Gopis  imbued  the captivating 
appearance  of Lord  and experienced  the joy of embracing  Him.  Lord  met all the Gopis  and 
embraced them. Inquired about their well being and preached them with spiri tual knowledge. By 
the virtue  of that knowledge,  feeling  of living  disappeared  among  the Gopis  and they merged 
with God  forever.  
   
 
ORGANISATION OF YAGYA BY  VASUDEV  
Devarishi  Narada,  Vyasa  and many  other  great  sages  arrived  in Kurukshetra  to have  a sight  of 
Lord. Lord welcomed them all. Then Vasudev greeted them and enquired about way for his  self 
up liftment.  Laughingly,  Narada  said:  "Vasudev,  a person,  already  living  at the bank  of the 
Ganges, discards her holy water and goes to other places of pilgrimage f or his  purification.  
 
In the presence  of Krishna  and Balarama,  the sages  said:  "You  regard  the indescrible,  eternal, 
Sachchidanand  Sri Krishna  as your son, and seek the way of your self upliftment  from  us. O 
Vasudev,  recognise  Him.  Take  to His refuge,  only He can save you."  Vasudev  got the meaning 
of sage's  words  and began  to develop  feelings  of devotion  for his son. Every  human  being  has 
obligation  for the gods,  sages  and his ancestors.  The sages  got a Yagya  performed  in 
Kurukshetra by Vasudev to free him from the obligation for  gods.  
   
 
REVISTING OF DEVAKI'S SIX  SONS  
In Dwaraka,  Krishna  and Balarama  used to greet  their parent's  first daily  in the morning.  Now 
Vasudev had recognised His identity. So after their return from Kurukshetra, when Krishna  and 
Balara ma went  as usual  to greet  their parents,  Vasudev  greeted  them  first. Lord  Krishna  then 
preached his father about the metaphysical knowledge. With that knowledge, Vasudev began  to 
see Krishna  everywhere.  
 
Mother  Devaki  was also present  there.  Memory  of her six children,  who were  killed  by Kansa, 
was still afresh  in her mind.  She had heard  that Krishna  had fetched  the dead  son of Sandipani 
from  Yamloka.  So she prayed  to them  " You both are venerable  even  to the gods.  Kindly  grant 
me my desire.  Show  me my six sons who were  killed  by Kansa.  By their mother's  dictate  and 
helped by Yogmaya, both the brothers reached Sutal  Loka.  
 
The demon king Bali welcomed them there and offered them a seat, and washed their feet.  King 
Bali then asked  God what  could  he do for Him. Lord  said:  O demon  king,  in Swayambhuv 
Manvantara, six sons were born to Urna the wife of Prajapati Marichi. They were all gods.  They 
had once  seen Brahma  trying  to copulate  with his own daughter  and hence  derided  at him. 
Indignant  Brahma  had then curse  them  to take birth  in demon  incarnation.  They  therefore  were 
born as the sons of  Hiranykashipu.  
 
In the present  era, Yogmaya  had made  them  born as Devaki's  sons who were  killed  by Kansa. 
They are all now in your Loka. Mother Devaki is mourning for them, so we shall take them  with 
us. They  will thus be freed  from  the curse  and go to their heavenly  abode."  Thus  Lord  Krishna 
and Balarama  brought  those  six babies  to Dwaraka  and handed  them  to mother  Devaki.  Seeing 
her babies again, Devaki's heart filled with love for her sons. Milk began to flood her breast.  She 
breast -fed them. Drinking the milk, all the babies received salvation. They then departed to  their 
heavenly  abode.  
   
 
LOVE AND MARRIAGE OF SUBHADRA AND  ARJUNA  
King Parikshit asked: "Gurudev, how did my g randfather Arjuna and grandmother Subhadra  got 
married? I want to hear this tale. Kindly narrate it to  me."  
 
Shukdev said: Parikshit once travelling on a pilgrimage tour, Arjuna reached in Prabhas  region. 
There he learned that Balarama was desirous of marr ying his sister Subhadra to Duryodhan.  But 
Vasudev  and Krishna  were  not in the favour  of this marriage.  So, a strong  urge took hold in his 
mind to get Subhadra as his wife. Acting as per the urge, Arjuna reached Dwaraka in the guise  of 
Vaishnava  sage.  It was rainy  season  then,  so with an excuse  of Chaturmasya  Vrat (four  months 
long fast), Arjuna stayed in Dwaraka. During his stay, Balarama served and looked after  him 
very well. But neither Balarama nor any other inmates of the palace could recognise  Arjuna . 
 
Once  Balarama  invited  Arjuna  to his home.  There  he offered  good,  delicious  food to Arjuna. 
Subhadra  too served  him well.  There,  they fell in love with each other.  Later  on, boarding  a 
chariot,  Subhadra  went  out of the palace  for a joy ride. At the outsk irts of the town,  Arjuna  was 
awaiting  for her. He had already  taken  permission  of Devaki,  Vasudev  and Krishna.  Subhadra 
too had silently nodded her  acceptance.  
 
So that evening Arjuna and Subhadra eloped from Dwaraka. The news of Subhadra eolping with 
Arjuna first outraged  Balarama.  But Lord  Krishna  and other  near and dear ones convinced  and 
pacified  him. PRAYERS OF  VEDAS  
King  Parikshit  asked:  "Brahmin,  Brahma  is beyond  the limit  of do's and why's.  He is free from 
the virtues like Sat, Raja and Tama. He ca nnot be seen by mind. On the other hand  Guna 
(Virtues) is the subject of all the Shrutis (Vedas). How do Vedas then depict  Brahma?"  
 
Shukdev says: "Parikshit, Lord is omnipotent and a treasure of all the virtues. Shrutis (Vedas)  do 
depict Saguna (with virt ues) clearly. But reflect on them deeply and you get virtuesless  meaning 
from  them.  Once,  Lord  Badrinarayana  had arrived  among  the inhabitant  sages  of Kalaygram. 
Devarishi Narada had asked him the same question. In the assembly of the great sages, Lord  then 
narrated the same tale, which the inhabitants of Janloka had  asked.  
 
The supreme  sages  like Sanakadi  and his brothers  were  equal  in knowledge,  penance  etc. Yet 
they chose  Sanandan  as the narrator,  and rest three  became  the audience.  Sanandan  had said: 
"Such as the savants  and balladiers  sing in praise  their king to wake  him up in the morning, 
similarly annihilating the entire universe in Him, Paramatma (supreme soul) lies asleep with  all 
His powers. At the end of Pralaya, Vedas (Shurtis) wake Him up throu gh the words  that 
demonstrate  Him."  
 
Shrutis  (Vedas)  says:  "O Ajit (invincible  one),  you are supreme,  no one can conquer  you; may 
you win everywhere.  O Lord,  you are complete  with all the luxuries,  hence  destroy  the illusion 
that allures  all the living  beings.  We are unable  to describe  your appearance.  But when  your 
powers manifest in creation. We get some ability to describe  you. 
 
Description  of Brahma,  Indra,  Agni,  Surya  and other  gods,  by us (Vedas)  appears  as separate, 
The complete  universe  is not different  from  you. It is a description  of your various  forms.  You 
are unborn, even in those idols. You do not take  birth.  
 
All the Vedas  describe  your merits.  All the savants  love none  but you through  hearing  and 
remembering of your auspicious, benevolent  virtues. 
 
O, endless,  if anybody  in human  incarnations  does not recite  or remember  your name  he is 
breathing in  vain.  
 
Dharma (duty), Artha (wealth), Kama (sensual pleasure) and Moksha (salvation) have  no 
meaning for those who remember you with pure  heart.  
 
O endless,  glorious  Lord,  common  people  are wandering  in abject  darkness  of unnecessary 
disputes.  Your  realization  is impossible.  When  will that moment  arrive  in my life. When  I shall 
recite  your names  like Madhav,  Vamana,  Trilochan,  Govind  etc. with joy and get free from  all 
the miseries.  
 
O Lord, this entire universe is false. But still appears as real. We pray to that God who is  present 
as an illuminating truth in this false  creation.  
O Lord of all, people can not sail across this ocean of death without you, no matter what they  do 
to achieve salvation. Their all efforts are  futile.  
 
O Lord,  all the living  beings  are wandering  in your illusion.  But the learned  ones don't  regard 
themselves separate from the cycle of life and death. In your shelter, they hav e nothing to  fear. 
 Shukdev says: "Parikshit as per your query, I told you how Vedas describe  Parabrahma 
Paramatma who is free from natural virtues and invisible. O king, it is the lord  who 
conceptualizes the universe and is present in the beginning, mid a nd the end of it. He is the  Lord 
of nature  and creatures.  It is He who created  the universe  and entered  it with the creatures.  He 
created the bodies and controls them. Such as a human being, who is immersed in deep sleep,  is 
not aware  of his body.  Similarl y, on receiving  God,  the creature  is freed  from  illusion.  So one 
must continuously reflect on the virtues of Lord Sri  Krishna."  
   
 
RELEASE OF LORD SHIVA FROM  CRISIS  
 
Parikshit  asked:  "Gurudev,  those  among  the gods,  human  beings  and the demons,  who worship 
Lord Lord Shiva, get wealth very soon. But those, who worship Lord Narayana,  remain 
afflicated with scarcity. What is the reason for  that?"  
 
Shukdev  said : "Parikshit,  your grandfather  Yudhisthira  had put the same  question  before  Lord 
Krishna."  
 
In reply,  Lord  Krishna  had said:  "O Yudhisthira,  I take away  all the wealth  from  those  whom  I 
bestow  my grace.  When  they are poor,  their relatives  desert  them.  I even  render  their efforts 
useless when they try to earn money. Thus being unsuccessful repeatedly, the p eople develop  an 
attitude of indifference for wealth. Then they begin to take shelter as my devotee and  mingle 
with me. Only  then,  I bestow  my full grace  on them  and they receive  me as Sachchidanand 
Parbrahma. Thus, pleasing me through my worship is extre mely difficult. Hence, ordinary  people 
give me up and worship other deities, which are in fact different forms of  me. 
 
Lord Shiva is Ashutosh and bestows his devotees quickly with grace. He gives wealth and  other 
riches  to his devotees.  But once  they get wealth,  the devotees  become  despotic  and even  forget 
the God who had blessed them." In this context Shukdev narrated one ancient tale to  Parikshit.  
 
Once  upon  a time,  there  was a demon  Vrikasur.  He had pleased  Lord  Shiva  and sought  a boon 
that the person,  upon whose  head  the demon  put his hand,  should  be incinerated  at once.  Lord 
Shiva granted the boon without considering the consequences. But as soon as the demon got  this 
supernatural  power,  he ran to incinerate  Lord  Shiva  first. The demon  was eyeing  Gauri  Parvati, 
so he was determined  to eliminate  Lord  Shiva.  Now  afraid  of his own boon,  Lord  Shiva  ran for 
his life, with the demon following him in hot pursuit. At last Lord Shiva reached in Vaikunth  and 
told Lord Vishnu about his crisis. Lord at once illusion ed the demon and made him put his  hand, 
on his own head. By the virtue of the boon, the demon was incinerated in no time and thus  Lord 
Shiva could be  saved.  
   
 
TESTING OF TRINITY  
Once  upon  a time,  all the sages  assembled  on the bank  of Saraswati  river.  A dispute  errupted 
among  them  as to who among  the trinity  was the greatest.  By consensus  they appointed  sage 
Bhrigu to test the trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh. Bhrigu reached to Brahma, but did  not 
greet  him. Brahma  got infuriated  but since  the sage Bhrigu was his own son, He did not curse 
him. Then  Bhrigu  visted  Lord  Shiva.  Lord  Shiva  proceeded  to embrace  the sage.  But instead  of 
accepting Lord Shiva's welcome, the sage began to abuse Him, saying: "You violate the  dignity 
of Vedas,  so I will not meet  with you."  Angry  Lord  Shiva  raised  his trident  to kill him, but 
Bhagavati stopped Him. At last Bhrigu reached Vaikunth to see Lord  Vishnu.  
 
Lord was lying with head in the lap of Lakshmi. Bhrigu kicked hard at His chest. But instead  of 
getting angry, Lord got  up, bowed his head before the sage and begged pardon: "O Sage,  pardon 
me, I could not welcome you at once, at your arrival. Your feet are soft, I hope they are not  hurt. 
All my sins have been washed by the touch of your feet." Bhrigu felt very pleased by the serious 
talks  of Lord.  His heart  felt overwhelmed  with excess  of devotion.  He returned  to the assembly 
of the sages and narrated his experience. Since then Lord Vishnu is regarded as the Supreme  and 
giver of peace and  fearlessness.  
   
 
REVIVAL OF BRAHMIN' S DEAD  CHILDREN  
There in Dwaraka lived a Brahmin. When the first son was born to his wife, it died  immediately 
after birth. The Brahmin took his dead son to the royal court and complained: "My Son has  died 
because  of anti-Brahmin  and licentious  actions  of the king."  One by one, thus,  eight  sons were 
born to the Brahmin  couple;  but they all died immediately  after birth.  And the Brahmin  kept on 
dumping his dead sons at the gate of the royal  palace.  
 
When his ninth son was born, and died, Arjuna was also ther e in Dwaraka. He made a promise  to 
the Brahmins: I shall guard your son or commit self immolation. At the time of next delivery,  the 
agitated Brahmin came to Arjuna. Training his bow and arrows, Arjuna made all arrangements  to 
protect  Brahmin's  tenth  son. Sanctified  by many  mantras,  Arjuna's  arrows  constructed  a fence 
around the labour room. A child took birth; but it too died after some time. Brahmin, then,  cursed 
Arjuna.  Arjuna  scouted  through  all the three  worlds  and even  the netherworlds  in search  of the 
Brahmin's dead son, but he could not find him anywhere. Ultimately accepting his failure and  as 
per his promise, Arjuna proceeded to immolate  himself.  
 
Meanwhile, Lord Krishna too learned about Arjuna's vow and stopped him from  self- 
immolation. Thereaft er, riding a divine chariot, Lord set out with Arjuna, towards west.  Beyond 
the limits  of cosmos.  They  reached  the abode  of Lord  Vasudev  in Tripadvibhuti.  There  Arjuna 
saw that Lord was present in Purushaottams appearance. Sri Krishna and Arjuna greeted  Him. 
 
Lord  Purushaottam  said in a serious  voice:  "O Krishna  and Arjuna,  only to have  a sight  of both 
of you, I brought the Brahmin's sons to me. Both of you had taken incarnation on earth from  my 
part to protect the religion. All the demons have been slain by now. Now you too return to  me. 
 
Sri Krishna and Arjuna again greeted Lord and returned on earth with all the sons  of  the 
Brahmin.  
Arjuna was greatly surprised to see the supreme abode of Lord. He felt that whatever strength  a 
living  being  had, it was all by Sri Krishna's  grace.  Like common,  ordinary  people,  the Lord 
stayed on earth enjoing mundane comforts, performed Yagyas like kings, behaved like  idealistic 
people; deterred His subjects and slayed evil kings to re -establish religion on  earth.  
   
 
CHAPTER  ELEVEN  
 
THE SAGES CURSE  YADUVANSHIS  
 
Shukdev  said:  "O Parikshit,  as the time passed,  Yaduvanshis  grew  stronger  and more  influencial.  Now no 
longer  did they like the welcoming  and treating  of the great  sages  like Kanu,  Dhrvasa,  Maitreya,  Dhannmy  
etc. by the Lord.  Lord Krishna  knew  about  their disliking,  but secretly  He was pleased  by this change  in 
Yaduvanshi's  behaviour,  for He knew  that by disregarding  the saints  and the scriptures,  they would  meet  
their end  sooner.  
 
Once the Yaduvanshis clothed Jambvati' s son Samb in a woman's attire and, showing him to  the 
sages asked mockingly: "Maharaj, this is our sister -in-law. She is an expecting mother. She  feels 
shy to ask but tell us what will be born to  her? 
 
Through their unfailing vision, the Sages knew the r eality and said: "Fools, a pestle shall be  born 
to her and that pestle  shall  exterminate  the entire  Yaduvansh.  Now  all the Yaduvanshis  were 
perplexed by sages' prediction, and approached their king Ugrasen. But, even the king  was 
helpless now because he co uld not change the words the pious  sages.  
 
In due course, a pestle was born to Samb. Frightened of an imminent fate, Yaduvanshis  crushed 
the pestle into a fine powder and threw it into the sea. Only a nail remained, that also was  thrown 
into the sea where a fish swallowed it. A fisher caught the fish and cut it open and found the  nail. 
He gave  it to a hunter.  The hunter  fixed  the nail in the head  of his arrow.  On the other  hand,  the 
sea waves  washed  the powder  of the pestle  ashore  where  it germinated  and grew as luxuriant 
grasses.  Later  on, once  all the Yaduvanshis  assembled  at the sea-shore  for a picnic  where  they 
drank  wine  and began  to fight  with one another  under  intoxication.  Soon  their quarrel  grew  so 
high that they pulled  out the grasses,  which  were  growing  there,  to use as the arms.  With  the 
grasses the Yaduvanshis beat one another to  death.  
   
 
NARADA PREACHES VASUDEV ABOUT  BHAGAVAT  
 
Once Narada arrived in Dwaraka. Vasudev prayed him and requested to provide him with  pious 
company of Bhagavat dharma. Na rada said: "O king, once upon a time, nine great sages  arrived 
in the court  of the king Janaka.  King  Janaka  had put the same  curiosity  before  them  also. I will 
narrate the conversation that followed there between the sages and the  king."  
 
First of all, the first Yogishwar  Kavi  said:  "O king Janaka,  dedication  is the first duty (dharma) 
of a Vaishnav.  He should  devote  everything  - his actions,  fruits  of actions  and even  himself,  at 
the feet of Lord. He ought to hear about Lord's virtues. Such a devotee shall  be indifferent to  the 
worldly affairs and shall laugh, dance or sing occasionally and sanctified all the three  worlds."  
The king then asked  about  the characteristics  of the Lord's  devotees.  Another  Yogeshwar  Hari 
said:  "A true devotee  of the Lord  remains  unaffected  by feelings  like hunger,  thirst,  life, death, 
labour,  pain,  fear and desire.  Such  a devotee  is the excellent  kind of Bhagavat.  Even  the wealth 
of all the three  worlds  cannot  shake  the faith of such a devotee,  because  Lord  Sri Hari himself 
stays  in his  heart."  
 
"What is illusion?" A Yogeshwar Antariksh replied: "King, an illusion is also God's play.  Having 
a possessive feeling about mundane is illusion. Thinking in terms of 'I', 'Me', 'Mine', 'My',  'You', 
'Your' is also illusion. If one can have such an affection for God as he has for worldly things,  one 
can easily surmount the  illusion."  
 
King Janaka then asked about the method of worshipping Lord. A yogeshwar, Karbhajan said:  " 
O king,  the Lord  had a fair complexion  in Satya  Yuga.  People  used to receive  Him through 
methods like meditation, reconciliation, etc. In Treta Yuga, the Lord had reddish complexion  and 
Yagyas were the main means to achieve Him. In Dwapar Yuga, the Lord had  yellowish 
complexion and He could be pleased through worships. In the present Kali Yuga, Lord has  dark 
complexion and one can receive Him through means like recitation, narration and hearing of  His 
name and  plays.  
 
Thus,  Narada  preached  Vasudev  about  Bhagavat  dharma.  Now  the heart  and mind  of Vasudev 
were thoroughly clea n and  pure.  
  LORD DEPARTS TO HIS ABODE AND  DESTRUCTION 
OF YADUVANSHIS  
To remind the Lord about the moment of His departure, Brahma arrived in  Dwaraka 
accompanied by all the gods. He prayed to Him: "O Lord, you have completed your duty of  what 
we had once  requested  you. Now,  You please  return  to your abode.  Lord  said:  "On the seventh 
day from now, Dwaraka shall submerge in the sea and Yadavas shall fight among themselves  to 
death. I too shall depart then. The arrow of a hunter shall be the cause of my  depar ture."  
 
When Uddhava learned that Lord was about to wind up His plays, he approached Him and  said: 
"I understand,  O Lord,  that this all is happening  by your wish.  But I cannot  part for a moment 
from your feet. Hence, take me also with you to your abode." L ord said: "Uddhava, I will not  go 
anywhere.  My entire  brilliance  will be present  in Srimad  Bhagavat.  You stay here preaching 
Bhagavat dharma." Saying thus, lord preached Uddhava about the Gita Jnana through the tale  of 
Avadhoot.  
Lord  narrated  thus:  "Uddha va, Once,  our ancestor  Yadu  happened  to see Lord  Dattatreya  in a 
forest.  Lord  was indulged  in the supreme  joy in the guise  of Avadhoot.  Yadu  asked  him about 
the reasons  for his whimsical  state."  Avadhoot  had said:  "O king,  making  the various  animals, 
birds , insects  etc as my teacher,  I have  learned  about  spirituality  from  them.  That is why I am 
free from  mourning  and attachment.  Earth,  air, sky, water,  fire, the moon  the sun, pigeon, 
python,  sea,  grasshopper,  bumblebee,  honey  bee,  elephant,  extractor   of  honey,  deer,    fish, 
prostitute, osprey, boy, girls, arrow -maker, snake, spider and wasp are all my teachers. I  took 
refuge at these twenty -four teachers and learned from their  behaviour.  
I learned  forgiveness  from  earth,  purity  from  the sky, holiness  and cleanliness  from  the water, 
innocence  and renunciation  from  the fire; indifferentness  from  the air, to remain  unaffected  by 
circumstances  from  moon,  abdication  from  the Sun, incoherence  from  the pigeon,  dependence 
upon  fate and remain  effortless  from  the python,  to remain  always  happy  and serious  from  the 
sea, to be under the control of sense organs and hence meet total destruction from  the 
grasshopper, acquiring of virtues from bumblebee, fault in cumulating from honey bee, to  abstain 
sensuous  talks from  the deer,  to eliminate  greed  from  the fish, sorrow  in hope  and happiness  in 
desperation  from  the prostitute,  to feel happy  in uncertainty  from  osprey,  dispute  among  many 
from the girls, concentration from the arrow -maker, to roam alone and detachm ent from  a 
particular place from the snake, virtues of the creator Lord from the spider, and I  learned 
similarity from the  wasp."  
 
In the guise of Avadhoot, Lord Dattatreya says: "O king, I learned wisdom and apathy from  my 
body also, because life, death, life and death again are inseparably intertwined with it. Hence  the 
net result  of loving  this body  is nothing  but sorrow.  Thus  our own body  also helps  us to learn 
about metaphysical  knowledge . 
 
Lord Krishna also explained Uddhava regarding futility of phy sical and heavenly luxuries.  This 
human body is like a tree, on which two birds - Jivatma and Paramatma  (microcosm  and 
supreme soul) - have taken shelter. Two fruits - happiness and sorrow - appear on it. These fruits 
are eaten by Jivatma (micrososm) whil e Paramatma (supreme soul) stays as an  indifferent 
onlooker. There are three kinds of Jiva - Baddh (Bound), Bhakta (devotee) and  Mukta 
(liberated). Baddh Jivas (bound souls) are those who indulge in sensual pleasures and those  who 
dislike pious company. M ukta Jiva (liberated souls) are those who are free from attachment  and 
bindings. Bhaktas (devotees) are those who meditate on me and dedicate their everything in  my 
feet and have  love for my virtues.  My devotee  is kind,  free from  flaws,  tolerant,  has feeling of 
fraternity for all and controls his  desires.   
BHIKSHU  GEET  
Lord  said:  "Uddhava,  in the world,  there  is indeed  a dearth  of such tolerant  people  who can 
tolerate bitter remarks of evil ones. In this context there is a tale of a greedy Brahmin who  lived  
in Ujjain. That Brahmin had been badly tormented by the evil people after he had lost his  wealth. 
But still the Brahmin  did not lose his patience  and regarding  his present  state as a result  of his 
previous birth's deeds, he expressed his feelings  thus:  
 
These people  are not the cause  of my miseries;  neither  the gods,  nor body,  not even  planets  and 
time,  can be blamed  for my miseries.  Scriptures  and learned  ones held the mind  itself  guilty  of 
one's miseries. It is the mind that runs the cycle of the world a nd makes every kind of  efforts.  
 
In the absence  of mind,  even  the soul is rendered  motionless.  When  one accepts  the dictates  of 
the mind and indulges in sensual pleasures, soul too comes to be bound with them. The  ultimate 
outcome  of all the spiritual  efforts like celibacy,  study  of Vedas  etc. and abidance  to pious  
actions  is the concentration  of mind.  Concentration  of mind  and is abstaintation  from  sensual 
pleasures  are the primary  conditions  for attainment  of Param  Yoga  (supreme  meditation).  Thus 
Lord  preached  Uddhava  about  Jnana  Gita.  Uddhava  too took Bhagavat  (which  is a form  of the 
Lord) with honor and departed for  Badrikashrama.  
   
 
CHAPTER  TWELVE 
DESCRIPTION OF DYNASTIES IN KALI  YUGA  
Shukdev  describes  about  the dynasties  that would  occur  in Kali Yuga.  Ripunjay  or Puranajay  would  be 
the last king of Brihdrath dynasty. This dynasty would be succeeded by the kings of Nand dynasty.  Then  
a diplomatic Brahmin, named Chanakya, would exterminate this dynasty and enthrone  Chandragupt  
Maurya.  In Maurya  dynasty,  a great  king would  occur  by the name  of Ashokvardhan.  After  him, Yavans  
would  rule then for six hundred  and forty years.  Their  rule would  be succeeded  by the governance  of the 
fair-complexioned  foreigners,  who would  rule for one hundred  and sixty years.  Thereafter,  there  would  be 
no king and no subjects  because  people  from all  the classes  would  come  forward  to rule. 
 
The ruler  would  be selected  by the majority  votes.  There  would  be no any thing  like holyness. 
Cows would grow thin like nannies. People would no t marry, as per their castes.  Greed, 
selfishness  and sex would  be the base of marriage  life. In adverse  conditions,  spouses  would 
desert  each other.  There  would  be nothing  like duty,  responsibility  and conduct.  Hair would  be 
the main item of adornment for the women.  
 
People would not have the knowledge of religious scriptures in Kali Yuga. Talkativeness  would 
be identified  with knowledge.  Only  those  would  be regarded  as clever,  who could  pick others' 
pockets. Children would not regard or pay due respect to  their parents. Children would  maintain 
relations  with parents  till their marriage  only,  not after that. Boys  would  not touch  the feet of 
their own parents,  but would  pay full respect  to their father  and mother -in-law, Brother -in-law 
would be dearer to the m than their own  brother.  
 
Shukdev  says:  Parikshit,  Kali Yuga  is the mine  of faults,  But it has only one great  virtue  - that 
the people will acquire divine position only by reciting Lord's name. Recitation of Lord's  name, 
regardless  of intention  and motiva tion-- whether  it is love,  derision,  laziness  or maliceness - 
would destroy one's  sins. 
 
But O Parikshit, the sinister people would do even the most difficult tasks in Kali Yuga, but they 
would not recite Lord's name. They would not have an interest in the Lord. Their interests  would 
be more in sensuous things like sound, touch, beauty, scent  etc. 
 
O Parikshit, the Paramagati (supreme salvation) that people could receive by ten thousand  years 
of meditation  in Satya  Yuga;  by performing  Yagya  for hundred  years  in Treta  Yuga  and by 
worshiping  Lord's  idol for ten years  in Dwapar  Yuga,  that supreme  salvation  is easily  available 
for people in Kali Yuga simply by reciting Lord's name for one day and one night  continuously. 
But still, in Kali Yuga people would not ha ve faith in Lord's name. It is their  misfortune.  
 
Shukdev says: O Parikshit, recitation of Sri Hari has occurred in Srimad Bhagavat  MahaPurana. 
O King, this soul is eternal, so you abandon this animal - like feeling that you would die. You  are  
not the bod y. You are the eternal form of joy. Imbibe your mind with the reflections  of 
Paramatma (supreme spirit) and have a sight of Him in the end. You are God yourself.  Then 
neither  Takshak  nor death  would  do any harm  to you. Unify  yourself  in the supreme  being  by 
thoughts like, 'I am Parabrahma.' Thus Shukdev assured Parikshit to be  fearless.  
   
 
FINAL BEATITUDE OF PARIKSHIT AND NAGYAGYA 
OF JANMEJAY  
Thus graced by Shukdev, king Parikshit faithfully worshiped Brahmrishi and prayed to him with 
folded hands: "Lord, you  are an idol of kindness. You have bestowed your graced on me 
narrating  the plays  of Lord  Sri Hari.  Now  I am saved  and have  achieved  my natural  state.  You 
helped  me receive  the supreme  position  in my life alone.  Now  I can experience  the soul as 
separate fr om my body." Accepting Parikshits worships, Shukdev made his departure.  Parikshit 
himself achieved the status of the sage and concentrated his soul in supreme spirit. Thus,  before 
Takshak could bite him, he was merged in Brahma. Takshak stung his physical body only,  which 
was burnt by the effect of the  sting.  
 
When Janmejay, the son of Parikshit, learned that a snake had stung his father, he  organised, 
Sarpsatra.  During  the Satra,  and invoked  by the hymns  of Brahmins,  snakes  drew  from  far and 
near and got burnt in the fire. Frightened Takshak approached Indra for refuge. Indra promised  to 
help him. There,  on earth,  Janmejay  asked  the Brahmins:  "Why  has Takshak,  the killer  of my 
father,  not arrived  yet?"  Through  reconciliation,  Brahmins  saw that Takshak  was clinging  to 
Indra's  throne.  The Brahmin  invoked  Takshak  along  with Indra.  Indra's  throne  began  to move 
earthward. But then Brahaspati, the teacher of the gods, intervened and stopped the  Yagya.  
   
 
BRANCHES OF VEDAS AND  DIVISIONS  
Suta described  about  the Samh itas and divisions  of Vedas  to the sages  like Shaunak  etc. Veda 
Vyasa divided Vedas into four parts and created four Sanhitas viz, Rig, Yajur, Sama and  Atharva 
and taught Rigsanhita to Pail, Nigad sanhita to Vaishampayan, Chhandog Sanhita to Jemini  and 
tought Atharvangiras Sanhita to Sumantu. All these four sages are the disciples of Veda  Vyasa.  
   
 
PENANCE OF MARKANDEYA AND SIGHTING  OF 
MAYA  
Suta narrated  the tale of Mrikandu's  son Markandeya.  Taking  shelter  at Mahakal  (Lord  Shiva), 
Markandeya had turned away even Kal (death). And by penance had a sight of Lord  Sri 
Narayana.  He prayed  God to show  His Maya  (illusion).  Thus  Markandeya  saw the scene  of 
Pralaya.  All the creatures  were  drowning  in the deluge.  On a leaf of Banyan,  then he saw Bal 
Mukund. Markandeya e ntered Lord's heart and saw endless cosmos there. Then, by  God's 
instinct, Markandeya returned to his hermitage. Thus Markandeya had the knowledge of  Lord's 
metaphysical  state.  
In the last chapters, a brief content of Bhagavat and glory of Lord's devotio n have  been 
discussed. Suta says: O great sages, I have described what you have asked on the occasion of  this 
pious assemblage. That voice is useless, which cannot recite Lord's name and can not praise  His 
virtues.  All the sins and omens  are destroyed  by constant  recitation  of Lord's  name.  One then 
receives devotion for Lord with pure heart and begins to experience and feel God's tangible  form. 
Though  all the other  Puranas  contain  description  of Lord's  appearance,  but in Srimad  Bhagavat 
Mahapurana, there is  profuse description of Sri Hari in every chapter. Srimad Bhagavat has  a 
confluence of knowledge, asceticism and devotion. One receives devotion for Lord and  salvation 
eventually merely by reciting, listening and reflecting over  it. 
 
 
 