                                                        1. BRAHMA  PURANA  
 
Preliminaries  
There  was a forest  known  as Naimisharanya.  The sages  (maharshis)  arranged  for a sacrifice 
(yajna)  in this forest  and the ceremony  went  on for twelve  years.  Naimisharany a forest  was a 
wonderful  place  to arrange  sacrifices  in. The climate  was pleasant.  There  were  trees  full of 
climate was pleasant. There were trees full of flowers and fruit. There was no shortage of food  in 
the forest, and animals, birds and sages lived th ee happily.  
 
Many  sages  came  to attend  the sacrifice  that had been  arranged  in Naimisharanya.  With  them 
was Romaharshana (alternatively Lomaharshana), Veda Vyasa's disciple. Veda Vyasa  had 
instructed this disciple of his in the knowledge of the Puranas. Th e assembled sages  worshipped 
the learned  Romaharshana  and said, "Please  tell us the stories  of the Puranas.  Who  created  the 
universe, who is its preserver and who will destroy it? Please instruct us in all these  mysteries".  
 
Romaharshana  replied,  "Many  years ago, Daksha  and the other  sages  had asked  Brahma  these 
very questions.  I have  learnt  about  Brahma's  replies  from  my guru)  teacher)  Veda  Vyasa.  I will 
relate to you what I  know".  
 
In the beginning, there was water everywhere and the Brahman slept on this  water in the form  of 
Vishnu.  Since  water  is called  nara and since  ayana  means  a bed, Vishnu  is known  as Narayana. 
In the water  there  emerged  a golden  egg. Brahma  was born inside  this egg. Since  he created 
himself,  he is called  Svayambhu,  born (bhu)  by himself (svayam).  For one whole  year,  Brahma 
lived inside the egg. He then split the egg into two and created heaven and the earth from the  two 
parts  of the egg. Skies,  directions,  time,  language  and senses  were  created  in both heaven  and 
earth.  From  the powe rs of his mind,  Brahma  gave  birth  to seven  great  sages.  Their  names  were 
Marichi,  Atri, Angira,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu  and Vashishtha.  Brahma  also created  the god 
Rudra and the sage  Sanatkumara.  
   
 
More  Creation  
To continue with the process of creation, Brahma gave birth to a man and a woman from his  own 
body. The man was named Svayambhuva Manu and the woman was named Shatarupa.  Humans 
are descended  from  Manu.  That is the reason  they are known  as manava.  Manu  and Shatarupa 
had three sons named Vira, Priya vrata and  Uttanapada.  
 
Uttanapada's son was the great Dhruva. Dhruva performed very difficult meditation (tapasya)  for 
three  thousand  divine  years.  Brahma  was so pleased  at this that he granted  Dhruva  an eternal 
place  in the sky, near the constellation  that is known  as saptarshi  or the seven  sages.  This is the 
constellation Ursa Majoris and Dhruva is the pole  Star. 
 
In Dhruva's line there was a king named Prachinavarhi. Prachinavarhi had ten sons, known as  the 
Prachetas. These Prachetas were supposed to loo k after the world and rule over it, but they  were 
not interested  in such mundane  matters.  They  went  off instead  to perform  tapasya  under  the 
ocean.  The tapasya  went  on for ten thousand  years.  The upshot  was that the earth  had no ruler 
and began  to suffer.  People  started  to die and thick  forests  sprouted  everywhere.  So thick  were 
the forests that even the winds could not  blow.  
 
News  of this catastrophe  reached  the Prachetas.  They  were  furious  with the trees  and created 
wind  (vayu)  and fire (agni)  from  their mouths.  The wind  dried  up the trees  and the fire burnt 
them, so that, very soon, there were very few trees left on  earth.  
 
Everyone  was alarmed  at the effects  of the Prachetas  anger.  The moon -god Soma  (or Chandra) 
came  to the Prachetas  with a beautiful  wom an and said, "Prachetas,  please  control  your anger. 
You need someone to rule over the world so that you can concentrate on your tapasya.  This 
woman is named Marisha. Her son will rule over the  world".  
 
The Prachetas  agreed  to this proposal  and Daksha  was born. The word  praja  means  subject  and 
the word pati means master. Since Daksha ruled over the world and its subjects, Daksha came  to 
be known as  Prajapati.  
 
The sages  interrupted  Romaharshana.  They  said, "Sage,  we are completely  confused.  We have 
heard  that Daksha  was born from  Brahma's  toe. And yet you have  told us that Daksha  was the 
son of the Prachetas. How is this  possible?"  
 
Romaharshana replied, "There is no reason for bewilderment. Many Dakshas have been born  to 
rule over the world. One was born fro m Brahma's toe, yet another was the son of the  Prachetas."  
   
 
Daksha's  Offspring  
Daksha's  wife was named  Asikli  and Asikli  gave  birth  to five thousand  sons.  They  were  known 
as the Haryashvas.  The Haryashvas  were  destined  to rule over the world.  But the sage Narada 
went to the Haryashvas and said, "How can you rule over the world if you don't even know  what 
the world  looks  like?  Are you familiar  with its geography  and its limits?  First find out about 
these things, before you contemplate ruling over the  world." 
 
The Haryashvas went off to explore the world and never  returned.  
 
Daksha  and Asikli  then had another  thousand  sons who were  named  the Shavalashvas.  Narada 
told them  what  he had told the Haryashvas  and the Shavalashvas  also went  off to explore  the 
world and never  returned.  
 
Daksha  and Asikli  were  distressed  that their children  should  disappear  in this manner.  Daksha 
blamed Narada for the instigation and proposed to kill him. But Brahma intervened  and 
persuaded  Daksha  to control  his anger.  This Daksha  agreed to do, provided  that his conditions 
were met. "Brahma must marry my daughter Priya," he said. "And Narada must be born  as 
Priya's  son."  
 
These conditions were accepted. In fact, Daksha and Asikli had sixty daughters. (Elsewhere,  the 
Brahma  Purana  me ntions  fifty  daughters.)  Ten  of  these  daughters  were  married  to  the  god 
Dharma  and thirteen  to the sage Kashyapa.  Twenty -seven  daughters  were  married  to Soma  or 
Chandra. The remaining daughters were married to the sages Arishtanemi, Vahuputra,  Angirasa 
and Krishashva.  
 
The ten daughters  who were  married  to the god Dharma  were  named  Arundhati,  Vasu,  Yami, 
Lamba, Bhanu, Marutvati, Sankalpa, Muhurta. Sadhya and Vishva. Arundhati's children were  the 
objects  (vishaya)  of the world.  Vasu's  children  were  the eight  gods  known  as the Vasus.  Their 
names were Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dhara, Salila, Anala, Pratyusha and Prabhasa. Anala's son  was 
Kumara.  Because  Kumara  was brought  up by goddesses  known  as the Krittikas,  he came  to be 
called Kartikeya. Prabhasa's son was Vishvakarma. Vishvakarma was skilled in architecture  and 
the making of jewelry. He became the architect of the  gods.  
 
Sadhya's  children  were  the gods  known  as Sadhyadevas  and Vishva's  children  were  the gods 
known as Vishvadervas. The twenty -seven daugh ters of Daksha who were married to Soma  are 
known as the nakshatras  (stars).  
 
As you have  already  been  told, Kashyapa  married  thirteen  of Daksha's  daughters.  Their  names 
were Aditi, Diti, Danu, Arishta, Surasa, Khasa, Surabhi, Vinata. Tamra, Krodhavasha, I la, Kadru 
and Muni.  
 
Aditi's  sons were  the twelve  gods  known  as the adityas.  Their  names  were  Vishnu,  Shakra. 
Aryama, Dhata, Vidhata, Tvashta, Pusha, Vivasvana, Savita, MitraVaruna, Amsha and  Bhaga.  
 
Diti's sons were the daityas (demons). They were named H iranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu,  and 
amongst their descendants were several other powerful daityas liked Bali and Banasura. Diti  also 
had a daughter  named  Simhika  who was married  to a danava  (demon)  named  Viprachitti.  Their offspring's were terrible demons l ike Vatapi, Namuchi, Ilvala, Maricha and the  nivatakavachas.  
 
The hundred  sons of Danu  came  to be known  as danavas.  The danavas  were  thus cousins  to the 
daityas  and also to the adityas.  In the danava  line were  born demons  like the poulamas  and 
kalakeyas.  
 
Arishta's  sons were  the gandharvas  (singers  of heaven).  Surasa  gave  birth  to the snakes  (sarpa). 
Khasa's  children  were  the yakshas  (demi -gods  who were  the companions  of Kubera,  the god of 
wealth) and the rakshasas (demons). Surabhi's descendants were cows and buffaloes.  
 
Vinata had two sons named Aruna and Garuda. Garuda became the king of the birds. Tamra  has 
six daughters. From these daughters were born owls, eagles, vultures, crows, water -fowl,  horses, 
camels and  donkeys.  
 
Krodhavasha had fourteen thousa nd children known as nagas (snakes). Ila gave birth to  trees, 
creepers, shrubs and bushes. Kadru's sons were also known as nagas or snakes. Among the  more 
important of Kadru's sons were Ananta, Vasuki, Takshaka and  Nahusha.  
 
Muni gave birth to the apsaras (dancers of heaven). Diti's children (daityas) and Auditi's  children 
(adityas) continually fought amongst themselves. On one particular occasion, the gods succeed  in 
killing many of the demons. Thirsting for revenge, Diti began to pray to her husband,  Kash yapa 
that she might given birth to a son who would kill Indra, the king of the  gods.  
 
Kashyapa found it difficult to refuse his wife outright. "All right", he said. "You have to bear  the 
son in your womb  for a hundred  years.  And throughout  this period,  you will have  indeed  kill 
Indira. But if you do not observe these instructions to the letter, your desire will not be  satisfied."  
 
Diti resolved to do as her husband had bidden her. But Indra had got to know about Diti's  resolve 
and was waiting for an opportu nity to save himself. There was an occasion when, tired after  her 
prayers.  Diti went  to sleep  without  first washing  her feet. This was an unclean  act and it gave 
Indra  the required  opportunity.  He adopted  a miniscule  form  and entered  Diti's  womb.  With  his 
weapon vajra, he sliced up the baby inside the womb into seven parts. The baby naturally  began 
to cry at the  pain.  
 
Indra kept on saying, "ma ruda," that is, "don't cry." But the bay, or rather its seven parts,  would 
not listen.  Indra  thereupon  sliced  up each of the seven  parts  into seven  more  sections,  so that 
there  were  forty -nine sections  in all. When  these  forty -nine sections  were  born,  they came  to 
known  as the Maruts,  from  the words  that Indra  had addressed  them.  Since  Diti had not been 
able to adhere  to the conditions  her husband  had set, the Maruts  did not kill Indra.  They  instead 
became Indra's followers or companions, and were treated as  gods.  
   
 
Prithu  
In Dhruva's  line there  was a king named  Anga,  Anga  was religious  and followed  the righteous 
path. But unfortunately,  Anga's  son Vena  inherited  none  of the good  qualities  of his father. 
Vena's mother was Sunitha and she happened to be the daughter of Mrityu. Mrityu was  notorious 
for his evil ways and deeds. Vena spent a lot of time with his maternal grandfather and picked  up 
these evil  characteristics.  
 
Vena gave up the religion that was laid down in the Vedas and stopped all yajnas. He  instructed 
his subjects that he alone was to be  worshiped.  
 
The sages led by Marichi came to Vena to try and persuad e him to mend his ways. But Vena  was 
in no mood to listen. He insisted that there was no one equal to him in the whole  universe.  
 
The sages realized that Vena was a lost cause. They physically caught hold of Vena and began  to 
knead his right thigh. From th is kneading thee emerged a horrible looking creature. It was a 
dwarf and its complexion, was extremely dark. The sage Atri was so aghast at the  dwarf's 
appearance  that he blurted  out, "nishida",  which  means  "sit".  From  this, the dwarf  came  to be 
known as n ishada. The race of nishadas became hunters and fishermen, and lived in the  Vindhya 
mountains. From them were also descended uncivilized races like Tusharas and  Tunduras.  
 
The evil that was in Vena's body and mind came out with the emergence of the  nishada . 
When  the sages  began  to knead  Vena's  right  arm, Prithu  emerged.  He shone  like a flaming  fire 
and his energy  lit up the four directions.  He held a bow in his hand  and he was clad in beautiful 
armour. As soon as Prithu was born, Vena  died.  
 
All the rivers  and the oceans  arrived  with their waters  and their jewels  to anoint  Prithu  as the 
king.  The gods  and the sages  also came  for the coronation.  Brahma  himself  crowned  Prithu  the 
king of the earth. He also took the opportunity to apportion out the lordships of  other parts of  the 
universe.  Soma  was appointed  lord over creepers,  herbs,  starts  (nakshatras),  planets  (grahas), 
sacrifices, meditation (tapasya) and over the first of the four classes  (brahmanas).  Varuna 
became lord of the oceans, Kubera of all the ki ngs, Vishnu of the adityas, Agni of vasus,  Daksha 
of all Prahlada of daityas and danavas, Yama of the pritris (ancestors), Shiva of  yakshas, 
rakshasas and pishachas (ghosts), and Himalaya of the  mountains.  
 
The ocean (samudra) was made the lord of all rive rs. Chitraratha of gandharvas, Vasuki of nagas, 
Takshaka  of sarpas,  Garuda  of birds,  the tiger of deer,  Airavata  of elephants,  Ucchaihshrava  of 
horses,  the bull of cows  and the ashvattha  tree (a banyan)  of all trees.  Brahma  also appointed 
four overlords  (dikapalas)  for the four directions.  To the east there  was Sudhanva,  to the south 
Shankhapada, to the west Ketumana and to the north  Hiranyaroma.  
 
Prithu was a king who ruled the earth well. During his reign, the earth was laden with  foodgrains. 
The cows wer e full of milk and the subjects were happy. To glorify King Prithu, the  sages 
performed a sacrifice and from this sacrifice there emerged two races known as the sutas and  the 
magadhas should sing praises in honor of  Prithu.  
 
"But what praise will we sing?"  asked the sutas and the magadhas. "Prithu is still young. He  has 
not done much that can be  praised".   
"That may be true," replied the sages. "But he will do wonderous deeds in  the future.  Sing 
praises of those wonderful deeds. We will tell you about  them ." 
 
Having learnt of these future deeds from the sages, the sutas and the magadhas began to  compose 
songs and chant praises in honor of Prithu. These stories were related throughout the earth.  Some 
of Prithu's subjects heard these stories and came to see P rithu. "King," they said. "We have  heard 
of your great deeds. But we find it difficult to make a living. Please indicate to us our  habitations 
on earth. And tell us where we may be able to get the food we need for  subsistence."  
 
King  Prithu  picked  up his bow and arrow.  He decided  to kill the earth,  since  the earth  was not 
yielding  foodgrains  to his subjects.  The earth  adopted  the form  of a cow and began  to flee. But 
wherever  the earth  went,  Prithu  followed  with his bow and arrow.  He followed  the earth  to the 
heaven and to the  underworld.  
 
Finally, in desperation, the earth started to pray to Prithu. "King," she said, "please control  your 
anger. I am a woman. Killing me will only mean a sin for you. Besides, what purpose will  killing 
me serve? Your subjects w ill then be without a place to live in. There must be some other way  of 
ensuring that your subjects can make a  living.  
The earth  then herself  offered  a solution  and King  Prithu  did her bidding.  With  his bow,  he 
leveled out the earth. The plains could now b e used for villages and cities and for agriculture  and 
animal  husbandry.  The plains  could  now be used for villages  and cities  and for agriculture  and 
animal  husbandry.  The mountains  were  gathered  together  in select  places,  instead  of being 
littered over wh ole earth. Earlier, Prithu's subjects had lived off fruits and roots. Now  Prithu 
milked  the earth  (in her form  of a cow)  and obtained  the seeds  of foodgrains  on which  people 
could live. Because of Prithu's deeds, the earth came to be known as  prithivi.  
   
 
Manvantaras  
A manvantara  is an era. There  are four smaller  eras (yugas)  and their names  are Satya  or Krita 
Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dvapara Yuga and Kali Yuga. Each cycle of Satya Yuga, Treta  Yuga, 
Dvapara  Yuga  and Kali Yuga  is called  a mahayuga.  A mahayuga  comp rises of 12,000  years  of 
the gods, or equivalently, 4320,000 years for human. 71 mahayugas constitute a manvantara  and 
14 manvantaras constitute a cycle (kalpa). One kalpa is one of Brahma's days and the universe is 
destroyed at the end of a  Kalpa.  
 
Each  manvantara  is ruled  over by a Manu.  In the present  kalpa,  six manvantaras  have  already 
passed  and the names  of the six Manus  who ruled  were  Svayambhuva,  Svarochisha,  Uttama, 
Tamasa,  Raivata  and Chakshusha.  The name  of the seventh  Manu,  who rules  over the seventh 
manvantara of the present kalpa, is  Vaivasvata.  
 
The titles of the seven great sages (saptarshi) as well as the tile of Indra change from  manvantara 
to manvantara. The gods also  change.  
 
In the present  vaivasvata  manvantara,  the seven  great  sages  are Atri, Vashishtha,  Kashyapa, 
Goutama,  Bharadvaja,  Vishvamitra  and Jamadagni.  The gods  now are the sadhyas,  the rudras, 
the vishwadevas, the vasus, the maruts, the adityas and the two  ashvinis.  
 
There  will be seven  Manus  in the future  before  the universe  is destroyed.  Five of these  Manus 
will be known as Savarni Manus. The remaining two will be called Bhoutya and  Rouchya.  
   
 
The Sun and the Solar  Dynasty  
You have probably forgotten by now that Kashyapa and Aditi had a son named Vivasvana.  This 
was the sun g od, also known as Surya or  Martanda.  
Surya  was married  to Samjna,  Vishvakarma's  daughter.  They  had two sons.  The fist son was 
Vaivasvata  Manu  and the second  son was Yama  or Shradhadeva,  the god of death.  Yama  had a 
twin sister named Yamuna. The sun's energ y was so strong that Samjna could not bear to look  at 
her husband.  Through  her powers,  she created  an image  from  her own body  that looked  exactly 
like her. This image was called Chhaya  (shadow).  
Samjna  told Chhaya,  "I cannot  bear the energy  of my husband,  I am going  off to my father's 
house.  Stay here,  pretend  to be Samjna  and look after my children.  Under  no circumstances  tell 
anyone, certainly not my husband, that your are not  Samjna."  
"I will do as you have  asked  me to," replied  Chhaya.  "But the moment  someone  curses  me or 
pulls me by the hair, I shall be forced to reveal the  truth."  
 
Samjna went to her father Vishvakarma kept asking her to return to her husband. But this  Samjna 
refused  to do. Instead,  she went  to the land known  as Uttara  Kuru  and started  to live there  as a 
mare.  
Meanwhile, Surya, who had not realized that Samjna had been replaced by Chhaya, had two  sons 
through  Chhaya.  They  were  named  Savarni  Manu  and Shani  (Saturn).  As soon  as her own 
children  were  born,  Chhaya  no longer  displayed  as much of love for Samjna's  children  as she 
used to do. Vaivasvata Manu was a quiet sort of person and he ignored the implied neglect.  But 
Yama  was not the tolerant.  Besides,  he was also younger.  He raised  his leg to kick Chhaya.  At 
this, Chhaya cursed Yama tha t his legs would fall  off. 
 
Yama went and complained to Surya. " I have not really kicked her," he said. "I only  threatened 
to. And does a mother ever curse her  children?"  
 
"I can't undo  the curse,  " replied  Surya.  "At best, I can reduce  its severity.  Your  legs will not 
actually  fall off. Some  of the flesh  from  your legs will fall off onto the earth  and create  worms. 
Thereby, you will be freed of your  curse."  
But nevertheless, Surya felt that there was some truth in Yama's asking whether a mother  would 
ever curse  her children.  He taxed  Chhaya  with the truth,  but Chhaya  would  not reveal  anything 
Surya  then grasped  her by the hair and threatened  to curse  her. Since  her conditions  were  now 
violated, Chhaya blurted out the  truth.  
 
In an extremely  angry  mood,  Surya dashed  off to Vishvakarma's  house.  Vishvakarma  tried to 
cool him down.  "it is all because  of your exercises  energy  that this has happened,  exclaimed 
Vishvakarma. "If you permit, I will shave off some of the extra energy. Then Samjna will be  able 
to look  at you."  
 
Surya agreed to this proposition. With the shaved off energy, Vishvakarma  manufactured 
Vishnu's chakra (a weapon like a bladed  discus).  
Surya found out that Samjna was in Uttara Kuru in the form of a mare. He joined her there in  the 
form of a ho rse. As horse, they had two sons named Nasatya and Dasra. Since ashva  means 
horse, the sons were also known as the two Ashvinish and became the physicians of the  gods.  
 
Surya and Samjna then gave up their equine forms and lived happily ever  after.   
Vaivasv ata Manu's  Children  
Vaivasvata  Manu  has no children  and he arranged  for a sacrifice  so that he might  have  a son. 
Nine sons were born as a result of this sacrifice. Their names were Ikshvaku, Nabhaga,  Dhrishta, 
Sharyati,  Narishyanta,  Pramashu,  Rishta,  Karus ha and Prishadhra.  Manu  also made  an offering 
to the two gods Mitra and Varuna. As a result of this offering, a daughter named Ila was  born.  
 
Budha  was the son of Chandra,  and Budha  and Ila had a son named  Pururva.  Subsequently, 
thanks  to a boon  conferred  on her by Mitra  and Varuna.  Ila became  a man named  Sudyumna. 
Sudyumna's sons were Utkala, Gaya and Vinatashva. Utkala ruled in Orissa, Gaya in the  region 
that is also called Gaya, and Vinatashva in the  west.  
 
Sudyumna was not entitled to rule since he had earlier been a woman. He lived in the city  known 
as Pratishthana. Pururava inherited this later  on. 
 
When  Vaivasvata  Manu  died,  his ten sons divided  up the earth  amongst  themselves,  Ikshvaku 
ruled  in the central  regions.  He had a hundred  sons,  the eldest  of whom  was named  Vikukshi. 
Vikukshi came to be known as Shashada. Thereby hangs a  tale. 
 
Ikshvaku wanted to organize a sacrifice and he sent his son Vikukshi to the forest to fetch  some 
meat for the sacrifice. While hunting for game, Vikukshi felt very hun gry and ate up some of  the 
meat.  This was a sacrilege  and the sage Vashishtha  advised  Ikshvaku  to banish  Vikukshi  from 
his kingdom. Because the meat that he had eaten had been the meat of a rabbit  (shashaka), 
Vikukshi came to be known as  Shashada.  
 
But aft er Ikshvaku died, Vikukshi returned to his father's kingdom and began to rule there.  This 
was the kingdom  of Ayodhya.  One of Vikukshi's  sons was Kakutshta,  and Rama  of Ramayana 
fame was born in this  line. 
   
 
Kubalashva  
Kubalashva was one of the kings desc ended from Kakutstha. Kubalashva's father was  named 
Vrihadashva.  After  Vrihadashva  had ruled  for many  years,  he desired  to retire  to the forest.  He 
therefore prepared to hand over the kingdom to his son Kubalashva. But learning of  King 
Vrihadashva's resolv e, a sage named Utanka came to meet the  king.  
 
"Don't go to the forest right now", Utanka told the king. My hermitage (ashrama) is on the  shores 
of the ocean and is surrounded by sand in all directions. A strong rakshasa named Dhundhu  lives 
under the sand.  He is so strong that even the gods have been unable to kill him. Once every  year, 
Dhundhu  exhales  his breath  and this raises  a tremendous  cloud  of sand and dust.  For an entire 
week the sun remains shrouded in dust and for the whole week, there are earthqu akes as a  result 
of Dhundhu's  exhalation.  This is disturbing  my mediation  (tapasya)  and you can't very well go 
away to the forest without first doing something about Dhundhu. Only you are capable of  killing 
him. I have accumulated a lot of power as a resul t of my tapasya and I will give this to you if you 
kill Dhundhu."  
Vrihadashva  told Utanka  that there  was no need  for Vrihadashva  himself  to kill Dhundhu.  He 
would  go to the forest  as he had decided.  His son Kubalashva  was perfectly  capable  of killing 
Dhund hu and would accompany  Utanka.  
 
Kubalashva  and his hundred  sons went  to the shores  of the ocean  where  all the sand was. 
Kubalashva  asked  his sons to start digging  so that they might  find Dhundhu.  Dhundhu  attacked 
Kubalashva's sons and killed all of them bu t three. The three who escaped were  named 
Dridashva, Chandrashva and Kapilashva. But Dhundhu himself was killed by Kubalashva. As  a 
result  of this great  feat, Kubalashva  came  to be known  as Dhundhumara.  The sage Utanka 
blessed Kubalashva and by the sage's blessings, Kubalashva's dead sons went straight to  heaven.  
   
 
Trishanku  
From  Dridashva  was descended  a king named  Trayaruni.  Trayaruni  was a righteous  king and 
followed all the religious dictates. But Trayarun's son Satyavrata was quite the opposite  and 
refused to follow the righteous path. King Trayaruni's chief priest was the great sage  Vashishtha. 
Vashishtha  advised  the king that his evil son should  be banished  from  the kingdom.  Trayaruni 
accepted  the sage's  advice.  Consequently,  Satyavrata  started  to live with outcasts  (chandalas) 
outside the  kingdom.  
 
After some time, Trayaruni relinquished his kingship and went away to the forest. The  kingdom 
had no king and degenerated  into anarchy.  The absence  of a king is also frowned  upon  by the 
gods and for twelv e years there was a terrible  drought.  
 
Vishvamitra was another great sage. While all this was going on, Vishvamitra was not present  in 
the kingdom.  He had gone  away  to perform  tapasya  on the shores  of the ocean,  having  left his 
wife and children in a hermi tage (ashrama) that was in the kingdom. But because there was  such 
a long spell of drought, there was also famine in the kingdom. People started to  starve. 
Vishvamitra's  wife decided  to sell her son so that she might  have  some  food to eat. She tied a 
rope round the son's neck and took him to the market -place. There, she sold him in exchange  for 
a thousand  cows.  Since  a rope had been  tied around  the son's  neck  (gala),  he came  to be known 
as Galava.  
 
But Satyavrata discovered what terrible straits Vishvamitra 's family was in. He freed Galava  and 
started to take care of Vishvamitra's wife and  children.  
 
Satyavrata  had not been  terribly  fond of Vashishtha.  He blamed  the sage for his banishment. 
When thee was famine everywhere, Satyavrata stole Vashishtha's cow. He killed the cow  and 
served the meat to Vishvamitra's sons, apart from eating it  himself.  
 
Vashishtha was in a terrible rage when he got to know about this incident. He cursed  Satyavrata.  
 
"You have committed three sins (shanku)," Vashishtha told Satyavra ta. "Firstly, you  have 
angered your father Trayaruni. Secondly, you have stolen and killed a cow. Thirdly, you  have 
eaten beef, a forbidden meat. Because of these three sins, you will henceforth be known  as 
Trishanku and be eternally cursed." (The word tri  means  three.)  
Satyavrata had however taken care of Vishvamitra's family when the sage was away on  his 
meditation.  After  Vishvamitra  returned,  he was very happy  to learn  about  what  Trishanku  had 
done and offered to grant him a boon. Trishanku desired the b oon that he might be allowed to  go 
to heaven in his own physical body. Thanks to Vishvamitra's immense powers, even  this 
virtually impossible task was accomplished. Trishanku became king in Trayaruni's kingdom  and 
Vishvamitra acted as his chief  priest.  
   
 
Sagara  
Trishanku's son was Harishchandra and from Harishchandra was descended a king named  Bahu. 
Bahu  devoted  too much  time to pleasurable  pursuits.  The upshot  of this was that the defence  of 
the kingdom was not properly taken care of. Enemy kings seized  this opportunity to  attack 
Bahu's kingdom. They drove Bahu out and Bahu went off to the forest with his wife  Yadavi,  
 
The enemy kings who dislodged Bahu were led by the Haihaya and Talajangha kings. They  were 
aided by the Shakas, Yavanas, Paradas, Kamboja s and  Pahlavas.  
 
King  Bahu  died in the forest.  His wife Yadavi  desired  to die on her husband's  funeral  pyre.  But 
since Yadavi was pregnant at the time, the sage Ourva persuaded her that such an act would be  a 
sin. He brought Yadavi to his own hermitage and  began to take care of  her. 
 
Bahu  had also a second  wife and she had once  tried to poison  Yadavi.  The poison  (gara)  had 
however  done  Yadavi  no harm  and emerged  when  the baby  was born.  Since  the baby  was born 
together with poison, he came to known as  Sagara . 
 
The sage Ourva took care of Sagara's education. He imparted to Sagara the knowledge of all  the 
shastras and also the usage of weapons. Amongst other things, Sagara acquired the skill of  using 
a divine weapon known as  agneyastra.  
 
When  he grew  up, Sagara  attacked  the Haihaya  kings  and defeated  them  through  the use of 
agneyastra.  He then defeated  the Shakas,  Yavanas,  Paradas,  Kambojas  and Pahlavas  and was 
about to kill them all. But these enemy kings fled to the sage Vashishtha for refuge  and 
Vashishtha  persuaded  Sagara  not to kill his enemies.  Instead,  the heads  of the Shakas  were  half 
shaven  off. The Yavanas  and Kambojas  had their heads  completely  shaven.  The Pahlavas  were 
instructed  that they would  have  to keep  beards.  These  enemy  kings  also lost all right to follow 
the religion  laid down  in the Vedas.  Amongst  the other  kings  who Sagara  defeated  were  the 
Konasarpas, the Mahishakas, the Darvas, the Cholas and the  Keralas.  
 
King Sagara had two wives. The first was named Keshini and she was the daughter of t he king  of 
Vidarbha. The Brahma Purana does not tell us the name of the second wife but from  the 
Mahabharataa  we know  that it was Sumati.  Keshini  and Sumati  had no sons.  They  therefore 
began to pray to Ourva so that they might have  sons.  
 
Ourva  was pleased  at these  prayers  and said, " Both  of you will have  sons.  But one of you will 
have a single son and the other will have sixty thousand sons. Tell me, who wants  what."  
Keshini asked for a single son and Sumati asked for sixty thousand sons. In due course,  Keshini 
gave birth to a son named Panchajana. Sumati gave birth to a gourd. Inside the gourd there was  a 
lump  of meat.  The gourd  was placed  inside  a pot full of clarified  butter  (ghrita).  And from  the 
lump of meat were born sixty thousand  sons.  
 
King Sagara  proceeded to conquer the entire earth. As a recognition of this conquest, he  initiated 
an ashvamedha  yajna  (horse  sacrifice).  In this ceremony,  the sacrificial  horse  is left free to 
wander all over the earth. The sixty thousand sons accompanied the horse as its guards.  The 
horse eventually reached the shores of the ocean that lies towards the south -east. While  Sagara's 
sons were  resting,  the horse  was stolen.  The sons started  to look for the horse  and began  to dig up the sands  in their search.  In this process, they came  upon  the sage Kapila.  Kapila  had been 
meditating and his meditation was disturbed by the terrible din that Sagara's sons made.  He 
gazed  at them  in fury and all but four of the sons were  burnt  to ashes.  The four sons who were 
saved were named  Varhiketu, Suketu, Dharmaketu and  Panchajana.  
 
The Brahma  Purana  is slightly  confused  here.  Was Panchajana  Keshini's  son or Sumati's  son? 
There is some inconsistency with the account given in the Mahabharataa. In the Mahabharataa,  it 
is Keshini  who gave  birth to sixty  thousand  sons and it is Sumati  who had a single  son named 
Asamanja. Also in the Mahabharataa, all sixty thousand sons were burnt to  ashes.  
 
The Brahma Purana also tells us that the sacrificial horse was obtained by Sagara from the  ocean. 
This is the reason why the ocean is referred to as  sagara.  
 
To come  back  to the account  given  in the Brahma  Purana.  Panchajana's  son was Amshumana 
and Amshumana's son was Dilipa. Dilipa had a son named Bhagiratha. Bhagiratha brought  down 
the river  Ganga  from  heaven  to earth  and thus redeemed  his ancestors  who had been  burnt  to 
ashes by Kapila. It was because of this that the river Ganga came to be known as  Bhagirathi.  
 
From Bhagiratha was descended Raghu. Raghu's son was Aja, Aja's son Dasharatha  and 
Dasharatha 's son  Rama.  
   
 
The Moon and the Lunar Dynasty  
There was a sage named Atri. Atri performed very difficult tapasya. So difficult was the  tapasya 
that Atri's  energy  was thrown  up into the sky. The sky could  not bear this energy  and hurled  it 
down  onto the earth. This energy  then gave  birth  to Soma  or Chandra,  the moon  god. Brahma 
took Chandra up into his chariot and drove the chariot around the earth twenty -one times. From 
whatever energy was left after Chandra has been created, the herbs were  born.  
 
Chandra  also performed very difficult tapasya. One padma year consists of  10,000,000,000,000 
normal  years.  For one hundred  such padma  years,  Chandra  mediated.  After  the meditation  was 
over, Brahma appointed Chandra lord over seeds, herbs, brahmanas and the oceans . Chandra  also 
performed a rajasuya yajna (royal sacrifice) as a celebration of his lordship. This gave him a  lot 
pomp, glory, wealth and  respect.  
But all this merely  served  to turn Chandra's  head.  The guru (teacher)  of the gods  was the sage 
Brihaspati. Br ihaspati had a wife named Tara and Chandra abducted Tara. Despite the gods  and 
the sages  asking  Chandra  to return  Tara,  the moon  god would  not listen.  A terrible  war then 
raged over Tara, the gods fighting for Chandra. Shukracharya, the guru of the demons,  fought  on 
Chandra's side and Shiva fought on Brihaspati's side. This war (Samgram) came to be known  as 
tarakamaya samgram, since it was fought over  Tara.  
 
Finally Brahma intervened and a truce was called. But Chandra and Tara had by then had a  son, 
and Br ihaspati refused to accept this son as his own. This son was Budha. As you already  known, 
Budha married Ila and they had a son named  Pururava.  
 
The Brahma Purana now describes several kings belonging to the lunar  dynasty.  
   
 
Yayati  
In the lunar  dynasty,  there was born a powerful  king named  Nahusha.  He married  Viraja  and 
they had six sons named Yati, Yajati, Samyati, Ayati, Yati, and Suyati. Yati became a hermit.  So 
although Yayati was not the eldest, he was crowned king after  Nahusha.  
 
Yayati  had two wives . The first was Devayani,  daughter  of Shukracharya.  And the second  was 
Sharmishtha,  daughter  of Vrishaparva,  the king of the danavas.  Devayani  had two sons named 
Yadu and Turvasu and Sharmishtha had three sons named Druhya, Anu and Puru.  Yayati 
conquered t he whole earth and ruled over it. When he became old, he divided the earth  amongst 
his five sons. Yadu was given the lands to the east, Puru the lands in the center, Turvasu  the 
lands to the south and south -east, Druhya those to the north and Anu those to the west.  
 
Yayati  gave  up his weapons  and decided  to travel  throughout  the world.  He called  Yadu  to him 
and said, "I wish  to explore  the world  and my old age is a hindrance.  Please  accept  my old age 
and give me your youth in  return."  
 
Yadu  refused.  "I will not,"  he said. "One  cannot  eat well when  one is old, nor can one pleasure 
the comforts  of the world.  Old age is not pleasant.  Ask one of my brothers  instead."  Yadu's 
refusal angered Yayati. He cursed Yadu that he or his descendants would never be kings.  Yayati 
next requested Druhya, Turvasu and Anu, but they too refused and were similarly cursed by  their 
father. But Puru agreed to his father's request and gladly accepted the old age. He was blessed  by 
his father.  
 
After many years had passed, Yayati got ti red of the world and returned Puru's youth to him.  He 
accepted back his old age and retired to the forest to  mediate.  
 
From  Puru  was descended  King  Bharataa  after whom  the land came  to be known  as 
Bharataavarsha.  Also  in this line was King  Kuru,  after whom  all the descendants  came  to be 
known as Kauravas. The sacred place named Kurukshetra owes its name to King  Kuru.  
 
From Turvasu were descended the kings of Pandya, Kerala, Kola and Chola. From Druhya  were 
descended the kings of Gandhara. The horses of the Gandhara kingdom are  famous.  
Yadu had five sons, Sahasrada, Payoda, Kroshtu, Nila and Anjika. Sahasrada's descendants  were 
the Haihayas, amongst whom the most famous was Kartyavirya Arjuna. Arjuna pleased the  sage 
Dattatreya and became invincible. He also had a thousand arms. Arjuna's greatest deeds were  his 
defeat  and imprisonment  of Ravana,  king of Lanks.  Kroshtu's  descendants  were  Vrishni  and 
Andhaka and in the Vrishni line was born  Krishna.  
   
 
Geography  
Having heard accounts of the solar and lunar dyna sties, the sages requested Romaharshana.  "Tell 
us a little about the geography of the world. What does the earth look like? What are its  limits?"  
 
Romaharshana  obligedand  said-- The earth  is divided  into seven  regions  (dvipas).  Their  names 
are Jambudvipa, Plakshadvipa, Shalmaladvipa, Kushadvipa, Krounchadvipa, Shakadvipa  and 
Pushkaradvipa.  These  regions  are surrounded  by seven  oceans  and their names  are Lavana, 
Ikshu, Sura, Sarpi, Dadhi, Dugdha and  Jala. 
 
Jambudvipa  is in the center  and right  in the middle  of Jambudvipa  is Mount  Sumeru.  To the 
south  of Sumeru  are the mountains  Himavana,  Hemakuta  and Nishadha  and to the north  of 
Sumeru  are the mountains  Nila,  Shveta  and Sringi.  Jambudvipa  itself  is divided  into several 
regions (varshas). For example, Sumeru i s in the middle of Ilavritavarsha. Braratavarsha is to  the 
south  of Sumeru.  To the east of Sumeru  is Bhadrashvarsha  and to the west is Ketumalavarsha. 
Harivarsha lies to the south and Ramyakavarsha to the north. Still further north  is 
Hiranmayavarsha and b eyond that, Uttara  Kuruvarsha.  
 
Brahma's  city is on the peak  of Sumeru.  It is there  that the river  Ganga  descends  from  heaven 
and gets divided into four tributaries. Sita flows eastwards, Chakshu westwards,  Bhadra 
Northwards and Alakananda southwards into  Bharataavarsha.  
 
There are seven major mountain range sin Bharataavarsha and their names are Mahendra,  Malya, 
Sahya, Shuktimana, Riksha, Vindhya and Pariyatra. Bharataavarsha itself is divided into  nine 
regions  (dvipas).  The names  of eight  of these  regions  are Indradvipa,  Soumya,  Gandharva  and 
Varuna. The ninth region is completely surrounded by the ocean in all directions. To the east  of 
Bharataavarsha live the Kiratas and to the west the  Yavanas.  
 
Below  the earth  lie the seven  regions  of the underworld  (Patala).  Their  names  are Atala,  Vitala, 
Nitala,  Sutala,  Talatala,  Rasatala  and Patala.  The daityas,  danavas  and the snakes  (sarpa)  live 
there. The underworld is a wonderful place, more beautiful than heaven itself. The sage  Narada 
once went on a trip to the  underworld and was bowled over by its beauty. It is full of palaces  and 
jewels.  The sun rises there,  but does not radiate  too much  of heat.  The moon  also rises,  but its 
beams  are not at all chilly.  The forests  are populated  by beautiful  trees  and the pond s are thick 
with lotus flowers, the songs of cuckoo birds are heard everywhere. Below the underworld  sleeps 
a great  snake,  known  as Shesha  or Ananta.  It has a thousand  hoods,  all covered  with jewels.  In 
fact, this snake is really Vishnu in one of this vari ous forms.  
 
Also part of the world are hells (naraka), presided over by Yama, the god of death. Those are  full 
of weapons, fire and poisons and sinners are sent there to be punished. Sins that are punished  by 
dispatch  to one of the several  hells  are lying , murder,  killing  cows,  destroying  cities,  drinking, 
killing brahmanas, theft, selling wines or hair, criticizing the Vedas, insulting elders,  making 
weapons, selling salt, destroying forests needlessly, killing sheep or deer, cheating and  studying 
under  one's own son. Each  sinner  receives  a punishment  that is in proportion  to the severity  of 
his sin. Of course,  if one performs  penance  (prayashchitta)  for one's  sins, one need  not go to 
naraka. The best form of penance is praying to  Krishna.  
 
The earth (Prit hivi or bhuloka) extends upto those arts of the sky that can be lit up by the rays  of the sun and the moon.  The expanse  from  there  to the solar  circle  is known  as bhuvarloka  and 
holy sages live there. Above the solar circle is the lunar circle and beyond i t, in succession,  come 
the regions  of Mercury  (Budha),  Venus  (Shukra),  Mars  (Mangala),  Jupiter  (Brihaspati),  Saturn 
(Shani), the Great Bear constellation (saptarshi) and the Pole Star (Dhruva). The region from  the 
solar  circle  to Dhruvaloka  is known  as heaven (Svarloka  or svarga).  Beyond  Dhruvaloka  is 
Maharloka and further away, Janaloka are Tapaloka and Satyaloka. At the end of a kalpa, all  the 
three  lokas  (regions)  of bhuloka,  bhuvarloka  and svarloka  are destroyed.  But the four lokas  of 
Maharloka, Janalok a, Tapaloka and Satyaloka are not  destroyed.  
   
 
Konaraka  
There  is an ocean  to the south  of Bharataavarsha.  One the shores  of this great  ocean  there  is a 
land named  Ondra  or Utkala  (present  Orissa).  Utkala  is populated  by religious  people  and the 
brahmanas  who live there  are learned  in the Vedas.  They  are very good  priests,  learned  in the 
Puranas and the shastras and skilled in the art of sacrifices. In the land of Utkala, there is  an 
image  of the sun (Surya)  known  as Konaditya.  The word  aditya  also means  the sun, as does the 
word  arka.  Thus,  Konaditya  is the same  as Konarka,  a corruption  of the latter  word  being 
Konaraka. The image of Konaditys is so wonderful that even if one gazes at the image, all  one's 
sins are  forgiven.  
 
All around  the temple  there  is sand.  But nevertheless,  many  trees  grow  around  the temple.  The 
best time to worship  the sun there  is at the time of sunrise.  One has to face the east and draw  a 
lotus flower on the ground with red sandalwood. The lotus flower must have exactly eight  petals . 
A copper  vessel  has to be placed  at the center  of the flower  and filled  with paddy,  sesamum 
water, red sandalwood, red flowers and sacred grass. One prays to Surya to descend on the  lotus 
flower  that has thus been  drawn.  If one worships  Konaditya  accordi ng to these  prescribed  rites, 
the sins of seven preceding generations are  forgiven.  
 
The twelve  adityas  are nothing  but different  forms  of Surya.  Their  names  are Indra.  Dhata, 
Parjanya, Tvashta, Pusha Aryama, Bhaga Vivasvana, Vishnu, Amshumana, Varuna, and  Mitra. 
As Indra, Surya destroys the enemies of the gods. As Dhata, he creates living beings.  As 
Parjanya, he showers down rain. As Tvashta, he lives in the trees and herbs. As Pusha, he  makes 
foodgrains grow. As Aryama, he is in the wind. As Bhaga, he is in the body of all living  beings. 
As Vivasvana,  he is in fire and helps  to cook  food.  As Vishnu,  he destroys  the enemies  of the 
gods. As Amshumana, he is again in the wind. As Varuna, Surya is in the waters and as Mitra,  he 
is in the moon and in the  oceans . 
In each month  of the year,  it is a different  aditya  who shines.  Indra  shines  in the month  of 
Ashvina, Dhata in Kartika, Parjanya in Shravana, Tvashta in Falguna, Pusha in Pousha,  Aryama 
in Vaishakha, Bhaga in Magha, Vivasvana in Jyaishtha, Vishnu in Chai tra, Amshumana  in 
Ashada, Varuna, in Bhadra and Mitra in Agrahayana. Vishnu has twelve hundred rays,  Aryama 
one thousand and three hundred. Vivasvana seventy -two, Amshumana fifteen, Parjanya  seventy - 
two, Varuna one thousand and three hundred, Tvashta one thousand and one hundred, Indra  two 
thousand and two hundred, Dhata eleven hundred, Mitra one thousand and Pusha nine  hundred. 
Apart  from  the names  of the twelve  adityas,  Surya  has twelve  other  names  as well.  These  are 
Aditya, Savita, Surya, Mihira, Arka, Prabhakara, Martanda, Bhaskara, Bhanu,  Chitrabhanu, 
Divakara and  Ravi.  
 
Brahma  once  recounted  to the sages  the one hundred  and eight  sacred  names  of Surya.  The 
Brahma Purana lists these names and we reproduce them in nine groups of twelve names  each.  
 
(1) Sury a, Archana,  Bhagavana,  Tvashta,  Pusha,  Arka,  Savita,  Ravi,  Gabhastimana,  Aja, Kala, 
Mrityu.  
 
(2) Dhata, Prabhakara, Prithivi, Jala, Teja, Akasha, Vayu, Parayana, Soma, Brihaspati,  Shukra, 
Budha.  
 
 (3) Angaraka,  Indra,  Vivasvana,  Diptamshu,  Shuchi,  Shouri,  Shanaish vara,  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
Rudra, Skanda,  Vaishravana.  
 
(4) Yama, Vaidyutam, Jathara, Agni, Aindhana, Tejohpati, Dharmadhvaja, Vedakarta,  Vedanga, 
Vedavahana, Krita,  Treta.  
 
(5) Dvapara, Kali, Sarvasurashraya, Kala, Kashtha, Muhurta, Kshapa, Yama,  Kshana, 
Samvatsara, A shvattha,  Kalachakra.  
 
(6) Vibhavasu, Shashvata, Purusha, Yogi, Vyaktavyakta, Sanatana,  Kaladhyaksha, 
Prajadhyaksha, Vishvakarama, Tamonuda, Varuna,  Sagara.  
 
(7) Amsha, Jimuta, Jivana, Ariha, Bhutashraya, Bhutapati, Sarvalokanamaskrita,  Shrashta, 
Samvartaka, Vahni , Sarvadi, Alolupa.  
 
(8) Ananta,  Kapila,  Bhanu,  Kamada,  Sarvotamukha,  Jaya,  Vishala,  Varada,  Sarvabhutasevita, 
Mana, Suparna,  Bhutadi.  
 
(9) Shighraga, Pranadharana, Dhanvantari, Dhumakety, Adideva, Aditinandana,  Dvadashatma, 
Ravi, Daksha, Pita, Mata,  Pitamaha.  
  Indradyumna and Purushaottama  Kshetra  
In Satya  Yuga  there  was a king named  Indradyumna.  He was a very powerful  king as Indra 
himself. He was handsome, honest and truthful, learned in the shastras and the Vedas, and skilled 
in the use of weapons. His radianc e put the sun to shame. Indradyumna was devoted to   Vishnu.  
He once decided that he would worship Vishnu. A tirtha is a sacred place of  pilgrimage. 
Indradyumna scanned all the existing tirthas and cities. But none of them satisfied him. None  of 
them, he f elt, was appropriate as a place for worshipping  Vishnu.  
 
Indradyumna's  own capital  was the city of Avanti,  in the kingdom  of Malva.  Avanti  was a 
beautiful and wealthy city, surrounded on all sides by moats and other fortifications.  Traders 
from  many  countr ies came  there  with all sorts  or commodities  for trading.  The roads  of the city 
were  lined  with shopes.  The houses  were  painted  white.  The king's  stables  were  full of horses 
and elephants.  All citizens  of Avanti  were  pleasant  of appearance  and happy.  Sacri fices  were 
held fairly often. Many were the temples, groves and ponds in Avanti. Any tree that grew  on 
earth could be found  there.  
 
There  was a temple  to Shiva  in the city. This was known  as the temple  of Mahakala.  The image 
there was so sacred that worshi pping Shiva in the temple of Mahakala was tantamount  to 
performing one thousand ashvamedha  yajnas.  
 
The river  Shipra  flowed  past Avanti.  On the banks  of the river  there  was a temple  of Vishnu 
known as Govindasvami. Another temple to Vishnu was named Vikram asvami.  But 
Indradyumna was not satisfied with these temples. He wanted to build another temple to  Vishnu. 
He left Avanti  to look for a proper  place.  His soldiers  and subjects  accompanied  their king,  so 
that it looked as if the entire city of Avanti was on  the march. After traveling for many days,  they 
arrived on the shores of the southern ocean, the ocean that is known as lavana  samudra.  
 
There  were  so many  waves  in the ocean  that the ocean  itself  seemed  to be dancing.  Marine 
animals  lived  in the ocean  and the waters  were  also the source  of all sorts  of jewels. 
Indradyumna began to live on the shores of the ocean. He discovered a place near the ocean  that 
was thick with flower and fruit trees. Many types of birds gathered there to eat the fruit. This  was 
the place known as Purushaottama kshetra (place), the city of Puri of modern  times.  
 
Purshottama kshetra was a very important tirtha. But all knowledge of this tirtha had been  hidden 
until Indradyumna arrived on the scene. There was a reason for this. Many y ears ago, there  used 
to be an image  of Vishnu  there,  where  people  used to pray.  So sacred  was the image  that all the 
sins of the worshippers  were  immediately  forgiven.  The result  was that Yama  could  not punish 
any of the sinners. They simply prayed to Vish nu's image and escaped. Yama therefore prayed  to 
Vishnu for a solution. Vishnu hid the image under the sand so that no one knew that it  existed.  
 
Indradyumna liked Purushaottama Kshetra. The river Mahanadi or Chitropala flowed not  very 
far away.  The peopl e who lived  around  the place  were  religious.  He decided  that this was the 
right place for building a temple to Vishnu. On an auspicious day, the foundation stone was  laid. 
 
Indradyumna  then got in touch  with the kings  of Kalkinga,  Utakala  and Koshala.  He requested 
their help in fetching  stones  for the building  of the temple.  The kings  sent their architects  to the 
Vindhya mountains. The stones were gathered from these mountains and brought  to 
Purushaottama  Kshetra  in boats  and chariots.  Messengers  were  also sent to several  other  kings 
for aid. They came with their armies and with a lot of  wealth.  Indradyumna  told the assembled  kings,  "I wish  to accomplish  two difficult  tasks.  The first is to 
perform an ashvamedha yajna here. And the second is to build a templ e to Vishnu. Both of  these 
are difficult  jobs,  particularly  the second.  But if you help me, I am confident  that both jobs can 
be done."  
 
The kings  agreed  to help.  They  offered  jewels,  wealth,  gold,  clothes,  food grains  and other 
objects.  The place  where  the yajna  was to be held was made  entirely  out of gold.  In fact, all the 
objects  used in the yajna  were  made  out of gold.  Brahmanas  from  all over Jambudvipa  came  to 
witness  the sacrifice.  They  were  donated  elephants,  horses  and cows  as alms.  Never  has there 
been  any other  sacrifice  to rival the one that Indradyumna  performed.  After  the sacrifice  was 
over and the temple  built,  there  remained  the more  important  question  of the image.  How  was 
this to be made? Indradyumna began to pray to Vishnu for  guidance.  
 
Vishnu  appeared  before  Indradyumna  in a dream  and said, "Why  are you so miserable?  When 
the sun rises,  go to the shores  of the ocean.  There  you will find a tree. Half of the tree is in the 
water  and the remaining  half in the sand.  Chop  down  this tree. It s wood will give you the 
material for the  image.  
 
In the morning,  Indradyumna  went  to the seashore  and found  the tree. It was just as Vishnu  had 
described  it to be. With  an axe, he chopped  down  the tree. As he was about  to slice the trunk  in 
two, two brahmana s appeared  before  him. Although  Indradyumna  did not know  it, these  two 
brahmanas were Vishnu and Vishvakarma in  disguise.  
 
"King.  What  have  you done?"  exclaimed  the brahmanas.  "You  have  cut down  the only tree that 
was on the shores of the  ocean."  
 
"Forgive  me," replied Indradyumna. "I wished to make an image of Vishnu. Vishnu  has 
instructed me in a dream that this is the tree from which the image should be  made."  
 
"That is an excellent idea," said the brahmana who was Vishnu in disguise. "There is nothing  so 
holy as praying  to Vishnu.  Meet  my companion.  He is as skilled  as the great  Vishvakarma 
himself. If you want, he will build the image for  you."  
 
King  Indradyumna  agreed.  And instructed  by Vishnu,  Vishvakarma  started  to build  the image. 
Or, to be more acc urate, there were three different images. The first one was that of Baladeva  or 
Balarama. This was completely white in colour, except for the eyes, which were red. The  image 
was dressed  in blue and a snake  held its hood  over Balarama's  head.  A club and a mace were  in 
Balarama's hands. The second image was Krishna's. This was blue in colour, with eyes like  lotus 
flowers. The image was dressed in yellow and had a chakra in its hand. The third image was  that 
of Krishna's  sister  Subhadra.  This image  was golden  in colour  and was dressed  in wonderful 
clothes.  
 
When Indradyumna discovered that the images were made in a matter of minutes, he  was 
thunderstruck. He realised that the two brahmanas cold not be mere mortals. He fell at their  feet 
and said, "Please tell m e who you are. You cannot be  humans."  
Vishnu  and Vishvakarma  then revealed  their true selves  and Indradyumna  was thrilled.  Vishnu 
blessed  the king and told him that he would  rule for ten thousand  and nine hundred  years.  And 
even  after Indradyumna  died,  a place would  be reserved  for him in heaven.  On an auspicious 
day, the three images were instated in the  temple.  
 Markandeya  
Many  years  ago, a great  destruction  (Pralaya)  took place.  The earth  was shrouded  in darkness 
and nothing  could  be seen.  There  was neither sun nor moon.  Lightning  and thunder  crushed 
mountains and trees. There were showers of meteors. Lakes and rivers dried up. The entire  earth 
burnt  with fire and the flames  of the fire reached  down  to the underworld.  All living  beings 
perished in this fi re, including the gods and the  demons.  
 
There  was a sage named  Markandeya.  While  all this was going  on, Markandeya  was busy 
meditating. Such was the power of Markandeya's tapasya that the fire dared not touch him. But  it 
is also true that Markandeya  was scared of the fire that raged  all around  him. He suffered  from 
hunger and thirst and forgot all about his tapasya. His lips and throat dried up from  fear. 
Markandeya discovered that there was a banyan tree that was untouched by all these ravages.  He 
retired to the shade of the banyan tree and started to pray to  Vishnu.  
 
Clouds gathered in the sky. They were thick and dark clouds and they spread all over the earth.  It 
started  to rain and it poured  and poured.  Water  was everywhere  and the earth  was flooded.  The 
water put out the fire. It rained continuously for twelve years. The oceans flooded the shores  and 
the mountains were pulverised. Vishnu slept on the  water.  
 
Markandeya  did not know  what  to do. There  was water  everywhere  and he floated  on it. But he 
conti nued to pray to  Vishnu.  
Vishnu spoke to Markandeya. "Do not be frightened, Markandeya," he said. "You are devoted  to 
me and I shall protect  you."  
 
Markandeya  did not realise  that it was Vishnu  who was speaking.  "Who  dares  to address  me 
thus?"  he demanded.  "Am  I a child  that I should  be so addressed?  I am the great  Markandeya, 
blessed by Brahma  himself."  
 
But try as he might, Markandeya cold not see anyone anywhere. Where had the voice come  from 
then?  Had it all been  an illusion?  Not knowing  what  to do, he started  to pray again  to Vishnu. 
Suddenly he saw the banyan tree floating on the water. A golden bed was spread on the  branches 
of the tree and on the bed there slept a small boy. Markandeya was exceedingly surprised to  see 
the small  boy floating  in the middle of this deluge.  He was so confused  by his illusions  that he 
did not realise that this boy was none other than  Vishnu.  
 
The boy spoke  to Markandeya.  "You  are tired,"  said the boy. "You  are looking  for a refuge. 
Enter my body and rest for some  time."  
Markandeya  was so confused  that, before  he could  react,  he entered  the boy's  body  through  the 
mouth.  Inside  the boy's  stomach  Markandeya  discovered  all the worlds,  the seven  regions  and 
the seven oceans. The mountains and the kingdoms were all there. So were all living  beings.  
 
Markandeya did not know what to make of all this. He started to pray to Vishnu. No sooner  than 
he had started,  he came  out of the boy's  mouth.  Vishnu  now appeared  before  him and blessed 
him. The sage spent  a thousand  years  with Vishnu.  Vishnu  then asked,  "I wish  to grant  you a 
boon. What is your  desire?"  
"I want  to build  a temple  to Shiva  in Purushaottama  Kshetra,"  replied  Markandeya.  "This  will 
prove to everyone that Vishnu and Shiva are really one and the  same."  
Vishnu granted the boon  and Markandeya built a temple to Shiva known as  Bhuvaneshvara 
(Lord of the  World).   
King  Shveta  
In Satya  Yuga  there  used to be a king named  Shveta.  He was such a good  king that during  his 
reign  people  lived  for ten thousand  years.  No one dies as a child.  Longevity  was high and there 
was no infant  mortality.  
 
But there was a sage named Kapalagoutama. Unfortunately, the sage's son died as an infant.  The 
sage brought  the dead  body  to Shveta  and the king resolved  that if he could  not bring  the sage's 
son back  to life within  a week,  he would  immolate  himself  in a fire. Having  thus taken  an oath, 
king Shveta  worshipped  Shiva  with one thousand  and one hundred  blue lotus  flowers.  Shiva 
appeared before the king and granted the boon that the infant son might be brou ght back to  life. 
 
King  Shveta  ruled  for a thousand  years.  He also built a temple  to Vishnu  in Purushaottama 
kshetra. The temple that had been built by Indradyumna was known as the temple of  Jagannatha. 
Shveta's temple was not very far from this and was kn own as the temple of Shvetamadhava.  The 
image in this temple was as white as the  moon.  
   
 
Bali 
There  was a king of the daityas  named  Bali.  He was powerful  and invincible.  He was also 
righteous and truthful. The gods cold not bear to see Bali's prosperity and began to plot how  Bali 
might  be foiled.  So well did Bali rule that disease,  drought  and evil disappeared  throughout  the 
three  worlds.  
 
In desperation,  the gods  approached  Vishnu.  "Please  do something  about  Bali",  they requested. 
"You always help us out  when we are in  trouble".  
 
"There  is no difference  between  Bali and the gods  so far as I am concerned,"  replied  Vishnu 
"Bali  is devoted  to me. I cannot  therefore  fight  with him. But I will think  of a way so that his 
kingdom might be taken away from him and  given to  you."  
Vishnu  decided  to be born as Aditi's  son. The son was a dwarf.  This was the Vamana  avatara 
(dwarf incarnation) of  Vishnu.  
 
Bali proposed to organise a horse sacrifice. Many sages came to the sacrifice and  Shukracharya 
was the chief priest. The dwarf also arrived to witness the  yajna.  
 
Shukracharya  realised  that the dwarf  was none  other  than Vishnu.  He told Bali,  "I suspect  that 
this dwarf  is Vishnu  in disguise.  He must  have  come  here to ask you for something.  Please  do 
not grant him anything  without first consulting  me."  
 
"Certainly  not,"  replied  Bali.  "It is good  fortune  indeed  that the great  Vishnu  has come  to my 
house. What is there to consult about? I shall grant Vishnu whatever he  wants."  
 
Bali went  to the dwarf  to ascertain  what  the dwarf wanted.  Vishnu  expressed  the wish  that he 
might be given as much of land as might be covered in three of the dwarf's steps. This boon  Bali 
readily  granted.  But no sooner  than the boon  had been  granted,  the dwarf  adopted  a gigantic 
form. He placed one fo ot on Bali's yajna and the second on  Brahmaloka.  
 
"Where  will I place  my third  step?"  demanded  Vishnu.  There  is no more  space  left in the entire 
universe. Find me a place for my third  step."  
 
Bali smiled and said, "Place it on my back."  
 
Vishnu was charmed  at Bali's generosity. He granted Bali the boon that Bali would hold the  title 
of Indra  in a future  manvantara.  He then appointed  Bali king of the underworld.  But Indra's 
kingdom of heaven, which Bali had conquered, was returned to  Indra.  
 
Brahma had all t his while been in Brahmaloka. When Vishnu placed his second foot  on 
Brahmaloka,  Brahma  felt that he should  welcome  his water -pot (kamandalu)  to wash  the foot. 
The water spilled over from the foot and fell on the mountains. There the water divided into  four. 
Vishnu accepted the flow that went northwards. The flow that went westwards returned  to 
Brahma's  kamandalu.  The flow that went  eastwards  was gathered  up by the gods  and the sages. 
But the flow that went southwards got entangled in Shiva's matted hair. Th is water was the  river 
Ganga.  
 Goutama  
Part of the water  of the Ganga  that got stuck  in Shiva's  hair was brought  down  to earth  by 
Bhagiratha. The remaining part was brought down by the sage  Goutama.  
 
Parvati  was married  to Shiva,  but Shiva  seemed  to be fonder of Ganga  than of Parvati.  Parvati 
resolved that a way had to be found to remove Ganga from Shiva's hair. She tried persuasion,  but 
Shiva refused to  listen.  
 
At this time,  there  was a terrible  drought  on earth  which  went  on for fourteen  years.  The only 
place that was not affected by the drought was the sage Gouthama's hermitage. Other people  also 
gathered in the hermitage to save themselves from the drought and Goutama welcomed them  all. 
Ganesha thought that he might be able to devise a way to free his m other of the Ganga  problem. 
He went and began to live in Gouthama's  hermitage.  
 
Ganesha  cultivated  the acquaintance  of the other  sages  and become  quite  friendly  with them. 
One of Parvati's  companions  was Jaya.  Ganesha  told Jaya that she was to adopt  the form of a 
cow and eat up the grain  in Goutama's  fields.  And the moment  she was struck,  she was to lie 
down on the ground and pretend to be  dead.  
 
Goutama noticed that a cow was eating up his grain. He tried to drive away the cow by striking  it 
with a blade o f grass. As soon as he did this, the cow uttered a Srill bellow and fell down on  the 
ground.  Ganesha  and the other  sages  came  running  to see what  had happened.  They  discovered 
that, to all intents and purposes, a cow had been struck down dead by sage Gouta ma. They 
therefore refused to stay in an ashrama where such a sin had been  committed.  
 
Goutama tried to restrain them. "Please do not go away and forsake me," he said. "Tell me how  I 
may performed  penance."  
 
"You  will have  to bring  down  Ganga  from  Shiva's  hair,"  replied  Ganesh.  "When  that water 
touches the dead body of the cow, your sin will be  forgiven."  
 
"You  will have  to bring  down  Ganga  from  Shiva's  hair,"  replied  Ganesha.  "When  that water 
touches the dead body of the cow, your sin will be  forgiven."  
 
Ganesha  was so friendly  with the other  sages  that they all accepted  his solution.  Goutama  also 
agreed  to do the needful.  Accordingly,  Goutama  went  to Mount  Kailasa  and began  to pray to 
Shiva.  Shiva  was pleased  at Goutama's  tapasya  and offered  to grant  a boon. Goutama  naturally 
wanted  the boon  that Ganga  might  be brought  down  to earth.  Shiva  agreed.  It was thus that 
Ganga  was brought  down  to earth  by the sage Goutama.  Ganga  has four tributaries  in heaven, 
seven  on earth  and four in the underworld.  Since  it was Goutama  who brought  Ganga  down  to 
earth, the river is also known as Goutami  Ganga.  
  The Doves  
In a mountain known as Brahmagiri there used to live a hunter who was very cruel. He not  only 
killed birds and animals, but brahmanas and sages as  well.  
 
The h unter once went on a hunt. He killed many animals and birds and some he put in his  cages. 
He had penetrated  so far inside  the forest  that he was far from  home.  It became  night  and also 
started  to rain. Hungry  and thirsty,  the hunter  lost his way.  He climbe d up a tree and decided  to 
spend the night there. But his mind kept going back to his wife and children at  home.  
 
For many  years  a dove  and its family  had lived  happily  on that tree. Both  the male  and female 
had gone  out to look for food.  But although  the make  dove  had returned  to the nest, the female 
dove had not. In fact, the female had been captured by the hunter and was now inside a cage.  The 
male did not know this. He mourned for his  wife.  
These  words  of mourning  were  heard  by the female  dove  inside  the cage and she made  her 
presence felt. The male dove came down and discovered his wife inside the cage. "The hunter  is 
sleeping now, " he said. "Now is the time for me to free  you."  
 
"No," replied the female dove. "You know how it is with living beings. On e living being lives  on 
another. I can find not fault with the hunter, he is merely collecting his food. He is like a guest  to 
us. And it is our duty to offer up our bodies for the sake of a  guest."  
 
"You  are quite  right,"  said the male  dove.  "I lost my sense of propriety.  We have  to serve  our 
guest. But how do we serve our guest? We have nothing that we can call our  own."  
 
"At the moment  the hunter  is suffering  most  from  the cold,"  replied  the female  dove.  "We have 
to light a fire to warm him up. Go and fi nd a fire and bring plenty of dead leaves and branches  so 
that the fire may  burn."  
 
The male  dove  found  a flaming  branch.  He also brought  many  dry leaves  and branches  so that 
the fire could burn. The rain had stopped and the fire warmed up the  hunter.  
 
"Now," said the female  dove,  "free  me so that I may immolate  myself  in the fire. My roasted 
flesh will serve as food for the  hunter."  
 
"Never," replied the male dove. "It is my right to serve the guest  first".  
 
Saying this, the male dove hurled himself into t he fire. The hunter had heard the  entire 
conversation and marveled that two doves could be so altruistic. The female dove now  requested 
the hunter  to free her from  the cage.  And as soon  as he did this, the female  dove  also hurled 
herself into the  fire. 
This selfless deed of the two doves was so wonderful that a space vehicle (Vimana) came  down 
to take the two doves  straight  to heaven.  The cruel  hunter  was also impressed  and repented  his 
past misdeeds.  He told the doves,  "You  are indeed  blessed.  Before  you go to heaven,  please  tell 
me how I may perform penance for my sins."  
"Go to Goutami  Ganga  and bathe  there  for fifteen  days,"  replied  the doves.  "Your  sins will also 
be forgiven."  
 
The hunter did as he had been asked to. The place where the doves immolated  themselves 
became a holy tirtha known as kapotatirtha, since the word kapota means  dove.   
Garuda and  Maninaga  
You have  already  been  told about  the great  snake  (naga)  Ananta.  Ananta  had a son named 
Maninaga. Garuda was the enemy of the snakes and the snakes  were all afraid of  Garuda.  
 
Maninaga  began  to pray to Shiva.  Having  pleased  Shiva,  he obtained  the boon  that Garuda 
would  be able to do him no harm.  Armed  with this boon,  Maninaga  started  to wander  around  
freely and did not run away even when faced with G aruda. Garuda found this to be  exceedingly 
strange.  Although  he could  not kill Maninaga,  he captured  him and kept him imprisoned  in his 
own house.  
 
Shiva had a companion named Nandi. Nandi told Shiva, "Lord, what has happened to  Maninaga? 
We have not seen him for some time. I hope that Garuda has not done him some  harm."  
 
Shiva  of curse  knew  what  had happened.  He advised  Nandi  to pray to Vishnu.  Nandi  was to 
please Vishnu and then ask for the boon that Maninaga might be freed from  Garuda's 
imprisonment. Nan di did this and Vishnu asked Garuda to release  Maninaga.  
 
"Lord,"  Garuda  told Vishnu,  "this is very unfair.  Other  masters  treat their servants  really  well. 
They  give their servants  gifts.  See how Shiva  has sent Nandi  himself  to rescue  Shiva's  devotee 
Manin aga. You never  give me any gifts.  Moreover,  when  I obtain  something  on my own,  you 
ask me to relinquish  it. Is this proper  on your part?  It is on me that you ride when  you go out to 
fight  the demons.  They  get defeated  because  of my prowess.  And yet it tickles your ego no end 
to think that you have defeated them  yourself."  
 
Vishnu  smiled  and replied,  "Garuda,  you are quite  right.  You have  become  thin and learn  from 
bearing  my weight.  It is quite  true that I can defeat  the demons  only because  of your prowess.  
You have  a lot of strength.  Why  don't  you bear the weight  of my little finger  and demonstrate 
your strength?"  
 
Vishnu  placed  his little finger  on Garuda's  head.  So heavy  was the finger  that Garuda  was 
crushed against the  ground.  
 
"Please forgive me, said"  Garuda. "I have been very stupid. I am an ignorant ass and you are  the 
lord of everything. I have been completely flattened by the weight of your little finger. Please  tell 
me how I may regain my old self."  
 
Vishnu  asked  Nandi  to take Garuda  to Shiva.  Shiva would  find a way of restoring  Garuda's  old 
appearance.  Maninaga  was released  and Nandi  took Garuda  to Shiva.  Shiva  asked  Garuda  to 
bathe in Goutami Ganga. This would make his appearance normal  again.  
 
Garuda  did this. Not only was his old appearance  restored,  he became  stronger  and swifter  than 
he used to be. The place where Garuda bathed is a tirtha known as  Garudatirtha.  
   
 
Vishvamitra and Indra  
Many years ago, there was a terrible drought. There was no food to be had. The  sage 
Vishvamitra had come t o the banks of the river Goutami Ganga with his disciples.  Vishvamitra's 
wife, children and disciples were all hungry. The sage therefore sent his disciples out to look  for 
food.  They  searched  everywhere,  but could  find no food.  The only object  that they could find 
was the body of a dead dog. They brought this to  Vishvamitra.  
"We have no choice," Vishvamitra told his disciples. "Clean the meat carefully with water.  Then 
offer it to the gods, the sages and the ancestors. This is what we have to live  on." 
 
Offering  the meat  of a dog to the gods  was unheard  of. Indra  adopted  the form  of a hawk  and 
stole  the vessel  in which  the meat  was kept.  But Vishvamitra  got to know  about  this and got 
ready to curse Indra. Indra was naturally scared of Vishvamitra's curse. H e changed the  dog-meat 
into amrita (a heavenly drink) and brought the vessel  back.  
 
"I don't  want  amrita,"  Vishvamitra  told Indra.  "Bring  the dog-meat  back.  I don't  want  to have 
amrita when the whole world is starving for food. There is no food available a nd I do not see  any 
sin in eating dog -meat. Nor should there be a sin in offering it to the  gods."  
 
Indra was the god of rains. He realised that the only way to persuade Vishvamitra against  eating 
the dog-meat  was to make  it rain so that there  would  be an end to the drought.  Instructed  by 
Indra,  the clouds  poured  down  rain. Vishvamitra  and his disciples  now consented  to partake  of 
the amrita.  
 
The place where all this happened has come to be known as  Vishvamitratirtha.  
   
 
Shveta  
There  used to be a brahmana  named  Shveta.  He was a friend  of the sage Goutama  and had a 
hermitage on the banks of the Goutami Ganga. Shveta was also devoted to Shiva. In due course, 
Shiveta  died and Yama's  messengers  arrived  to take Shveta  to Yama.  But they could  not even 
enter Shiv eta's house.  
 
Finding  that Yama's  messengers  ere not returning,  Yama's  companion  Chitraka  told Yama, 
"What do you think has happened? Why aren't the messengers  returning?  
 
Yama  now sent his companion  Mrityu  (literally  death)  to find out what  was going  on. Mrityu 
went to Shveta's house and found Yama's messengers standing outside the house. They  explained 
that they were unable to enter the house because Shiva himself was guarding Shveta's body.  One 
of Shiva's companions asked Mrityu. "What are you doing here ? What do you  want?"  
 
"I have come to take Shveta to Yama," replied Mrityu. "His time on earth is  up." 
 
Mrityu  flung  a noose  to grasp  Shveta's  body.  But Shiva's  companion  struck  Mrityu  with a rod 
and killed him. When the news of this was taken to Yama, he was furious. With all  his 
companions he attacked Shveta's house. Nandi, Ganesha, Kartikeya and several of  Shiva's 
companions  came  to fight  on Shiva's  side, and a battle  royal  raged.  All the gods  arrived  to 
mediate and end the strife. Things had a got a bit  out of hand and Yama himself had been  killed 
by Kartikeya.  
 
The problem  seemed  to defy solution.  Yama  was, after all, performing  his duty.  But Shiva 
insisted that his devotees would never be taken to Yama, but would instead go straight to  heaven. 
Shiva's  condition  was  finally agreed  to.  Nandi  brought  water  from  the  Goutami  Ganga  and 
sprinkled  it on Yama  and the others  who had died in the fighting.  They  were  all immediately 
brought back to  life. 
   
 
Kubera  
Kubera was the eldest son of the sage Vi shrava. Vishrava had two wives. The fist wife give  birth 
to Kubera. The second wife was a rakshasa (demon) woman and gave birth to  Ravana, 
Kumbhakarna  and Vibhishana.  Kubera  used to rule in Lanka  and his relations  with his cousins 
were  extremely  good.  But Ravana's  mother  did not like idea of her sons mixing  so much  with 
Kubera.  
 
She called her sons and said, "What are you up to? Why do you cause me so much of pain?  You 
are demons  and Kubera  is a god. Is it proper  that you should  be so friendly  with him?  The 
relation  between  gods  and demons  is one of enmity.  Consider  Kubera's  pomp  and glory.  Have 
you got anything  like that to show  for yourselves?  Do something  so as to improve  your own 
statures." Thus instructed by their mother, Ravana, Kumbhakarna and Vibhish ana went off to  the 
forest to perform tapasya. They pleased Brahma with their prayers and desired the boon that  they 
might win over the kingdom of Lanka. Ravana also obtained the boon that he would  become 
very strong.  
 
Thus fortified with the boons, the d emons attacked Kubera and defeated him. They drove Kubera 
out of Lanka. Kubera possessed a beautiful Vimana named pushpaka. This was also  appropriated 
by Ravana. Ravana also made it known that whoever gave Kubera refuge would be killed  by 
him. This meant that no one dared give refuge to  Kubera.  
 
Kubera sought the advice of his grandfather Pulastya. Pulastya told him to go to the banks of  the 
Goutami Ganga and pray to Shiva there. Shiva appeared before Kubera and blessed him with  the 
boon that Kubera would become the god of all  wealth.  
   
 
Harishchandra  
In the Ikshvaku dynasty there ruled a king named Harishchandra. Harishchandra had no son.  One 
day two sages named Narada and Parvata came to visit Harishchandra and told him that  he 
would go to hell if he di d not have a  son. 
 
"How can I obtain a son?" asked  Harishchandra.  
 
"Go to the banks  of the Goutami  Ganga,"  advised  the sages.  "Pray  to the god Varuna  there.  We 
are sure that Varuna will grant you a  son."  
 
Harishchandra pleased Varuna with his prayers and a sked for a  son. 
 
"You will have a son," said Varuna. "But there is a condition attached. You will have  to 
subsequently organise a yajna in my honor and you will have to sacrifice your son at this  yajna. 
Tell me if this condition is acceptable to  you."  
"Yes  indeed," replied  Harishchandra.  
 
In due course, Harishchandra had a son who was named  Rohita.  
 
Varuna came to Harishchandra and asked, "What about the yajna in my  honor?"  
 
"My son is still too young,"  replied  Harishchandra.  "Let him at least attain  ten days of age. Till 
then, the baby is in any case impure and is not fit to be  sacrificed."  
 
After ten days Varuna came again and asked, "What about the yajna in my honor?  
 
"Please let him grow his teeth," replied Harishchandra. "Animals are sacrificed at yajna s. And  no 
one becomes an animal until he actually has  teeth."  
 
Varuna waited till the teeth grew and returned when Rohita was seven years of age. "What  about 
the yajna in my honor?" he  asked.  
 
"These are only milk teeth," replied Harishchandra. "These do n ot characterise an animal.  Please 
wait until his proper teeth have  grown."  
 
Varuna returned when the proper teeth grew and asked, "What about the yajna in my  honor?"  
 
"He is the son of kshatriya (the second of the four classes, a warrior class),"  replied 
Harishchandra. "But his training in the art of fighting has not even begun. He cannot be called  a 
kshatriya until he knows how to fight. Till that day he is an incomplete man. Do you really  want 
such an incomplete man as a  sacrifice?"  
 
After some years had passed, Rohita became skilled in the art of fighting and was appointed  the 
heir-apparent (yuvaraja) to the kingdom. He was then sixteen years of  age. 
 
Varuna appeared again and asked, "What about the yajna in my honor?"  
 This time the entire  conversation  took place  in front  of the prince  and Rohita  intervened  before 
Harishchandra could say anything. "Father," he said, "I have already resolved to perform a  yajna 
in Vishnu's honor. Grant me the permission to complete that first. After that, do what you  will."  
 
Rohita went off to the forest. Meanwhile, Varuna had had enough and he afflicted  Harishchandra 
with a painful stomach ailment. News of his father's illness was taken to Rohita in the forest.  In 
the forest, Rohita met a sage named Ajigarta. The sage was v ery poor and, together with his  wife 
and three sons, was  starving.  
 
"Will you sell one of your three sons to me?" asked Rohita. "The boy is needed for a  sacrifice."  
 
"I shall  not sell my eldest  son,"  said the sage.  "My wife will not permit  the youngest  one to be 
sold.  You can have  the one in the middle.  His name  is Shunahshepa.  The price  will be one 
thousand cows, one thousand golden coins, one thousand pieces of clothing and a lot of  wealth."  
Rohita paid the price and brought Shunahshepa home to  Harishchan dra. 
 
"We can't do this,"  said Harishchandra.  "It is the duty of kings  to protect  the brahmanas.  How 
can we sacrifice the son of a brahmana? It is better to die instead. Go and return Shunahshepa  to 
his father."  
 
Just then a divine voice was heard from hea ven. The voice said, "There is no need for anyone  to 
die. Take  Shunahshepa  to the banks  of the Goutami  Ganga  and perform  the yajna  to Varuna 
there.  Goutami  Ganga  is such a sacred  river  that no human  sacrifices  are needed  if a yajna  is 
performed  there.  
 
This is what  Harishchandra  did not Varuna  was satisfied.  As for Shunahshepa,  he was adopted 
by the sage Vishvamitra as a  son. 
   
Vriddhagoutama  
The sage Goutama had a son named Vriddhagoutama. Vriddhagoutama was also a sage. But  he 
was very ugly.  Besides,  he had no nose;  had never  had one since  he had been  born.  He was so 
ashamed of this deformity that he could not bear to join the other children of the sages  in 
studying  the Vedas  and Shastras  under  a teacher.  But Vriddhagoutama  knew  some  incantations 
(mantras) which he always chanted. He also worshipped the god  Agni.  
 
When  he grew  a bit older,  Vriddhagoutama  went  out to tour the world.  He traveled  to many 
places and met many people. Since he was deformed, he never got married. Who would want  to 
marry a person so  ugly as  he? 
 
In the course of his travels, Vriddhagoutama arrived at a mountain named Shitagiri.  He 
discovered  a beautiful  cave in the mountain  and thought  that this might  be a good  place  to live 
in. So he entered  the cave and was very surprised  to find an old woman  inside.  The old woman 
had obviously  been  living  inside  the cave for many  years.  Her body  was thin and wasted  from 
the rigours of severe  tapasya.  
 
Vriddhagoutama  was about  to touch  the feet of such a venerable  old woman,  but the woman 
restrained  him. "Please  don't  touch  my feet,"  said the woman.  "You  are my guru.  Does  a guru 
ever bow before his  disciple?"  
 
Vriddagoutama  was surprised  at these  words.  This was the first time in his life that he had met 
the old woman.  "How  can I be your guru?",  he asked.  "You  are much  older  than me. Besides,  I 
have  never  learnt  anything  and you are clearly  a respected  ascetic.  Your  words  are a complete 
mystery to  me."  
 
"Let me tell you my story," said the old woman. "Otherwise, you will not  understand."  
 
There  used to be a handsome  and brave  prince  named  Ritadhvaja.  He was the son of King 
Arshtishena.  Ritadhvaja  went  on a hunt to the forest  and arrived  at that very cave.  There  he 
happened  to meet  an apsara  named  Sushyama.  The two fell in love with each other  and got 
married.  But eventually,  Ritadhvaja  had to return  home  and Sushyama  gave  birth  to a daughter 
there. Sushyama left her daughter in the cave itself with the instruction that she was not to  leave 
the cave.  The first man to enter  the cave would  become  her husb and. It was this daughter  who 
had now become  the old woman.  Ritadhvaja  had reigned  for eighty  thousand  years.  After  that, 
ritadhvaja's  son had reigned  for ten thousand  years.  All this while,  Sushyama's  daughter  had 
lived in the cave, that is, for ninety th ousand years all  together.  
 
"Now you see that you are to be my husband," said the old woman. "Is a husband not a  guru?"  
 
"What you say is quite impossible," replied Vriddhagoutama. "You are much older than me. I  am 
only a thousand  years  old and you more  than ninety  thousand.  How  can we marry?  I am like a 
child next to  you."  
 
"If you do not marry me, I will kill myself," said the old  woman.  
 
"But I am ugly,"  protested  Vriddhagoutama.  "I will promise  you this much.  If I every  become 
handsome and learned, I wi ll indeed marry  you."   
"I have pleased the goddess Sarasvati, who presides over all learning, through my tapasya,"  said 
the old woman.  "She  will make  you learned.  I have  also pleased  the god Varuna  and he will 
make you  handsome."  
 
Vriddhagoutama became han dsome and learned and married the old woman. They lived  happily 
in the  cave.  
 
One day, various sages came to visit the couple. Amongst them there were sages like  Vashishtha 
and Vamadeva. But there were also young sages who ere not all that sensible. The yo unger  sages 
started to laugh at the sight of the young and handsome Vriddhagoutama and his aged  wife.  
 
"Who is this man?" they asked the old woman. "Is he your son or your  grandson?"  
 
The sages went away, but the couple felt ashamed. They asked the sage Ag astya what they  might 
do. Agastya told them to go and bathe in the river Goutami Ganga. The river is so sacred that  all 
one's  heart's  desires  are thereby  granted.  The couple  did this and prayed  to Vishnu  and Shiva. 
Wonder of wonders, the old woman became y oung and pretty. The place on the banks  of  the 
river where these wonderful things happened is a tirtha named  Vriddhasangama.  
  Pippalada  
Many  years  ago, there  used to be a sage named  Dadhici.  His wife was Lopamudra.  Dadhichi's 
hermitage was right next to t he holy river Ganga. Lopamudra's sister Gabhastini also used to  live 
in the hermitage.  Such  was the sage Dadhichi's  powers  that daityas  and danavas  dared  not set 
foot inside the  hermitage.  
The gods once fought with the demons and managed to defeat them. A fter the war was over,  they 
came to pay their respects to Dadhichi. Dadhichi welcomed his guests and wanted to know  how 
they were  faring.  
 
"Thanks to your blessings, we are fine," replied the gods. "We have just defeated the demons in a 
war. In fact, we have a slight  problem.  We no longer  need  our weapons  now that the demons 
have  run away.  We don't  know  of a safe place  where  we can store  all these  weapons.  We were 
wondering  if we might  keep  the weapons  in your ashrama.  This is one of the safest  places  that 
can be  found."  
 
Dadhichi consented to this proposal. The gods left their weapons in the hermitage and went  back 
to heaven.  
 
When  Lopamudra  heard  what  Dadhichi  had done,  she was not at all pleased.  "You  have  done 
something  that is mot improper,"  she told her husband.  "one should  never  accept  responsibility 
for someone  else's  property,  especially  if one is an ascetic  and has not material  possessions  of 
one's own. Moreover, you have agreed to store the weapons of the gods. Dose this not mean  that 
those who are  the god's enemies will look upon you too as an enemy? And what are you going  to 
do if something should happen to the weapons? Will the gods not blame you  then?"  
 
"Your points are well taken," said Dadhichi. "But I had not thought of them and I have given  the 
gods my word. I can't very well go back on my word  now."  
 
A hundred years passed. The gods did not return to collect their weapons. The weapons began  to 
lose their luster, Dadhichi did not know how the energy of the weapons might be preserved.  He 
washe d them with holy water and the energy of the weapons got dissolve in the water.  Dadhichi 
then drank up the water. As for the weapons themselves, they faded away once their energy  was 
gone.  
 
Finally the gods came to claim their weapons. "Can we have our wea pons back? They  asked. 
"Our enemies have become powerful again. We need our  weapons."  
"That  may be," said Dadhichi.  "But the weapons  are no longer  there.  I have  swallowed  up their 
energy.  Let me tell you what  can be done.  I will use the powers  of meditatio n (yoga)  to give up 
my life. Then excellent weapons can be made out of my  bones.  
 
The gods  were  reluctant,  but thee was no other  solution.  Dadhichi  died and the gods  requested 
Vishvakarma to make weapons for them out of Dadhichi's bones. Vishvakarma compli ed and  the 
weapon name vajra that he made was truly  remarkable.  
Lopamudra  was away  when  this incident  took place.  She returned  and found  that her husband 
had died.  She was afflicted  with sorrow  and wished  to immolate  herself  in a fire. But she 
happened  to be pregnant  at the time,  so that this could  not immediately  be done.  Once  the baby 
was born, she killed herself after having handed over the baby to a pippala (fig) tree for  rearing.  Since  the pippala  tree brought  up the boy, he came  to be known  as Pippa lada.  Chandra  was the 
lord over all trees. The trees asked Chandra for some amrita for Pippalada and Chandra  obliged. 
The amrita gave Pippalada a lot of  strength.  
 
When  Pippalada  grew  up, he wanted  to know  who his parents  were  and the trees  told him the 
story. Pippalada  blamed  the gods  for his parents  death  and decided  to seek revenge.  The trees 
brought Pippalada to  Chandra.  
 
"You  are still too young,"  said Chandra.  "First  you must  become  learned  and well-versed  in the 
use of weapons. Go to the forest of da ndakaranya. The river Goutami Ganga flows through  that 
forest. Pray to Shiva there and I am sure that your wishes will be  fulfilled."  
 
Pippalada pleased Shiva through his  prayers. 
"What boon do you desire?" asked  Shiva.  
I want the boon that I may be able t o destroy the gods," replied  Pippalada.  
 
"I have a third eye in the middle of my forehead," said Shiva. "The day you can see my third  eye, 
your wish will be  granted."  
 
"I have a third eye in the middle of my forehead," said Shiva. "the day you can see my third eye, 
your wish will be  granted."  
 
Try as he might,  Pippalada  could  not see Shiva's  third  eye. Pippalada  therefore  performed  even 
more difficult tapasya for even more years. Eventually he managed to see Shiva's third eye.  From 
Shiva's third eye was bor n a demon that looked like a  mare.  
 
"What is your desire?" asked the demon of  Pippalada. 
"Kill my enemies, the gods," was the  reply.  
The demon immediately attacked  Pippalada.  
 
"What  are you doing?"  asked  Pippalada.  "Why  are you trying  to kill me? I asked  you to kill the 
gods."  
 
"But your body has bee created by the gods," replied the demon. "I will therefore kill you  also."  
 
Pippalada ran to Shiva for deliverance. Shiva earmarked a region inside the forest for  Pippalada. 
There the demon was not permitted to  enter. Pippalada lived there, protected from the ravages  of 
the demon. Meanwhile, the gods requested Shiva to save them as well. Shiva  persuaded 
Pippalada  to control  his anger.  He convinced  Pippalada  that nothing  was to be gained  by killing 
the gods. That  would not bring his parents  back.  
Pippalada  agreed.  But he wished  to see his parents  once.  Accordingly,  Vimana  descended  from 
heaven  on which  Dadhichi  and Lopamudra  were  seated.  They  blessed  Pippalada  and asked  him 
to marry and have  children.  
 
As for the  demon, it became a river and merged with the holy  Ganga.  
 Nageshvara  
There was a city named Pratishthana. A king named Shurasena ruled in that city. Shurasena  did 
not have  any sons.  After  a lot of effort,  a son was born to him. But the son happened  to be a 
snake. The king and the queen were mortified at this turn of events. But they brought up their  son 
in great secrecy. Not even the king's ministers and priests knew that the prince was a  snake.  
 
When the prince grew slightly, he began to talk like a human , even though he was a snake.  King 
Shurasena arranged for the prince's education. After the snake had become learned in  the 
knowledge  of the Vedas,  he told his father,  "Father,  it is time for me to get married.  If I do not 
have a son, I am certain to go to  naraka."  
 
King Shurasena was very surprised to hear this. "How is that possible?" he asked.  "Which 
princess will consent to marry a  snake?"  
 
"I don't  know,"  replied  the prince.  "But I do know  that I have  to get married.  Other  wise,  I will 
commit  suicide.  There  are many  forms  of marriage  that are permissible.  Perhaps  a princess  can 
be kidnapped and married to  me." 
 
Shurasena called his ministers and told them, "My son Nageshvara has now come of age. He has 
also been  made  the heir-apparent  to the kingdom.  There is no one equal  to him in bravery  on 
earth, in heaven or in the underworld. I am getting old. Please arrange for Nageshvara to  get 
married. I shall then relinquish my kingdom and retire to the  forest."  
 
The king did not of course tell his ministers tha t Nageshvara was a  snake.  
 
Shurasena had an aged minister. This minister reported that there was a king named Vijaya  who 
ruled  in the eastern  part of the country.  King  Vijaya  had eight  sons and one daughter.  The 
daughter's  name  was Bhogavati  and she was very beautiful.  She would  be the right  match  for 
Nageshvara.  
 
The aged  minister  was sent as a messenger  to Vijaya  and the king agreed  to the match.  There 
was a custom amongst kshatriyas that the bride did not always have to be married to  the 
bridegroom  in person.  She could  also be married  to the bridegroom's  sword  or some  other 
weapon. The minister explained to King Vijaya that there were some private reasons which  made 
it impossible  for Nageshvara  to come  in person  for the marriage.  Bhogavati  should  be marri ed 
off to Nageshvara's sword. Vijaya consented to this and the marriage ceremony was  performed. 
The entire retinue then returned to the city of  Pratishthana.  
But what  was to be done  now that the marriage  was over?  Nageshvara's  mother  sent a made  to 
Bhogav ati. The maid  was to tell Bhogavati  that her husband  was actually  a snake  and then 
observe her  reaction.  
 
The maid told Bhogavati, "Your husband is a god, but he has the form of a  snake."  
 
"That is my good fortune," replied Bhoavati. "Normally, women are m arried to men. I must  have 
performed many good deeds in my earlier life to have been married to a  god."  
 
Bhogavati  was then brought  to Nageshvara  and at the sight  of Bhogavati,  Nageshvara 
remembered his earlier life. He used to be a snake (naga) in his ear lier life and was a  companion 
of Shiva's. His wife in the earlier life was  Bhogavati.   
There  had bee an occasion  when  Shiva  had laughed  at a joke of parvati's  and Nageshvara  had 
also laughed.  This had annoyed  Shiva  and he had cursed  Nageshvara  that he woul d be born on 
earth  as the son of a human,  but in the form  of a snake.  When  he went  and bathed  in Goutami 
Ganga,  the period  of the curse  would  be over.  When  Nageshvara  recounted  these  incidents  to 
Bhogavati, she also remembered her earlier life. The two wen t and bathed in the scared river  and 
Nageshvara  obtained  a handsome  and divine  form.  Nageshavara  ruled  after Shurasena's  death. 
And when Nageshvara and Bhogavati died, they went back to Kailasa to live with  Shiva.  
 
On the banks of the Goutami Ganga, Nagesh vara and Bhogavati built a temple to Shiva. This is  a 
famous tirtha known as  Nagatirtha.  
   
 
Brahma's  Head  
Years  ago, there  was a war between  the gods  and the demons  and the gods  lost. The gods  came 
to Brahma for advice and Brahma asked them to pray to  Shiva.  
 
When  Shiva  appeared  before  them,  the gods  said, "The  demons  have  defeated  us. Please  kill 
them and save  us." 
 
Shiva  went  to fight  with the demons.  He drove  the demons  off from  Mount  Sumeru  and out of 
heaven.  He pursued  them  to the ends of the earth.  All this exertion  made  Shiva  sweat.  And 
wherever  the drops  of sweat  fell down  on the ground,  terrible  ogresses  named  matris  were 
created. The matris also started to kill the demons and pursued them down to the  underworld.  
 
While the matris were killing the dem ons in the underworld, Brahma and the other dos waited  on 
the banks of the river Goutami Ganga. This place came to be known as  Pratishthana.  
 
When the matris had killed all the demons, they returned to earth and began to live on the  banks 
of the Goutami Ga nga. This tirtha has come to be known as  matritirtha.  
 
Brahma  used to have  five heads.  The fifth head  was in the shape  of a donkey's  head.  When  the 
demons  were  running  away  to the underworld,  this donkey's  head  addressed  the demons  and 
said, "why  are you running  away?  Come  back  and fight  with the gods.  I shall  aid you in your 
fight."  
 
The gods  were  alarmed  at this paradoxical  situation.  Brahma  was helping  them  in their flight 
with the demons  and Brahma's  fifth head  was trying  to help the demons.  They  went  to Vishnu 
and said, "Please cut off Brahma's fifth head. It is causing too much of  confusion."  
 
"I can do what you want," replied Vishnu, "but there is a problem. When the cut -off head falls  on 
earth, it will destroy the earth. I think you should pray to S hiva to find a way  out."  
 
The gods prayed to Shiva and Shiva agreed to cut off the head. But what was to be done with  the 
severed head? The earth refused to bear it and so did the ocean. Finally it was decided that  Shiva 
himself would bear the  head.  
 
The place where  Shiva  cut off Brahma's  fifth head  is known  as rudratirtha.  Ever  since  that day, 
Brahma  has had four heads  and is known  as Chaturmukha  (chatur  connotes  four and mukha 
connotes  face).  There  is a temple  to Brahma  on the banks  of the Goutami  Ganga.  This is a holy 
place known as brahmatirtha. A killer of brahmanas is pardoned his sin if he visits this  temple.  
   
 
The Owl and the  Dove  
A dove used to live on the banks of the Goutami Ganga. The dove's name was Anuhrada and  its 
wife's name was Heti. Anuhrada  was Yama's  grandson.  
 
Not very far away,  there  lived  an owl named  Uluka.  The owl's  wife was called  Uluki.  The owls 
were descended from the god  Agni.  
 
The doves and the owls were enemies. They fought amongst themselves continually. The  doves 
had received  all sorts  of weapons  from  Yama  and the owls  had received  all sorts  of weapons 
from Agni. These divine weapons threatened to burn up everything. But Yama and  Agni 
intervened.  They  persuaded  the owls  and the doves  to forget  their enmity  and live together  as 
friends.  The place  where  the doves  lived  came  to be known  as a tirtha  named  yamyatirtha.  And 
the place where the owls lived came to be known as  Agnitirtha.  
   
 
The Hunter  
There  was a sage named  Veda.  He used to pray to Shiva  every  day. The prayers  lasted  till the 
afternoon and after the prayers were over, Veda used to go to the nearby villages to beg  alms.  
 
A hunter  named  Bhilla  used to come  to the forest  every  afternoon  to hunt.  After  the hunt was 
over,  he used to come  to Shiva's  linga  (image)  and offer  to Shiva whatever  it was that he had 
hunted.  In the process  of doing  this, he often  moved  Veda's  offerings  out of the way.  Strange 
though it might seem, Shiva was stirred by Bhilla's offerings and eagerly used to wait for it  every 
day. Bhilla and Veda never met.  But Veda noticed that every day his offerings lay scattered  and 
a little bit of meat  lay by the side. Since  this always  happened  when  Veda  had gone  out to beg 
for alms, Veda did not know who was responsible. One day, he decided to wait in hiding so as  to 
catch the culprit  red-handed.  
 
While Veda waited, Bhilla arrived and offered what he had brought to Shiva. Veda was  amazed 
to discover that Shiva himself appeared before Bhilla and asked, "Why are you late today? I  have 
been waiting for you. Did you get very tired?"  
 
Bhilla  went  away  after making  his offerings.  But Veda  came  up to Shiva  and said, "What  is all 
this? This is a cruel and evil hunter, and yet, you appear before him. I have been  performing 
tapasya for so many years and you never appear before me. I am disgusted at this partiality. I  will 
break your linga with this  stone."  
 
"Do it if you must," replied Shiva. "But please wait till  tomorrow."  
 
Next day, when Veda came to present his offerings, he found traces of blood on top of the  linga. 
He care fully washed away the traces of blood and completed his  prayers.  
 
After some time, Bhilla also came to present his offerings and discovered traces of blood on  top 
of the linga.  He thought  that he was in some  way responsible  for this and blamed  himself  for 
some unknown transgression. He picked up a sharp arrow and began to pierce his  body 
repeatedly with this arrow as  punishment.  
 
Shiva  appeared  before  both of them  and said, "Now  you see the difference  between  Veda  and 
Bhilla.  Veda  has given  me his offerings , but Bhilla  has given  me his whole  soul.  That is the 
difference between ritual and true  devotion."  
 
The place where Bhilla used to pray to Shiva is a famous tirtha known as  bhillatirtha.  
   
 
Goutama and Manikundala  
There  was a city named  Bhouvana.  In that city there  lived  a brahmana  named  Goutama.  The 
brahmana had a vaishya (trader and agriculture caste) friend named  Manikundala.  
 
Goutama's  mother  gave  him a lot of ill advice.  As a result  of this, Goutama  told Manikundala, 
"Let us go to other countries to tra de and make  profits."  
 
"But my father  has a lot of wealth,"  replied  Manikundala.  "What  is the need  to obtain  more 
wealth?"  
 
"You  don't  have  the proper  perspective,"  said Goutama.  "A successful  person  is one who does 
not thrive on what is left to him by his  father. He makes his own  fortune."  
 
Manikundala was convinced by Gountama's logic. He did not realise that his so -called friend  was 
out to defraud  him. 
 
The two friends set out on their journey, Manikundala providing all the  capital.  
In the course  of their travels  Goutama  remarked,  "Have  you noticed  how those  who follow  the 
path of dharma (righteousness) always suffer? They are neither wealthy nor happy. There  seems 
to be no point in being  righteous."  
 
"Please don't say that," protested manikundala. "Happ iness lies in following the path of  dharma. 
Poverty and misery are inevitable, they are of no account at  all." 
 
The two friends  argued  over this, but could  not decide  who was right.  They  resolved  to have  a 
bet. They  would  ask the opinions  of others.  And whoever  lost the bet would  surrender  all his 
wealth to the winner. They asked many people for their opinions. Naturally most people said  that 
it was the evil who thrived and prospered. And it was the righteous who suffered. The upshot  of 
this was that Maniku ndala surrendered all his wealth to Goutama. But Manikundala continued  to 
praise  dharma.  
 
"You are an utter ass," said Goutama. "Haven't you lost all your wealth to me? Yet you continue 
to praise  dharma."  
 
"The  wealth  is of no account  at all," replied  Mani kundala.  "Dharma  is on my side and your 
apparent victory is only an illusion. Dharma will triumph in the  end."  
 
The two friends  decided  to have  another  bet. This time it was agreed  that whoever  lost the bet 
would have his two arms chopped off. They again a sked several people and most people said  that 
is was adharma (evil) which triumphed. So Manikundala lost his two  arms.  
 
"How does it feel now?" asked  Goutama.  
 
"The  same  as ever,"  replied  Manikundala.  "What  is important  is dharma.  And dharma  is on my 
side." 
 
Goutama  lost his temper  at this. He threatened  to cut off Manikundala's  head  if Manikundala persisted in his praise of dharma. But Manikundala was unperturbed. The friends decided to have 
another bet. This time it was agreed that whoever lost would forf eit his life. Manikundala lost  yet 
again. And Goutama gouged out Manikundala's eyes and left him for  dead.  
 
Manikundala  lay on the banks  of the Goutami  Ganga  and pondered  about  the fate that had 
befallen him. It became  night.  
 
There  was an image  of Vishnu  on the banks  of the river  and the rakshasa  Vibhishana  used to 
come there every night to pray to Vishnu. Vibhishana's son discovered Manikundala lying  there 
and found out from him the entire story. He recounted the story to his  father.  
 
"Many years ago, I h ad joined Rama in his fight with Ravana," Vibhishana told his  son. 
"Ragvana's  son Meghanada  shot a venomous  arrow  at Rama's  brother  Lakshmana.  Lakshmana 
fell unconscious.  The monkey  Hanuman  then went  to the Himalayas  and brought  a mountain 
named Grandhamad ana to Lanka. On that mountain there was a wonderful herb  named 
vishalyakarani  which  cures  all  illnesses.  When  Hanuman  returned  the  mountain  to  the 
Himalayas, a bit of the vishalyakarani fell down at this spot. Near Vishnu's image. Let us try  and 
find it. We should be able to cure  Manikundala."  
 
Father and son hunted for the herb. The vishalyakarani had become a huge tree. They lopped  off 
a branch and placed it on Manikundala's chest. Manikundala immediately regained his eyes  and 
arms. After cur ing Manikundala, Vibhishana and his retinue returned to  Lanka.  
 
Manikundala began to travel. He eventually came to a city named Mahapura where a king  named 
Maharaja  ruled.  Maharaja  had no sons,  only a daughter.  The daughter  was blind.  Maharaja  had 
announce d that whoever  cured  his daughter  would  become  his son-in-law and rule after him. 
Manikundala  cured  the princess  with his knowledge  of the vishalyakarani.  He then married  the 
princess and became king of Mahapura after  Maharaja.  
 
Many years later, Goutama w as brought before Manikundala by the soldiers. He had  been 
arrested  on the charge  of committing  a crime.  Goutama  had lost all his wealth  by then and was 
no more than a beggar. Manikundala pardoned his friend and shared with him whatever he  had. 
 
Such  are the virtues  of following  the path of dharma.  There  are many tirthas  along  the banks  of 
the Goutami Ganga where these wonderful incidents took  place.  
   
 
Kandu  
There  was a sage named  Kandu.  He had a hermitage  on the banks  of the Goutami  Ganga.  The 
ashrama was a  beautiful place and Kandu performed very difficult tapasya there. In the  summer 
Kandu  meditated  in the hot sun, in the monsoon  he meditated  on the wet ground,  and in the 
winter he meditated dressed in wet  clothing.  
 
Indra  got sacred  as a result  of all this tapasya.  He thought  that the sage Kandu  might  want  to 
become Indra the king of the gods. He therefore called an apsara named disturb  Kandu's 
tapasya."  
 
Pramalocha  went  to the hermitage  and began  to sing there  in a beautiful  voice.  This disturbed 
Kandu an d he discovered a beautiful woman wandering around in his  ashrama.  
 
"Who are you?" Kandu asked the  woman.  
 
"I have come here to pluck flowers," replied Pramalocha. "I am your servant. I will do  whatever 
you wish me  to." 
 
Kandu  had fallen  in love with Prama locha  and he married  her. He forgot  all about  his tapasya 
and Indra  heaved  a sigh of relief.  Years  passed.  Pramalocha  wished  to return  to heaven,  but 
Kandu would not let  her. 
 
After  years  and years  had passed,  Kandu  came  out of his hut, looking  rather  distracted.  It was 
then evening and Kandu was obviously going  somewhere.  
"Where are you going?" Pramalocha  asked.  
 
"What a stupid question!" exclaimed Kandu. "Can't you see that it is now evening? I have got  to 
go and observe the evening rites. The day has  passed."  
 
"What day?", asked Pramalocha. "Several days have passed and several evenings have come  and 
gone."  
 
"No, you came here this morning," said Kandu. "I brought you to my hut and it is now evening,  I 
don't understand what you are trying to say. Explain  yourself."  
 
"It is true that I came  here in the morning,"  answered  Pramalocha.  "But that was a morning 
which dawned many years ago. Hundreds of years have passed since that  day."  
 
"How many years?" asked Kandu. "When did you come  here?'  
 
"Sixteen hundred years, six months and three days ago," replied  Pramalocha. 
"Are you sure?" asked Kandu. "It seems like a single day to  me."  
"I am sure," said Pramalocha. "I dare not lie to  you."  
 
"You  have  dislodged  me from  my tapasya,"  responded  Kandu.  "But I will not curse you, since you have been my wife. Go back to heaven. I have to atone for my sins."  
 
The sage Kandu  went  to Purshottama  kshetra  and performed  penance  for his sins. He was 
blessed by  Vishnu.  
 
Kandu and Pramalocha had a daughter named  Marisha.  
 
The Brahma  Purana  also describes  several  other  tirthas.  Most  of these  are on the banks  of the 
river Goutami Ganga. This is now identified as the river  Godavari.  
 
After describing these several tirthas, the text describes incidents in Krishna's life. These we  will 
skip, since they are described in much greater detail in the other  Puranas.  
   
 
VarnA  Ashrama  
There are four varnas (classes). Their names are brahmana, kshatriya, vaishya and  shudra.  
 
The duties of a brahmana are to donate alms, perform tapasya, worship the go ds, perform  yajnas 
and study  the Vedas.  To earn a living,  brahmanas  are authorized  to teach  and act as priests  at 
sacrifices. The duties of kshatriya are to beat arms and protect the earth, donate alms and  perform 
sacrifices. A kshatriya is also permitted to study the shastras. The duties of a vaishya  are 
agriculture,  animal  husbandry  and  trade.  That  apart,  vaishyas  should  donate  alms,  perform  
sacrifices and study the shastras. The duties of a shudra are to serve brahmanas. Shudras can  also 
be sh opkeepers and  artisans.  
 
In times of emergency, a brahmana is allowed to adopt the livelihoods of kshatriyas or  vaishyas 
to earn a living. In similar fashion, a kshatriya is permitted to adopt the livelihoods of vaishyas  or 
shudras and a vaishya is permitt ed to adopt the livelihoods of  shudras.  
 
There  are four ashramas  (stages  of life) as well.  The first of these  is known  as brahmacharya 
(celibate  studenthood).  During  this period,  the individual  spends  his days with his guru and 
studies  the Vedas  well.  He has to serve  his guru in proper  fashion  and live on alms.  The next 
ashrama  is that of Grihastha  (householder  stage).  The individual  now gets married  and has 
children. He serves the gods, the sages, the ancestors and guests. It is householders who  provide 
alms for sages  and hermits.  That is the reason  why the householder  stage  is so very important. 
The third ashrama is known as vanaprastha (forest -dwelling stage). The individual now retires  to 
the forest  and withdraws  his mind  from  the earthly  life. He can leave his wife in the care of his 
sons or take her with him. He lives on roots, fruits and leaves and makes a bed for himself  under 
the trees. He is not permitted to shave or cut his hair and his clothes have to be made out of  bark 
or skins.  The final ashram a is that of sannyasa  (hermithood).  A hermit  gives  up all association 
with the world and lives alone. He grows completely detached. He lives alone. He gets his  food 
through begging. He is not permitted to spend more than one night in a village, or more tha n five 
nights at a time in a  city. 
   
 
The Chandala and the  Brahmarakshasa  
A chandala is an outcast. On the outskirts of the city named Avanti lived a chandala. There was  a 
temple of Vishnu in Avanti and the chandala was devoted to Vishnu. He was also a good  singer. 
Ekadashi tithi is the eleventh lunar day. Every month, on ekadashi tithi, the chandala would  fast 
during  the day. At night  he would  go to Vishnu's  temple  and sing praises  of Vishnu.  He never 
failed to observe this  ritual.  
 
The river  Kshipra  (Shipra ) flowed  by the city of Avanti.  On one particular  night,  on ekadashi 
tithi, the chandala went to the banks of the river to collect some flowers for worshipping  Vishnu. 
On the banks of the river there was a tree and on that tree there lived a brahmarakshasa  (demon). 
As soon as the demon saw the chandala, it wished to devour  him. 
 
"Please  not tonight,"  said the chandala.  "I have  to worship  Vishnu  throughout  the night.  Let me 
go now."  
 
"Not on you life," replied the demon. "I have not eaten for ten days and I am famished. I can't  let 
you go." 
 
"Please,  " said the chandala,  "let me go. I promise  that I will come  back  once  the prayers  are 
over. You will then be free to do with me as you  will."  
 
The demon  let the chandala  go. The chandala  went  to the temple.  He worshipped  Vishnu  and 
spent the night in singing Vishnu's praises. Next day, he returned to the  demon.  
"I am indeed  surprised,"  said the demon.  "You  are very truthful.  You can't be a chandala.  You 
must be a brahmana. Answer my questions. What did you do all  night?"  
 
"I stood outside Vishnu's temple and sang his praise," replied the  chandala. 
"For how long have you been doing this?" asked the  demon.  
"For twenty years," was the chandala's  reply.  
 
"You  have  acquired  a lot of punya  (store  of merit)  through  this," said the demon.  "Please  grant 
me one night's punya, I am  sinner."  
 
"No," replied the chandala. "I will not part with my punya. I have given you my body, eat me  if 
you will. But the punya is mine  own."  
 
"Very well then,' said the demon. "Give me two hours ' worth of punya. I am a  sinner."  
 
"I have  told you I will not give you any of my punya,"  replied  the chandala.  "But what  is your 
sin?"  
 
The brahmarakshasa related his story. His name was Somasharma and he was the son  of 
Devasharma. Devasharma was a righte ous brahmana. But Somasharma fell into evil ways.  A 
brahmana  is not authorised  to act as a priest  in a sacrifice  before  he has had his sacred -thread 
ceremony (upanayana). But Somasharma became a priest at a yajna even though his  upanayana had not been  held. As a result  of this sin, when  he died,  he became  a demon.  The chandala  was 
stirred to pity at this sad story and parted with some of his punya. The demon was delighted  and 
expressed  his gratitude.  He went  to a tirtha  and performed  penance.  Thus  it was that the demon 
was freed.  
 
What  about  the chandala?  He returned  home  and then left for a tour of all the sacred  places  of 
pilgrimage. At one such tirtha. He remembered the story of his earlier  life. 
 
He used to be a hermit  well-versed  in the Vedas  and the shastras.  He used to beg alms  for a 
living.  Once  he had obtained  some  alms.  But some  thieves  were  then in the process  of stealing 
cows,  and the hooves  of the cows  raised  a cloud  of dust.  The dust fell onto the food and the 
hermit threw away the alms in disgu st. Since he had thrown away alms, he was born as  a 
chandala. After performing penance for this sin, the chandala was  pardoned.  
   
 
Yoga  
The word yoga means union. Yoga is thus a form of meditation that unites the human  soul 
(atman) with the divine soul (Para matman), or equivalently, with the divine essence  (Brahman).  
 
A practitioner of yoga has to study the Puranas, the Vedas and history He has  to  exercise 
restraint  regarding  the sort of food he eats. The best forms  of food are yoghurt  fruits,  roots  and 
milk. Yoga  should  be practiced  in a place  that is pleasant.  It should  not be too hot or too cold 
there. Nor should there be any noise to distract the  practitioner.  
 
Yoga  has to be performed  in a proper  posture  (asana).  The practitioner  concentrates  the entire  
focus of his mind on the tip of his nose. He contemplates the form of brahmana. This can only  be 
successful if one is detached and controls one's senses  completely.  
 
If yoga  is performed  properly,  there  comes  the knowledge  that the same  Paramatman  is in all 
living beings. To think that living beings are distinct from one another is only to fall prey to  one's 
illusions. All the elements have the same Paramatman in  them.  
   
 
Epilogue  
Romaharshana  said to the sages  who had assembled  in naimisharanya,  "Many  years  ago, the 
great Veda Vyasa had recited the adi Purana to sages. The sages had been delighted to learn  the 
wisdom that was in the great Brahma Purana. Whatever Veda Vyasa had told those sages, I have 
now recited before you. Everyone should listen to a recit al of this Purana, be he a householder  or 
a hermit."  
 
A brahmana who listens to a recital of the Brahma Purana becomes learned, a kshatriya  becomes 
victorious, a vaishya becomes rich and a shudra achieves happiness. One who listens to  the 
recital  faithful ly attains  all his wishes.  The fruits  of listening  to such a recital  are superior  to 
visiting the most holy of tirthas or performing the most difficult of  yajnas.  
 
Romaharshana blessed the sages and returned to his own hermitage, with the express  injunctio n 
that the secrets of the Purana should never be divulged to atheists who did not believe in  God.  
 