                                                               Brahmananda  Purana  
 
It is the eighteenth  Purana.  It has 1200  verses.  Presently  available  in separate  parts.  We 
do not have  the full text. Hence  we have  given  the three  important  ones  which  we have:  
1. About the Mokshada  Ekadasi.  
2. The Lalitopakhyanam about Devi Lalita Tripura Sundari . This also contains  the 
Lalita Sahasranama Stotra and the Lalita Trishati Stotra, both of which are in our  Stotras  
section.  
3. Also included is the The Sons of Sagara section - an interesting story by Rishi  Jaimini  
according to which they dug into the earth to find a horse in Patala loka. A lot of  people  
site this as an example to support the "hollow earth  theory".  
This Purana has four parts - Prakriya, Anushanga, Upotaghat and Upasamhar.  This 
Purana is said to be narrated by Sutaji on the bank of the river Drishdvati in  Yaksh  
kshetra (identified with Sutlej in modern Himachal Pradesh). From his narration, it is  clear  
that Sutaji had heard the Purana from Veda Vyasa who, in his turn, received it  from 
Vayudev.  
Creation of the universe, determination of Kalpa, differentiation of Yugas, description  of 
Manvantaras, description of Jambudweep and Bharatvarsh, description of  Kimpurush.  
Anudweep, Ketumaal varsh etc. and description of Bharat vansha, Prithu vansha,  Dev 
vansh, Rishi vansh, Agni vansh and preceptors are the main topics of Brahmand  Purana.  
Sages,  the dynasties  of rulers  and the legends  of Pitas  and their propitiation,  the conflict  
between Karttikeya, King of Hihayas and Bhargava Parasurama.. Subsidiary episodes  as 
that of Sagara, the lineage of Vaivasvata Manu and the dissolution of universe,  the 
ultimate  annihilation.  
Described in the Purana, Adhyatma Ram ayana has seven parts. First part describes  the 
Brahmaswarup (cosmic appearance) of Shri Rama. Incarnation of Lord Rama to  relieve  
the earth from the atrocities of the demons. Baal -leela (childhood plays). Emancipation  of 
Ahilya. Removal of Bhargava's (Par ashuram's) ego. Second part contains: Lord  Rama  
going  into exile.  Demise  of Dashrath.  Aranyakanda  describes  killing  of the illusionary  deer 
and abduction of Sita. Kishkindha khand describes the killing of Baali. Search of  Sita. 
Sundar Khand has the tales o f Hanuman's entry into Lanka. Lanka kanda contains  the 
description of killing of Ravana and coronation of Lord Rama upon his return to  Ayodhya.  
In Uttar Khand reasons for Ravana's birth have been described. It also contains  the 
description  of Sita?s  desertion  by Rama.  Desertion  of Lakshmana.  Coronation  of Luv and 
Kush and departure of Rama to his original Vaikunth  loka.  
   
Lalitopakhyanam  
It is the most important section of this Purana. The narration is written in the form  of 
conversation between Hayagreeva and the sage Agastya. Hayagreeva in this context is  a 
seer.  There  is a celestial  of the same  name.  Who are they?  We get the reply  for this also 
in the text.There is a detailed description in the book establishing the  harmonious  
synthesis of the aspects of the three deities Shiva, Vishnu and the Divine Mother. In  the 
past several  devotees  used  to daily recite  Lalitopakhyana,  the detailed  story  of Lalita.  This 
pious story contains the inner meanings of the several technical terms o f the spiritual  
science and the finer aspects of the Mantra Shastra (the science of holy chants). Let  us 
enjoy the feast of nectar by listening to this pious story with deep  devotion.  
   
Penance of Agastya . Long ago, the mountain Vindhya (central India) star ted growing  
upward in gigantic proportion due to egoism. The sage Agastya decided to subdue  the 
pride of Vindhya. For this purpose, he came from Varanasi (Uttara Pradesh, India)  and 
settled in South India. By the divine presence of the sage Agastya, the en tire SouthIndia  
gradually became prosperous and pious. Eventually the Kali Yuga started (As per  the 
tradition  of India,  Kali Yuga  is the fourth  Age, the others  being  Kruta,  Treta  and Dvapara).  
In spite  of the severe  inspection  ofthe  sage  Agastya,  the evil traits  of the Kali Yuga  started  
sprouting slowly. Noting this trend, the sage felt sad and proceeded on a pilgrimage.  The 
strange  and unrighteous  ways of  the people  made  him quite  unhappy.  There  was rampant  
selfishness  and sensuousness  prevalent  everywhere.  ―How  can thesepeople  attain  
liberation?‖ – This was his nagging grief. After reaching Kanchi (Tamil Nadu – South   
India) he was unable to bear the burden of the grief, and performed severe  penance  
meditating on Varadaraja (The Best of the boon givers – a synonym of Vishnu).  God‘s  
ways are mysterious! His power of illusion is incomprehensible! Vishnu appeared to  the 
sage in the form of  Hayagreeva.  
Agastya  asked  Hayagreeva  ―OhLord!  What is the path of salvation  to these  ignorant  
people‖?  
Hayagreeva replied ―There are two paths  for this. They are: 
a) After  renouncing  everything,  one can attain  the knowledge  of the, attributeless  aspect  
of God. This is a very difficult  way. 
b) The second method is to worship the Divine Mother who is the form of Vishnu  with 
attributes. Even a sinner can do the worship. There is another advantage in this type.  The 
devotee can simultaneously get enjoyment and salvation by following this path‖.  Further,  
Vishnu  ordered  to the sage  Agastya  ―You have  to propagate  this divine  secret in the 
entire  world‖.  
The sage  asked,  ―Lord  Vishnu!  Kindly  narrate  the story  of Para  Shakti  (The 
UltimatePower, the Divine Mother) who is your aspect with attributes  ‖. 
At this stage, Vishnu asked sage Hayagreeva (born with the Lord‘s aspects) to tell  the 
detailed story to  Agastya.  
"The Divine Mother emanated from meditation of Brahma (the Creator). Her name  then 
was Prakruti (The nature). Mohini Avatara. For the second t ime, the Divine  Mother  
manifested as Mohini at the time of the churning the ocean by the celestials and  the 
demons (to obtain Amruta -nectar). Let us see how it  happened.  
Once upon a time, Indra (the Lord of the Heaven was overpowered by the pride of  his 
prosperity.  His reverence  to even  Shiva  gradually  diminished.  Observing  this, Shiva  asked  
the sage Durvasa to meet Indra in the Heaven. The sage started taking the path  of 
Gandharvas (the celestial singers), which was very beautiful. The sage app eared  uglier  
than a beggar. Anyway he proceeded ahead pompously. On the way the sage saw  a 
celestial  lady holding  a fragrant  garland  of divine  flowers.  The ugly looking  sage  asked  the 
beautiful  lady, ―Where  did you get this garland‖?  
She observed him keenly and realised that he was a sage. She prostrated to him  and 
replied  humbly  ―Sir!  I am just now returning  after doing  the worship  of the Divine  Mother,  
who manifested and gave me this garland as Prasadam‖. Jumping joyously, the  sage  
asked her to give the garland to him. She happily handed it over to the sage  and, 
prostrated  to him. The sage  blessed  her ―May  your devotion  to the Divine  mother  be firm‖.  
Taking leave of the sage, she went away. By this incident, the sage realised that it  was 
not difficult to others to recognise him, even if he was in any ugly appearance. He  was 
satisfied with this thought and proceeded  further.  
After a while, he saw Indra riding the elephant Iravata. The sage approached Indra,  who 
did not appear to recognise and prostrate to the sage. However, the sage did not  get 
angry  and said,  ―Indra!  This is the garland  given  by the Divine Mother  Herself.   Take  it.Saying so, the sage presented the garland to Indra. Indra didn‘t refuse. He 
received  the garland with disgust and threw the same on the head of the elephant, 
which  proceeded  ahead.  A little latter,  the elephant  threw  down  the garland  with its trunk 
and trampled  over it. Looking  at this, the sage  Durvasa  became  very furious  and cursed 
Indra,  ―Oh!  Egoistic  fellow! You have not recognised me. Not only that. You have not 
even respected  the Prasadam of the Divine mother. Due to this, M ay your prosperity 
vanish!‖ With  these  words, Indra‘s pride was humbled. He got down the elephant and 
prostrated to the feet  of the angry sage Durvasa. However, the sage went away  silently.  
Then Indra‘s troubles started one by one. He saw bad omens in the Heaven. Afraid  of 
them,  Indra  asked  the sage  Bruhaspati  (the Spiritual  Master  of the celestials)  to reveal  the 
cause  of the bad omens.  The sage  replied,  ―The  effect  of your sins follows  you as a 
shadow. Saying so, the sage narrated a fine  story.  
Long long ago, there was a thief by name Vajra in Kanchipuram (Tamil Nadu,  South  
India).  He used  to steal  small  things  and gradually  amassed  large  quantum  of money.  As 
the wealth accumulated considerably, he wanted to hide it safely and went to the  nearby  
forest to do so. In a dense part of the forest, he dug a deep pit and secured the  money  
there in. However, a hunter by name Veeradanta, sitting on a tall tree observed all  this, 
quite unexpectedly. After the thief has left the place, the hunter dug out the  pit and  after 
taking only one tenth of the money, he covered the pit, without causing any doubt  to 
anyone. The hunter‘s wife saw the money and knowing how her husband got it, she  said,  
―It is customary  that many  Brahmanas  visit the home  of my parents.  Whenever  they saw 
me, they used  to forecast  ―You  will get rich quite  suddenly.  Their  prediction  came  true 
now‖. The hunter Veeradanta planned to purch ase meat and wine with the  money.  
However  his wife said,  ―The  Brahmana  visitors  of my parents‘  home  used  to tell 
something more. They cautioned that hard -earned money only will give  durable  
enjoyment and that the easy money was sinful. Hence let us use this unexpected  and 
unearned money for ch arities. After prolonged discussions, the wife‘s opinion won.  Then  
Veeradanta  selected  a place  of water  scarcity  and arranged  the digging  a big water  tank 
for public  use. While  the work was  in progress,  further  plans  were  made  and accordingly,  
he started the construction of temples for Vishnu and Shiva by the side of the tank.  When  
the projects were half way, the money was exhausted. Hence Veeradanta started  spying  
to find out the several  places  at which  the thief Vajra  was hiding  the stolen  wealth. 
Without  causing any  doubt  to the thief,  the hunter  used  to take out money  little by little 
from the pits and continued  the construction  without  interruptions.  Along  with this, he 
started to donate the money. However the hunter did not use the money for himself or  his 
family. Thus, constantly encouraged by his wife, his charities developed. The  Brahmanas  
of Kanch i were  glad and gave  the titles ―Dvijavarma‖  and ―Shilavati‖  to the hunter  and his 
wife. These titles eventually became their names in vogue. Some time later, the  hunter  
planned and constructed a city. Instead of giving it his own name, the hunter named it  as 
―Devaratapura‖,  as a mark  of respect  to his guru ―Devarata‖.  After a few years,  the hunter  
and his wife died at the same time. The messengers of Yama (The God of death and  the 
Lord of Hell), and Shiva and Vishnu arrived to takeaway the Jivas (the subtle form of  life 
of the dead). Their debate as to who can take the Jivas could not be settled. At that  time,  
the sage Narada arrived there. He asked the three groups of messengers to stop  the 
arguments  and revealed  another  aspect  of the code  of righteousness  thus,  ―The  hunter 
has performed the deeds of merit (Punya) like charities, with the money stolen by  him. 
Hence as per the rules of righteousness, he must move about in the form of a ghost  until 
the death of all the owners of the stolen wealth. Hence none of you have the right to  take 
away  the Jiva. ―Next,  his wife was great.  She didn‘t  commit  any sin. As she was a devotee  
of Shiva, the messengers of the Lord can take away her Jiva. ‖Listening to this ruling,  
Shilavati‘s  Jiva sat down  obstinately,  saying  ―I won‘t  go to Kailasha,  the abode  of Shiva,  
leaving  my husband  in the form of a ghost‖.  She prayed  to the sage  Narada,  ―Sir!  Kindly  
direct me what I have to do to unburden my husband‘s sins‖. Narada was very  much  
pleased with her chastity and fidelity and gave initiation of Shiva mantra (chant) to her.  By 
her penance, the husband and wife attained the grace of Shiva and were accepted t o stay in Kailasha (Shiva‘s abode). Sometime later, the thief Vajra and the persons from  whom  
he stole the money died. All the Jivas reached the Hell, the abode of Yama, the god  of 
death,  He asked  all of them  to assemble  and said,  ―Though  you did not intend  to do  the 
acts of Punya (merit), they were performed with your money. Hence you are eligible  to 
stay in Kailasha (abode of Shiva) for sometime. Hence I ask you whether you choose  to 
experience either the effect of Punya (merit) or Papa (sin) in the first instance.  They  
replied  in chorus ―we opt to experience  the effect  of merit  first. By doing  so, we will have  a 
chance  of association  with the pious  which  in turn will wipe out past sins‖.  Yama  felt glad 
by their choice and sent them all as the attendants of Dvijavarma at Kailasha. By his  good  
association,  all their sins were  washed  off and they settled  in Kailasha  happily.  
   
Preaching  of Bruhaspati.  After  narrating  the story,  Bruhaspati  said,  ―Indra!  Now you 
think  of your sins‖.  Indra  once  again  prostrated  to the sage  and requested.  ―Sir!  I am 
unable to realise my sins. Kindly give me  details‖.  
Bruhaspati  replied  ―In the distant  past,  ‗Diti‘, the second  wife of Kashyapa  gave  birth to a 
son by name Danu and a daughter named Rupavati. Danu is the predecessor of the  race 
of Danavas (demons). Rupavati was married to Brahma (the Creator). Her son  was 
Vishwarupa. He did severe penance. He had many divine aspects. However he was  a 
nephew of the demons. He was affectionate towards both the races – the celestials  and 
the demons. After a while, Indra chose Vishwarupa as his Guru (at that time,  Bruhaspati  
was not the Guru of the celestials). Indra expected that Vishwarupa would be  partial 
towards the celestials and that he would destroy the demons. However Vishwarupa  was 
friendly towards all. Observing this, Indra suspected that being a friend of the  demons,  
Vishwarupa was harming the celestials. One day, Indra suddenly went to Vishwarup a and 
cut off all his three heads. By doing so, Indra was afflicted by the sin of  Brahmahatya  
(killing  Brahmana).  Not only that. Aggrieved  by the death  of His son, Brahma  (the Creator)  
cursed Indra. Terrified by these two (Brahmahatya and curse of Brahma),  Indra  
accompanied by all the celestials, sought refuge at the feet of Vishnu, who  contemplated  
deeply and allocated the effect of Indra‘s sins to the earth, the trees and the women.  As 
compensation, Vishnu gave the power that the pits of earth could be filled up, the  power  
that even the trees once cut off could revive and the power of women to beget  children.  
Thus Indra was relieved of the effect of the sin of Brahmahatya (kill ing a  Brahmin).  
However, the curse of Brahma (the Creator) still persisted. Vishnu called for Brahma  and 
requested Him on behalf of Indra for relief from the curse. Brahma thought over the  same  
and said, ―OK.  For the present  my curse won‘t  take effect‖.  Vishnu  said nothing.  Again  
Indra became prosperous. However, very soon his pride increased. This time, Indra  was 
affected by the anger of Shiva and so he was cursed by the sage  Durvasa‖.  
Listening  to all this, Indra  recollected  the past events  and sadly  asked  Bruhaspati  ―Master!  
What have I to do  now‖?  
When the guru was about to reply, a demon named Malaka invaded the Heaven with  a 
huge  army  and seized  the kingdom.  Indra  had to escape  in a great hurry.  He went straight  
to Brahma and prayed to Him for merc y, who also pitied Indra. However even the  Creator  
could not decide what to do and approached Vishnu along with Indra and the  celestials.  
Vishnu  thought  of the problem  deeply  and advised  them,  ―You  churn the ocean  to get  the 
Goddess of  prosperity‖.  
For this purpose, Indra made reconciliation with the demons and taking their help, he  and 
the celestials churned the ocean. During the churning, very valuable things  emanated   
from the ocean. At last, Dhanvantari (the God of Healing) came out holding the p ot of 
Amruta (nectar). Looking at him, the demons grabbed the pot and started running  away  
with it. A bitter battle started between the celestials and the demons. There was  utter 
confusion. Even Brahma and Shiva escaped and reached their abodes. Observing all  this, 
Vishnu went to a secluded spot and started meditation of Sri Lalita Devi, who  dwells   
within Him as the aspect of power. Due to this meditation he manifested as a form  of  
Lalita Devi. Taking this incarnation as an embodiment of eroticism, Vishnu  approached   
the celestials and demons. The celestials could realise the form as divine and  auspicious.  
However, due to their predominating trait of Tamas (ignorance), the demons  were  
enchanted by the beauty of the form and stopped fighting. She mesmerised them  and  
took the pot of Amruta (nectar) from them, taking their consent to her to serve the  nectar  
to all. She asked the celestials and the demons to sit in separate rows. She started to  give 
the nectar to the celestials only first. Allured by her, the demons sat still stupefied. By  the 
time the nectar was given to the celestials, the stock exhausted. She  disappeared  
suddenly. The demons again started to fight with the celestial s. However as the  celestials  
have already drunk the nectar by then, the demons were  defeated.  Thus, the Divine Mother who manifested and enchanted the demons was called  MOHINI  
(the divine enchantress). Shiva, staying in Kailasha came to know of these event s and 
wanted to note the specialty of the new form of Vishnu. Along with his consort  Parvati,  
Shiva went to Vaikuntha, the abode of Vishnu and pressed Him tos how the form  of 
Mohini. Vishnu suddenly disappeared without saying yes or no. While Shiva  was 
searching for Vishnu, he happened to reach a new place where he continued to  search.  
There he heard the music of Veena. He saw a beautiful young lady. Unable to resist  this 
infatuation, Shiva embraced her. At once a son was born. He was named SASTA  (one 
who rules). He became a commander in Shiva‘s army. At once the lady  disappeared.  
Shiva realised that she was none else than Mohini, a form of Vishnu. He applauded  her 
beauty  and returned  to Kailasha  along  with Parvati.  Thus  the Divine  Mother  incarnated  as 
Mohini and granted success of the activities of the  celestials.  
Agastya  heard  the story  and said,  ―Hayagreeva!  Kindly  let me know  in detail  which  form of 
Para Shakti (The Divine Mother, the Supreme Power) will bestow both food and  salvation  
to the devotees in the Kali  Yuga‖.  Hayagreeva  replied,  ―Lalita  Devi isthe only Goddess  who has the power  to do so. Listen  
to her st ory‖.In the distant past, Sati Devi, a daughter of Daksha was married to  Shiva.  
However gradually, Daksha developed hatred towards Shiva. Due to this ill will,  Daksha  
intended to perform a Yaga (fire sacrifice) without making any offering to Shiva. He  didn‘t 
invite even his daughter Sati Devi to the Yaga. She came to know of the  forth-coming  
great Yaga to be done by her father. She didn‘t know other details. However,  overjoyed  
by the news of the ritual her father was going to perform, he went to the Yaga, in spite  of 
Shiva‘s disapproval of her visit. Sati Deha Tyaga (Self -immolation of  Sati) Ignoring  the 
natural  affection  to his daughter,  Daksha  insulted  her and repeatedly  abused  Shiva.  
Unable to bear the insult to Shiva, Sati Devi burnt her body in the fire created by  her 
power  of yoga.  Knowing  about  this calamity,  Shiva  became  furious.  Creating  the terrific  
Veerabhadra out of the locks of hair of His head, Shiva sent him to attack  Daksha.  
Veerabhadra destroyed the hall of Yaga, swallowed even the Chakra (the circular  weapon  
of Vishnu) and beheaded Daksha. The wives of Daksh apra yed to Veerabhadra who  was 
pacified and revived Daksha back to life by joining he head of a goat to the trunk.  Daksha  
repented and prayed to Shiva for pardon. Sati Devi was born as the daughter  of 
Himavanta (Himalaya Mountain) and Menaka, as the couple did  penance for 150  million  
years with the intention to beget her as their child. The newborn was named  Parvati  
(daughter of Parvata -mountain) and brought Her up with love and  affection.  
One day, the sage  Narada  visited  Himavanta  and said,  ―You  are very fortunate.  The 
Divine  Mother  is born as your daughter;  Shiva  is doing  penance  in your mountain  range  in 
his ―Sthanu  Ashrama‖  (abode  of stones).  After the departure  of Sati Devi,  He has become  
an ascetic.  It will benefit  you considerably  if you  send  your daughter  o serve  Him‖.  
Himavanta‘s joy knew no bounds on hearing Narada‘s words. He went to the abode  of 
Shiva alon g with his daughter. After taking Nandi‘s (the Ox which is the vehicle of  Shiva)  
permission, he approached Shiva, worshipped Him and prayed to Him to allow Parvati  to 
serve  him. Shiva  said,  ―OK.  She may do so‖. Then onwards,  Parvati  used  to render  
services to Shiva for hours together. However, Shiva used to be in a state of ecstasy  of 
yoga continuously. Kama Dahana (Burning of  Cupid)  
 
This being so, a demon by name Taraka invaded and occupied the Heaven along with  his 
army and started to hurt and pester the celestials. All of them approached Brahma  for 
relief,  who said,  ―The  son born to Shiva  and Parvati  only can kill the demon.  Hence  you 
make such efforts that the marria ge will be performed‖. Indra, the Lord of the  celestials  
called for Manmatha (Cupid - the God of love). He praised Cupid and asked him to  see 
that Shiva‘s ascetic attitude was lessened and that He would start to love  Parvati.  
Manmatha was exuberated by praises and agreed to do as directed. Rati devi, the  spouse  
of Manmatha came to know of this new assignment and tried her best to dissuade  cupid  
from embarking on the hazardous venture. In spite of it, Cupid proceeded to  Shiva‘s  
abode  ―Sthanu  Ashrama‖.  There he suddenly  created  the alluring  atmosphere  of the 
spring season. The Pramathaganas (the armies of Shiva) were very much disturbed  in 
their minds with the erotic feelings. Observing this, Nandi (Ox -the vehicle of  Shiva)  
disciplined them. In the meantime, Cupid entered the abode of Shiva stealthily and  saw 
Shiva seated in the state of ecstasy of meditation. The very sight of Shiva in the  posture  
suddenly unnerved  Cupid.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 At the same moment, Parvati came there. Looking at H er, Cupid recovered his  courage.  
While Parvati was getting up after bending low to prostrate to Shiva, Her  uppergarment  
slipped  a bit. Exactly  at that moment,  Manmatha  aimed  an arrow  (of lust) on Shiva,  whose  
mind was affected a bit. Observing this, Parvati feet a gush of joy inwardly.  However   
Shiva analysed His feeling immediately and looked around to know why it happened  so. 
Shiva saw Cupid hiding behind the bushes. At once, Shiva‘s third eye (in between  the 
eyebrows) opened and the fire rushing there from reduced Cupid to ashes. Parvati  closed  
her eyes out of fear. By the time She opened Her eyes in a moment, Shiva  disappeared  
with all His attendants. Himavanta came there, consoled Her and took Her  home.  Rati 
devi wept bitterly due to the death of her husband Manmatha. Vasanta, the god of  spring  
approached Rati devi, consoled her and reminded her of the curse of Brahma  to 
Manmatha. Curse of Brahma to  Manmatha.  
 
Once upon a time, there were two demons  by name Sunda and Upasunda,who  were  
brothers.  They  did penance  meditating  on Brahma  and obtained  a strange  boon  that their 
death could not be caused by anyone else except by themselves only. They were  very 
much fond of one another. Hence they expected that no mutual harm would be  possible.  
Thereafter they created havoc by their terrific acts in the three worlds. All the  celestials  
prayed to Brahma who thought of a strategy to destroy the demons. He accumulat ed the 
essence of beauty of all the fine things in the world and created a woman of  exquisite  
beauty. As she was created with a gingelly aspect of beauty in everything, she was  called  
Tilottama (Tila -gingelly; Uttama -Best) Her beauty enchanted even the cel estials.  Brahma   
 
checked up keenly whether her beauty was superb in all aspects. Manmatha,  who 
happened to be there at that time, wanted to play a practical joke. Hence he aimed  an 
arrow (of lust) at Brahma. Due to this, Brahma forgetting that she was His  daughter  chased  
her lustily.  As a last resort,  Tilottama  started  running  taking  the form of a deer.  
Brahma  also followed  her in the form of a deer.  The celestials  were  highly  agitated  by this 
untoward event. Observing this impending danger, Shiva manifested as a hunter  and 
holding a bow and arrows came near Brahma who was in the form of a deer. Looking  at 
the fierce form of Shiva, Brahma came to senses. He prostrated to His feet and prayed  for 
pardon. By then, the celestials and Tilottama arrived there. Everyone was pacified.  After  
taking Shiva‘s permission, the celestials sent Tilottamato meet Sunda and  Upasunda  
looking at Tilottama going about in a garden, both Sunda and Upasunda competed  to 
enjoy with her and at last the demons killed one another. Tilottama returned to  Brahma,  
who felt happy and sent her to the Heaven with a permanent status as one of  the 
Apsaras(celestial  dancers).  
 
After the entire affair was over, Brahma recollected what all had happened and sent  for 
Manmatha  and said ―You  fellow!  Blind ed by the power  bestowed  to you, how dare you 
aim your arrows  (of lust) at one and all, disregarding  their age?  Do you intend  to destroy  
the code of righteousness? I am saved of grievous sin due to the timely arrival  and 
protection of Shiva. Hence, one day you will be burnt to ashes by the fire of Shiva‘s  third 
eye. Beware!  
‖Hearing the curse, Rati and Manmatha were frightened and p rayed to Brahma for  relief  
of the curse.  Brahma  regained  His composure  and said,  ―The  Divine  Mother  will manifest  
as Lalita  devi. She will marry  Shiva.  After  the marriage,  She will revive  Manmatha  to life‖ 
After narrating the story, Vasanta (the god of spring season) consoled Rati devi,  saying,  
―Sister -in-law! It is a must  for everyone,  however  great  he is, to undergo  the suffering  of a 
curse. However as predicted by Brahma, my brother Manmatha will be revived to  life 
soon. Until then, be bold and continue to pray to Lalita devi. Rati devi left the place  and 
followed the  advice.  
  
 
Birth of Bhandasura . At this point of time, Chitrakarma, the  commander of one of  the 
Rudra  Ganas  (Gana  = troupe)  one day started  toying  with the ash of the burnt  Manmatha  
and prepared a doll out of it. He took this doll to Lord Shiva. Lord Shiva‘s intentions  are 
indeed unfathomable. As soon as the doll neared Lord Shiva, it sprang to life and the  boy 
thus born prostrated before Lord Shiva and Chitrakarma. Chitrakarma was  overwhelmed  
with joy. He gave the boy the Upadesha of Shata -Rudreeya Mantra and asked him  to 
undertake penance. When the penance reached the stage of fruition, Lord  Shiva  
appeared  before  him. He asked  Lord Shiva  to grant  him a special  boon  ―Anyone  who 
fights against me should immediately lose half of his strength and that strength should  be 
added to my strength. None of the weapons of my opponents should be able to bind  me‖ 
was his request.  Immediately  Lord Shiva  granted  the boon  and added,  ―I am also 
bestowing on you the boon of ruling the kingdom for sixty thousand years‖. After  giving  
these boons, Lord Shiva disappeared. He became surprised and a bit apprehensive  by 
the words of Lord Shiva. But soon he forgot  it. 
Lord Brahma,  who was witnessing  all this, grew  frustrated  and swore  ―Bhand‖  ―Bhand‖  
(meaning  shame,  shame).  From  then on, he got the name  ―Bhanda‖.  Because  of his 
qualities he became an Asura (demon) and entered the domain of Asuras. This is how  he 
got the name  ‗Bhandasura‘.  
In the mean time, from the remnants of the ash of Manmatha were born two demons  – 
Vishukra and Vishanga. These two became the main brothers of Bhandasura. In  addition,  
thousands of Rakshasas (demons) were born out of the ash of Manmatha. All of  them  
became  followers of Bhandasura. They formed a strong army of 300 Akshouhinis  (one 
Akshouhini consists of 21870 elephants, 65610 horses and109350 soldiers).  Having  
come to know about the birth of thousands of Rakshasas, Shukracharya (the guru  of 
Rakshasas) came t here and assumed the role of the Guru for all those Rakshasas  and 
initiated  them  to undertake  regular  Anushthanas  (daily  rituals).  He also summoned  Maya,  
the architect -builder of demons and asked him to create a new city in the province  of 
Mahendra  Mountai ns. He named the city as ‗Shoonyaka  Pattana‘  
Shukracharya asked all the demons to move to the new city. He crowned Bhandasura  as 
the king of the newly formed kingdom and made Vishukra and Vishanga the  Yuvarajas  
(princes) of that kingdom. Bhandasura had four wives. 1. Sammohini, 2. Kumudini,  3. 
Chitrangi  4.Sundari.  Under  the guidance  of Shukracharya,  activities  like fire sacrifices,  
Vedic education and penance went on uninterruptedly in every  house.  
   
 
Tormenting of the three worlds: When the kingdom was well established,  Bhandasura  
called for a meeting of his brothers and ministers and  said:  
A) Devatas (Gods) are our enemies. As long as Manmatha was alive, their  lineage  
continued without any problems. They  also enjoyed many  pleasures.  
B) Now, because of our luck, we have taken birth from the ashes of Manmatha. The  gods  
are trying to see that Manmatha is born again. We should not allow that to happen.  Before  
they try anything like that, we should kill the  Devat as. 
C) But, if we go in our present form, we can not win. Let us therefore assume the form  of 
air and enter  their bodies.  D) After  having  so entered  their bodies,  let us dry up their body  
fluids, especially the  semen.  
E) If semen  dries  up, the strength  of other  tissues  and organs  will automatically  diminish.  
Then they will automatically be  annihilated.  
F) Let us torment  the beings  of all the three  worlds  by entering  their bodies  in the form of 
air and by drying up their body  fluids.  
Hearing this, the entire army of the demons cheered with joy. Without wasting much  time,  
Bhandasura and his army of 1000 Akshouhinis assumed the invisible form of air  and 
entered the heaven. First of all, they entered the minds of the angels and dried up  their 
mental faculties. Subsequently they entered the face of the angels, robbed them of  their 
beauty and made them ugly looking. All the women and men in the heaven  became  
impotent and sterile. Not only that, their love for one another was also lost. They  lost 
enthusiasm to do anything. Even the plants and animals suffered the same  fate. 
Vishukra, along with his troupes entered Bhooloka (earth) and meted out the  same  
treatment  to the beings  there.  People  on the planet  earth  stopped  smiling.  They  lost all 
happiness. No one had any respect for another. No one thought of helping the  other.  
They  lost interest  in their activities.  The situation  was stone -like, devoid  of any life and 
feelings.  
Vishanga, along with his troupes entered Rasaatala (one of t he seven netherworlds).  He 
created similar havoc there also. In the Naga Loka (land of serpents) everyone  became  
afflicted with grief for no apparent reason. Everyone started hating everyone  else.  
Everyone  became  drained  of energy  and potency.  Rasa,  the fluid principle  is the basis  for 
the accomplishment of the four -fold aims of life (Purusharthas). Let us see  how.  
A. Rasa itself is the form of Paramatma, the  Almighty.  
B. From Rasa are created Shukla (sperm) and Shonita (ovum). These two are  collectively  
called  as Veerya.  
C. From Veerya comes Kanti (radiance), Utsaaha (enthusiasm),  Ullasa(happiness),  
Dharma (righteousness), Daya (compassion), Preeti (love),Buddhi  (intellectual  
capabilities), Vikasa (development), Parakrama (valour)Shastra Vijnana  (scientific  
knowle dge), Kala Asakti (interest in arts), Soundarya Drishti (proper concept of  beauty)  
etc. 
D. In plants,  the Rasa  enhances  the fire energy,  which  is hidden  in them.  Only when  the 
fire energy is harnessed, the plants can branch out and bear flowers and fruits.  Because  
of this fire principle, the dried logs catch fire easily and  burn.  
E. The Vedas have declared that beings can experience happiness only if Rasais  present.  
F. Rasa is nothing but Prana (vital energy). G. Having known all these  secrets,  
Bhandasura devised the plan of entering the bodies of all beings in the form of air  and 
drying them up.  
 
 
 Vasanta, the close friend and associate of Manmatha observed this immediately  and 
consoled  Rati (Manmatha‘s  wife).  He said ―Even  the sun, the moon  and the stars  have  
lost their brilliance. Even Goddess Parvati seems to have become dull and has  engaged  
in Tapas. Therefore, the day when your dead husband will come to life again is not  very 
far. That day will come  very soon.  So, stop grieving.‖  On hearing  this, Rati Devi prepared  
to undertake  penance.  
In the heaven, all the Devatas including Brahma, could not comprehend what was  going  
on and what had caused the situation. Not knowing the remedy for their hardship,  they 
approached Lord Sri Hari. When they fi nally reached the abode of Lord Sri Hari, they  saw 
that even He was sitting still with his eyes closed. It appeared as though He was  merged  
in the bliss of  Sushupti.  
After  the angels  praised  His glory  for a long time,  Lord Sri Hari slowly  opened  His eyes.  
―What  is this?  Why are you all looking  drained  of your energies?‖  asked  Lord Sri Hari. He 
called everyone by their names and  said:  
A. Your present condition is due to the invisible foul play of  Bhandasura.  
B. Even  I have  lost the affinity  for Goddess  Lakshmi.  What  to say about  other  lesser  
beings?  
C. Myself, Brahma and Rudra are Karana Purushas (causal beings for the  manifest  
creation). Even then, because we are also inhabiting this creation, even we can  not 
escape  the torture  of Bhandasura.   
D. D. There  is however  one Almighty  God who is beyond  this manifest Brahmanda. He is 
called Maha Shambhu. Parashakti is constantly in  His Company.  
E. He is devoid  of form.  He is not dependent  on anything.  He has nomodifications.  He is 
greater than the greatest. He is the  ultimate.  
F. He is not influenced by the foul play of Bhandasura, who is born from the ashes  of 
Manmatha. G. He can rescue us from our difficulties. Therefore, let us all take refuge  in 
Him and praise Him. Follow  me. 
So saying, Sri Hari led all the angels to the brim of the Brahmanda (Universe). There  was 
a huge wall like fence there. The angels summoned the celestial elephants to break  the 
wall. After  toiling  continuously  for one year,  a breach  was formed  in the wall. After  passing  
through the breach, they saw Chinmaya Akasha, which was Niralamba  (independent),  
Nirajnana (untainted) and which was devoid of the five elements. They all stood in  that 
Chinmaya Akasha and sang the glory of Maha Shambhu, who was of the form  of 
Chidakasha. Then Maha Shambhu appeared before them. He was dark like clouds.  He 
had two hands. He was holding a Shoola (spear) in one hand and a Kapala (skull) in  the 
other. He had three eyes. Parashakti also appeared before them. She was holding  Aksha  
Mala (rosary of beads) and Pustaka (book) in Her hands. She was bright and cool like  the 
moon.  
The great Maha Shambhu smiled and  said 
A. I am aware why you have all come  here.  
B. Pralaya  (destruction)  is of three  types.  (i) Avaantara  Pralaya  (ii) Maha  Pralaya  and (iii) 
Kama Pralaya.  
C. I am the one who is responsible to rescue the world from Maha Pralaya. Vishnu is  the 
one who rescues from Aavantara Pralaya. It is Lalita Parameshwari who rescues  from 
Kama Pralaya.  
D. These three kinds of Pralaya take place in a cycl ic pattern in every Kalpa.  Now,  
Kaamika Pralaya has taken place because of the destruction of Kama and  subsequently  
due to the actions of  Bhandasura.  
E. Only Lalita  Devi can rescue  from this situation.  Parashakti  alone  can create  another  
Lalita Devi. Therefor e, take shelter in her. Beg her to help  you. 
Hearing this, the Devatas did not know what to do. They again prayed to Maha  Shambhu  to teach them the method of appeasing  Parashakti.  
Maha Shambhu  explained:  
A. This is called as Maha Yaga. (great fire  sacrifice)  
B. I am (assuming  the form of Vayu)  the Hota  (the priest  who makes  the offerings  in a 
Homa) in this Yaga (fire  sacrifice).  
C. My Chidagni itself is the fire in this  Yaga.  
D. The last of the seven seas, i.e., Jala Samudra (Water Sea) has now dried up.  The 
huge pit so formed itself is the Homa Kunda (fire pit where Homa is  performed)  
E. The remaining six great oceans constitute the six drops of ghee which is used  as 
offering.  
F. Srishti (creation) is of five types (i) Manasa Srishti (ii) Jarayavee Srishti  (creatio n-taking  
place through the  womb.  
G. Human beings), (iii) Anda Srishti (creation taking place through eggs) (iv)  Swedaja  
Srishti (creation taking place through sweat) and (v) Udbhijja Srishti (creation taking  place  
by sprouting). These five Srishtis (creations ) are the sacrifice animals in this  Maya  
Yaga.G. Bhoomi (land), Parvata (mountains), Jala (water), Vayu (air) and Akasha  (space)  
these five are the substances used in this fire sacrifice. Agni element (one of the  five 
elements) being a part of my  Chidagni can not be a substance to be  offered.  
H. At the end of this great fire sacrifice, all of you (the performers of the Yaga)  should  
jump in to the Homa Kunda (fire pit). While doing so, you must possess  absolute  
devotion.  
I. Then, Lalita Parameshwari will  manifest.  
J. She will be seated in a chariot called Chakra Raja  Ratha.  
K. She will create Parabrahma in the name of Kameshwara and will have Him as  Her 
consort.  
L. This couple  will re-create  the entire  universe,  which  will turn out to be more  beautiful  
than the previous  creation.  
M. Lalita Parameshwari will bring Manmatha back to  life. 
N. She will create four weapons, namely (i) Ikshu Dhanus – a bow of sugarcane  (Mano  
roopekshu kodanda – is one of the 1000 names of Goddess Lalita) (ii) five Pushpa  Banas  
– flower arrows (Pancha tanmatrasaayaka is one of the 1000 names), (iii) Paasha  – 
noose (Raaga svaroopapaashaadhyaa – is one of the 1000 names of Lalita) and  (iv) 
Ankusha (a hook, especially an elephant driver‘s hook) (Krodha -akaaran kushojjvala  is 
one of th e descriptions of  Lalita)  
O. With the help of these weapons, she will destroy  Bhandasura.  
P. She will bring Manmatha back to  life. 
Q. She will give you fresh  bodies.  
R. If you all agree, I will begin this great sacrifice  myself.  
The angels became very pleased and begged Maha Shambhu to be the Hota and  carry  
on the sacrifice. Parashakti and Maha Shambhu disappeared. The angels also returned  to 
their abode.  
After some time, Maha Shambhunatha, accompanied by Parashakti started chanti ng the 
Lalita Maha Mantra and entered the Universe in the form of the seven -layered Vayu  (air). 
Parashakti assumed the form of His Kriya Shakti (energy of action). With the help of  Kriya  
Shakti, Vayu blew the Jala Samudra with all his energy. The Jala Samu dra (water  ocean)  
became totally dry. In the pit thus formed He kindled the Chidagni with the help of  fire 
emanating from the third eye. This Agni raged from the Patala (a region in the  nether - 
world)  to the Brahma  Loka.  He decorated  the periphery  of the Homa Kunda  with the stars  
just as one decorates a sacrificial fire pit with flowers. After this, he performed the  Yaga  as ordained by the Vedas. He used the Pralaya Meghas (clouds appearing  during  
Pralaya), namely Pushkala and Aavartakaas Srik and Sruva (the two spoons which  are 
used to offer ghee in fire worship). As the Homa progressed, the Chidagni  emanating  
from it spread to vast area. He then offered the first six oceans and then the  five-fold 
creations to this Agni. In the end, the gods too decorated themselves and sat on the  Srik 
and Sruva, ready to be offered to Agni. Maha Shambhunatha offered them to Agni.  After  
this, Maha Shambhunatha discarded his Vayu form and assumed his real form. He  then 
chanted 8 special mantras and performed 8  Homas.  
   
Manifestation of Lalita Devi . At the end of the Homa, Lalita Devi came out of  the 
Chidagni  Homa  Kunda,  seated  on a special  chariot called  ―Chakra  Raja Ratha‖.  
Therefore,  we find the descriptions  such  as ―Chidagnikunda  sambhoota‖  ―Deva  kaarya  
samudyataa‖  and ―Chakra  Raja Rathaa  Roodha  Sarvaayudha  Parishkritaa‖  in Lalita  
Sahasranama.  
The Sri Chakra Raja Ratha had the following  dimensions:  
A. Width 4 Yojanas (1 Yojana is approximately 9  miles)  
B. Height 10  Yojanas  
C. Parvas (landings)9 in  number  
D. Chakras (wheels) – the four  Vedas.  
E. Horses – the four -fold aims  (Purusharthas)  
F. Flag absolute  bliss.  
G. The seat at the topmost landing is the Bindu  Peetha.  
H. Form - of the form of Meru  Prastara.  
I. The material that was used to make this was  ‗Tejas‘.  
The Lalita Parameshwari so manifested, created a male form from within Herself.  His 
name was Kameshwara. By her power of will, she created 4 different weapons.  They   
were (i) Ikshu Dhanus (ii) Five arrow s, (iii) Pasha (noose) and 4 Ankusha (a special  hook).  
She held all these  weapons  in her hands.  We see the description  – ―Chaturbahu  
samanvitaa‖ in the Lalita Sahasranama. She was shining like the morning sun,  with 
crimson color. (Udyad bhanusahasraabhaa is a description found in Lalita  Sahasranama).  
Her beauty was full in all aspects. (Sarvarunaanavadyangee sarvaabharanabhooshitaa  – 
Lalita Sahasranama). She always appears as though she is 16 years of age.  (Nityaa  
shodashikaaroopaa is a description in Lalita Sahasranama. This description has  two 
meanings.  One meaning  is that she always  appears  as one who is sixteen  years  of age. 
The other meaning is, there are 16 Nityaa Devis. She is of the form of these 16  Nityaa  
Devis. Maha Shambhunatha praised Her in many ways. Order of Creation. She  extended  
Herself in both male and female forms and continued the process of  creation.  
A. From the left eye, which was of the nature of Soma (moon) came Brahmaand  Lakshmi  
Devi.  
B. From the right eye, which was of the nature of Soorya (sun) came Vishnu and  Parvati.  
C. From the third eye, which was of the nature of Agni (fire), came Rudra and  Sarasvati.  
D. Lakshmi & Vishnu, Shiva & Parvati and Brahma & Sarasvati became  couples.  
E. Lalita Devi directed them to continue the process of Creation. She herself continued  to 
create certain things. (i) From her long hair she created darkness. (ii) From her eyes,  she 
created the sun, the moon and the fire. (iii) From the pendent hanging in front of  her 
forehead came the stars (iv) From the chain above her forehead came the nine  planets.  
(v) From the eyebrows, she created the penal code. (vi) From her breath, she created  the 
Vedas. (vii) From her speech, she created poetry and plays. (viii) From her chin  she 
created the Vedangas. (ix) From the three lines in her neck, she created  various  
Shaastras. (x) From her breasts, she created mountains.(xi) From her mind, she  created  
the power  of bliss.  (xii) From  her fingernails,  she created  the 10 incarnations  of Vishnu.  
(xiii) From her palms, she created the Sandhyas. (xiv) She created other things  as 
narrated in the Purusha Sookta. (xv) From her heart, she created Baalaa Devi. (xvi)  From  
her intellect,  she created  Shyamala  Devi.  (xvii)  From  her ego, she created  Vaaraahi  Devi.  
(xviii) From her smile, she created Vighneshwara.(xix) From the Ankusha (a  special  
hook), she created Sampatkaree Devi. (xx) Form the noose, she created Ashwaa  Roodha  
Devi. (xxi) From her cheeks, she created Nakuleshvari Devi. (xxii) From he r Kundalini  
Shakti, she created Gayatri. (xxiii) From the eight wheels of the Chakra Raja chariot,  she 
created 8 Devatas.(xxiv) In the 9th landing, in the Bindu Peetha, she herself was  seated.  (xxv)  Afterwards,  she created  the Devatas  who would  protect  the Chakra  Rajachariot.  
After  having  thus completed  the great  creation,  Lalita  Devi requested  her consort,  Shiva  
Kama Sundara to created the Shiva Chakra. He immediately brought out a big  humming  
sound and from this, the Shiva Chakra Devatas numbering 23 manifested. Later,  Lalita  
Devi crowned Shyamala Devi as the prime minister. Therefore Shyamala Devi is  called  
Mantrini  Devi.  Lalita  Devi handed  over the finger  ring to Mantrini  Devi.  
She made  Vaart aalee  Devi the chief of  her army.  Therefore  Vaartaalee  Devi is also called  
as Dandanaathaa Devi. She is also called as Vaaraahee Devi. Lalita Devi created a  mace  
(a weapon) from her eye brows and gave it to Dandanathaa Devi. After this, Lalita  Devi 
created  two chariots from her chariot and gave them to Mantrini Devi and  Dandanatha  
Devi.  Mantini  Devi‘s  chariot is called  ―Geya  Chakra  Ratha‖.  This chariot used  to make  
musical  sounds  whenever  it moved.  Dandanatha  Devi‘s  chariot is called  ―Kiri  Chakra  
Ratha‖. Later, Lalita Devi hummed with rage. From this hum, 64000000 Yoginis  were  
born. Another 64000000 Bhairavas were also born. Innumerable Shakti Senas  (armies)  
were also created by her  hum.  
   
Devi vijaya yatra (Devi’s victory procession) Later Lalita de vi, making the  noise  
emanating from the four oceans as the drums and accompanied with several  other  
instruments proceeded for the battle against Bhandasura. From Lalitha devi‘s  Ankusham  
(=spear),  ‗Sampat  karidevi‘,  came out along  with crores and crores  of elephants  and 
started following Lalita devi (sampatkarisamarudha sindhura vraja sevita).  Sampatkari  
Devi was sitting  on the elephant  named  ‗Ranakolahalam‘  (=battlebustle,  battle  uproar).  
From Lalita devi‘s Pasham (=whip) arose Ashwaroodha devi along with a big army  of 
horses and was moving in front of Lalita devi.(ashwarudhadhishtishtaswa  koti 
kotibhiravruta)  . The horse  carrying  Ashwaroodha  devi was named ‗Aparajitam‘  (=one  
whichcannot be defeated). Later , commander of the army Dandanatha devi played  the 
drums to startmarching. As the march started Dandanatha devi got down from her  chariot  
and sat down  on the lion. The lion is named  ‗Vajraghosham‘  (kirich akra ratha  rudha  
damdanadhapuraskruta). All her soldiers started praising her by twelve different  names.  
(Panchami dandanatha cha sakjeta samayeshwaritatha samaya sakjeta varahi  potrini  
tathavartali cha maha sena pyajna chakreshwari tathaarighni cheti samproktam  nama  
dwadasak am yune). Later Mantrini devi played the drums of marching. Her soldiers  were  
mainly decorated sensuously. They were playing veenas and singing. Mantrini devi  was 
moving in her Geyachakra ratha (circle of army formed by singers) [geyachakra  ratha  
rudha mantrini parisevita). She was being praised by sixteen names. (Sangeeta  yogini  
shyama shyamala mantra nayikamantrini sachiveshani pradhaneshi shukapriyavina  vati 
vainiki cha mudrini priyakapriyanipapriya kadambeshi kadamba vanavasinisadamada  cha 
nama ni shodashaitaini kumbhaja) One who recites this strotra can conquer all the  three  
worlds.  
Then, from the bird in the hands of Mantrini devi, appeared god Dhanurveda with  a 
spectacular  bow in his hand  and said ―Mother!  this bow is called  chitrajeevam.  This quiver  
is akshaya (=one which is unlimited, fills up spontaneously). Please accept them  for 
demolishing the demons.‖ Now Lalita devi started moving with sugarcane, bow,  arrows,  
spear  and whip in the ‗srichakraraja‘ch ariot.  She is being  praised  with 25 names  - 
simhasanesi lalitha maharajni varankusha sundari chakranathacha samrajni  chakrini  
rathachakreshwari mahadevi kameshi parameshwari kamaraja  priyakamakotika  
chakravartini mahavidya shivananga vallabha sarvapatalakulanatha  amnayanatha  
sarvamnaya nivas inishringara nayika cheti panchavimshati namabhih. One who  recites  
this stotra attains ashta siddhi (8 spiritual accomplishments) Bandasura  vadhodyukta  
shaktisena samanvita in Lalita sahasranama stotram means one who is ready with  her 
army (shakti sena) to annihilate  Bhandasura.  Bhanda’s war preparation: While Lalita devi was proceeding for the war, many  bad 
omens were  observed  in Bhanda‘s  ‗Shunyaka‘  town.  Bhandasura  called  upon  an urgent  
meeting along with his brothers Vishukra and Vishanga to assess and evaluate  the 
situation. In the meeting Vishukra spoke  thus:  
a.) All gods have burnt themselves by jumping into fire, out of  despair.  
b.) From that fire arose mother goddess, who rejuvenate d all gods  
c.) She is coming for a war with us, along with an army of  women  
d.) Those gods are trying to cut stones using tender  leaves  
e.) Even then we should not neglect that woman. We must send our army  immediately.  
Vishanga  said:  
a.) Any work should only be done after properly thinking about  it. 
b.) First we must send spies and see how powerful their army  is. 
c.) We must not under estimate the enemies  army.  
d.) In the past Hiranyakashipa was killed by an  animal.  
e.) Sumbha and Nish umbha were killed by a  woman.  
f.) So, we must get more information about  her 
g.) Who is she ? Who is supporting or protecting her? What does she want? All  these  
queries should be  answered.  
Listening to this Bhandasura shuddered at the proposal with a sarc astic grin. "Even if  all 
the gods  are behind  her, we have  nothing  to fear. Do not entertain  such  useless  thoughts  
and spoil your  mind".  
Immediately  Bhandasura  ordered  ‗Kutilaksha‘,  Commander -in-chief  of his army,  to protect  
the fort. He ordered  the priests  and ministers  to perform  abhichara  (black  magic)  homa.  
He ordered Lalita to be dragged to him holding her hair. Now, the demons played the  war 
drums. Kutilaksha sent the first batch of army with demon Durmada as  the 
commander..At Shunyapura Kutilaksha made arrangements for protection - Eastern  entry  
_ Tala jangha,  Southern  entry  - Tala bhuja,  Western  entry  -- Talagriva,  Northern  entry  - 
Tala ketu were placed along with 10 akshohini army each. For each corner of the  town 
another 10 akshohini was allocated for  protection.  
   
Shakti senas’s uproar . Durmada was confronted by Sampatkaridevi and her army  of 
elephants (who arose from Lalita devi‘s spear). Realising that his army was  being  
defeated Durmada himself came for the wa r seated on a camel. Sampatkari devi who  was 
seated  on ‗Ranakolahala‘  her elephant,  faced him. In the ferocious  battle  Durmada  was 
able to destroy one gem from the crown of Sampatkari devi. Angry with this,  Sampatkari  
devi killed Durmada with her arrows which pierced his heart. With that the  remaining  
demons fled back to their town out of  fear. 
Listening to this Bhandasura was very angry and sent Durmada‘s elder brother  Kurunda  
for battle. He is an expert in maya yuddha  (war using mystical powers). Full of  vengeance  
he attacked Sampatkari devi. In the meanwhile Ashwarudha devi who had taken  birth  
from Lalita devi‘s whip came forward and pleaded Sampatkari devi to give her a ch ance  to 
fight with this demon. Now Ashwarudh a devi along with her army pounced upon  Kurunda.  
Ashwarudha  devi mounted  on ‗Aparajita‘  was herself  leading  the army.  In that battle  she 
killed  Kurunda  by piercing  his chest  with her spear.  Remaining  demonsfled  for their lives.  
Bhanda became furious. He sent a huge army this time (100 akshohini) along with  5 
commanders.  They  materialised  serpent  gods  by name  ‗Ranashambari‘  which  attacked  
shaktisena. The demons had previously defeated gods using these mystic powers.  Crores  
and crores of serpents, which arose from the serpent gods, started torturing  the 
shaktisena. They were taking birth again and again even after being killed a number  of 
times. Then Nakuli devi mounted on garuda came to the battlefield. From her mouth  came  
out 32 crores of mongooses. These mongooses started gobbling up all the  newborn  
serpents immediately after birth. Then Nakuli devi killed Ranashambari with  Garudastram.  
All the five commanders now attacked Nakuli devi. N akuli devi‘s mongoose army  attacked  
them  from the rear. In that ferocious  battle  Nakuli  devi who was  mounted  on Garuda  was 
making aerial strikes on the demons who were not able to catch her. She killed the  five 
commanders by chopping of their  heads.  
Bhanda after listening to this sent Valahaka and other seven commanders along with  300 
akshohini army. These seven demons are sons of demoness named Kikasa. In the  past 
they obtained a boon from sun god that at the time of war sun would reside in  theireyes . 
As soon as these demons entered the battlefield the shakti sena army started  becoming  
blindfolded and incapacitated unable to face the brilliance of their eyes. Demons  started  
becoming ferocious. Immediately the bodyguard of Dandanatha devi  –named  
Tirask arinika devi, entered the battle field mounted on an aeroplane  named  
‗Tamoliptam‘.At the order of Damdanatha devi she discharged an arrow named 
‗Andhanastra‘  and the seven  commanders  were  forced  to close  their eyes.  Now shakti  
sena  started  pouncing  back.  Keeping  Tiraskarinika  devi in the forefront,  other  gods  killed  
the sevencommanders. With this blow Bhandasura lost his senses. He called upon  his 
two brothers for a  discussion.  
In that meet ing it was decided that Vishanga would attack devi‘s army from its rear side  in 
a treacherous way (This is called Parshti grahamu). This decision was taken  because   
they got information from their spies that Lalita devi was having less army and  protection  
at her rear end and it was easier  for them  to approach Lalita  devi directly  and attack  her, if 
they approach ed from the rear. After the first day‘s war, at dusk, Vishanga with a  small  
army pr oceeded to the rear of Lalita devi‘s army noiselessly without any drums. By  then 
Lalita devi‘s army was moving westward. Vishanga along with his army moved  north  
wards and then turned to reach eastern side. He was able to see Srichakraraja  chariot  
very near to him. Lalita  devi was looking  forward  observing  the movement  of the army.  
She was not having much army close to her. Taking this opportunity Vishanga  attacked  
devi‘s ch ariot from the rear, all of  asudden.  
 
 
 
 Anima and other gods who were present there wer e taken back at this sudden attack  but 
quickly  recovered  themselves  and prepared  for a counter  fight.  Exactly  at the same  time 
Kutilaksha  along  with ten akshohini  army  attacked  from the front side.  Seeing  attack  from 
both ends Lalita devi was a little angry. In the mean while, struck by an arrow  from 
Vishanga, the fan present in Lalita devi‘s hand fell down andbroke. Seeing  this 
Tithidevatas got very angry. They went and requested Lalita devithat Vahnivasini  and 
Jwalam alini nitya  devas  have  property  and capacity  of self illumination.  If they glow then 
the demons  who are in the dark will all becomevisible.  With the permission  of Lalita  devi,  
Vahnivasini  and Jwalamalini  devis  started  glowing  like fireballs.  All the demons  who were  
hiding in darkness now becamevisible. Now the 16 nitya devi‘s became outrageous  and 
attacked Vishanga‘s army. All the commanders in the demons army died. Wounded  all 
over the body Vishanga fled for his life shamelessly. Even Kutilaksha who attacked  from 
the front also fled. (In Lalita sahasranama - nityaparakrama topa nirikshana  samatsuka  
=seeing the valour of nityadevatas, Lalita devi was very pleased). Mantrini devi  and 
Dandanatha  devi felt unhappy  about  this unprecedented  attack  in the night  They  felt very 
sorry that their arrangements of protection were not up to the mark. Agni  prakara  
(compound wall made of fire). Both of them went to Lalita devi, expressed sorry f or what  
had happened and made arrangements for protection. At the instance of Lalita  devi,  
Jwalamalini devi made a compound wall of fire around the devi‘s army The fire wall is  100 
yojana wide and 30 yojana tall. (1 yojana is approximately 8 mile s). At the southern end  of 
fire wall is a 1 yojana long entry, to enable devi‘s army to go out and fight  because  
Shunyapuram is facing this end.  (L.S.N —jwalamalinikashipta  
vahniprakaramadhyaga)Stambhini devi a member of Dandanatha devi family along  with 
20 akshohinisenas was protecting this entry point. She is also called Vighna devi. By  then 
it was  dawn.  
Knowing all this news Bhandasura was in despair and started thinking what to do.  This 
time he sent all his 30 sons for the war. After listening to this news Lalita devi‘ s daughter  
Baladevi  wanted  to fight these  demons  herself.  Baladevi  is the only daughter  of Lalita  devi 
.She resembles Lalita devi very much but is always only years old .She stays  permanently  
with her mother..  Baladevi  approached  her mother  and requested  for permission  to fight in 
thebattlefield.. At the outset Lalita devi denied but looking at the courage and will  power  
exhibited by Bala devi she ultimately gave permission. Seeing Bala devi coming for  the 
war Mantrini and Dandanayaka were astonished and they stood as her body guards.  Now 
Baladevi started ferocious fighting with Bhanda‘s sons. Every one was surprised at  her 
valor. Whole of the second day Baladevi fought. That evening she shot 30 arrows at  a 
time and killed the 30 sons o f Bhanda.  
Lalita devi was very happy and she embraced her daughter (Bhanda putra  vadhodyukta  
bala vikrama  nandita).  
Bhanda was grief stricken. Desperately he himself started off for the war. Vishukra  and 
Vishanga pacified  Bandasura.  
   
Vighnayentra nashnam (Destruction of the mystic symbol of obstacles). Now  Bhanda  
sent Vishukra to the warfront. In the darkness Vishukra approached the  Vahniprakara  
(firewall) –on a flat stone he drew a mystic symbol and performed some black magic.  He 
then threw  that mystic  symbol  forcefully. It  fell in the firewall  at some  point.  With the affect  
of that yantra (mystic symbol) laziness crept into the minds ofthe devi‘s army.  Some  
started  arguing  that war itself was wrong.  (b.) Some  said,  ―Why  should  we fight on  behalf  
of the gods‖.  (c.) Some  said,  ―Who  is this Lalita  devi?  Who  has given  her superior  ship over 
us?‖ (d.) Some  said, ―If all of us together  decline  not to fight what can Lalita  devi do?‖ (e.) 
All of them fell into sleep of ignorance. After midnight Vishukra along with  30  akshohini 
sena surrounded the firebarrier. Even then none of the members of shakti  sena  moved 
under the influence of the ignorance caused by the Vighna yantra.  However,  Vighnayentra 
was not able to affect Mantrini and Dandanatha. But they were both  very sad worried 
seeing the state of their army. Not knowing what to do they went  and  enquired Lalita 
devi. Then Lalita devi looked at the Kameshwara‘s face and passed  a gentl e smile. From 
her smile Ganapathi took birth. He immediately searched in the  firewall  and noticed  the 
‗vighnayentra  shila‘  at one place.  He broke  the shila into pieces  and powder with his 
tooth.(kameshwaramukhaloka kalpita sri ganeshwara  Mahaganesha  nirbhi nna 
vighnayentra praharsita). With that shaktisena‘s ignorance and sleep  was dispelled, they 
immediately got ready for the war. Now Vighneswara along with this  army  came out of the 
fire barrier and started fighting with  Vishukra.  
Vishukra sent Gajasura to attack him but soon Gajasura was slayed. Seeing this  Vishukra  
ran away.  
   
Annihilation of Vishukra and Vishanga. After discussing with Bhandasura,  Vishukra  
came back to war, along with his brother Vishanga and son -in-law. With this the third  day 
war had started.  Mantrini  and Dandanatha  both started  to fight simultaneously.  In the front 
was Dandanatha devi mounted on her kirichakra ratha with her plough  weapon  
(halayudha) swirling it rapidly. Behind her was Mantrini devi mounted on  Geyachakra  
ratha as an archer with bow and arrows. Dandanatha devi attacked Vishunga.  Mantrini  
devi confronted Vishukra.. Ashwarudha, Sampatkari and others attacked the son - in-law 
of the demons who had come..The army of the demons started slackening. Noticing  this 
Vishukra discharged Trushastram (weapon which produces thirst). Shaktisena‘s  army  
started to experience intense thirst. Then Dandanatha devi  invited  
‗Madyasamudra‘( =ocean  of liquor)  devata  from her kirichakra  and quenched  their thirst.  
Madyasamudra  deva  showered  liquor  rains.  With that the army  quenched  their thirst  and 
rejuvenated.. By sunset most of the demons including Bhanda‘s son -in-law had  died.  
Then Shyamala devi (Mantrini) fought with Vishukra and killed him  with 
‗Brahmashironamakastra‘  (a powerful weapon  named  brahmashira).  Dandanatha  devi 
(Potrini) killed Vishanga with her plough weapon and pestle. However in  Lalita  
sahasranama it is mentioned  that Vishukra was killed by Varahiand Vishanga was  killed  
by Mantrini -Mantrinyamba virachita vishanga vadhatoshitaVishukra prana  harana  
varahiveryanandita. By then it was past  midnight.  
Only Kutilaksha the commander in chief was left over to console Bhandasura.  Bhanda  
along with Kutilaksha started towards the battlefield. 2185 akshohini army along with  40 
commanders followed  him. 
A). He boarded  a chariot named  ‗Aabhilamu‘(=dreadful).  It is dragged  by 1000lions  
instead of  horses.  
B). His sword is named Yatana (= torture in  hell).  
Noticing this Lalita devi herself started moving in her Srichakra raja ratha towards  the 
warfront. Behind her was Mantrini in the Geyachakra ratha followed by Potrini  in 
kirich akraratha. Other shakti deities followed her in crores. In the usage of sastra‘s  (mystic  
weapons)  and pratyastra  (corresponding  neutralising  weapons),  none  of them  were  drawn  
aback (LSN —Bhandasurendra nirmukta shastra pratyastra  varshini)  
Now Bandasu ra by his mystical powers regenerated Madhukaitabha, Raktabija and  other  
old demons. Then Lalita devi made a violent frenzied laughter –Durga devi and  other  
deities described in chandi saptashati were born and slayed these demons. Now  Bhanda  
generated  Somaka  and other  demons.  Then  Lalita  devi generated  the 10 incarnations  of 
Vishnu from the finger tips of her hands (LSN – Karanguli nakhotpanna  narayana  
dasakrutih). Sun was about to set. Lalita devi decided not to delay any more. She  then 
discharged Nara yana astra and Pashupata astra and destroyed the demons and  their 
commanders who were all turned into ashes (Mahapashupatastragni  nirdagdhasura  
sainyaka) .Now Bhandasura was the only one left. Lalita devi discharged  the 
Mahakameshawarastra and annihilated Bhandasura. Immediately his shunyaka town  got 
burnt down. (Kameshwarastra nirdagdhasabhandasura  sunyaka.  
Gods  proclaimed  victory  of Lalita  devi on the drums  and they showered  flowers,  lighted  
camphor blazes and shouted victory  slogans.  
   
Kama sanjeevanam (rebirth of kama). Brahma, Vishnu, Indra and other gods  praised  
Lalita devi‘s grandeur (LSN —Brahmopendra mahendradi deva samstuta vaibhava).  In 
that praise they proclaimed  thus:  
A.) Mother! Bhanda is dead but his friend Taraka is still alive to trouble  us. 
B.) To annihilate him Shiva must have a  son 
C.) We were  trying  for the same  but in the mean  while  Manmadha  (god of love)  died and 
all these events  happened  
D.) Therefore  kindly  give rebirth  to Manmadha  and perform  the marriage  of Shiva  and 
Parvathi.  
Lalita devi smiled compassionately and looked at Kameshwara. From her  looks  
Manmadha took rebirth .(Haranetragni sandagdha amasanjeevanaushadhih - meaning  
Lalita devi is the sacred herb sajeevini which gave rebirth to Manmadha who  was 
destroyed by the fire from Shiva‘s eye). Rati and Manmadha prostrated to the  mother  
goddess and praised  her. 
The mother goddess blessed them and  instructed:  
A.) Manmadha! Now you need not  fear 
B.) Go once again and cast your magical arrow on  Shiva  
C.) Shiva will loos e to you and will marry  Parvathi  
D.) With my blessings Shiva will do you no  harm.  
E.) From now on you can enter every ones body and cause aesthetic/  sensuous  
pleasures to  them.  
F.) Protect my  devotees.  
At the instructions of mother goddess Manmadha with his family went and cast his  magic  
charm on Shiva. This time Shiva left renunciation and started searching vehemently  for 
parvathi. Then Manmadha cast magical arrows on Parvati also. Shiva was very  please d 
with parvathi‘s penance. He appeared before her, granted a boon and married  her. 
Kumaraswamy was born to Shiva and Parvathi .He became the commander of  Gods  
army  and annihilated  Tarakasura.  He then married  Devasena  devi,  the daughter  of Indra.  
After  helping  all the gods  Manmadha  left to Sripura  to serve  goddess  Lalita  devi.  
   
Sripura varnanam (description of Sripura ) What does Sripura mean? After  the 
annihilation of Bhandasura, Trimurtis called upon the cosmic architect Viswakarma  and 
the architect of demons Maya , and instructed them to construct 16 palaces in 16  kshetras  
(sacred places) for the residence of Lalita & Shiva Kameswara. Meru and other  gigantic  
mountains (9) Jalasamudra and other oceans (7) – total 16 Kshetras. The  palatial  
buildings of mo ther goddess located in these kshetras are called Sripura. Wherever  a 
Sripura is located , its dimensions are like  this. 
1.) Mount Meru has 4 peaks One on the eastern side, one on north west, one on  the 
south west. Each is 100 yojanas tall and 100 yojanas wide these are trimurtis worlds.  In 
the center of these is the fourth, which is 400 yojanas tall and 400 yojanas  wide.  
2.) Sripura is on the Middle peak. Sripura has got metallic compound walls 7 in  number  
they are square shaped. Each wall is separated from the next one by one a distance of  7 
yojanas.1.  Kalayasa  (iron)  wall – The perimeter  of this wall is 16 thousand  yojanas2.  
Kansya (bronze) wall —Between these two is the first chamber. Several trees and  gardens  
are located here. Mahakali and Mahakala are the gate keepers here. Kalachakra is  their 
throne.  
3. Tamra (copper) wall - Here is a forest of Kalpavruksha (wish granting tree). This is  also 
called as Kalpavatica. This is the second chamber. Vasanta (spring ) is its  protector  
.Madhusri and Madhavasri are his  consorts.  
4. Seesa (lead) wall - Here is a forest of santana trees (progeny granting). This is the  third 
chamber Grishma (summer) is the ruler . Shukrasri and Shuchisri are his  consorts.  
5. Aarkuta (brass) wall - This is the fourth chamber. Here is a forest of  Hari 
chandanavruksha (yellow fragrant sandal wood). The ruler is varsharutu (rainy  season.  
Nabhasri and Nabhasyasri are his  consorts.  
6. Panchaloha (five metal) wall —In this fift h chamber is a garden of  mandara  
trees(Calotropis  gigantea).Sharadrutu  is the protector.  Ishasri  and Urjasri  are his 
consorts.  
7. Raupya  (silver)  wall – Sixth  chamber.Parijata  tree forest  .Hemantarutu  is the protector.  
Sahasri and Sahasyasri are his  consorts.  
8. Hema (gold) wall - Seventh chamber. Kadamba forest. Sisira (winter) s the  protector.  
Tavasri  and Tavasyasri  are his consorts.  This is where Mantrini  devi resides  in a temple.  
She has one more quarter very close to that of Lalita devi in Mahapadmatavi( forest  of 
lotuses). When she is on duty she stays in that quarter. In this seventh chamber  near 
Mantrini‘s residence Matanga kanyas are constantly singing and  dancing.  
   
Matanga kanyaka charitra (story of Matanga kanya). In the olden days a sage  named  
Matanga used to expand the creation byvirtue of the power of his penance.362. His  son 
Matanga was a great saint and practitioner of penance. He was the friend of  Himavanta.  
Once Himavanta started boasting saying that he was the father of Gauri devi. With  that 
Matanga  felt humiliated  and started  great  penance  for Mudrini  devi(Mudrinidevi  is none  
other than Mantrini devi who had received a ring from Lalita devi. She is also  called 
Shyamala  devi.  
She was very happy with his penance and gave boon that she herself would be born as  a 
daughter to him. A few days later Shyamala devi appeared in the dream of  Siddhamati  
devi (consort of Matanga). Shyamala devi gave her a flower from the bunch  decorating  
the formers ear. Very soon she had a female child who was named Laghushyama as  she 
was born in a very short duration (Laghu = short, small). She was also called  Matangi,  
Matanga Kanyaka. With her power she generated crores of virgins, who stay  near 
Mantrini devi‘s house and keep singing her praises all the  time.  
  The Compounds of precious stones : Inside the golden compound, there are  eleven  
prakaras (compounds) one inside th e other and inside them there are six  more  
compounds described hereunder. All these compounds are perfect squares. Here  also,  
the distance between one compound and the other is Seven yojanas. (yojana is  a 
measurement of length of about nine  miles).  
1. Pushyar aga Prakara (The compound of Topaz) The area between the  golden  
compound and this one is called Pushyaraga area. Here male and female Siddhas  reside.  
Those who were born earlier in the race of Siddha and who obtained attainment  (Siddhi)  
in their spiritual  practices  worshipping  the Divine  Mother,  stay here as Siddhas  and gladly  
continue to worship  Her. 
2. Padmaraga Prakara (The compound of Ruby) Here celestials of the species  called  
Caranas reside. Those who were born in Carana world and worshipped the Mother  are 
reborn here, after attaining Her  grace.  
3. Gomedhika Prakara (The compound of Agate) In this arena, Kala Sankarshani  devi 
resides. She is worshipped by the Yoginis and  Bhairavas.  
4. Vajra Prakara (The compound of diamonds) Apsaras and Gandharvas (divine  dancers  
and singers) stay in this arena. They are ever engaged in the Japa (repetition) of  the 
Divine Mother‘s names and stay here happily. The river Vajranadi flows in this place.  The 
Goddess Vajreswari stays here. When the demon Bhanda swallowed the  diam ond 
weapon (Vajra Ayudha) of Indra, he could get back his weapon by worshipping  the 
Mother here.  
5. Vaidurya Prakara (The compound of Cat‘s eye) Those of the netherworld, who  attained  
spiritual achievements by worshipping the Mother, stay in this arena. The e mperor  Bali 
also resides here.  
6. Indraneela Prakara (The compound of Sapphire) Those people who were born on  the 
earth  stay in this area enjoying  pleasures,  after their worship  of Lalita  during  their lifetime  
there.  Soon  after the effect  of their punya  (merit)  is exhausted,  they will be born again  as 
human beings on the earth. By the effect of their previous pious deeds, they  again  
worship the Mother and return once more to this pious place. Due to the blue colour  of 
these precious stones, the dark effect of likes and dislikes persists in them. Hence  they 
are born again and again. Those who can control their senses to merge in the  ultimate  
state of salvation, i.e., in the Divine Mother. They do not have  rebirth.  
7. Mukta Prakara (The compound of pearls) Several rivers named  Tamraparni,  
Mahaparni, Sadamukta, Sadodaka etc. flow in this area. The celestials who  worshipped  
the Mother and chanted her Mantras stay here. The cities of the rulers of the eight  sides  
exist here. (Th e eight sides are East, West, North, South, North -East, South -East,  North - 
West and  South -West).  
8. Marakata Prakara (The compound of Emerald) The abode of the Goddess  Dandanatha  
also called Varahi exists in this area. There is a garden of golden palm -trees h ere. The 
Goddess Unmattabhairavi, Svapnesvari, Tiraskarinidevi, Kirapadadevi reside in this  area.  
When Goddess Dandanatha is on duty, she stays in a separate palace in the forest  of 
Mahapadma (Big  lotuses).  
9. Vidruma Prakara (The compound of Coral) In this area, Brahma along with sages  like 
Marica stays and worship the  DivineMother.  
10. Manikya Prakara (The compound of Gem) This area is also called the hall of gems  i.e. 
Manikya Mantapa. Her Vishnu worships the  Moth er. 
11. Navaratna Prakara (The compound of nine precious stones) In this area exists a  huge  
hall with thousands of pillars. Here Siva along with his attendants constantly  supervises  
the activities being done as per the orders of Lalita  Devi.  
12. Manomaya Prakara (The compound of mind) The entire area is a big well of  Amruta  
(nectar). The Goddess Tara resides here. Along with her attendants, she rows a big  boat 
and takes her devotees inside along with  Her. 13. Buddhi Prakara (The compound of the intell ect) The entire area is a big well of  Bliss.  
The captain of the ship in this arena is the Goddess Varuni. She is also called as  Sudha  
malini and  Amruteswari.  
14. Ahankara Prakara (The compound of Egoism) The entire area is a big well of  criticism  
and nectar; The water of this well is nothing else than the nectar in the nerve  Sushumna  
(The central nerve between Ida and Pingala nerves of one‘s backbone). The captain  of 
the ship in this area is the Goddess  Kurukulla.  
15. Suryabimba Prakara (The compound o f the Sun) Here brilliance comparable to  the 
light of the rising  Sun exists  always.  Plenty  of flowers  called  Kuruvinda  are abundant  here.  
The Sun performed penance here and obtained brilliance. Martanda Bhairava stays  here.  
He has a very luminous form. His three wives are Mahaprakasa Sakti, Cakshusmati  Sakti  
and Chayada Sakti (The powers of great brilliance, eyesight and  shade).  
16. Candrabimba Prakasa (The compound of the Moon) Moonshine ever exists here.  The 
Moon performed pena nce here and attained illumination. Somanatha, the Lord of  the 
stars is the chief deity of this  area.  
17. Srungara  Prakara  (The compound  of eroticism)  This area is full of waters  of eroticism.  
Here Manmatha, (Cupid -the god of love) does Japa of the Mother‘s sacred names,  rowing  
in a boat. Only those who are of pure mind by nature can cross this  area.  
 
18. Cintamani Gruha (The abode of Gems) This is the great palace of Sri -chakra. It  is 
called Mahapadmatavi also. Around the mansion, hundreds of thousands of lotus  like 
palaces exist. To the east of this place, there is a large vessel with a diameter of  one 
Yojana. This is called Arghya Patra (the vessel used to wash hands) b) At the  south -east 
corner exists Cidagnikunda (The fire pit of knowledge). At the south -west exists  Sricakra  
Ratha, the vehicle of Sricakra. At the north -west exists the Geya Cakra Ratha of  the 
Goddess Mantrini. At the north -east exists the Kiri Cakra Ratha of the Godde ss Dandini.  
In between the East and the south -east exists Mantrini gruha - the abode of the  Goddess  
Mantrini. In between the East and the north -east exists Dandini gruha – the abode of  the 
Goddess  Dandini.  
   
The description of the Palace of  Cintamani  
1. This palace is centrally located in Sripattana – The City of Sri  (Wealth).  
2. The walls of the palace are built with Cintamani  gems.  
3. The roof also is made of the same stones of  Cintamani.  
4. The palace has three towers by names Iccha Sikhara, Kriya Sikhara and J nana  Sikhara  
i.e. the towers of desire, action and  knowledge.  
5. The palace has four doors. They are called Amnaya devas. They are Purva,  Dakshina,  
Pascima and Uttara – Amnaya devas (on the East, South, West and North  sides).  
Amnaya means  Veda.  
6. Bindu Peetha (central seat of power) is centrally located in the  palace.  
7. This seat of power (peetha) has steps on four  sides.  
8. The entire structure described above is of the design of  Sricakra.  
9. All the male and female deities of Sricakra reside  here.  
10. The Bindu Peetha is called Sri Peetha, Maha Peetha, Vidya Peetha  andAnanda  
Peetha also (The seat of prosperity, greatness, knowledge  andbliss).  
11. On the pedastal exists the cot of the five  brahmas.  
12. The cot has four legs namely Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesana and Is wara. These  four 
deities have attained female form by worshipping  Mother.  
13. The plank resting on these legs is  Sadasiva.  
14. To the east of this cot, there  are 36 steps,  representing  the 36 aspects  of spiritualism.  
15.There is a foot -rest in front of the  cot. 
16. There is swan like bed on the  cot. 
17. On the cot, there are two pillows for the head and one pillow for the  legs.  
18. A light red blanket is spread on the  bed. 
19. The Lord Kameswara sits on the cot facing the East. He is ever in the form of a  sixteen  
year old boy. He has four hands and three eyes. He wears erotic  costumes.  
20. On His lap sits Lalita Devi. She is ever in the form of a sixteen year old girl.  Her 
complexion is rosy. She wears erotic costumes. She has four hands. Her decoration is  the 
moon.  
21. As she pleases Sadasiva, she is called Lalita (Lalana - to please)  Siva 
Kameswarankastha Siva Svadheena Vallabha Sumeru madhya  srungastha  
Srimannagara nayika. Cintamani gruhantastha Panca Brahmasana sthita.  Maha  
Padmatavi samstha Kadamba vana vasini Sudha sa gara madhyastha  Kamakshi  
Kamadayini The above names in the Lalita Sahasra nama indicate the Srinaara,  the 
Cintamani  gruha  (the palace  of the Mother)  and her other  divine  aspects  described  above.  
The Mother incarnated to kill the demon Bhanda. She is the Supreme Mother as  per  
these divine names, will achieve everything  auspicious  
   
Mokshada  Ekadasi  
Yudhishthira Maharaj said, "O Vishnu, master of all, O delight of the three worlds, O  Lord 
of the enti re Universe, O creator of the world, O oldest personality, O best of all beings,  I 
offer my most respectful obeisances unto  You. 
"O Lord of lords, for the benefit of all living entities, kindly answer some questions that  I 
have. What is the name of the Eka dasi that occurs during the light fortnight of the  month   
of Margashirsha (November -December) and removes all sins? How does one observe  it 
properly,  and which  Deity  is worshipped  on that holiest  of days?  O my Lord please  explain  
this to me in  full." 
Lord Sri Krishna replied, "O dear Yudhishthira, your enquiry is very auspicious in  itself  
and will bring you fame. Just as I previously explained to you about the dearest  Utpannaa  
Maha -Dwadasi - which occurs during the dark part of the month of Margashirs ha, which  is 
the day when Ekadasi -devi appeared from My body to kill the demon Mura, and  which  
benefits everything animate and inanimate in the three worlds - so I shall now relate  to 
you regarding  this Ekadasi  that occurs  during  the light part of the mont h of Margashirsha.  
This Ekadasi is famous as Mokshadaa because it purifies the faithful devotee of all  sinful  
reactions and bestows liberation upon him. The worshippable Deity of this all  auspicious  
day is Lord Damodara. With full attention one should wors hip Him with incense, a  ghee  
lamp, fragrant flowers, and Tulasi manjaris  (buds).  
"O best of saintly kings, please listen as I narrate to you the ancient and  auspicious  
history of this wonderful Ekadasi. Simply by hearing this history one can attain the  merit  
earned by performing a horse sacrifice. By the influence of this merit, one's  forefathers,  
mothers, sons, and other relatives who have gone to hell can turn around and go to  the 
heavenly kingdom. For this reason alone, O king, you should listen with rapt attention  to 
this narration. "There once was a beautiful city named Champaka -nagar, which  was 
decorated with devoted Vaishnavas. There the best of saintly kings  Maharaj  
Vaikhaanasa, ruled over his subjects as if they were his very own dear sons  and 
daughters. The brahmins in that capital city were all expert in four kinds of  Vedik  
knowledge. The king, while ruling properly, had a dream one night in which his father  was 
seen to be suffering the pangs of hellish torture in one of the hellish planets rule d over  by 
the Yamaraj. The king was overwhelmed with compassion for his father and shed  tears.  
The next morning, Maharaj Vaikhaanasa described what he had seen in his dream to  his 
council of twice born learned  brahmins.  
" ' O brahmanas,'  the king addressed  them,  'in a dream  last night  I saw my father  suffering  
on a hellish planet. He was crying out in anguish, "O son, please deliver me from  this 
torment of this hellish condition !" Now I have no peace in my mind, and even  this  
beautiful kingdom has become unbearable to me. Not even my horses, elephants,  and 
chariots and my vast wealth in my treasury that formerly brought so much pleasure,  gives  
me no pleasure at  all. 
" 'Everything, O best of the brahmins, even my own wife and sons , have become a  source  
of unhappiness since I beheld my father suffering the tortures of that hellish condition  so. 
Where can I go, and what can I do, O brahmins, to alleviate this misery? My body  is 
burning with fear and sorrow ! Please tell me what kind of charity, what mode of  fasting,  
what austerity, or what deep meditation, and in service upon which Deity I may have  to 
perform to deliver my father from that agony and bestow upon liberation upon  my 
forefathers. O best among the brahmins, what is the use of one's being a powerful son  if one's father must suffer on a hellish planet? Truly, such a son's life is utterly useless,  to 
him and to his  forefathers.  
" The twice born brahmins replied, ' O king, in the mountainous forest not far from here  is 
the ashram where a great saint Parvata Muni resides. Please go to him, for he is  tri-kala- 
jnan (he knows the past, the present, and the future of everything) and can surely  help 
you in your gaining re lief from your  misery.'  
"Upon hearing this advise, the distressed king immediately set out on a journey to  the 
ashram of the famous sage Parvata Muni. The ashram was indeed very big and  housed  
many learned sages expert in chanting the sacred hymns of the f our Vedas (Rg,  Yajur,  
Sama, and Arthava). Approaching the holy ashram, the king beheld Parvata Muni  seated  
among the assembly of sages adorned with hundreds of tilaks (from all the  authorised  
sampradayas) like another Brahmaa or  Vyaas.  
"Maharaj Vaikhaanasa offered his humble obeisances to the muni, bowing his head  and 
then prostrating his entire body before him. After the king had seated himself among  the 
assembly Parvata Muni asked him about the welfare of the seven limbs of his  extensiv e 
kingdom (his ministers, his treasury, his military forces, his allies, the brahmins,  the 
sacrificial  offerings  performed,  and the needs  of his subjects).  The muni  also asked  him if 
his kingdom was free of troubles and whether everyone was peaceful, happy  and 
satisfied. To these enquiries the king replied, 'By your mercy O glorious and great  sage,  
all seven limbs of my kingdom are doing very well. Yet there is a problem that  has 
recently arisen, and to solve it I have come to you, O brahmana for your exper t help  and 
guidance'.  
"Then Parvata Muni, the best of all sages, closed his eyes and meditated on the  king's  
past, present and future. After a few moments he opened his eyes and said, 'Your  father  
is suffering the results of committing a great sin, and I have discovered what it is. In  his 
previous life he quarrelled with his wife and forcibly enjoyed her sexually during  her 
menstrual period. She tried to protest and resist his advances and even yell ed out, 
"Someone please save me! Please, O husband, do not interrupt my monthly period in  this 
way!"  Still he did not stop or leave  her alone.  It is on account  of this grievous  sin that your 
father now has fallen into such a hellish condition of  suffering. ' 
"King Vaikhaanasa then said, 'O greatest among sages, by what process of fasting  or 
charity may I liberate my dear father from such a condition? Please tell me how I  can 
relieve  and remove  the burden  of his sinful  reactions,  which are  a great  obstacle  to his 
progress toward ultimate release (salvation - liberation - going back  home).'  
"Parvata Muni replied, 'During the light fortnight of the month of Margashirsha  there  
occurs an Ekadasi called Mokshadaa. If you observe this sacred Ekadasi strictly, with  a 
full fast, and give directly  to your suffering  father  the merit  you thus attain/obtain,  he will 
be freed from his pain and instantly  liberated'.  
"Hearing  this, Maharaj  Vaikhaanasa  profusely  thanked  the great  sage  and then returned  
to his palace to perform his vrata (austere rite). O Yudhishthira, when the light part of  the 
month of Margashirsha at last arrived, Maharaj Vaikhaanasa faithfully waited for  the 
Ekadasi  tithi to arrive.  He then perfectly  and with full faith observed  the Ekadasi  fast with 
his wife, children, and other relatives. He dutifully gave the merit from this fast to  his 
father, and as he made the offering, beautiful flower petals showered down from  the 
devas who peered out from behind the clouds in the sky. The king 's father was  then 
praised  by the messengers  of the demigods  (devas)  and escorted  to the celestial  region.  
As he passed his son, as he traversed the lower to middle to higher planets, the  father  
said to the king, 'My dear son, all auspiciousness unto  you!' At last he reached the heavenly realm from where he can again with his newly  acquired  
merit perform devotional service to Krishna or Vishnu and in due course return back  to 
home back to  Godhead.  
"O son of Pandu, who so ever strictly observes the  sacred Moksha Ekadasi, following  the 
established  rules  and regulations,  achieves  full and perfect  liberation  after death.  There  is 
no better  fasting  day than this Ekadasi  of the light fortnight  of the month  of Margashirsha,  
O Yudhishthira, for it is a crystal -clear and sinless day. Whoever faithfully observes  this 
Ekadasi fast, which is like chintaa -mani (a gem that yields all desires), obtains  special  
merit that is very hard to calculate, for this day can elevate one from he llish life to  the 
heavenly planets, and for one who observes Ekadasi for his own spiritual benefit,  this 
elevates  one to go back  to Godhead,  never  to return  to this material  world."  
Thus end the narration of the glories of Margashirsha -shukla Ekadasi or  Mokshada  
Ekadasi, from the Brahmanda  Purana.  
   
 
 
The Sons of Sagara  
CHAPTER  FIFTY -TWO  
The Sacrificial Horse is let  loose  
Jaimini  Said:  
1. " After banishing his son, the virtuous -souled Lord Sagara transferred his love for  him 
to the child Amsumam whose conduct was  righteous.  
2. At the very same  time,  O king,  the sons  of' Sumati  grew  up collectively. All  of them  
were amiable, devoted and faithful to one  another.  
3. They had adamantine bodies. They were cruel, merciless and shameless. They  were  
habitually evil in their activities. They had the same nature and  characteristics.  
4. They cooperated in doing simultaneously the same work. They were deluded in  their 
minds.  They  were  easily  irritable.  They  could  not be easily  assailed  by any living  being.  
They regularly harassed the  people.  
5. They had no concern for humility, good conduct or the path of virtue. They  harassed  
the entire world around as they pleased, like  Asuras.  
6. Attacked and tormented by them, the whole world became distressed and unhappy  in 
particular with Yajñas and paths of virtue destroyed. The people could not have  their 
regular  selfstudy  of the Vedas  nor could  they perform  holy rites by uttering  the Vasatkara  
mantra.  
7. When everything was being completely destroyed by the sons of Sagara who  were  
haughty on account of' the boons they had been granted, the Devas, Asuras and  the 
grreat serpents became extremely  agitated.  
8. The Earth, overwhelmed by the ocean, began to  quake though its name is Acala  ( 
immovable  ). There  was a break  and hindrance  in the penance  and abstract  iiwditation  of 
the ascetics.  
9. Depraved of the Havya and Kayva offerings, the Devas and the Pitris  became  
oppressed by great sorrow. They went to the abode of  Brahma.  
10. After  going  there,  the Devas  with Sharva*  ( probably  Shakra  ) at their head,  duly 
reported to him the entire activities of the sons of  Sagara.  
11. On hearing  their words,  Brahma,  the grandfather  of the worlds,  became  engrossed  in 
thought for a short while. The most excellent one among the Suras then  said:  
 
12. 0 Devas,  listen,  attentively  to my words.  Welfare  unto you. There  is no doubt  that the 
sons of Sagara will be destroyed ere  long.  
13. Wait for a short time. Everything is being controlled by time. Everything else is but  an 
instrumental. That time alone is the master of  all. 
14. Hence, O excellent Suras, what I am going to say for your welfare should now  be 
carried out by all of you without a ny slackness.  
15. The holy lord Kapila, the most excellent among victorious ones, the roost  exalted  
among the leading Yogins, is born on the earth with a partial power of Visnu, for  the 
welfare of the  universe.  
16. He is now sitting, meditating in a lonely place s omewhere in the ocean, the water  of 
which had been sucked up by Agastya. This meditation has been going on for the  last 
hundred years according to the reckoning of heaven  dwellers.  
17. At my behest, all of you go to the leading sage Kapila. Stand near him wish ing for  the 
conclusion of his  meditation.  18. At the close  of his abstract  meditation,  you will bow down  to him and tell him your 
purpose in full. He will do what is conducive to your  welfare.  
19. O excellent Devas, do something whereby a break in the abstract meditation of  the 
sage can be caused through the sons of Sagara". Jaimini  said:  
20. On being told thus by him, the Devas bowed down to Brahma and went to Kapila,  the 
most excellent among the brahm anas; with palms joined in reverence, they spoke to  him. 
The Devas  said:  
21. Be pleased  with us, oh excellent sage.  We have  sought  refuge  in you. The whole  of 
the universe, harassed by the sons of Sagara, is  perishing.  
22. It is well known that you are the cause of the sustenance and annihilation of  the 
worlds. With the partial power of Vishnu, you have incarnated on the earth and you  stay 
here as the leading  Yogin.  
23. A physical  body  has been  voluntarily  assumed  by you, only for the destruction  of the 
great distress of men afflicted by the three types of agony. Indeed, you are the  most  
excellent among those who perform austerities.  
24. Undoubtedly,  O Brahmana,  you are capable,  at your will, to mentally,  create  the entire  
universe,  sustain it and annihilate  it. 
25. You are our creator and dispenser of our destiny. You are our preceptor. You are  our 
greatest resort. You are our protector. Put an end to our  adversity.  
26. O leading  Brahmana,  be the resort  and refuge  of the leading  Brahmanas  in particular,  
who reside in the three worlds and who are being persecuted by the sons of  Sagara.  
27. Indeed,  the activities  of people  like you will be of Satva  ( very good  ) nature.  Hence,  O 
sage of good holy rites, it behooves you to save us and all the  world.  
28-31a. If not, O holy saint, the entire universe will be destroyed prematurely."  Jaimini  
Said: " On being told thus by all the Devas, Kapila slowly opened his eyes. Glancing  at 
there, he spoke these pleasing words ' Utterly burned by their own acti ons, the sons  of 
Sagara  will surely  perish  when  the proper  time arrives.  Let that time be awaited  by you all. 
For the achievement of your purpose, O excellent Suras, I shall become the cause  of 
destruction of those evilminded  ones.'  
31-33. Ere long, the sons of Sagara, whose minds are inclined towards sinful  activities  
and whose intellects have been adversely affected by Kala ( Time, God of Death ) will  be 
burned by the fire of my anger. Hence, 0 Devas, all the worlds shall be rid of  distress.  
They will have fear from nowhere. Let them ( sons of Sagara ) be wicked in their  actions.  
They will quickly meet with their annihilation. So be free from fear and go back to  your 
own city. Wait for some time. Thereafter, you will realis e what you  desire."  
34-38. On being  told thus by Kapila,  all those  Devas  including  Indra,  became  delighted.  
After bowing down to him they went towards heaven. In the meantime, king Sagara,  the 
Lord of the Earth desired to perform Vajimedha (HorseSacrifice) , the great Yajna.  With 
the permission of Vasistha, he gathered together all the necessary  requisites.  
Accompanied by Aurva and other Brahmanas he duly took the initiation for  the 
performance of sacrifice. For the purpose of letting the horse roam about, t he king  of 
great renown called all his sons and commanded them thus: O my sons, make the  horse  
roam  about  all round  the earth.  It behoves  you to do this immediately  and bring  it back  to 
me." Jaimini  said:  
39-43. " At the behest of their father they took the horse and made it wander over  the 
entire  earth.  It was only because  of the directive  of the Vedic  injunction  that the horse  was 
made  to go round  the earth  and not for the conquest  of the quarters  nor for levying taxes  
and tributes as the whole of the earth had already been conquered by that king.  Kings   
had already  been  made  payers  of tributes  by that king of exalted  heroism  in the battlefield.  
Then  those   princes   reached  the  lower   ground   surface   of  the   salt   ocean                    
wherein there was no water. With great delight they encircled the horse and entered  the interior of the  earth.  
CHAPTER  FIIFTY -THREE  
The Destruction of the Sons of  Sagara  
Jamini  Said:  
1. When they reached there, the wind god who had been directed by Indra, carried  away  
the horse to the netherworlds within a  moment.  
2. Stealing  the horse  without  being  seen  by any of them,  O king,  the wind god carried  it 
away along that path to the vicinity of sage  Kapila.  
3-4. When the horse disappeared, all those princes became perplexed. Searching for  the 
horse, they went 'round and 'round the earth. After searching the entire earth including  the 
cities,  mountains  and forests,  they attained  great  sorrow  because  they were  still unable  to 
see the sacrificial  animal.  
5. Then they went back to Ayodhya, surrounded by the sagas, met their father,  bowed  
down to him and initiated to him  everything.  
6. " The moment we entered the ocean after wandering over the whole of the earth,  the 
horse was taken away by some one though it was being vigilantly guarded by us  who 
were on the watch."  
7-8. On being told thus by them the excellent king became infuriated and  told them "  Go 
away  hence,  unrighteous  ones,  never  to return  again.  How was it lost by you, while  you 
were alive. You were indeed evil minded ones. There is no question of your  returning  
without the horse  here".  
9. Then all of them together setout from that place and said to one another: " Even  now 
the horse is not to be seen, what shall we do  ?" 
10. The whole of the earth was searched by us, including the mountains, forests  and 
parks. The horse is not seen anywhere nor its news is heard.  
11. Hence,  starting  with the ocean  and extending  as far as the netherworlds,  we shall split 
the earth and dig it. We shall enter the netherworlds and search for the  horse.  
 
12. Having decided thus, all those sons of Sagara, of cruel resolve, dug the  earth  
everywhere beginning with the  seashore.  
13. Being dug by them, the earth became greatly excited and cried aloud. On seeing  their 
activity, all living beings cried in  distress.  
14. After  digging  the Bharata  subcontinent  and casting  it off on the ground,  they united  a 
thousand Yojanas of the earth to the  ocean.  
15. Digging  the earth  upto the netherworlds,  the sons  of the king saw the horse  grazing  in 
the netherworlds.  
I6. Delighted  very much  they gathered  together  and laughed  out of contentment.  Some  of 
them danced with great  joy. 
17-21. They saw the noble -souled Kapila of brilliant lustre who was very old; who  was 
seated in the lotusposture, with his eyes fixed yet at the tip of his nose, who had kept  the 
head and neck straight and long; who had kept the chest projecting forward, who  was 
shining with his own splendour radiating all round in full like a lamp placed i n a windless  
spot; whose body was full of perfect knowledge shining within himself; whose mind  was 
engaged in abstract meditation; who appeared like the motionless ocean; who was  duly 
engaged in the yogic exercise; whose mind was engrossed in what should b e meditated  
upon; who  was the most  excellent among  leading  Yogins  and who looked  like the fire with 
its clusters of flames extinguished. On seeing him staying there, they consulted  one 
another  about  him for a short  while.  For a short  while,  they underwent  excessive  agitation.  
 22-23. Thinking that it was he who stole the horse, the evil -minded sons of'  Sagara,  
induced by the God of death, surrounded Kapila, the excellent sage. Encircling him  they 
said, " This is the thief: There is no doubt about it. This e vil-minded robber of the  horse  
deserves to be killed by  us". 
Jaimini said  : 
24-27a. " All those Sagaras whose intellect had become deluded and whose death  was 
imminent, suddenly molested the sage who was sitting like an ordinary  person.  
Then sage Kapila wh o had never been dejected in mind, was overwhelmed with  wrath,  
because he lead been upset due to the break in his abstract meditation. He was  agitated.  
Assailed by those evilminded ones, the unassailable sage Kapila became agitated.  He 
assumed  a huge  size like the fire that increases  in size at the end of the  Kalpa  on account  
of the gusts of  wind.  
27b-30a. The fire of anger arising out of his body as vast and majestic as the ocean,  burst  
forth like the Samkarshana fire issuing from the poison of Sesha out to burn down  the 
netherworlds. His anger was further kindled by the recollection of attack. The sage  who 
had a lustre similar to that of a wheel of fire ( i.e. whirling fire ) opened his eyes. Then  for  
a moment, O king, his eyes became extremely red and shone like the Sun and the  Moon  
simultaneously appearing in the sky at  dawn.  
30b-35. He looked at the princes with rolling eyes gravely, like the God of annihilation  at 
the close  of ( Kalpa ) period. Sparks  and flames  of fire suddenly  emerged  from the eyes  of 
that infuriated sage and spread all round in various directions continuously, like the  sparks  
of Kalagni ( destructive fire at the time of final annihilation ). The sparks of fire of  the 
Sage's anger pervaded the quarters all round, with columns of smoke projecting  forward  
and emitting floods of sparks  frequently.  
The sparks emanating from his eyes like the poisonous flames with the cavity of the  belly 
of a python, shone like the flame s of the Vadavafire ( submarine fire ) of the violent  ocean.  
The fire of anger,  O great  king,  that pervaded  the spaces  in the quarters  by means  of its  
flames, enveloped the firmament and burned the sons of  Sagara.  
36. The world became enveloped by th e clusters of flames of fire and smoke  whirling  
round  and round  on account  of the angry  ( i.e. violent  ) blasts  of wind that blew with a loud 
report. It became filled with the dusts of the earth too, that were blown up  excessively.  
Hence, the world became too much  afflicted.  
37. All round, the fire appeared to be scraping the firmament by means of its  flames  
struck  by the velocity  of wind.  It immediately  burned  down  completely  the sons  of the king 
who were the enemies of the  Suras.  
38. Even  as all the worlds  were  watching,  the fire of Kapila's  anger  reduced  the Sagaras  
to ashes completely, sparing only the  horse.  
39. Thus the sons of Sagara, of sinful mind, were burned suddenly on account of that  fire 
of anger like the dry trees that get consumed  in the forest  conflagration.  
40. On seeing the annihilation of those evil -minded Sagaras, the Devas spoke to  one 
another in wonder, along with the  Sages.  
41-42. Oh, the ultimate bad result of those persons who have committed terrible sins  has 
not been delayed. Indeed, in this world, men of wicked souls have to meet with a bad  end. 
These wicked and cruel minded persons, huge in size like mountains, have suddenly  and 
forcibly perished like dry grass in  fire. 
43. They had caused anxiety and torture t o all living beings. They were  extremely  
censured by good men throughout their lives. Fortunately, they have met with  their 
destruction.  
 
 
  
44. Which man can attain happiness in this world after committing an inauspicious  action  
that is censured by the worlds and  that causes harassment to others? 45. These  sinners  
had made all living beings cry aloud. They have now been struck dead by means  of 
brahmadanda ( the punishing rod of a brahmana ). Hence, on account of their own  evil 
actions, they have gone to hell where they will be spending many many  years.  
46. Hence,  only good  actions  should  be performed  by intelligent  persons.  The other  type 
of actions censured by the world should be cast off far away ( i.e. completely avoided  ). 
47. As long as one is alive,  one should  strive  for the attainment  of final beatitude.  This 
should be done by one who knows what is good for him. One should not harm or  injure  
any one, as life is  transitory.  
48. This body is nonpermanent. Riches are extremely fickle. The entire worldly  existence  
is utterly worthless. How may the learned one believe ( otherwise )?" 49. Even as  the 
leading Suras and sages were telling one another thus, the sons of Sagara perished  after 
becoming the fuel to the fire of the anger of the  sage.  
50. The sons of Sagara whose bodies were burnt down suddenly, ( as if ) paralysed  the 
earth with their ashes and instantaneously fell into hell due to their sinful  deeds.  
51. After  burning  those  sons  of Sagara  entirely,  the fire arising  from his anger  was on the 
point of burning all the worlds suddenly in a  moment.  
52. The Devas who became frightened gathered together and stood by in the  firmament.  
Being desireous of suppressing the fire of anger, they eulogised the noble -souled  sage."  
   
CHAPTER  FIFTY -FOUR  
Recovery of the Sacrificial  Horse:  
Jaimini  said:"  It behoves  you, O Leading  Brahmana,  to restrain  immediately  this Fire of 
anger.  If not, the entire  universe  is likely  to be burnt  by it untimely.  Your  greatness  has 
been seen. The whole world including the mobile and the immobile beings has  been  
pervaded by this fire of your anger. Forbear, please restrain this anger, O  leading  
Brahmana. Obei sance to  you."  
On being eulogised thus, the saintly Kapila, immediately controlled the extremely  terrible  
fire of anger.  Thereupon,  the entire  universe  including  the mobile  and the immobile  beings  
became calm. Devas and the ascetics became free from  distre ss. 
In the meantime, the saintly Rishi Narada, O King, casually went to Ayodhya from  the 
Devaloka ( the world of the Devas  ). 
On seeing that Narada had arrived, Sagara worshipped him perfectly in accordance  with 
the injunctions  of the scriptures,  with Arghya,  Padya  and other  materials of  worship.  
Accepting that honour and worship, Narada sat on the exalted seat and spoke  these  
words, O King, to Sagara the tiger among  kings.  
Narada said : " Your sons who had gone to take horse around the, world, O  excell ent 
king, have been struck down by the curse of a Brahmana. All of them have  perished.  
Your sacrificial horse, O King, that was being guarded by all of them was  taken  
somewhere in the heaven without being noticed by anyone, as ordained by  fate. 
They began to search for the lost horse all over the earth. For a long time, O king,  they 
did not get any information of its  whereabouts.  
Thereupon, they decided to search for the horse underneath the earth.  Beginning  
earnestly, those Sagaras dug up the surface of th e earth.  
While digging the earth, O King, they saw the horse in Patala ( Netherworlds ) and near  it 
they saw the great sage Kapila, the leading  Yogin.  
On seeing him, they committed a sinful deed. All of then being urged by Kala (God  of 
death),  saying  "This is the robber  of the horse",  they made  Kapila  sufficiently  infuriated.  
Thereupon,  your sons  perished  with their bodies  as fuel to the fire emanating  from his 
eyes and caused by his anger, the fire that burned the  quarters.  
You need  not grieve  over them.  It does  not behoove  you to grieve  over them,  O leading  
King, because they were cruel, of sinful conduct and were creating troubles  and 
impediments to all people. Retain your courage as your asset  . 