“Caitanya-caritamrita – Adi Lila ” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Summary: Caitanya-caritamrita is the biography of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
written by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami in the 16th century, now published
with elaborate translations and commentaries in English by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami. The multi-volume Caitanya-caritamrita is dividedinto three sections, Adi Lila, Madhya Lila, and Antya Lila, representingthe beginning, middle, and concluding pastimes of Lord ChaitanyaMahaprabhu. This file comprises the text of the several volumes thatmake up the Adi Lila section.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluationcopy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyrightinformation intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Caitanya Caritamrita” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1974-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .
                                   Preface
     There is no difference between the teachings of Lord Caitanya
presented here and the teachings of Lord Krsna in Bhagavad-gita. Theteachings of Lord Caitanya are practical demonstrations of Lord Krsna'steachings. Lord Krsna's ultimate instruction in Bhagavad-gita is thateveryone should surrender unto Him, Lord Krsna. Krsna promises to takeimmediate charge of such a surrendered soul. The Lord, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, is already in charge of the maintenance of thiscreation by virtue of His plenary expansion, Ksirodakasayi Visnu, butthis maintenance is not direct. However, when the Lord says that Hetakes charge of His pure devotee, He actually takes direct charge. Apure devotee is a soul who is forever surrendered to the Lord, just as achild is surrendered to his parents or an animal to its master. In thesurrendering process, one should: (1) accept things favorable fordischarging devotional service, (2) reject things unfavorable, (3)believe firmly in the Lord's protection, (4) feel exclusively dependent
on the mercy of the Lord, (5) have no interest separate from theinterest of the Lord, and (6) always feel oneself meek and humble.     The Lord demands that one surrender unto Him by following these sixguidelines, but the unintelligent so-called scholars of the worldmisunderstand these demands and urge the general mass of people toreject them. At the conclusion of the Ninth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita,Lord Krsna directly says: "Engage your mind always in thinking of Me,offer obeisances and worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surelyyou will come to Me." (Bg. 9.34) However, the scholarly demons misguidethe masses of people by directing them to the impersonal, unmanifest,eternal, unborn truth rather than the Personality of Godhead. Theimpersonalist Mayavadi philosophers do not accept that the ultimateaspect of the Absolute Truth isthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ifone desires to understand the sun as it is, one must first face thesunshine, then the sun globe and, after entering into that globe, comeface to face with the predominating deity of the sun. Due to a poor fundof knowledge, the Mayavadi philosophers cannot go beyond the Brahmaneffulgence, which may be compared to the sunshine. The Upanisads confirmthat one has to penetrate the dazzling effulgence of Brahman before onecan see the real face of the Personality of Godhead.     Lord Caitanya therefore teaches direct worship of Lord Krsna, whoappeared as the foster child of the King of Vraja. He also suggests thatthe place known as Vrndavana is as good as Lord Krsna because there isno difference between the name, quality, form, pastimes, entourage andparaphernalia of Lord Krsna and Lord Krsna Himself. That is the absolutenature of the Absolute Truth.     Lord Caitanya also recommended that the highest mode of worship inthe highest perfectional stage is the method practiced by the damsels ofVraja. These damsels (gopis, or cowherd girls) simply loved Krsnawithout a motive for material or spiritual gain. Caitanya alsorecommended Srimad-Bhnavatam as the spotless narration of transcendentalknowledge, and He pointed out that the highest goal in human life is todevelop unalloyed love for Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.     Lord Caitanya's teachings are identical to those given by LordKapila, the original propounder of sankhya-yoga, the sankhya system ofphilosophy. This authorized system of yoga recommends meditation on thetranscendental form of the Lord. There is no question of meditating onsomething void or impersonal. One can meditate on the transcendentalform of Lord Visnu even without practicing involved sitting postures.Such meditation is called perfect samadhi. This perfect samadhi isverified at the end of the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-git\ where LordKrsna says: "And of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with greatfaith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is mostintimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47)     Lord Caitanya instructed the mass of people in the sankhyaphilosophy of acintya- bhedabheda-tattva, which maintains that theSupreme Lord is simultaneously one with and different from His creation.Lord Caitanya taught this philosophy through the chanting of the holyname of the Lord. He taught that the holy name of the Lord is the soundincarnation of the Lord and that since the Lord is the absolute whole,there is no difference between His holy name and His transcendentalform. Thus by chanting the holy name of the Lord one can directlyassociate with the Supreme Lord by sound vibration. As one practicesthis sound vibration, he passes through three stages of development: the
offensive stage, the clearing stage and the transcendental stage. In theoffensive stage one may desire all kinds of material happiness, but inthe second stage one becomes clear of all material contamination. Whenone is situated on the transcendental stage, he attains the most covetedposition--the stage of loving God. Lord Caitanya taught that this is thehighest stage of perfection for human beings.     Yoga practice is essentially meant for controlling the senses. Thecentral controlling factor of all the senses is the mind;therefore onefirst has to practice controlling the mind by engaging it in Krsnaconsciousness. The gross activities of the mind are expressed throughthe external senses either for the acquiring of knowledge or thefunctioning of the senses in accordance to the will. The subtleactivities of the mind are thinking, feeling and willing. In accordanceto one's consciousness, the individual is either polluted or clear. Ifone's mind is fixed on Krsna (His name, quality, form, pastimes,entourage and paraphernalia), all one's activities--both subtle andgross--become favorable. The Bhagavad-gita's process of purifyingconsciousness is the process of fixing one's mind on Krsna by talking ofHis transcendental activities, cleansing His temple, going to Histemple, seeing the beautiful transcendental form of the Lord nicelydecorated, hearing His transcendental glories, tasting food offered toHim, associating with His devotees, smelling the flowers and tulasileaves offered Him, engaging in activities for the Lord's interest, etc.No one can bring the activities of the mind and senses to a stop, butone can purify these activities through a change in consciousness. Thischange is indicated in Bhagavad- gita when Krsna tells Arjuna of theknowledge of yoga whereby one can work without fruitive results. "O sonof Prtha, when you act by such intelligence, you can free yourself fromthe bondage of works," (Bg. 2.39) A human being is sometimes restrictedin sense gratification due to certain circumstances such as disease,etc., but this is not the prescription. Without knowing the actualprocess by which the mind and senses can be controlled, less intelligentmen either try to stop the mind and senses by force, or they give in tothem and are carried away by the waves of sense gratification.     The regulative principles and the rules of yoga, the varioussitting postures and breathing exercises performed in an attempt towithdraw one's senses from the sense objects are methods meant for thosewho are too much engrossed in the bodily conception of life. Theintelligent man who is situated in Krsna consciousness does not try toforcibly stop his senses from acting. Rather, he engages his senses inthe service of Krsna. No one can stop a child from playing by leavinghim inactive. A child can be stopped from engaging in nonsense by beingengaged in superior activities. The forceful restraint of senseactivities by the eight principles of yoga is recommended for inferiormen. Being engaged in the superior activities of Krsna consciousness,superior men naturally retire from the inferior activities of materialexistence.     In this way Lord Caitanya teaches the science of Krsnaconsciousness. That science is absolute. Dry mental speculators try torestrain themselves from material attachment, but it is generally foundthat the mind is too strong to be controlled and that it drags them downto sensual activities. A person in Krsna consciousness does not run thisrisk. One has to engage his mind and senses in Krsna consciousactivities, and Lord Caitanya teaches one howto do this in practice.
Before accepting sannyasa (the renounced order), Lord Caitanya was knownas Visvambhara. The word visvambhara refers to one who maintains theentire universe and who leads all living entities. This maintainer andleader appeared as Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya to give humanity thesesublime teachings. Lord Caitanya is the ideal teacher of life's primenecessities. He is the most munificent bestower of love of Krsna. He isthe complete reservoir of all mercies and good fortune. As confirmed inSrimad- Bhaga vatam, Bhaga vad-gita, Mah\bharata a n d th e Upanisads, He is th e S u p re m e Personality of Godhead, Krsna Himself, and He isworshipable by everyone in this age of disagreement. Everyone can joinin His sankirtana movement. No previous qualification is necessary. Just by following His teachings, anyone can become a perfect human being.If one is fortunate enough to be attracted by His features, one is sureto be successful in one's life mission. In other words, those who areinterested in attaining spiritual existence can be easily relieved fromthe clutches of maya by the grace of Lord Caitanya. These teachingspresented in this book are nondifferent from the Lord.     Being engrossed in the material body, the conditioned soulincreases the pages of history by all kinds of material activities. Theteachings of Lord Caitanya can help human society stop such unnecessaryand temporary activities. By these teachings, humanity can be elevatedto the topmost platform of spiritual activity. These spiritualactivities actually begin after liberation from material bondage. Suchliberated activities in Krsna consciousness constitute the goal of humanperfection. The false prestige one acquires by attempting to dominatematerial nature is illusory. Illuminating knowledge can be acquired fromthe teachings of Lord Caitanya, and by such knowledge one can advance inspiritual existence.     Everyone has to suffer or enjoy the fruits of his activity; no onecan check the laws of material nature which govern such things. As longas one is engaged in fruitive activity, he is sure to be baffled in anattempt to attain the ultimate goal of life. I sincerely hope that byunderstanding the teachings of Lord Caitanya, human society willexperience a new light of spiritual life which will open the field ofactivity for the pure soul.     om tat sat
     A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami     Birthday of Lord Caitanya
     Sri-Sri-Radha-Krsna Temple     New York, N.Y.
                                 Introduction
     (Originally delivered as five morning lectures on Caitanya-
caritamrta-- the authoritative biography of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu byKrsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami--before the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness, New York City, April 10-14,1967)     The word caitanya means living force. As living entities, we canmove, but a table cannot because it does not possess living force.Movement and activity may be considered to be signs or symptoms of theliving force. Indeed, it may be said that there can be no activitywithout the living force. Although the living force is presentin thematerial condition, it is not amrta, immortal. The words caitanya-caritamrta, then, may be translated as "the character of the livingforce in immortality."     But how is this living force displayed immortally? It is notdisplayed by man or any other creature in this material universe, fornone of us are immortal in these bodies. We possess the iiving force, weperform activities, and we are immortal by our nature and constitution,but the material condition into which we have been put does not allowour immortality to be displayed. It is stated in the katha Upanisad thateternality and the living force belong both to ourselves and God.Although this is true in that both God and ourselves are immortal, thereis a difference. As living entities, we perform many activities, but wehave a tendency to fall down into material nature. God has no suchtendency. Being all-powerful, He never comes under the control ofmaterial nature. Indeed, material nature is but one display of Hisinconceivable energies.     On the ground we may see only clouds in the sky, but if we flyabove the clouds we can see the sun shining. From the sky, skyscrapersand cities seem very tiny; similarly, from God's position this entirematerial creation is insignificant. The tendency of the conditionedliving entity is to come down from the heights where everything can beseen in perspective. God, however, does not have this tendency. TheSupreme Lord is not subject to fall down into illusion (maya) any morethan the sun is subject to fall beneath the clouds. Because the SupremeLord is not subject to illusion, He is unconditioned; because we, asfinite living entities, are prone to fall into iilusion, we are calledconditioned. Impersonalist philosophers (Mayavadis) maintain that boththe living entity and God Himself are under the control of maya whenthey come into this material world. This may be true of the livingentity, but it is not true of God, for in all instances the materialenergy is working under His direction. Those who consider the SupremeLord to be subject to material conditioning are called fools by KrsnaHimself in Bhagavad-gita:
                             avajananti mam mudha
                            manusim tanum asritam                            param bhavam ajananto                            mama bhuta-mahesvaram
"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be." (Bg.9.1 1)     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu should not be considered to be one of us.He is Krsna Himself, the supreme living entity, and as such He nevercomes under the cloud of maya. Krsna, His expansions, and even Hishigher devotees never fall into the clutches of illusion. Lord Caitanyacame to earth simply to preach krsna-bhakti, love of Krsna. In otherwords, He is Lord Krsna Himself teaching the living entities the proper
way to approach Krsna. He is like a teacher who, seeing a student doingpoorly, takes up a pencil and writes, saying, "Do it like this: A, B,C." By this, one must notfoolishly think that the teacher is learninghis ABC's. Although He appears in the guise of a devotee, we shouldalways remember that Lord Caitanya is Krsna (God) Himself teaching ushow to become Krsna conscious, and we must study Him in that light.     In Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna sets forth the highest religiousprinciple in this way:
                           sarva-dharman parityajya
                            mam ekam saranam vraja                           aham tvam sarva-papebhyo                            moksayisyami ma sucah
"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." (Bg. 1 8.66)     This may seem to be a simple instruction to follow, but invariablyour reaction is, "Oh, surrender? Give up? But I have so manyresponsibilities." And maya, illusion, says to us, "Don't do it, oryou'll be out of my clutches. Just stay in my clutches, and l'll kickyou." It is a fact that we are constantly being kicked by maya, justasthe maie-ass is kicked in the face by the she-ass when he comes forsex. Similarly, cats and dogs are always fighting and whining when theyhave sex. These are the tricks of nature. Even an elephant in the jungleis caught by the use of a trained she-elephant who leads him into a pit.Maya has many activities, and in the material world her strongestshackle is the female. Of course in actuality we are neither male norfemale--for these designations refer only to the outer dress, the body.We are all actually Krsna's servants. I n conditioned life, however, weare shackled by the iron chains which take the form of beautiful women.Thus every male is bound by sex life, and therefore when one attempts togain liberation from the material clutches, he must first learn tocontrol the sex urge. Unrestricted sex puts one fully in the clutches ofillusion. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu officially renounced this illusionatthe age of twenty-four, although His wife was sixteen and His motherseventy, and He was the only male member of the family. Although He wasa brahmana and was not rich, He took sannyasa, the renounced order oflife, and thus extricated Himself from family entanglement.     If we wish to become fully Krsna conscious, we have to give up theshackles of maya, or, if we remain with maya, we should live in such away that we will not be subject to illusion. It is not necessary for oneto abandon his family, for there were many householders amongst LordCaitanya's closest devotees. What must be renounced is the propensityfor material enjoyment. Although Lord Caitanya approved of a householderhaving regulated sex in marriage, He was very strict with those in therenounced order, and He even banished Junior Haridasa for glancinglustfully at a young woman. The point is that one must take up aparticular path and stick to it, obeying all the rules and regulationsnecessary for success in spiritual life. It was Lord Caitanya's missionthat He teach the path of Krsna consciousness to all men and therebyenable them to partake of the immortality of spiritual life.     From Caitanya-caritamrta we learn how Caitanya taught people tobecome immortal, and thus the title may be properly translated as "theimmortal character of the living force." The supreme living force is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is also the supreme entity. There areinnumerable living entities, and all of them are individual. This isvery easy to understand: We are all individual in thought and desires,and the Supreme Lord is also an individual person. He is different,though, in that He is the leader,the one whom no one can excel. Amongstthe created iiving entities, one being can excel another in one capacityor another. The Lord is an individual, just as the living entities areindividual, but He is different in that He is the supreme individual.God is also infallible, and in Bhagavad-gita He is addressed as Acyuta,which means, "He who never falls down." This is indicated because inBhagavad-gita Arjuna had fallen into delusion but Krsna had not. Weoften hear it said that God is infallible, and in Bhagavad-gita Krsnastates:
                          nanyam gunebhyah kartaram
                            yac a drastanupasyati                           gunebhyas ca param vetti                          mad-bhavam so 'dhigacchati
"When you see that there is nothing beyond these modes of nature in all
activities and that the Supreme Lord is transcendental to all thesemodes, then you can know My spiritual nature." (Bg. 14.19)     Thus we should not think that Krsna is overpowered by the materialpotency when He is in the material world. Krsna and His incarnations arenot under the control of material nature. They are totally free. Indeed,in Srimad-Bhagavatam one who has a godly nature is actually defined asone who is not affected by the modes of material nature, although inmaterial nature. If even a devotee can attain this freedom, then what tospeak of the Supreme?     The real question is how can we remain unpolluted by materialcontamination while in the material world. It was Rupa Gosvami whoexplained that we can remain uncontaminated while in the world if wesimply make it our ambition to serve Krsna. One may then justifiablyask, "How can I serve?" Obviously this is not simply a matter ofmeditation, which is just an activity of the mind, but of practicalwork. Love of Krsna's service can only be attained by working for Krsna.In such work, we should leave no resource unused. Whatever is there,whatever we have, should be used for Krsna. We can use everything:typewriters, automobiles, airplanes, missiles--anything. If we simplyspeak to people about Krsna consciousness, we are also renderingservice. If our minds, senses, speech, money and energies are thusengaged in the service of Krsna, we cannot be considered to be existingin material nature. By virtue of spiritual consciousness, or Krsnaconsciousness, we transcend the platform of material nature. It is afact that Krsna, His expansions and His devotees--that is, those whowork for Him--are not in material nature, although people with a poorfund of knowledge think that they are.     Caitanya-caritamrta teaches that the spirit soul is immortal andthat ou r activities in the spiritual world are also immortal. TheMayavadis, who hold to the view that the Absolute is impersonal andformless, contend that a realized soul has no need to talk. However, theVaisnavas, who are devotees of Krsna, contend that when one reaches thestage of realization, he really begins to talk. "Previously we onlytalked of nonsense," the Vaisnava says. "Now let us begin our real
talks, talks of Krsna." The Mayavadis are also fond of using the exampleof the water pot, maintaining that when a pot is not filled with waterit makes a sound, but that when it is filled it makes no sound. But arewe waterpots? How can we be compared to them? A good analogy utilizes asmany similarities between two objects as possible. A water pot is not anactive living force, but we are. Ever silent meditation may be adequatefor a water pot, but not for us. Indeed, when one has realized he has somuch to say about Krsna, twenty-four hours in a day are not sufficient.It is the fool who is celebrated as long as he does not speak, for whenhe breaks his silence his lack of knowledge is exposed. Caitanya-caritamrta shows that there are many wonderful things to discover byglorifying the Supreme.     In the beginning of Caitanya-caritamrta, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvamiwrites: " I offer my respects to my spiritual masters." He uses theplural here to indicate the disciplic succession. It is not that heoffers obeisances to his spiritual master alone but to the wholeparampara, the chain of disciplic succession beginning with Lord KrsnaHimself. Thus the guru is addressed in the plural to show the author'shighest respect for all the Vaisnavas. After offering obeisances to thedisciplic succession, the author pays obeisances to all other devotees,Godbrothers, the expansions of Godhead and the first manifestation ofKrsna's energy. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu (sometimes called KrsnaCaitanya) is the embodiment of ali of these; He is God, guru, devoteeand the expansion of God. As His associate, Nityananda, He is the firstmanifestation of energy; as Advaita, He is an incarnation; as Gadadhara,He is the internal potency; and as Srivasa, He is the marginal livingentity. Thus Krsna should not be thought of as being alone but should beconsidered as eternally existing with all His manifestation, asdescribed by Ramanujacarya. In visistadvaita philosophy, God's energies,expansions and incarnations are considered to be oneness in diversity.In other words, God is not separate from all of these; everythingtogether is God.     Actually Caitanya-caritamrta is not intended for the novice, for itis the postgraduate study of spiritual knowledge. Ideally, one beginswith Bhagavad-gita and advances through Srimad-Bhagavatam to theCaitanya-caritamrta. A Ith ou gh al I these great scriptures are on thesame absolute level, for the sake of comparative study Caitanya-caritamrta is considered to be on the highest platform. Every verse init is perfectly composed. Indeed, Lord Caitanya and Nityananda arecomparedto the sun and moon in that They dissipate the darkness of the materialworld. In this instance both the sun and moon have risen together, andit is proper to offer obeisances directly to Lord Caitanya andNityananda.     In the Western world where the glories of Lord Caitanya arerelatively unknown, one may inquire, "Who is Krsna Caitanya?" Thescriptural conclusion in answer to that question is that He is theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Generally in the Upanisads the SupremeAbsolute Truth is described in an impersonal way, but the personalaspect of the Absolute Truth is mentioned in the Isopanisad, where,after a description of the all-pervading, we find the following verse:
                             hiranmayena patrena                            satyasyapihitam mukham
                           tat tvam pusann apavrnu                            satya-dharmaya drstaye
     "O my Lord, sustainer of all that lives, Your real face is covered
by Your dazzling effulgence. Kindly remove that covering and exhibitYourself to Your pure devotee." (Sri Isopanisad, Mantra 15)     The impersonalists do not have the power to go beyond theeffulgence of God and arrive at the personality from whom thiseffulgence is emanating. At the end of Isopanisad, however,there is ahymn to the Personality of Godhead. It is not that the impersonalBrahman is denied; it is also described, but that Brahman is consideredto be the glaring effulgence of the body of Caitanya. In other words,Krsna Caitanya is the basis of the impersonal Brahman. It is also statedby Krsna in Bhagavad-gita that the impersonal Brahman rests on H im(brahmano hi pratisthaham, Bg. 14.27). The Paramatma, or Supersoul,which is present within the heart of every living entity and withinevery atom of the universe, is but the partial representation ofCaitanya. Krsna Caitanya is therefore the basis of Brahman and theSupreme Personality ofGodhead as well. As the Supreme He is full in sixopulences: wealth, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge and renunciation.In short, we shouid know that He is Krsna, God, and nothing is equal toor greater than Him. There is no superior to be conceived. He is theSupreme Person.     It was Rupa Gosvami, a confidential devotee taught for more thanten days continuously by Lord Caitanya, who wrote:
                 namo maha- vac anyaya krsna-prema-pradaya te
                krsnaya krsna-caitanya-namne gaura-tvise namah
"I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord Sri Krsna
Caitanya who is more magnanimous than any other avatara, even KrsnaHimself, because He is bestowing freely what no one else has ever given--pure love of Krsna."     It is not that Caitanya teaches a long and elaborate path to Godrealization. He is completely spiritual, and He begins from the point ofsurrender to Krsna. He does not pursue the paths of karma-yoga or jnana-yoga or hatha-yoga but begins at the end of material existence, at thepoint where one gives up all material attachment. In Bhagavad-gita Krsnabegan His teachings by distinguishing the soul from matter and in theEighteenth Chapter concluded atthe point where the soul surrenders toHim in devotion. The Mayavadis would have all talk cease there, but atthat point the real discussion only begins. It is the Veoanta-sutrawhich begins: athato brahma- jjjnasa.- "Now let us begin to inquireabout the Supreme Absolute Truth." Rupa Gosvamithus praises Caitanya asthe most munificent incarnation of all, for He gives the greatest giftby indicating the highest form of devotional service. In other words, Heanswers the most important inquiries that anyone can make.     There are different stages of devotional service and Godrealization. Strictly speaking, anyone who accepts the existence of Godis situated in devotional service. To acknowledge that God is great issomething, but not much. Caitanya, preaching as an acarya, a greatteacher, taught that we can enter into a relationship with God andactually become God's friend. In Bhagavad-gita Krsna showed Arjuna Hisuniversal form because Arjuna was His "very dear friend." Upon seeing
Krsna as the Lord of the universes, however, Arjuna actually asked Krsnato forgive the familiarity of his friendship. Caitanya goes beyond thispoint. Through Lord Caitanya we can become friends with Krsna, and thereis no limit to this friendship. We can become friends of Krsna not inawe or adoration but in complete freedom. We can even relate to God asHis father. This is not only the philosophy of Caitanya- caritamrta butof Srimad-Bhagavatam as well. Th e re a re n o other lite ratu res i nthe world in which God is treated as the son of a devotee. Usually Godis seen as the almighty Father who supplies the demands of His sons. Thegreat devotees, however, sometimes treat God as a son in their executionof devotional service. The son demands, and the father supplies, and insupplying Krsna the devotee becomes like a father. Instead of takingfrom God, we give to God. It was in this relationship that Krsna'smother, Yasoda, told the Lord, "Here, eat this or You'll die. Eatnicely." In this way Krsna, although the proprietor of everything,depends on the mercy of His devotee. This is a uniquely high level offriendship in which the devotee actually believes himself to be thefather of Krsna.     However, Lord Caitanya's greatest gift was His teaching that Krsnacan be actually treated as one's iover. In this relationship the Lord isso much attached that He expresses His inability to reciprocate. Krsnawas so obliged to the gopis, the cowherd girls of Vrndavana, that Hefelt unable to return their love. "I cannot repay your love," He toldthem. "I have no more assets to return." Thus devotional service isperformed on this excellent platform, and knowledge of the devotee'srelationship to Krsna as lover and beloved was given by CaitanyaMahaprabhu. It was never given by any previous incarnation or acarya.Thus Rupa Gosvami wrote of Caitanya: "Devotional service itself is thehighest platform,the glorious platform which You have contributed. Youare Krsna in a yellow complexion, and You are Sacinandana, the son ofmother Saci. Those who hear Caitanya-caritamrta will keep You in theirhearts. It will be easy to understand Krsna through You." Thus CaitanyaMahaprabhu came to deliver Krsna. His method of deliverance was notmeditation, fruitive activities or scriptural study, but love.     We have often heard the phrase "love of Godhead." How far this loveof Godhead can actually be developed can be learned from the Vaisnavaphilosophy. Theoretical knowledge of love of God can be found in manyplaces and in many scriptures, but what that love of Godhead actually isand how it is developed can be found in Vaisnava literatures. It is theunique and highest development of love of God that is given by CaitanyaMahaprabhu.     Even inthis material world we can have a little sense of love. Howis this possible? It is due to the love which is found in the Godhead.Whatever we find within our experience within this conditional life issituated in the Supreme Lord, who is the ultimate source of everything.In our original relationship with the Supreme Lord there is real love,and that love is reflected pervertedly through material conditions. Ourreal love is continuous and unending, but because that love is reflectedpervertedly in this material world, it lacks continuity and isinebriating. If we want real transcendental love, we have to transferour love to the supreme lovable object--the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. This is the basic principle of Krsna consciousness.     In material consciousness we are trying to love that which is not
at all lovable. We give our love to dogs and cats, running the risk thatat the time of death we may think of them and consequently take birth ina family of cats or dogs. Thus love that does not have Krsna as itsobject leads downward. It is not that Krsna or God is something obscureor something that only a few chosen people can attain. CaitanyaMahaprabhu informs us that in every country and in every scripture thereis some hint of love of Godhead. Unfortunately no one knows what love ofGodhead actually is. The Vedic scriptures, however, are different inthat they can direct the individual in the proper way to love God. Otherscriptures do not give information on how one can love God, nor do theyactually define or describe what or who the Godhead actually is.Although they officially promote love of Godhead, they have no idea howto execute it. But Caitanya Mahaprabhu gives a practical demonstrationof how to love God in a conjugal relationship. Taking the part ofRadharani, Caitanya tries to love Krsna as Radharani loved Him. Krsnawas always amazed by Radharani's love. "How does Radharani give Me suchpleasure?" He would ask. In order to study Radharani, Krsna lived in Herrole and tried to understand Himself. This is the secret of LordCaitanya's incarnation. Caitanya is Krsna, but He has taken the mode orrole of Radharani to show us how to love Krsna. Thus He is addressed: "Ioffer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord who is absorbed inRadharani's thoughts."     This brings up the question of who Radharani is and what Radha-Krsna is. Actually Radha-Krsna is the exchange of love. This is notordinary love; Krsna has immense potencies, of which three areprincipal: internal, external and marginal. In the internal potencythere are three divisions: samvit, hladiniand sandhini. Thehladinipotency is the pleasure potency. All living entities have thispleasure-seeking potency, for all beings are trying to have pleasure.This is the very nature of the living entity. At present we are tryingto enjoy our pleasure potency by means of the body in this materialcondition. By bodily contact we are attempting to derive pleasure frommaterial sense objects. We should not think, however, that Krsna,who isalways spiritual, tries to seek pleasure on this material plane like us.Krsna describes the material universe as a nonpermanent place full ofmiseries. Why, then, would He seek pleasure in the material form? He isthe Supersoul, the supreme spirit, and His pleasure is beyond thematerial conception.     In order to learn how Krsna's pieasure can be obtained, we mustread the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam in which Krsna's pleasurepotency is displayed in His pastimes with Radharani and the damsels ofVraja. Unfortunately, unintelligent people turn at once to the sports ofKrsna i n the Dasama-skandha, the Tenth Canto. Krsna's embracingRadharani or His dancing with the cowherd girls in the iasa dance aregenerally not understood by ordinary men because they consider thesepastimes in the light of mundane lust. They incorrectly think that Krsnais like themselves and that He embraces the gopis just as an ordinaryman embraces a young girl. Some people thus become interested in Krsnabecause they think that His religion allows indulgence in sex. This isnot krsna-bhakti, love of Krsna, but prakrta-sahajiya--materialisticlust.     In order to avoid such errors, we should understand what Radha-Krsna actually is. Radha and Krsna display their pastimes throughKrsna's internal energy. The pleasure potency of Krsna's internal energy
is a most difficult subject matter, and unless one understands whatKrsna is, he cannot understand it. Krsna does not take any pleasure inthis material world, but He has a pleasure potency. Because we are partand parcel of Krsna, the pleasure potency is within us also, but we aretrying to exhibit that pleasure potency in matter. Krsna, however, doesnot make such a vain attempt. The object of Krsna's pleasure potency isRadharani, and He exhibits His potency or His energy as Radharani andthen engages in loving affairs with Her. In other words, Krsna does nottake pleasure in this external energy but exhibits His internal energy,His pleasure potency, as Radharani. Thus Krsna manifests Himself asRadharani in order to exhibit His internal pleasure potency. Of the manyextensions, expansions and incarnations of the Lord, this pleasurepotency is the foremost and chief.     It is not that Radharani is separate from Krsna. Radharani is alsoKrsna, for there is no difference between the energy and the energetic.Without energy, there is no meaning to the energetic, and without theenergetic, there is no energy. Similarly, without Radha there is nomeaning to Krsna, and without Krsna, there is no meaning to Radha.Because of this, the Vaisnava philosophy first of all pays obeisances toand worships the internal pleasure potency of the Supreme Lord. Thus theLord and His potency are always referred to as Radha-Krsna. Similarly,those who worship the name of Narayana first of all utter the name ofLaksmi, as Laksmi-Narayana. Similarly, those who worship Lord Rama firstof all utter the name of Sita. In any case--Sita-Rama, Radha-Krsna,Laksmi-Narayana--the potency always comes first.     Radha and Krsna are one, and when Krsna desires to enjoy pleasure,He manifests Himself as Radharani. The spiritual exchange of lovebetween Radha and Krsna is the actual display of the internal pleasurepotency of Krsna. Although we speak of"when" Krsna desires, just when He did desire we cannot say. We onlyspeak in this way because in conditional life we take it that everythinghas a beginning; however, in the absolute or spiritual life there isneither beginning nor end. Yet in order to understand that Radha andKrsna are one and that They also become divided, the question "When?"automatically comes to mind. When Krsna desired to enjoy His pleasurepotency, He manifested Himself in the separate form of Radharani, andwhen He wanted to understand Himself through the agency of Radha, Heunited with Radharani, and that unification is called Lord Caitanya.     Why did Krsna assume the form of Caitanya Mahaprabhu? It isexplained that Krsna desired to know the glory of Radha's love. "Why isShe so much in love with Me?" Krsna asked. "What is My specialqualification that attracts Her so? And what is the actual way in whichShe loves Me?" It seems strange that Krsna, as the Supreme,should beattracted by anyone's love. We search after the love of a woman or a manbecause we are imperfect and lack something. The love of a woman, thatpotency and pleasure, is absent in man, and therefore a man wants awoman, but this is notthe case with Krsna, who is full in Himself. ThusKrsna expressed surprise: "Why am I attracted by Radharani? And whenRadharani feels My love, what is She actually feeling?" In order totaste the essence of that loving affair, Krsna appeared just as the moonappears on the horizon of the sea. Just as the moon was produced by thechurning of the sea, by the churning of spiritual love affairs the moonof Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared. Indeed, Caitanya's complexion wasgolden, just like the moon. Although this is figurative language, it
conveys the meaning behind the appearance of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thefull significance of His appearance will be explained in later chapters.     The manifestations of the Su preme are also explained in Caitanya-caritamrta. After offering respects to Lord Caitanya, Krsnadasa Kavirajanext offers them to Nityananda. He explains that Nityananda is amanifestation of Sankarsana, who is the origin of the Maha-Visnu.Krsna's first manifestation is as Balarama and then Sankarsana,and afterSankarsana He is manifest as Pradyumna. In this way so many expansionstake place. Although there are many expansions, Lord Sri Krsna is theorigin, as confirmed in Brahma-samhita. He is like the original candlefrom which many thousands and millions of candles are lit. Although anynumber of candles can be lighted, the original candle still retains itsidentity as the origin. In this way Krsna expands Himself into so manylights, and all these expansions are called visnu-tattva. Visnu is alarge light, and we are small lights, but all are expansions of Krsna.     When it is necessary to create the material universe, Visnu expandsHimself as the Maha-Visnu. This Maha-Visnu lies down on the Causal Oceanand breathes all the universes from His nostrils. Thus from the Maha-Visnu and the Causal Ocean all the universes spring, and all theseuniverses float in the Causal Ocean. In this regard there is the storyof Vamana, who, when He took three steps, stuck His foot through thecovering of the universe. Water from the Causal Ocean flowed through thehole which His foot made, and it is said that that flow of water becamethe River Ganges. Therefore the Ganges is accepted as the most sacredwater of Visnu and is worshiped by all Hindus from the Himalayas down tothe Bay of Bengal.      That Maha-Visnu who lies on the Causal Ocean isactually an expansion of Balarama, who is Krsna's first expansion, and,in the Vrndavana pastimes, is the brother of Krsna. In the maha-mantraHare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,Rama Rama, Hare Hare, the word Rama refers to Balarama. Since Nityanandais an expansion of Balarama, Rama also refers to Lord Nityananda. ThusHare Krsna, Hare Rama addresses not only Krsna and Balarama but LordCaitanya and Nityananda as well.     The subject matter of Caitanya-caritamrta primarily deals with whatis beyond this material creation. The cosmic material expansion iscalled maya because it has no eternal existence. Because it is sometimesmanifested and sometimes not manifested, it is regarded as illusory. Butbeyond this temporary manifestation there is a higher nature, asindicated in Bhagavad-gita.
                          paras tasmat tu bhavo 'nyo
                          'vyakto 'vyaktat sanatanah                            yah sa sarvesu bhutesu                            nasyatsu na vinasyati
"Yetthere is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendentalto
this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is neverannihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains asit is." (Bg. 8.20)     That supreme nature is beyond the manifested (vyaktah) andunmanifested (avyaktah). This superior nature which is beyond bothcreation and annihilation is the living force which is manifest in thebodies of all living entities. The body itself is composed of inferiornature, matter, but it is the superior nature that is moving the body.
The symptom of that superior nature is consciousness. Thus in thespiritual world, where everything is composed of the superior nature,everything is conscious. In the material world inanimate objects are notconscious, but in the spiritual world this is not so. There a table isconscious, the land is conscious,the trees are conscious--everything isconscious.     It is not possible to imagine how far this material manifestationextends. In the material world everything is calculated by imaginationor by some imperfect method, but Vedic literatures give information ofwhat lies beyond the material universe. Those who believe inexperimental knowledge may doubt the Vedic conclusions, for they cannoteven calculate how far this universe is extended, nor can they reach farinto the universe itself. It is not possible to obtain information ofanything beyond this material nature by experimental means. That whichis beyond our power of conception is called acintya, inconceivable. Itis useless to argue or speculate about what is inconceivable. If it istruly inconceivable, it is not subject to speculation orexperimentation. Our energy is limited, and our sense perception islimited; therefore we must rely on the Vedic conclusions regarding thatsubject matter which is inconceivable. Knowledge of the superior naturemust simply be accepted without argument. How is it possible to argueabout something to which we have no access? The method for understandingtranscendental subject matter isgiven by Lord Krsna Himself in Bhagavad-gita, where Krsna tells Arjunaat the beginning of the Fourth Chapter:
                             imam vivasvate yogam
                            proktavan aham avyayam                            vivasvan manave praha                           manur iksvakave 'bravit
"I instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god,
Vivasvan, and Vivasvan instructed it to Manu, the father of mankind, andManu in turn instructed it to Iksvaku." (Bg. 4.1)     This is the method of parampara, or disciplic succession.Similarly, in Srimad- Bhagavatam Krsna imparted knowledge into the heartof Brahma, the first created creature within the universe. Brahmaimparted those lessons to his disciple, Narada, and Narada imparted thatknowledge to his disciple, Vyasadeva. Vyasadeva imparted it toMadhvacarya, and from Madhvacarya the knowledge comes down toMadhavendra Puri, to Isvara Puri and from him to Caitanya Mahaprabhu.     One may ask that if Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Krsna Himself, then whydid He need a spiritual master? Of course He did not need a spiritualmaster, but because He was playing the role of acarya (one who teachesby example), He accepted a spiritual master. Even Krsna Himself accepteda spiritual master, for that is the system. In this way the Lord setsthe example for men. We should not think, however, that the Lord takes aspiritual master because He is in want of knowledge. He is simplystressing the importance of accepting the disciplic succession. Theknowledge of that disciplic succession actually comes from the LordHimself, and if the knowledge descends unbroken, it is perfect. Althoughwe may not be in touch with the original personality who first impartedthe knowledge, we may receive the same knowledge through this process oftransmission. In Srimad-Bhagavatam, it is stated that Krsna, the
Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, transmitted transcendentalknowledge into the heart of Brahma. This, then, is one way knowledge isreceived--through the heart. Thus there are two processes by which onemay receive knowledge: One depends upon the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, who is situated as the Supersoul within the heart of all livingentities, and the other depends upon the guru or spiritual master, whois an expansion of Krsna. Thus Krsna transmits information both fromwithin and from without. We simply have to receive it. If knowledge isreceived in this way, it doesn't matter whether it is inconceivable ornot.     In Srimad-Bhagavatam there is a great deal of information givenabout the Vaikuntha planetary systems which are beyond the materialuniverse. Similarly, a great deal of inconceivable information is givenin Caitanya-caritamrta. Any attempt to arrive at this informationthrough experimental knowledge is not possible. The knowledge simply hasto be accepted. According to the Vedic method, sabda, or transcendentalsound, is regarded as evidence. Sound is very important in Vedicunderstanding, for, if it is pure, it is accepted as authoritative. Evenin the material world we accept a great deal of information which issent thousands of miles by telephone or radio. In this way we alsoaccept sound as evidence in our daily lives. Although we cannot see theinformant we accept his information as valid on the basis of sound.Sound vibration then is very important in the transmission of Vedicknowledge.     The Vedas inform us that beyond this cosmic manifestation there areextensive planets and the spiritual sky. This material manifestation isregarded as only a small portion of the total creation. The materialmanifestation includes not only this universe but innumerable others aswell, but all the material universes combined comprise only one fractionof the total creation. The majority of the creation is situated in thespiritual sky. In that sky innumerable planets float, and these arecalled Vaikunthalokas. In every Vaikunthaloka Narayana presides in theform of His four-armed expansions: Sankarsana, Pradyumna, Aniruddha andVasudeva.     As stated before, the material universes are manifested by the Lordin the form of Maha-Visnu. J ust as a husband and wife combine to begetoffspring, the MahaVisnu combines with His wife Maya, or materialnature. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita where Krsna states:
                            sarva-yonisu kaunteya
                           murtayah sambhavan tiyah                           tasam brahma mahad yonir                            aham bija-pradah pita
"It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunti, are
made possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father." (Bg. 14.4)     Visnu impregnated Maya or material nature simply by glancing ather. This is the spiritual method. Materially we are limited toimpregnate by only one particular part of our body, but the SupremeLord, Krsna or Maha-Visnu, can impregnate any part by any part. Simplyby glancing the Lord can conceive countless living entities in the wombof material nature. The Brahma-samhita also confirms that the spiritualbody of the Supreme Lord is so powerful that any part of that body can
perform the functions of any other part. We can only touch with ourhands or skin, but Krsna can touch just by glancing. We can only seewith our eyes, we cannot touch or smell with them. Krsna, however, cansmell and also eat with His eyes. When foodstuffs are offered to Krsnawe don't see Him eating, but He eats simply by glancing at the food. Wecannot imagine how things work in the spiritual world where everythingis spiritual. It is not that Krsna does not eat or that we imagine thatHe eats; He actually eats, but His eating is different from ours. Oureating process will be similar to His when we are completely on thespiritual platform. On that platform every part of the body can act onbehalf of any other part.     Visnu does not require anything in order to create. He does notrequire the goddess Laksmi in order to give birth to Brahma, for Brahmais born from a lotus flower which grows from the navel of Visnu. Thegoddess Laksmi sits at the feet of Visnu and serves Him. In thismaterial world sex is required to produce children, but in the spiritualworld one can produce as many children as he likes withouthaving to take help from his wife. Because we have no experience withspiritual energy, we think that Brahma's birth from the navel of Visnuis simply a fictional story. We are not aware that spiritual energy isso powerful that it can do anything and everything. Material energy isdependent on certain laws, but spiritual energy is fully independent.     Brahma is born from the navel of Garbhodakasayi Visnu, who is but apartial manifestation of the Maha-Visnu. Countless universes reside likeseeds within the skin pores.of the Maha-Visnu, and when He exhales, theyall are manifest. In the material world we have no experience of such athing, but we do experience a perverted reflection in the phenomenon ofperspiration. We cannot imagine, however, the duration of one breath ofthe Maha-Visnu, for within one breath all of the universes are createdand annihilated. Lord Brahma only lives for the duration of one breath,and according to our time scale 4,320,000,000 years constitute onlytwelve hours of Brahma, and Brahma lives one hundred of his years. Yetthe whole life of Brahma is contained within one breath of the Maha-Visnu. Thus it is not possible for us to imagine the breathing power ofthe Supreme Lord. That Maha--Visnu is but a partial manifestation ofKrsna.     Thus Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami discusses Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhuas Sri Krsna Himself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and LordNityananda as Balarama, the first expansion of Krsna. Advaitacarya,another principal disciple of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's, is accepted asan expansion of the Maha-Visnu. Thus Advaitacarya is also the Lord, or,more precisely, an expansion of the Lord. The word advaita meansnondual, and his name is such because he is nondifferent from theSupreme Lord. He is also called acarya, teacher, because he disseminatedKrsna consciousness. In this way he is just like Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Although Caitanya is Sri Krsna Himself, He appears as a devotee to teachpeople in general how to love Krsna. Similarly, Advaitacarya appearedjust to distribute the knowledge of Krsna consciousness. Thus he is alsothe Lord incarnated as a devotee. Krsna is manifested in five differentexpansions, and He and all of His associates appear as devotees of theSupreme Lord in the form of Sri Krsna Caitanya, Nityananda,Advaitacarya, Gadadhara, Srivasa and others. In all cases, CaitanyaMahaprabhu is the source of energy for all His devotees. Since this isthe case, if we take shelter of Caitanya Mahaprabhu for the successful
execution of Krsna consciousness, we are sure to make progress. Onedevotional song by Narottama dasa Thakura states: "My dear LordCaitanya, please have mercy upon me. There is no one who is as mercifulas You. My plea is most urgent because Your mission is to deliver fallensouls, and no one is more fallen than I. I beg priority."     The author of Caitanya-caritamrta, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, wasan inhabitant of Vrndavana and a great devotee. He had been living withhis family in Katwa, a small town in the district of Burdwan in Bengal.His family also worshiped RadhaKrsna, and once when there was somemisunderstanding amongst his family about devotional service, KrsnadasaKaviraja was advised by Nityananda Prabhu in a dream to leave home andgo to Vrndavana. Although he was very old, he started out that verynight and went to live in Vrndavana. While he was there, he met some ofthe Gosvamis, principal disciples of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He wasrequested to write Caitanya-caritamrta by the devotees of Vrndavana.Although he began this work at a very old age, by the grace of LordCaitanya he finished it. Today it remains the most authoritative book onCaitanya's philosophy and life.     When Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami was living in Vrndavana, there werenot very many temples. At that time Madana-mohana, Govindaji andGopinatha were the three principal temples. As a resident of Vrndavana,he offered his respects to the Deities in these temples and requestedGod's favor: "My progress in spiritual life is very slow, so l'm askingYour help." In Caitanya-caritamrta, Krsnadasa first offers hisobeisances to Madana-mohana vigraha, the Deity who can help us progressin Krsna consciousness. In the execution of Krsna consciousness, ourfirst business is to know Krsna and our relationship with Him. To knowKrsna is to know one's self, and to know one's self is to know one'srelationship with Krsna. Since this relationship can be learned byworshiping Madana-mohana vigraha, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami firstestablishes his relationship with Him.     When this is established, Krsnadasa begins to worship thefunctional Deity, Govinda. Govinda resides eternally in Vrndavana. Inthe spiritual world of Vrndavana the buildings are made of touchstone,the cows are known as surabhi cows, givers of abundant milk, and thetrees are known as wish-fulfilling trees, for they yield whatever onedesires. In Vrndavana Krsna herds the surabhi cows, and He is worshipedby hundreds and thousands of gopis, cowherd girls, who are all goddessesof fortune. When Krsna descends to the material world, this sameVrndavana descends just as an entourage accompanies an importantpersonage. Because when Krsna comes, His land also comes, Vrndavana isnot considered to exist in the material worid. Therefore devotees takeshelter of the Vrndavana in India, for it is considered to be a replicaof the original Vrndavana. Although one may complain that no kalpa-vrksa, wish-fulfilling trees, exist there, when the Gosvamis were there,the kalpa-vrksa were present. It is not that one can simply go to such atree and make demands; one must first become a devotee. The Gosvamiswould live under a tree for one night only, and the trees would satisfyall their desires. Forthe common man this may all seem very wonderful,but as one makes progress in devotional service, all this can berealized.     Vrndavana is actually experienced as it is by persons who havestopped trying to derive pleasure from material enjoyment. "When will mymind become cleansed of all hankering for material enjoyment so I will
be able to see Vrndavana?" one great devotee asks. The more Krsnaconscious we become and the more we advance, the more everything isrevealed as spiritual. Thus Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami consideredVrndavana in India to be as good as the Vrndavana in the spiritual sky,and in Caitanya-caritamrta he describes Radharani and Krsna as seatedbeneath a wishfulfilling tree in Vrndavana on a throne decorated withvaluable jewels. There Krsna's dear friends, the cowherd boys and thegopis, serve Radha and Krsna by singing, dancing, offering betel nutsand refreshments and decorating Their Lordships with flowers. Even todayin India people decorate thrones and recreate this scene during themonth of July. Generally at that time people go to Vrndavana to offertheir respects to the Deities there.     Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami maintains that the Radha and KrsnaDeities show us how to serve Radha and Krsna. The Madana-mohana Deitiessimply establish that "I am Your eternal servant." With Govinda,however, there is actual acceptance of service, and therefore He iscalled the functional Deity. The Gopinatha Deity is Krsna as master andproprietor of the gopis. He attracted all thegopis, or cowherd girls, bythe sound of His flute, and when they came, He danced with them. Theseactivities are all described in the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam.These gopis were childhood friends of Krsna, and they were all married,for in India the girls are married by the age of twelve. The boys,however, are not married before eighteen, so Krsna, who was fifteen orsixteen at the time, was not married. Nonetheless He called these girlsfrom their homes and invited them to dance with Him. That dance iscalled the rasa-lila dance, and it is the most elevated of all theVrndavana pastimes. Krsna is therefore called Gopinatha because He isthe beloved master of the gopis.     Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami petitions the blessings of LordGopinatha. "May that Gopinatha, the master of the gopis, Krsna, blessyou. May you become blessed by Gopinatha." Just as Krsna attracted thegopis by the sweet sound of His flute, the author of Caitanya-caritamrtaprays that He will also attract the reader's mind by His transcendentalvibration.
                                 Chapter One
     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is none other than the combined form of Sri
Radha and Krsna. He is the life of those devotees who strictly follow inthe footsteps of Srila Rupa Gosvami. Srila Rupa Gosvami and SrilaSanatana Gosvami are the two principal followers of Srila SvarupaDamodara Gosvami, who acted as the most confidential servitor of LordSri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, known as Visvambhara in His early life. Adirect disciple of Srila Rupa Gosvami was Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.The author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami,stands as the direct disciple of Srila Rupa Gosvami and Srila Raghunathadasa Gosvami.     The direct disciple of Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami was SrilaNarottama dasa Thakura, who accepted Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti as hisservitor. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura accepted Srila J agannathadasa Babaji, who initiated Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura, who in turninitiated Srila Gaurakisora dasa Babaji, the spiritual master of OmVisnupada Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja, the divine
master of our humble self.     Since we belong to this chain of disciplic succession fromSriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, this edition of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta willcontain nothing newly manufactured by our tiny brains, but only remnantsof foodstuff originally eaten by the Lord Himself. Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu does not belong to the mundane plane of the three qualitativemodes. He belongs to the transcendental plane beyond the reach of theimperfect sense perception of a living being. Even the most eruditemundane scholar cannot approach the transcendentai plane unless hesubmits himself to transcendental sound with a receptive mood, for inthat mood only can one realize the message of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.What will be described herein, therefore, has nothing to do with theexperimental thoughts created by the speculative habits of inert minds.The subject matter of this book is not a mental concoction but a factualspiritual experience that one can realize only by accepting the line ofdisciplic succession described above. Any deviation from that line willbewilder the reader's understanding of the mystery of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, which is a transcendental literature meant for the post-graduate study of one who has realized all the Vedic literatures such asthe Upanisads and Vedanta and their natural commentaries such as Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita-.     T h i s ed itio n of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta is p rese n ted fo rth e stu d y of si n cere scholars who are really seeking the AbsoluteTruth. It is not the arrogant scholarship of a mental speculator but asincere effort to serve the order of a superior authority whose serviceis the life and soui of this humble effort. It does not deviate evenslightly from the revealed scriptures, and therefore anyone who followsin the disciplic line will be able to realize the essence of this booksimply by the method of aural reception.     The First Chapter of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta begins with fourteenSanskrit verses that describe the Absolute Truth. Then the next threeSanskrit verses describe the principal Deities of Vrndavana, namely, SriRadha-Madana-mohana, Sri RadhaGovindadeva and Sri Radha-Gopinathaji. Thefirst of the fourteen verses is a symbolic representation of the SupremeTruth, and the entire First Chapter is in actuality devoted to thissingle verse, which describes Lord Caitanya in His six differenttranscendentai expansions.     The first manifestation described is the spiritual master, whoappears in two plenary parts called the initiating spiritual master andinstructing spiritual master. They are identical because both of themare phenomenal manifestations of the Supreme Truth. Next described arethe devotees, who are divided into two classes, namely, the apprenticesand the graduates. Next are the incarnations (avataras) of the Lord, whoare explained to be nondifferent from the Lord. These incarnations areconsidered in three divisions--incarnations of the potency of the Lord,incarnations of His qualities, and incarnations of His authority. Inthis connection, Lord Sri Krsna's direct manifestations and Hismanifestations for transcendental pastimes are discussed. Nextconsidered are the potencies of the Lord, of which three principalmanifestations are described: the consorts in the kingdom of God(Vaikuntha), the queens of Dvarakadhama and, highest of all, the damselsof Vrajadhama. Finally, there is the Supreme Lord Himseif, who is thefountainhead of all these manifestations.     Lord Sri Krsna and His plenary expansions are all in the category
of the Lord Himself, the energetic Absolute Truth, whereas His devotees,His eternal associates, are His energies. The energy and energetic arefundamentally one, but since their functions are differently exhibited,they are simultaneously different also. Thus the Absolute Truth ismanifested in diversity in one unit. This philosophical truth, which ispursuant to the Vedanta-sutras, is called acintya-bhedabheda-tattva, orthe conception of simultaneous oneness and difference. In the iatterportion of this chapter, the transcendental position of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu and that of Srila Nityananda Prabhu are described withreference to the above theistic facts.
                                    TEXT 1                           vande gurun isa-bhaktan
                              isam isavatarakan                         tat-prakasams ca tac-chaktih                           krsna-caitanya-samjnakam
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances unto the spiritual masters, the
devotees of the Lord, the Lord's incarnations, His plenary portions, Hisenergies, and the primeval Lord Himself, Sri Krsna Caitanya.
                                    TEXT 2
                          vande sri-krsna-caitanya-
                            nityanandau sahoditau                            gaudodaye puspa vantau                           citrau sandau tamo-nudau
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances unto Sri Krsna Caitanya and Lord
Nityananda, who are like the sun and moon. They have arisensimultaneously on the horizon of Gauda to dissipate the darkness ofignorance and thus wonderfully bestow benediction upon all.
                                    TEXT 3
              yad advaitam brahmopanisadi tad apy asya tanu-bha
                ya atmantaryami purusa iti so 'syamsa-vibhavah             sad-aisvaryaih purno ya iha bhagavan sa svayam ayam              na caitanyat krsnaj jagati para-tattvam param ina
                                 TRANSLATION     What the Upanisads describe as the impersonal Brahman is but the
effulgence of His body, and the Lord known as the Supersoul is but Hislocalized plenary portion. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Krsna Himself, full with six opulences. He is the Absolute Truth, and no
other truth is greater than or equal to Him.
                                    TEXT 4
                 anarpita-carim cirat karunayavatirnah kalau
             samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasam s va-bhakti-sri vam                harih purata-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandioitah                sada hrdaya-kandare sphuratu vah saci-nandanah
                                 TRANSLATION     May that Lord, who is known as the son of Srimati Sacidevi, be
transcendentally situated in the innermost chambers of your heart.Resplendent with the radiance of molten gold, He has appeared in the ageof Kali by His causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation everoffered before: the most sublime and radiant spiritual knowledge of themellow taste of His service.
                                    TEXT 5
               radha krsna-pranaya-vikrtir hladini saktir asmad
                ekatmanav api bhuvi pura deha-bhedam gatau tau            caitanyakhyam prakatam adhuna tad-dvayam caikyam aptam             radha-bha va-dyuti-su valitam naumi krsna-s varupam
                                 TRANSLATION     The loving affairs of Sri Radha and Krsna are transcendental
manifestations of the Lord's internal pleasure-giving potency. AlthoughRadha and Krsna are one in Their identity, They separated Themselveseternally. Now these two transcendental identities have again united inthe form of Sri Krsna Caitanya. I bow down to Him, who has manifestedHimself with the sentiment and complexion of Srimati RadharanialthoughHe is Krsna Himself.
                                    TEXT 6
                sri-radhayah pranaya-mahima kidrso vanayaiva--
                svadyo yenadbhuta-madhurima kidrso va madi vah              saukhyam casya mad-anubhavatah kidrsam vetilobhat             tad-bhavadhyah samajani saci-garbha-sindnau harinduh
                                 TRANSLATION     Desiring to understand the glory of Radharani's love, the wonderful
qualities in Him that She alone relishes through Her love, and thehappiness She feels when She realizes the sweetness of His love, theSupreme Lord Hari, richly endowed with Her emotions, appears from thewomb of Srimati Saci-devi, as the moon appears from the ocean.                                    TEXT 7
                         sankarsanah karana-toya-sayi
                        garbhoda-sayi ca payobdhi-sayi                      sesas ca yasyamsa-kalah sa nitya--                       nandakhya-ramah saranam mamastu
                                 TRANSLATION     May Sri Nityananda Rama be the object of my constant remembrance.
Sankarsana, Sesa Naga and the Visnus who lie on the Karana Ocean, GarbhaOcean and ocean of milk are his plenary portions and the portions of Hisplenary portions.
                                    TEXT 8
                        mayatite vyapi-vaikuntha-loke
                     purnais varye sri-catur-vyuha-madhye                      rupam yasyodbhati sankarsanakhyam-                      tam sri-nityananda-ramam prapadye
                                 TRANSLATION     I surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Nityananda Rama, who is
known as Sankarsana in the midst of the catur-vyuha [consisting ofVasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha]. He possesses fullopulences and resides in Vaikunthaloka, far beyond the materialcreation.
                                    TEXT 9
                       maya-bhartajanda-sanghasrayangah
                       sete saksat karanambhodhi-madhye                      yasyaikamsah sri-puman adi-de vas                      tam sri-nityananda-ramam prapadye
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my full obeisances unto the feet of Sri Nityananda Rama,
whose partial representation called Karanodakasayi Visnu, lying on theKarana Ocean, is the original purusa, the master of the illusory energy,and the shelter of all the universes.
                                   TEXT 10
                       yasyamsamsah srila-garbhoda-sayi
                     yan-nabhy-abjam loka-sanghata-nalam                       loka-srastuh sutika-dhama dnatus                      tam sri-nityananda-ramam prapadye                                 TRANSLATION
     I offer my full obeisances unto the feet of Sri Nityananda Rama, a
partial part of whom is Garbhodakasayi Visnu. From the navel ofGarbhodakasayi Visnu sprouts the lotus that is the birthplace of Brahma,the engineer of the universe. The stem of that lotus is the restingplace of the multitude of planets.
                                   TEXT 11
                       yasyamsamsamsah paratmakhilanam
                     posta- visnur bhati dugdhabdni-sayi                    ksauni-bharta yat-kala so 'py anantas                      tam sri-nityananda-ramam prapadye
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances unto the feet of Sri Nityananda
Rama, whose secondary part is the Visnu lying in the ocean of milk. ThatKsirodakasayi Visnu is the Supersoul of all living entities and themaintainer of all the universes. Sesa Naga is His further sub-part.
                                   TEXT 12
                           maha-visnur jagat-karta
                            mayaya yah srjaty adah                              tasyavatara evayam                             advaitacarya isvarah
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Advaita Acarya is the incarnation of Maha-Visnu, whose main
function is to create the cosmic world through the actions of maya.
                                   TEXT 13
                            advaitam harinadvaitad
                           acaryam bhakti-samsanat                            bhaktavataram isam tam                             advaitacaryam asraye
                                 TRANSLATION     Because He is nondifferent from Hari, the Supreme Lord, He is
called Advaita, and because He propagates the cult of devotion, He iscalled Acarya. He is the Lord and the incarnation of the Lord's devotee.Therefore I take shelter of Him.
                                   TEXT 14                          panca-tattvatmakam krsnam
                            bhakta-rupa-svar\pakam                          bhaktavataram bhaktakhyam                           namami bhak ta-saktikam
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my obeisances unto the Supreme Lord, Krsna, who is
nondifferent from His features as a devotee, devotional incarnation,devotional manifestation, pure devotee, and devotional energy.
                                   TEXT 15
                            jayatam suratau pangor
                            mama manda-mater gati                           mat-sarvasva-padambhojau                             radha-madana-mohanau
                                 TRANSLATION     Glory to the all-merciful Radha and Madana-mohana! I am lame and
ill advised, yet They are my directors, and Their lotus feet areeverything to me.
                                   TEXT 16
                      divyad-vrndaranya-kalpa-drumadhah-
                       srimad-ratnagara-simhasana-sthau                      srimad-radha-srila-go vinda-de vau                      presthaiibhih se vyamanau smarami
                                 TRANSLATION     In a temple of jewels in Vrndavana, underneath a desire tree, Sri
Sri RadhaGovinda, served by Their most confidential associates, sit uponan effulgent throne. I offer my humble obeisances unto Them.
                                   TEXT 17
                            sriman rasa-rasarambhi
                            vamsivata-tata-sthitah                          karsan venu-svanair gopir                          gopi-nathah sriye'stu nah
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Srila Gopinatha, who originated the transcendental mellow of
the rasa dance, stands on the shore in Vamsivata and attracts theattention of the cowherd damsels with the sound of His celebrated flute.May they all confer upon us their benediction.                                   TEXT 18
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhak ta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     Glory to Sri Caitanya and Nityananda! Glory to Advaitacandra! And
glory to all the devotees of Sri Gaura [Lord Caitanya]!
                                   TEXT 19
                ei tina thakura gaudiyake kariyachena atmasat
                   e tinera carana vandon, tine mora natha
                                 TRANSLATION     These three Deities of Vrndavana [ Madana-mohana, Govinda and
Gopinatha] have absorbed the heart and soul of the Gaudiya Vaisnavas[followers of Lord Caitanya]. I worship Their lotus feet, for They arethe Lords of my heart.
                                   PURPORT     The author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta offers his respectful
obeisances unto the three Deities of Vrndavana named Sri Radha-Madana-mohana, Sri RadhaGovindadeva and Sri Radha-Gopinathaji. These threeDeities are the life and soul of the Bengali Vaisnavas, or GaudiyaVaisnavas, who have a natural aptitude for residing in Vrndavana. TheGaudiya Vaisnavas who foilow strictly in the line of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu worship the Divinity by chanting transcendental sounds meantto develop a sense of one's transcendental relationship with the SupremeLord, a reciprocation of mellows (rasas) of mutual affection, and,ultimately, the achievement of the desired success in loving service.These three Deities are worshiped in three different stages of one'sdevelopment. The followers of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu scrupulouslyfollow these principles of approach.     Gaudiya Vaisnavas perceive the ultimate objective in Vedic hymnscomposed of eighteen transcendental letters that adore Krsna as Madana-mohana, Govinda and Gopijana-vallabha. Madana-mohana is He who charmsCupid, the god of love, Govinda is He who pleases the senses and thecows, and Gopijana-vallabha is the transcendental lover of the gopis.Krsna Himself is called Madana-mohana, Govinda, Gopijana-vallabha andcountless other names as He plays in His different pastimes with Hisdevotees.     The three Deities--Madana-mohana, Govinda and Gopijana-vallabha--have very specific qualities. Worship of Madana-mohana is on theplatform of reestablishing our forgotten relationship with thePersonality of Godhead. In the material world we are presently in utterignorance of our eternal relationship with the Supreme Lord. pangohrefers to one who cannot move independently by his own strength, andmanda-mateh is one who is less intelligent because he is too absorbed inmaterialistic activities. It is bestfor such persons not to aspire for
success in fruitive activities or mental speculation, but instead simplyto surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The perfection oflife is simply to surrender to the Supreme. In the beginning of ourspiritual life we must therefore worship Madana-mohana so that He mayattract us and nullify our attachment for material sense gratification.This relationship with Madana-mohana is necessary for neophyte devotees.When one wishes to render service to the Lord with strong attachment,one then worships Govinda on the platform of transcendental service.Govinda is the reservoir of all pleasures. When by the grace of Krsnaand the devotees one reaches perfection in devotional service, he canappreciate Krsna as Gopijana-vallabha, the pleasure Deity of the damselsof Vraja.     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu explained this mode of devotionalservice in three stages, and therefore these worshipable Deities wereinstalled in Vrndavana by different Gosvamis. They are very dear to theGaudiya Vaisnavas there, who visit the temples at least once a day.Besides the temples of these three Deities, many other temples have beenestablished in Vrndavana, such as the temple of Radha-Damodara of JivaGosvami, the temple of Syamasundara of Syamananda Gosvami, the temple ofGokulananda of Lokanatha Gosvami, and the temple of Radharamana ofGopala Bhatta Gosvami. There are seven principal temples over fourhundred years old that are the most important of the 5,000 temples nowexisting in Vrndavana.     "Gaudiya" indicatesthe part of India between the southern side ofthe Himalayan Mountains and the northern part of the Vindhya Hilis,which is called Aryavarta, or the Land of the Aryans. This portion ofIndia is divided into five parts or provinces (Panca-gaudadesa):Sarasvata (Kashmir and Punjab), Kanyakubja (Uttar Pradesh, including themodern city of Lucknow), Madhya-gauda (Madhya pradesh), Maithila (Biharand part of Bengal) and Utkala (part of Bengal and the whole of Orissa).Bengal is sometimes called Gaudadesa, partly because it forms a portionof Maithila and partly because the capital of the Hindu king RajaLaksmana Sena was known as Gauda.This old capital later came to be knownas Gaudapura and gradually Mayapur.     The devotees of Orissa are called Udiyas, the devotees of Bengalare called Gaudiyas, and the devotees of southern India are known asDravididevotees. As there are five provinces in Aryavarta, soDaksinatya, southern India, is also divided into five provinces, whichare called Panca-dravida. The four Vaisnava acaryas who are the greatauthorities of the four Vaisnava disciplic successions, as well asSripada Sankaracarya of the Mayavada school, appeared in the Panca-dravida provinces. Among the four Vaisnava acaryas, who are all acceptedby the Gaudiya Vaisnavas, Sri Ramanuja Acarya appeared in the southernpart of Andhra Pradesh at Mahabhutapuri, Sri Madhva Acarya appeared atPajakam (near Vimanagiri) in the district of Myangalora, Sri Visnusvamiappeared at Pandya, and Sri Nimbarka appeared at Mungera-patana in theextreme south.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted the chain of disciplic successionfrom Madhva Acarya, but the Vaisnavas in His line do not accept thetattva-vadis, who also claim to belong to the Madhva-sampradaya. Todistinguish themselves clearly from the tattva-vadi branch of Madhva'sdescendants, the Vaisnavas of Bengal prefer to call themselves GaudiyaVaisnavas. Sri Madhva Acarya is also known as Sri Gaudapurnananda, andtherefore the name Madhva-Gaudiya-sampradaya is quite suitable for the
disciplic succession of the Gaudiya Vaisnavas. Our spiritual master, OmVisnupada Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiGosvami Maharaja, acceptedinitiation in the Madhva-Gaudiya-sampradaya.
                                   TEXT 20                   granthera arambh e kari `mangalacarana,
                  guru, vaisnava, bhagavan,--tin era smarana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the beginning of this narration, simply by remembering the
spiritual master, the devotees of the Lord, and the Personality ofGodhead, I have invoked their benedictions.
                                   TEXT 21
                     tinera smarane haya vighna-vinasana
                      anayase haya nija vanchita-purana
                                 TRANSLATION     Such remembrance destroys all difficulties and very easily enables
one to fulfill his own desires.
                                   TEXT 22
                   se mangalacarana haya tri-vidha prakara
                      vastu-nirdesa, asirvada, namaskara
                                 TRANSLATION     The invocation involves three processes: defining the objective,
offering benedictions and offering obeisances.
                                   TEXT 23
                    prathama dui sloke ista-deva-namaskara
                     samanya-visesa-rupe dui ta' prakara
                                 TRANSLATION     The first two verses offer respectful obeisances, generally and
specifically, to the Lord, who is the object of worship.
                                   TEXT 24
                     trtiya slokete kari vastura nirdesa
                    yana ha-ite jani para-tattvera uddesa                                 TRANSLATION
     In the third verse I indicate the Absolute Truth, who is the
ultimate substance. With such a description, one can visualize theSupreme Truth.
                                   TEXT 25
                     caturtha slokete karijagate asirvada
                    sarvatra magiye krsna-caitanya-prasada
                                 TRANSLATION     In the fourth verse I have invoked the benediction of the Lord upon
all the world, praying to Lord Caitanya for His mercy upon all.
                                   TEXT 26
                      sei sloke kahi banyavatara-karana
                    panca sastha sloke kahi mula-prayojana
                                 TRANSLATION     In that verse I have also explained the external reason for Lord
Caitanya's incarnation. But in the fifth and sixth verses I haveexplained the prime reason for His advent.
                                   TEXT 27
                    ei chaya sloke kahi caitanyera tattva
                    ara panca sloke nityanandera mahattva
                                 TRANSLATION     In these six verses I have described the truth about Lord Caitanya,
whereas in the next five I have described the glory of Lord Nityananda.
                                   TEXT 28
                      ara dui sloke advaita-tattvakhyana
                    ara eka sloke panca-tattvera vyakhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     The next two verses describe the truth of Advaita Prabhu, and the
following verse describes the Panca-tattva [the Lord, His plenaryportion, His incarnation, His energies and His devotees].                                   TEXT 29
                      ei caudda sloke kari mangalacarana
                    tanhi madhye kahi saba vastu-nirupana
                                 TRANSLATION     These fourteen verses, therefore, offer auspicious invocations and
describe the Supreme Truth.
                                   TEXT 30
                    saba srota-vaisna vere kari' namaskara
                      ei saba slokera kari artha-vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my obeisances unto all my Vaisnava readers as I begin to
explain the intricacies of all these verses.
                                   TEXT 31
                     sakala vaisnava, suna kari' eka-mana
                    caitanya-krsnera sastra-mata-nirupana
                                 TRANSLATION     I request all my Vaisnava readers to read and hear with rapt
attention this narration of Sri Krsna Caitanya as inculcated in therevealed scriptures.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya is the Absolute Truth, Krsna Himself. This is
substantiated by evidence from the authentic spiritual scriptures.Sometimes people accept a man as God on the basis of their whimsicalsentiments and withoutreference to the revealed scriptures, but theauthor of Caitanya-caritamrta proves all his statements by citing thesastras. Thus he establishes that Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the SupremePersonality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 32                 krsna, guru, bhakta, sakti, avatara, prakasa
                      krsna ei chaya-rupe karena vilasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna enjoys by manifesting Himself as the spiritual masters,
the devotees, the diverse energies, the incarnations, and the plenaryportions. They are all six in one.                                   TEXT 33
                    ei chaya tattvera kari carana vandana
                     prathame samanye kari mangalacarana
                                 TRANSLATION     I therefore worshiped the lotus feet of these six diversities of
the one truth by invoking their benedictions.
                                   TEXT 34
                           vande gurun isa-bhaktan
                              isam isavatarakan                        tat-prakasams ca tac-cnakti-h                           krsna-caitanya-samjnakam
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances unto the spiritual masters, the
devotees of the Lord, the Lord's incarnations, His plenary portions, Hisenergies, and the primeval Lord Himself, Sri Krsna Caitanya.
                                   PURPORT     Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami has composed this Sanskrit verse for the
beginning of his book, and now he will explain it in detail. He offershis respectful obeisances to the six principles of the Absolute Truth.Gurun is plural in number because anyone who gives spiritualinstructions based on the revealed scriptures is accepted as a spiritualmaster. Although others give help in showing the way to beginners, theguru who firstinitiates one with the maha-mantra is to be known as theinitiator, and the saints who give instructions for progressiveadvancement in Krsna consciousness are cailed instructing spiritualmasters. The initiating and instructing spiritual masters are equal andidentical manifestations of Krsna, although they have differentdealings. Theirfunction isto guide the conditioned souis back home, backto Godhead. Therefore Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami accepted NityanandaPrabhu and the six Gosvamis in the category of guru.     Isa-bhaktan refers to the devotees of the Lord like Sri Srivasa andall other such followers, who are the energy of the Lord and arequalitatively nondifferent from Him. Isavatarakan refers to acaryas likeAdvaita prabhu, who is an avatara of the Lord. Tat-prakasan indicatesthe direct manifestation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Nityananda prabhu, and the initiating spiritual master. Tac-chaktihrefers to the spiritual energies (saktis) of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Gadadhara, Damodara and Jagadananda belong to this category of internalenergy.     The six principles are differently manifested but all equallyworshipable. Krsnadasa Kaviraja begins by offering his obeisances untothem to teach us the method of worshiping Lord Caitanya. The externalpotency of Godhead called maya can never associate with the Lord, justas darkness cannot remain in the presence of light; yet darkness, being
but an illusory and temporary covering of light, has no existenceindependent of light.
                                   TEXT 35                     mantra-guru ara yata siksa-guru-gana
                      tanhara carana age kariye vandana
                                 TRANSLATION     I first offer my respectful obeisances at the lotus feet of my
initiating spiritual master and all my instructing spiritual masters.
                                   PURPORT     Srila J iva Gosvami, in his thesis Bhakti-sandarbha (202), has
stated that uncontaminated devotional service is the objective of pureVaisnavas and that one has to execute such service in the association ofother devotees. By associating with devotees of Lord Krsna, one developsa sense of Krsna consciousness and thus becomes inclined toward theloving service of the Lord. This is the process of approaching theSupreme Lord by gradual appreciation in devotional service. If onedesires unalloyed devotional service, one must associate with devoteesof Sri Krsna, for by such association only can a conditioned soulachieve a taste for transcendental love and thus revive his eternalrelation with Godhead in a specific manifestation and in terms of thespecific transcendental mellow (rasa) that one has eternally inherent inhim.     If one develops love for Krsna by Krsna conscious activities, onecan know the Supreme Absolute Truth, but he who tries to understand Godsimply by iogical arguments will not succeed, nor will he get a tastefor unalloyed devotion. The secret is that one must submissively iistento those who know perfectly the science of God, and one must begin themode of service regulated by the preceptor. A devotee already attractedby the name, form, qualities, etc., of the Supreme Lord may be directedto his specific manner of devotional service; he need not waste time inapproaching the Lord through logic. The expert spiritual master knowswell how to engage his disciple's energy in the transcendental lovingservice of the Lord, and thus he engages a devotee in a specificdevotional service according to his special tendency. A devotee musthave only one initiating spiritual master because in the scripturesacceptance of more than one is always forbidden. There is no limit,however, to the number of instructing spiritual masters one may accept.Generally a spiritual master who constantly instructs a disciple inspiritual science becomes his initiating spiritual master later on.     One should always remember that a person who is reluctant to accepta spiritual master and be initiated is sure to be baffled in hisendeavor to go back to Godhead. One who is not properly initiated maypresent himself as a great devotee, but in fact he is sure to encountermany stumbling blocks on his path of progress toward spiritualrealization, with the result that he must continue his term of materialexistence without relief. Such a helpless person is compared to a shipwithout a rudder, for such a ship can never reach its destination. It isimperative, therefore, that one accept a spiritual master if he at all
desires to gain the favor of the Lord. The service of the spiritualmaster is essential. If there is no chance to serve the spiritual masterdirectly, a devotee should serve him by remembering his instructions.There is no difference between the spiritual master's instructions andthe spiritual master himself. In his absence, therefore, his words ofdirection should be the pride of the disciple. If one thinks that he isabove consulting anyone else, including a spiritual master, he is atonce an offender at the lotus feet of the Lord. Such an offender cannever go back to Godhead. It is imperative that a serious person accepta bona fide spiritual masterin terms of the sastric injunctions. Sri Jiva Gosvami advises that onenot accept a spiritual master in terms of hereditary or customary socialand ecclesiastical conventions. One should simply try to find agenuinely qualified spiritual master for actual advancement in spiritualunderstanding.
                                   TEXT 36                    sri-rupa, sanatana, bhatta-raghunatha
                   sri-jiva, gopala-bhatta, dasa-ragnunatha
                                 TRANSLATION     The instructing spiritual masters are Sri Rupa Gosvami, Sri
Sanatana Gosvami, Sri Bhatta Raghunatha, Sri Jiva Gosvami, Sri GopalaBhatta Gosvami and Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 37
                      ei chaya guru--siksa-guru ye amara
                    tan' sabara pada-padme koti namaskara
                                 TRANSLATION     These six are my instructing spiritual masters, and therefore I
offer millions of respectful obeisances unto their lotus feet.
                                   PURPORT     By accepting the six Gosvamis as his instructing spiritual masters,
the author specifically makes it clear that one should not be recognizedas a Gaudiya Vaisnava if he is not obedient to them.
                                   TEXT 38                   bhagavanera bhakta yata srivasa pradhana
                   tan' sabhara pada-padme sahasra pranama
                                 TRANSLATION     There are innumerable devotees of the Lord, of whom Srivasa Thakura
is the foremost. I offer my respectful obeisances thousands of timesunto their lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 39
                    advaita acarya--prabhura ams a-avatara
                     tanra pada-padme koti pranati amara
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya is the Lord's partial incarnation, and therefore I
offer my obeisances millions of times at His lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 40
                  nityananda-raya--prabhura s varupa-prakasa
                    tanra pada-padma vando yanra muni oasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Nityananda Rama is the plenary manifestation of the Lord, and
I have been initiated by Him. I therefore offer my respectful obeisancesunto His lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 41
                   gadadhara-panditadi--prabhura njja-sakti
                   tan' sabara carane mora sahasra pranati
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances unto the internal potencies of the
Lord, of whom Sri Gadadhara Prabhu is the foremost.
                                   TEXT 42
                  sri-krsna-caitanya prabh u svayam-bhagavan
                      tanhara padaravinde ananta pranama
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the Personality of Godhead
Himself, and therefore I offer innumerable prostrations at His lotusfeet.
                                   TEXT 43
                      savarane prabhure kariya namaskara                     ei chaya tenho yaiche--kariye vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     Having offered obeisances unto the Lord and all His associates, I
shall now try to explain these six diversities in one.
                                   PURPORT     There are many unalloyed devotees of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, all of whom are considered associates surrounding the Lord.Krsna should be worshiped with His devotees. The diverse principles aretherefore the eternal paraphernalia through which the Absolute Truth canbe approached.
                                   TEXT 44                     yadyapi amara guru--caitanyera dasa
                      tathapi janiye ami tanhara prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Although I know that my spiritual master is a servitor of Sri
Caitanya, I know Him also as a plenary manifestation of the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     Every living entity is essentially a servant of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and the spiritual master is also His servant.Still, the spiritual master is a directmanifestation of the Lord. With this conviction, a disciple can advancein Krsna consciousness. The spirituai master is nondifferent from Krsnabecause he is a manifestation of Krsna.     Lord Nityananda, who is Balarama Himself, the first directmanifestation or expansion of Krsna, is the original spiritual master.He helps Lord Krsna in His pastimes, and He is a servant of the Lord.     Every living entity is eternally a servant of Sri Krsna Caitanya;therefore the spiritual master cannot be other than a servant of LordCaitanya. The spiritual master's eternal occupation is to expand theservice of the Lord by training disciples in a service attitude. Aspiritual master never poses as the Supreme Lord Himself; he isconsidered a representative of the Lord. The revealed scripturesprohibit one's pretending to be God, but a bona fide spiritual master isa most faithful and confidential servant of the Lord and thereforedeserves as much respect as Krsna.
                                   TEXT 45                    guru krsna-rupa hana sastrera pramane
                   guru-rupe krsna krpa karena bhakta-gane
                                 TRANSLATION     According to the deliberate opinion of all revealed scriptures, the
spiritual master is nondifferent from Krsna. Lord Krsna in the form ofthe spiritual master delivers His devotees.
                                   PURPORT     The relationship of a disciple with his spiritual master is as good
as his relationship with the Supreme Lord. A spiritual master alwaysrepresents himseif as the humblest servitor of the Personality ofGodhead, but the disciple must look upon him as the manifestedrepresentation of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 46                            acaryam mam vijanijan
                             navamanyeta karhicit
                           na martya-buddhyasuyeta
                            sarva-de vamayo guruh
                                 TRANSLATION     "One should know the acarya as Myself and never disrespecthim in
any way.One should not envy him, thinking him an ordinary man, for he isthe representative of all the demigods."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.17.27) spoken by Lord
Krsna when He was questioned by Uddhava regarding the four social andspiritual orders of society. He was specifically instructing how abrahmacari should behave under the care of a spiritual master. Aspiritual master is not an enjoyer of facilities offered by hisdisciples. He is like a parent. Without the attentive service of hisparents, a child cannot grow to manhood; similarly, without the care ofthe spiritual master one cannot rise to the plane of transcendentalservice.     The spiritual master is also called acarya, or a transcendentalprofessor of spiritual science. The Manu-samhita (2.140) explains theduties of an acarya, describing that a bona fide spiritual masteraccepts charge of disciples, teaches them the Vedic knowledge with allits intricacies, and gives them their second birth. The ceremonyperformed to initiate a disciple into the study of spiritual science iscalled upaniti, or the function that brings one nearer to the spiritualmaster. One who cannot be brought nearer to a spiritual master cannothave a sacred thread, and thus he is indicated to be a sudra. The sacredthread on the body of a brahmana, ksatriya or vaisya is a symbol ofinitiation by the spiritual master; it is worth nothing if worn merelyto boast of high parentage. The duty of the spiritual master is toinitiate a disciple with the sacred thread ceremony, and after thissamskara, or purificatory     , process, the spiritual master actually begins to teach thedisciple about the Vedas. A person born a sudra is not barred from suchspiritual initiation, provided he is approved by the spiritual master,who is duly authorized to award a disciple the right to be a brahmana if
he finds him perfectly qualified. I n the Vayu Purana an acarya isdefined as one who knows the import of all Vedic literature, explainsthe purpose of the Vedas, abides by their rules and regulations, andteaches his disciples to act in the same way.     Only out of His immense compassion does the Personality of Godheadreveal Himself as the spiritual master. Therefore in the dealings of anacarya there are no activities but those of transcendental lovingservice to the Lord. He is the Supreme Personality of Servitor Godhead.It is worthwhile to take shelter of such a steadydevotee, who is called asraya-vigraha, or the manifestation or form ofthe Lord of whom one must take shelter.     If one poses himself as an acarya but does not have an attitude ofservitorship to the Lord, he must be considered an offender, and thisoffensive attitude disqualifies him from being an acarya. The bona fidespiritual master always engages in unalloyed devotional service to theSupreme Personality of Godhead. By this test he is known to be a directmanifestation of the Lord and a genuine representative of Sri NityanandaPrabhu. Such a spiritual master is known as acaryadeva. Influenced by anenvious temperament and dissatisfied because of an attitude of sensegratification, m undaners criticize a real acarya. In fact, however, abona fide acarya is nondifferent from the Personality of Godhead, andtherefore to envy such an acarya is to envy the Personality of GodheadHimself. This will produce an effect subversive to transcendentalrealization.     As mentioned previously, a disciple should always respect thespiritual master as a manifestation of Sri Krsna, but at the same timeone should always remember that a spiritual master is never authorizedto imitate the transcendental pastimes of the Lord. False spiritualmasters pose themselves as identical with Sri Krsna in every respect toexploit the sentiments of their disciples, but such impersonalists canonly mislead their disciples, for their ultimate aim is to become onewith the Lord. This is against the principles of the devotional cult.     The real Vedic philosophy is acintya-bhedabheda-tattva, whichestablishes everything to be simultaneously one with and different fromthe Personality of Godhead. Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami confirms thatthis is the real position of a bona fide spiritual master and says thatone should always think of the spiritual master in terms of his intimaterelationship with Mukunda (Sri Krsna). Srila Jiva Gosvami, in hisBhakti-sandarbha (213), has clearly defined that a pure devotee'sobservation of the spiritual master and Lord Siva as one with thePersonality of Godhead exists in terms of their being very dear to theLord, not identical with Him in all respects. Following in the footstepsof Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami and Srila Jiva Gosvami, later acaryaslike Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura have confirmed the same truths.In his prayers to the spiritual master, Srila Visvanatha CakravartiThakura confirms that all the revealed scriptures accept the spiritualmaster to be identical with the Personality of Godhead because he is avery dear and confidential servant of the Lord. Gaudiya Vaisnavastherefore worship Srila Gurudeva (the spiritual master) in the light ofhis being the servitor of the Personality of Godhead. In all the ancientliteratures of devotional service and in the more recent songs of SrilaNarottama dasa Thakura, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura and other unalloyedVaisnavas, the spiritual master is always considered either one of theconfidential associates of Srimati Radharani or a manifested
representation of Srila Nityananda Prabhu.
                                   TEXT 47                    siksa-guruke ta'jani krsnera s varupa
                   antaryami, bhakta-srestha,--ei dui rupa
                                 TRANSLATION     One should know the instructing spiritual master to be the
Personalityof Krsna. Lord Krsna manifests Himself as the Supersoul andas the greatest devotee of the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami states that the instructing
spiritual master is a bona fide representative of Sri Krsna. Sri KrsnaHimself teaches us as the instructing spiritual master from within andwithout. From within He teaches as Paramatma-, our constant companion,and from without He teaches from Bhagavad-gita as the instructingspiritual master. There are two kinds of instructing spiritual masters.One is the liberated person fully absorbed in meditation in devotionalservice, and the other is he who invokes the disciple's spiritualconsciousness by means of relevant instructions. Thus the instructionsin the science of devotion are differentiated in terms of the objectiveand subjective ways of understanding. The acarya in the true sense ofthe term, who is authorized to deliver Krsna, enriches the disciple withfull spiritual knowledge and thus awakens him to the activities ofdevotional service.     When by learning from the self-realized spiritual master oneactually engages himself in the service of Lord Visnu, functionaldevotional service begins. The procedures of this devotional service areknown as abhidheya, or action one is dutybound to perform. Our onlyshelter is the Supreme Lord, and one who teaches how to approach Krsnais the functioning form of the Personality of Godhead. There is nodifference between the shelter-giving Supreme Lord and the initiatingand instructing spiritual masters. If one foolishly discriminatesbetween them, he commits an offense in the discharge of devotionalservice.     Srila Sanatana Gosvami is the ideal spiritual master, for hedelivers one the shelter of the lotus feet of Madana-mohana. Even thoughone may be unable to travel on the field of Vrndavana due toforgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, he can get an adequate opportunity to stay in Vrndavana andderive all spiritual benefits by the mercy of Sanatana Gosvami. SriGovindaji acts exactly like the siksa-guru (instructing spiritualmaster) by teaching Arjuna Bhagavad-gita. He is the original preceptor,for He gives us instructions and an opportunity to serve Him. Theinitiating spiritual master is a personal manifestation of Srila Madana-mohana vigraha, whereas the instructing spiritual master is a personalrepresentative of Srila Govindadeva vigraha. Both of these Deities areworshiped at Vrndavana. Srila Gopinatha is the ultimate attraction inspiritual realization.                                   TEXT 48
                     naivopayanty apacitim kavayas tavesa
                   brahmayusapi krtam rddha-mudah smarantah                 yo'ntar bahis tanu-bhrtam asubham vidhunvann                  acarya-caittya-vapusa s va-gatim vyanakti
                                 TRANSLATION     "O my Lord! Transcendental poets and experts in spiritual science
could not fully express their indebtedness to You, even if they wereendowed with the prolonged lifetime of Brahma, for You appear in twofeatures--externally as the acarya and internally as the Supersoul--todeliver the embodied living being by directing him how to come to You."
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.29.6) was spoken by Sri
Uddhava after he heard from Sri Krsna all necessary instructions aboutyoga.
                                   TEXT 49                            tesam satata-yuktanam-
                           bhajatam priti-purvakam                           dadami buddhi-yogam tam                             yena mam upayanti te
                                 TRANSLATION     "To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I
give the understanding by which they can come to Me."
                                   PURPORT     This verse of Bhagavad-gita (10.10) clearly states how Govindadeva
instructs His bona fide devotee. The Lord declares that by enlightenmentin theistic knowledge He awards attachment for Him to those whoconstantly engage in His transcendental loving service. This awakeningof divine consciousness enthralls a devotee, who thus relishes hiseternal transcendental mellow. Such an awakening is awarded only tothose convinced by devotional service about the transcendental nature ofthe Personality of Godhead. They know that the Supreme Truth, the all-spiritual and all-powerful person, is one without a second and has fullytranscendental senses. He is the fountainhead of all emanations. Suchpure devotees, always merged in knowledge of Krsna and absorbed in Krsnaconsciousness, exchange thoughts and realizations as great scientistsexchange their views and discuss the results of their research inscientific academies. Such exchanges of thoughts in regard to Krsna givepleasure to the Lord, who therefore favors such devotees with allenlightenment.
                                   TEXT 50                           yatha brahmane bhagavan
                         svayam upadisyanubhavita van
                                 TRANSLATION     The Supreme Personality of Godhead [svayam bhagavan] taught Brahma
and made him self-realized.
                                   PURPORT     The English maxim that God helps those who help themselves is also
applicable in the transcendental realm. There are many instances inrevealed scriptures of thePersonality of Godhead's acting as the spiritual master from within. Hewas the spiritual master who instructed Brahma, the original livingbeing in the cosmic creation. When Brahma was first created, he couldnot apply his creative energy to arrange the cosmic situation. At firstthere was only sound, vibrating the word tapa, which indicates theacceptance of hardships for spiritual realization. Refraining fromsensual enjoyment, one should voluntarily accept all sorts of difficultyfor spiritual realization.This is called tapasya. An enjoyer of thesenses can never realize God, godliness or the science of theisticknowledge. Thus when Brahma, initiated by Sri Krsna by the soundvibration tapa, engaged himself in acts of austerity, by the pleasure ofVisnu he was able to visualize the transcendental world, Sri Vaikuntha,through transcendental realization. Modern science can communicate usingmaterial discoveries such as radio, television and computers, but thescience invoked by the austerities of Sri Brahma, the original father ofmankind, was still more subtle. In time, material scientists may alsoknow how we can communicate with the Vaikuntha world. Lord Brahmainquired about the potency of the Supreme Lord, and the Personality ofGodhead answered his inquiry in the following six consecutivestatements. These instructions, which are reproduced in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.9.31-36), were imparted by the Personality of Godhead,acting as the supreme spiritual master.
                                   TEXT 51                           jnanam parama-guhyam me
                           yad viinana-saman vitam                           sarahasyam tad-angam ca                             grhana gaditam maya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please hear attentively what I shall speak to you, for
transcendental knowledge about Me is not only scientific but also fullof mysteries.
                                   PURPORT     Transcendental knowledge of Sri Krsna is deeper than the impersonal
knowledge of Brahman,for it includes knowledge of not only His form andpersonality but also everything else related to Him. There is nothing in
existence not related with Sri Krsna. In a sense, there is nothing butSri Krsna, and yet nothing is Sri Krsna save and except His primevalpersonality. This knowledge constitutes a complete transcendentalscience, and Visnu wanted to give Brahmaji full knowledge about thatscience. The mystery of this knowledge culminates in personal attachmentto the Lord, with a resulting effect of detachment from anything "non-Krsna." There are nine alternative transcendental means to attain thisstage: hearing, chanting, remembering, serving the lotus feet of theLord, worshiping, praying, assisting, fraternizing with the Lord, andsacrificing everything for Him. These are different parts of the samedevotional service, which is full of transcendental mystery. The Lordsaid to Brahma that since He was pleased with him, by His grace themystery was being revealed.
                                   TEXT 52                            yavan aham yatha-bhavo
                            yad-rupa-guna-karmakah                           tathaiva tattva-vjjnanam                            astu te mad-anugrahat
                                 TRANSLATION     "By My causeless mercy, be enlightened in truth about My
personality, manifestations, qualities and pastimes.
                                   PURPORT     The transcendental personal forms of the Lord are a mystery, and
the symptoms of these forms, which are absolutely different fromanything made of mundane elements, are also mysterious. The innumerableforms of the Lord, such as Syamasundara, Narayana, Rama andGaurasundara; the colors of these forms (white, red, yellow, cloudlikesyama and others); His qualities, as the responsive Personality ofGodhead to pure devotees and as impersonal Brahman to dry speculators;His queens at Dvaraka,and entering the rasa dance with the damsels ofVraja, expanding Himself in as many forms asthere were damsels in thedance--these and innumerable other uncommon acts and attributes are allmysteries, one aspect of which is pre-sented in the scientific knowledge of Bhagavad-gita, which is read andadored all over the world by all classes of scholars, with as manyinterpretations as there are empiric philosophers. The truth of thesemysteries was revealed to Brahma by a descending process, without thehelp of the ascending one. His mercy descends to a devotee like Brahmaand, through Brahma, to Narada, from Narada to Vyasa, from Vyasadeva toSukadeva and so on in the bona fide chain of disciplic succession. Wecannot discover the mysteries of the Lord by our mundane endeavors; theyare only revealed, by His grace, to the proper devotees. These mysteriesare gradually disclosed to the various grades of devotees in proportionto the gradual development of their service attitude. In other words,impersonalists who depend upon the strength of their poor fund ofknowledge and morbid speculative habits, without submission and servicein the forms of hearing, chanting and the others mentioned above, cannotpenetrate to the mysterious region of transcendence where the supreme
truth is a transcendental person, free from all tinges of the materialelements. Discovering the mystery of the Lord eliminates the impersonalfeature realized by common spiritualists who are merely trying to enterthe spiritual region from the mundane platform.
                                   TEXT 53                              aham evasam evagre
                          nanyad yat sad-asat-param                           pascad aham yad etac ca                           yo'vasisyeta so'smy aham
                                 TRANSLATION     "Prior to the cosmic creation, only I exist, and no phenomena
exist, either gross, subtle or primordial. After creation, only I existin everything, and after annihilation, only I remain eternally.
                                   PURPORT     Aham means "I"; therefore the speaker who is saying aham, "l," must
have His own personality. The Mayavadi philosophers interpret this wordaham as referring to the impersonal Brahman. These Mayavadis are veryproud of their grammatical knowledge, but any person who has actualknowledge of grammar can understand that aham means "I" and that "I"refers to a personality. Therefore the Personality of Godhead,speakingto Brahma, uses aham while describing His own transcendental form. Ahamhas a specific meaning; it is not a vague term that can be whimsicallyinterpreted. Aham, when spoken by Krsna, refers to the SupremePersonality of Godhead and nothing else.     Before the creation and after its dissolution, only the SupremePersonality of Godhead and His associates exist; there is no existenceof the material elements. This is confirmed in the Vedic literature.Vasudevo va idam agra asin na brahma na ca sankarah. The meaning of thismantra is that before creation there was no existence of Brahma or Siva,for only Visnu existed. Visnu exists in His abode, the Vaikunthas. Thereare innumerable Vaikuntha planets in the spiritual sky, and on each ofthem Visnu resides with His associates and His paraphernalia. It is alsoconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita that although the creation is periodicallydissolved, there is another abode, which is never dissolved. The word"creation" refers to the material creation because in the spiritualworld everything exists eternally and there is no creation ordissolution.     The Lord indicates herein that before the material creation Heexisted in fullness with all transcendental opulences, including allstrength, all wealth, all beauty, all knowledge, all fame and allrenunciation. If one thinks of a king, he automatically thinks of hissecretaries, ministers, military commanders, palaces and so on. Since aking has such opulences,one can simply try to imagine the opulence ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. When the Lord says aham, therefore,it is to be understood that He exists with full potency, including allopulences.     The word yat refers to Brahman, the impersonal effulgence of the
Lord. In the Brahma-samhita (5.40) it is said, tad-brahma niskalamanantam asesa-bhutam: the Brahman effulgence expands unlimitedly. Justas the sun is a localized planet although the sunshine expandsunlimitedly from that source, so the Absolute Truth is the SupremePersonality of Godhead, but His effulgence of energy, Brahman, expandsunlimitedly. From that Brahman energy the creation appears, just as acloud appears in sunshine. From the cloud comes rain, from the raincomes vegetation, and from the vegetation come fruits and flowers, whichare the basis of subsistence for many other forms of life. Similarly,the effulgent bodily luster of the Supreme Lord is the cause of thecreation of infinite universes. The Brahman effulgence is impersonal,but the cause of that energy is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. FromHim, in His abode, the Vaikunthas, this brahmajyoti emanates. He isnever impersonal. Since they cannot understand the source of the Brahmanenergy impersonalists mistakenly choose to think this impersonal Brahmanthe ultimate or absolute goal. But as stated in the Upanisads, one hasto penetrate the impersonal effulgence to see the face of the SupremeLord. If one desires to reach the source of the sunshine, he has totravel through the sunshine to reach the sun and then meet thepredominating deity there. The Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person, Bhagavan, as the Srimad-Bhagavatam explains.     Sat means "effect," asat means "cause," and param refers to theultimate truth, which is transcendental to cause and effect. The causeof the creation is called the mahat-tattva, or total material energy,and its effectis the creation itself. But neither cause nor effect existed in thebeginning; they emanated from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as didthe energy of time. This is stated in the Vedanta-sutra (janmady asyayatah). The source of birth of the cosmic manifestation or mahat-tattvais the Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed th roughout the Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita. I n Bhagavad-gita (10.8) the Lord says,aham sarvasya prabhavah: "I am the fountainhead of all emanations." Themateriai cosmos, being temporary, is sometimes manifest and sometimesunmanifest, but its energy emanates from the Supreme Absolute Lord.Before the creation there was neither cause nor effect, but the SupremePersonality of Godhead existed with His full opuience and energy.     The words pascad aham indicate that the Lord exists after thedissolution of the cosmic manifestation. When the material world isdissolved, the Lord still exists personally in the Vaikunthas. Duringthe creation the Lord also exists as He is in the Vaikunthas, and Healso exists as the Supersoul within the material universes. This isconfirmed in the Brahma-samhita (5.37). Goloka eva nivasati: although Heis perfectly and eternally present in Goloka Vrndavana in Vaikuntha, Heis nevertheless all-pervading (akhilatma-bhutah). The all-pervadingfeature of the Lord is called the Supersoul. I n Bhagavad-gita it issaid, aham krtsnasya jagatah prabhavah: the c osmic manifestation is adisplay of the energy of the Supreme Lord. The material elements (earth,water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego) display theinferior energy of the Lord, and the living entities are His superiorenergy. Since the energy of the Lord is not different from Him, in facteverything that exists is Krsna in His impersonal feature. Sunshine,sunlight and heat are not different from the sun, and yet simultaneouslythey are distinct energies of the sun. Similarly, the cosmicmanifestation and the living entities are energies of the Lord, and they
are considered to be simultaneously one with and different from Him.TheLord therefore says, "I am everything," because everything is His energyand is therefore nondifferent from Him.     Yo'vasisyeta so'smy aham indicates that the Lord is the balancethat exists after the dissolution of the creation.The spiritualmanifestation never vanishes. It belongs to the internal energy of theSupreme Lord and exists eternally. When the external manifestation iswithdrawn, the spiritual activities in Goloka and the rest of theVaikunthas continue, unrestricted by material time, which has noexistence in the spiritual world. Therefore in Bhagavad-gita it is said,yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama: "The abode from which noone returns to this material world is the supreme abode of the Lord."(Bg. 15.6)
                                   TEXT 54                           rte 'rtham yat pratiyeta
                             na pratiyeta catmani
                           tad vidyad atmano mayam
                            yathabhaso yatha tamah
                                 TRANSLATION     "What appears to be truth without Me is certainly My illusory
energy, for nothing can exist without Me. It is like a reflection of areal light in the shadows, for in the light there are neither shadowsnor reflections.
                                   PURPORT     In the previous verse the Absolute Truth and its nature have been
explained. One must aiso understand the relative truth to actually knowthe Absolute. The relative truth, which is called maya, or materialnature, is explained here. Maya has no independent existence. One who isless intelligent is captivated by the wonderful activities of maya, buthe does not understand that behind these activities is the direction ofthe Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-gita it is said, mayadhyaksena prakrtihsuyate sa-caracaram: the material natu re is worki ng and prod ucing moving and nonmoving beings only by the supervision of Krsna (Bg. 9.10)     The real nature of maya, the illusory existence of the materialmanifestation, is clearly explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam. The AbsoluteTruth is substance, and the relative truth depends upon its relationshipwith the Absolute for its existence. Maya means energy; therefore therelative truth is explained to be the energy of the Absolute Truth.Since it is difficult to understand the distinction between the absoluteand relative truths, an example can be given for clarification. TheAbsolute Truth can be compared to the sun, which is appreciated in termsof two relative truths: reflection and darkness. Darkness is the absenceof sunshine, and a reflection is a projection of sunlight into darkness.Neither darkness nor reflection has an independent existence. Darknesscomes when the sunshine is blocked. For example, if one stands facingthe sun, his back will be in darkness. Since darkness stands in theabsence of the sun, it is therefore relative to the sun. The spiritual
world is compared to the real sunshine, and the material world iscompared to the dark regions where the sun is not visible.     When the material manifestation appears very wonderful,this is dueto a perverted reflection of the supreme sunshine, the Absolute Truth,as confirmed in the Vedanta- sutra. Whatever one can see here has itssubstance in the Absolute. As darkness is situated far away from thesun, so the material world is also far away from the spiritual world.The Vedic literature directs us not to be captivated by the dark regions(tamah) but to try to reach the shining regions of the Absolute (yogi-dhama).The spiritual world is brightly illuminated, but the material world iswrapped in darkness. In the material world, sunshine, moonshine ordifferent kinds of artificial light are required to dispel darkness,especially at night, for by nature the material world is dark.Thereforethe Supreme Lord has arranged for sunshine and moonshine. But in Hisabode, as described in Bhagavad-gita (15.6), there is no necessity forlighting by sunshine, moonshine or electricity because everything isself-effulgent.     That which is relative, temporary and far away from the AbsoluteTruth is called maya, or ignorance. This illusion is exhibited in twoways, as explained in Bhagavad- gita. The inferior illusion is inertmatter, and the superior illusion is the living entity. The livingentities are called illusory in this context only because they areimplicated in the illusory structures and activities of the materialworld. Actually the living entities are not illusory, for they are partsof the superior energy of the Supreme Lord and do not have to be coveredby maya if they do not want to be so. The actions of the living entitiesin the spiritual kingdom are not illusory;they are the actual, eternalactivities of liberated souls.
                                   TEXT 55                            yatha mahanti bhutani
                             bhutesuccavacesv anu                            pravistany apravistani                           tatha tesu na tesv aham
                                 TRANSLATION     "As the material elements enter the bodies of all living beings and
yet remain outside them all, I exist within all material creations andyet am not within them.
                                   PURPORT     The gross material elements (earth, water, fire, air and ether)
combine with the subtle materiai elements (mind, intelligence and falseego) to construct the bodies of this material world, and yet they arebeyond these bodies as well. Any material construction is nothing but anamalgamation or combination of material elements in varied proportions.These elements exist both within and beyond the body. For example,although the sky exists in space, it also enters within the body.Similarly, the Supreme Lord, who is the cause of the material energy,lives within the material world as well as beyond it. Without His
presence within the material world, the cosmic body could not develop,just as without the presence of the spirit within the physical body, thebody could not develop. The entire material manifestation develops andexists because the Supreme Personality of Godhead enters it asParamatma, or the Supersoul. The Personality of Godhead in His all-pervading feature of Paramatma enters every entity, from the biggest tothe most minute. His existence can be realized by one who has the singlequalification of submissiveness and who thereby becomes a surrenderedsoul. The development of submissiveness is the cause of proportionatespiritual reaiization, by which one can ultimately meet the Supreme Lordin person, as a man meets another man face to face.     Because of his development of transcendental attachment for theSupreme Lord, a surrendered soul feels the presence of his belovedeverywhere, and all his senses are engaged in the loving service of theLord. His eyes are engaged in seeing the beautiful couple Sri Radha andKrsna sitting on a decorated throne beneath a desire tree in thetranscendental land of Vrndavana. His nose is engaged in smelling thespiritual aroma of the lotus feet of the Lord. Similarly, his ears areengaged in hearing messages from Vaikuntha, and his hands embrace thelotus feet of the Lord and His associates. Thus the Lord is manifestedto a pure devotee from within and without. This is one of the mysteriesof the devotional relationship in which a devotee and the Lord are boundby a tie of spontaneous love. To achieve this love should be the goai oflife for every living being.
                                   TEXT 56                            etavad e va jiinasyam
                            tattva jijnasunatmanah                            an vaya-vyatirekabhyam                          yat syat sarvatra sarvada
                                 TRANSLATION     "A person interested in transcendental knowledge must therefore
always directly and indirectly inquire about it to know the all-pervading truth."
                                   PURPORT     Those who are serious about the knowledge of the transcendental
world, which is far beyond the material cosmic creation, must approach abona fide spiritual master to learn the science both directly andindirectly. One must learn both the means to approach the desireddestination and the hindrances to such progress. The spiritual masterknows how to regulate the habits of a neophyte disciple, and therefore aserious student must learn the science in all its aspects from him.     There are different grades and standards of prosperity. Thestandard of comfort and happiness conceived by a common man engaged inmaterial labor is the lowest grade of happiness, for it is inrelationship with the body. The highest standard of such bodily comfortis achieved by a fruitive worker who by pious activities reaches theplane of heaven, or the kingdom of the creative gods with theirdelegated powers. But the conception of comfortable life in heaven is
insignificant in comparison to the happiness enjoyed in the impersonalBrahman, and this brahmananda, the spiritual bliss derived fromimpersonal Brahman, is like the water in the hoofprint of a calfcompared to the ocean of love of Godhead. When one develops pure lovefor the Lord, he derives an ocean of transcendental happiness from theassociation of the Personality of Godhead. To qualify oneself to reachthis stage of life is the highest perfection.     One should try to purchase a ticket to go back home, back toGodhead. The price of such a ticket is one's intense desire for it,which is not easily awakened, even if one continuously performs piousactivities for thousands of lives. All mundane relationships are sure tobe broken in the course of time, but once one establishes a reiationshipwith the Personality of Godhead in a particular rasa, it is never to bebroken, even after the annihilation of the material world.     One should understand, through the transparent medium of thespiritual master, that the Supreme Lord exists everywhere in Histranscendental spiritual nature and that the living entities'relationships with the Lord are directly and indirectly existingeverywhere, even in this material world. I n the spiritual world thereare five kinds of relationships with the Supreme Lord--santa, dasya,sakhya, vatsalya and madhurya. The perverted reflections of these rasasare found in the material world. Land, home, furniture and other inertmaterial objects are related in santa, or the neutral and silent sense,whereas servants work in the dasya relationship. The reciprocationbetween friends is called sakhya, the affection of a parent for a childis known as vatsalya, and the affairs of conjugal love constitutemadhurya. These five relationships in the material world are distortedreflections of the original pure sentiments, which should be understoodand perfected in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godheadunder the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. I n the materialworld the perverted rasas bring frustration. If these rasas arereestablished with Lord Krsna, the result is eternal blissful life.     From this and the preceding three verses of Caitanya-caritamrta,which have been selected from the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the missionaryactivities of Lord Caitanya can be understood. Srimad-Bhagavatam has18,000 verses, which are summarized in the four verses beginning withaham evasam evagre (53) and concluding with yat syat sarvatra sarvaoa(56). In the first of these verses (53) the transcendental nature ofLord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is explained. The secondverse (54) further explains that the Lord is detached from the workingsof the material energy, maya. The living entities, as parts and parcelsof Lord Krsna, are prone to be controlled by the external energy becausealthough they are spiritual, in the material world they are encased inbodies of material energy. The eternal relationship of the livingentities with the Supreme Lord is explained in that verse. The nextverse (55) instructs that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by Hisinconceivable energies, is simultaneously one with and different fromthe living entities and the material energy. This knowledge is calledacintya- bhedabheda-tattva. When an individual living entity surrendersto Lord Krsna, he can then develop natural transcendentai love for theSupreme Lord. This surrendering process should be the primary concern ofa human being. In the next verse (56) it is said that a conditioned soulmust ultimately approach a bona fide spiritual master and try tounderstand perfectly the material and spiritual worlds and his own ex
istential position. H ere the words an vaya-vyatirekabhyam, "d i rectlyand indirectly," suggest that one must learn the process of devotionalservice in its two aspects: one must directly execute the process ofdevotional service and indirectly avoid the impediments to progress.
                                   TEXT 57                     cintamanir jayati somagirir gurur me
                 siksa-gurus ca bhagavan sikhi-pincha-maulih                     yat-pada-kalpataru-pallava-sekharesu                   lila-svayam vara-rasam labhate jayasrih
                                 TRANSLATION     "All glories to Cintamani and my initiating spiritual master,
Somagiri. All glories to my instructing spiritual master, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, who wearspeacock feathers in His crown. Under the shade of His lotus feet, whichare like desire trees, J ayasri [ Radharani] enjoys the transcendentalmellow of an eternal consort."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from the Krsna-karnamrta, which was written by a
great Vaisnava sannyasi named Bilvamangala Thakura, who is also known asLiiasuka. He intensely desired to enter into the eternal pastimes of theLord,and he lived at Vrndavana for seven hundred years in the vicinityof Brahma-kunda, a still existing bathing tank in Vrndavana. The historyof Bilvamangala Thakura is given in a book called Sri Vallabha-digvijaya. He appeared in the Eighth Century Saka Era in the province ofDravida and was the chief disciple of Visnusvami. In a list of templesand monasteries kept in Sankaracarya's monastery in Dvaraka,Bilvamangala is mentioned as the founder of the Dvarakadhisa Templethere. He entrusted the service of his Deity to Hari Brahmacari, adisciple of Vallabha Bhatta.     Bilvamangala Thakura actually entered into the transcendentalpastimes of Lord Krsna. He has recorded his transcendental experiencesand appreciation in the book known as Krsna-karnamrta. In the beginningof that book he has offered his obeisances to his different gurus, andit is to be noted that he has adored them all equally. The firstspiritual master mentioned is Cintamani, who was his instructingspiritual master because she first showed him the spiritual path.Cintamani was a prostitute with whom Bilvamangala was intimate earlierin his life. She gave him the inspiration to begin on the path ofdevotional service, and because she convinced him to give up materialexistence to try for perfection by loving Krsna, he has first offeredhis respects to her. Next he offers his respects to his initiatingspiritual master, Somagiri, and then to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, who was also his instructing spiritual master. He explicitlymentions Bhagavan, who has peacock feathers on His crown, because theLord of Vrndavana, Krsna the cowherd boy, used to come to Bilvamangalato talk with him and supply him with milk. In his adoration of SriKrsna, the Personality of Godhead, he describes that J ayasri, thegoddess of fortune, Srimati Radharani, takes shelter in the shade of His
lotus feet to enjoy the transcendental rasa of nuptial love. Thecomplete treatise Krsna- karnamrta is dedicated to the transcendentalpastimes of Sri Krsna and Srimati Radharani. It is a book to be read andunderstood by the most elevated devotees of Sri Krsna.
                                   TEXT 58                   jive saksat nahi tate guru caittya-rupe
                    siksa-guru haya krsna-mahanta-s varupe
                                 TRANSLATION     Since one cannot visually experience the presence of the Supersoul,
He appears before us as a liberated devotee. Such a spiritual master isno one other than Krsna Himself.
                                   PURPORT     It is not possible for a conditioned soul to directly meet Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but if one becomes a sincere devoteeand seriously engages in devotional service, Lord Krsna sends aninstructing spiritual master to show him favor and invoke his dormantpropensity for serving the Supreme. The preceptor appears before theexternal senses of the fortunate conditioned soul, and at the same timethe devotee is guided from within by the caittya-guru, Krsna, who isseated as the spiritual master within the heart of the living entity.
                                   TEXT 59                            tato duhsangam utsrjya
                           satsu sajjeta buddhiman                           santa e vasya chindanti                           mano-vyasangam uktibhih
                                 TRANSLATION     "One should therefore avoid bad company and associate only with
devotees. With their realized instructions, such saints can cut the knotconnecting one with activities unfavorable to devotional service.,,
                                   PURPORT     This verse, which appears in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.26.26), was
spoken by Lord Krsna to Uddhava in the text known as the Uddhava-gita.The discussion relates to the story of pururava and the heavenlycourtesan Urvasi. When Urvasi leftPururava, he was deeply affected by the separation and had to learn toovercome his grief.     It is indicated that to learn the transcendental science, it isimperative that one avoid the company of undesirable persons and alwaysseek the company of saints and sages who are able to impart lessons oftranscendental knowledge. The potent words of such realized soulspenetrate the heart, thereby eradicating all misgivings accumulated byyears of undesirable association. For a neophyte devotee there are two
kinds of persons whose association is undesirable: (1) grossmaterialists who constantiy engage in sense gratification and (2)unbelievers who do not serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead butserve their senses and their mental whims in terms of their speculativehabits. Intelligent persons seeking transcendental realization shouldvery scrupulously avoid their company.
                                   TEXT 60                     satam prasangan mama virya-sam vido
                     bhavanti hrt-karna-rasayanah kathah                      taj josanad asv apavarga-vartmani                     sraddha ratir bhaktir anukramisyati
                                 TRANSLATION     "The spiritually powerful message of Godhead can be properly
discussed only in a society of devotees, and it is greatly pleasing tohear in that association. If one hears from devotees, the way oftranscendental experience quickly opens to him, and gradually he attainsa taste in knowledge that in due course develops into attraction anddevotion."
                                   PURPORT     This verse appears in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.25.25), where
Kapiladeva replies to the questions of His mother, Devahuti, about theprocess of devotional service. As one advances in devotional activities,the process becomes progressively clearer and more encouraging. Unlessone gets this spiritual encouragement by following the instructions ofthe spiritual master, it is not possible to make advancement. Therefore,one's development of a taste for executing these instructions is thetest of one's devotional service. Initially, one must develop confidenceby hearing the science of devotion from a quaiified spiritual master.Then, as he associates with devotees and tries to adopt the meansinstructed by the spiritual master in his own life, his misgivings andother obstacles are vanquished by his execution of devotional service.Strong attachment for the transcendental service of the Lord develops ashe continues listening to the messages of Godhead, and if he steadfastlyproceeds in this way, he is certainly elevated to spontaneous love forthe Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 61                    isvara-svarupa bhakta tanra adhisthana
                    bhaktera hrdaye krsnera satata visrama
                                 TRANSLATION     A pure devotee constantly engaged in the loving service of the Lord
is identical with the Lord, who is always seated in his heart.
                                   PURPORT     The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one without a second, and
therefore He is all-powerful. He has inconceivable energies, of whichthree are principal. The devotee is considered to be one of theseenergies, never the energetic. The energetic is alwaysthe Supreme Lord.The energies are related to Him for the purpose of eternal service. Aliving entity in the conditional stage can uncover his aptitude forserving the Absolute Truth by the grace of Krsna and the spiritualmaster. Then the Lord reveals Himself within his heart, and he can knowthat Krsna is seated in the heart of every pure devotee. Krsna isactually situated in the heart of every iiving entity, but only adevotee can realize this fact.
                                   TEXT 62                            sadhavo hrdayam mahyam
                           sadhunam hrdayam tv aham                           mad-anyat te na jananti                            naham tebhyo manag api
                                 TRANSLATION     "Saints are My heart, and only I am their hearts. They do not know
anyone but Me, and therefore I do not recognize anyone besides them asMine."
                                   PURPORT     This verse appears in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.68) in connection
with a misunderstanding between Durvasa Muni and Maharaja Ambarisa. As aresult of this misunderstanding, Durvasa Muni tried to kill the King,when the Sudarsana cakra, the celebrated weapon of Godhead, appeared onthe scene for the devoted King's protection. When the Sudarsana cakraattacked Durvasa Muni, he fled in fear of the weapon and sought shelterfrom all the great demigods in heaven. Every one of them was unable toprotect him, and therefore Durvasa Muni prayed to Lord Visnu forforgiveness. Lord Visnu advised him, however, that if he wantedforgiveness he had to get it from Maharaja Ambarisa, not from Him. Inthis context Lord Visnu spoke this verse.     The Lord, being full and free from problems, can wholeheartedlycare for His devotees. His concern is how to elevate and protect allthose who have taken shelter at His feet. The same responsibility isalso entrusted to the spiritual master. The bona fide spiritual master'sconcern is how the devotees who have surrendered to him as arepresentative of the Lord may make progress in devotional service. TheSupreme Personality of Godhead is always mindful of the devotees whofully engage in cultivating knowledge of Him, having taken shelter atHis lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 63                           bhavad-vidha bhagavatas
                          tirtha-bhutah svayam vibho                          tirthi-k urvan ti tirthani                          svan tah-sthena gadabhrta
                                 TRANSLATION     "Saints of your caliber are themselves places of pilgrimage.
Because of their purity, they are constant companions of the Lord, andtherefore they can purify even the places of pilgrimage."
                                   PURPORT     This verse was spoken by Maharaja Yudhisthira to Vidura in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.13.10). Maharaja Yudhisthira was receiving hissaintly uncle Vidura, who had been visiting sacred places of pilgrimage.Maharaja Yudhisthira told Vidura that pure devotees like him arepersonified holy places because the Supreme Personality of Godhead isalways with them in their hearts. By their association, sinful personsare freed from sinful reactions, and therefore wherever a pure devoteegoes is a sacred place of pilgrimage. The importance of holy places isdue to the presence there of such pure devotees.
                                   TEXT 64                    sei bhakta-gana haya dvi-vidha prakara
                      parisad-gana eka, sadhaka-gana ara
                                 TRANSLATION     Such pure devotees are of two types: personal associates [parisats]
and neophyte devotees [sadhakas].
                                   PURPORT     Perfect servitors of the Lord are considered His personal
associates, whereas devotees endeavoring to attain perfection are calledneophytes. Among the associates, some are attracted by the opulences ofthe Personality of Godhead, and others are attracted by nuptial love ofGodhead. The former devotees are placed in the realmof Vaikuntha to render reverential devotional service, whereas thelatter devotees are placed in Vrndavana for the direct service of SriKrsna.
                                  TEXT 65-66                       isvarera avatara e-tina prakara
                       amsa-a vatara, ara guna-avatara
                      saktyavesa-avatara--trti ya e-mata
                     amsa-avatara--purusa-matsyadika yata
                                 TRANSLATION     There are three categories of incarnations of Godhead: partial
incarnations, qualitative incarnations and empowered incarnations. Thepurusas and Matsya are examples of partial incarnations.                                   TEXT 67
                   brahma visnu siva--tina gunavatare gani
                   saktyavesa--sanakadi, prthu, vyasa-muni
                                 TRANSLATION     Brahma, Visnu and Siva are qualitative incarnations. Empowered
incarnations are those like the Kumaras, King Prthu and Mahamuni Vyasa[the compiler of the Vedas].
                                   TEXT 68                      dui-rupe haya bhaga vanera prakasa
                     eke ta' prakasa haya, are ta' viiasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The Personality of Godhead exhibits Himself in two kinds of forms:
prakasa and vilasa.
                                   PURPORT     The Supreme Lord expands His personal forms in two primary
categories. The prakasa forms are manifested by Lord Krsna for Hispastimes, and their featu res are exactly like His. When Lord Krsnamarried sixteen thousand queens in Dvaraka, He did so in sixteenthousand prakasa expansions. Similarly, during the rasa dance Heexpanded Himself in identical prakasa forms to dance beside each andevery gopi simultaneously. When the Lord manifests His vilasaexpansions, however, they are all somewhat different in their bodilyfeatures. Lord Balarama is the first vilasa expansion of Lord Krsna, andthe four-handed Narayana forms in Vaikuntha expand from Balarama. Thereis no difference between the bodily forms of Sri Krsna and Balaramaexcept that Their bodily colors are different. Similarly, Sri Narayanain Vaikuntha has four hands, whereas Krsna has only two. The expansionsof the Lord who manifest such bodily differences are known as vilasa-vigrahas.
                                  TEXT 69-70                      eka-i vigraha yadi haya bahu-r\pa
                     akare ta' bheda nahi, eka-i svarupa
                   mahisi-vivahe, yaiche yaiche kaila rasa
                    ihake kahiye krsnera mukhya 'prakasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Personality of Godhead expands Himself in many forms, all
nondifferent in Their features, as Lord Krsna did when He marriedsixteen thousand queens and when He performed His rasa dance, such forms
of the Lord are called manifested forms.
                                   TEXT 71
                            citram bataitad ekena
                            vapusa yugapat prthak                           grhesu dvy-asta-sahasram                             striya eka udavahat
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is astounding that Lord Sri Krsna, who is one without a second,
expanded Himself in sixteen thousand similar forms to marry sixteenthousand queens in their respective homes."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.69.2).                                   TEXT 72                           rasotsa vah sampra vrtto
                            gopi-mandala-manditah                             yogesvarena krsnena                          tasam madhye dvayor dvayoh
                                 TRANSLATION     "When Lord Krsna, surrounded by groups of cowherd girls, began the
festivities of the rasa dance, the Lord of all mystic powers placedHimself between each two girls.
                                   PURPORT     This verse is also quoted from the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.3).                                  TEXT 73-74                            pra vistena grhitanam
                          kanthe sva-nikatam striyah                          yam manyeran nabhas tavad                             vimana-sata-sankulam
                             divaukasam sadaranam
                           atyautsukya-bhrtatmanam                            tato dundubhayo nedur                            nioetuh puspa-vrstayah
                                 TRANSLATION     "When the cowherd girls and Krsna thus joined together, each girl
thoughtthat Krsna was dearly embracing her alone. To behold thiswonderful pastime of the Lord, the denizens of heaven and their wives,
all very eager to see the dance, flew in the sky in their hundreds ofairplanes. They showered flowers and beat sweetly on drums."
                                   PURPORT     This is another quote from the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.4-5)                                   TEXT 75                              anekatra prakatata
                            rupasyaikasya yaikada                           sarvatha tat-s varupaiva                             sa prakasa itiryat e
                                 TRANSLATION     "If nume rous forms, all equal in their features, are displayed
simultaneous ly, such forms are called prakas a-vigrahas of t he Lord."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from the Lagh u-bhagavatamrta (1.21), co mpiled
by Srila Rupa Gosva mi.
                                   TEXT 76                   aneka praka sa haya, 'vilasa' tara nama                                 TRANSLATION     But when the numerous forms are slightly different from one
another, they are called vilasa-vigrahas.
                                   TEXT 77
                            svarupam anyakaram yat
                            tasya bhati vilasatah                           prayenatma-samam saktya                             sa vilaso nigadyate
                                 TRANSLATION     "When the Lord displays numerous forms with different features by
His inconceivable potency, such forms are called vilasa-vigrahas."
                                   PURPORT     This is another quotation from the Laghu-bhagavatamrta.                                   TEXT 78                     yaiche balade va, paravyome narayana                   yaiche vasude va pradyumnadi sankarsana
                                 TRANSLATION     Examples of such vilasa-vigrahas are Baladeva, Narayana in
Vaikunthadhama,and the catur-vyuha--Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna andAniruddha.
                                  TEXT 79-80
                      isvarera sakti haya e-tina prakara
                    eka laksmi-gana, pure mahisi-gana ara
                     vraje gopi-gana ara sabhate pradhana
                   vrajendra-nandana ya'te s vayam bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     The energies [consorts] of the Supreme Lord are of three kinds: the
Laksmis in Vaikuntha, the queens in Dvaraka, and the gopis in Vrndavana.The gopis are the best of all, for they have the privilege of servingSri Krsna, the primeval Lord, the son of the King of Vraja.
                                   TEXT 81
                 s vayam-rupa krsnera kaya-vyuha--tanra sama
                      bhakta sahite haya tanhara avarana
                                 TRANSLATION     The personal associates of the primeval Lord, Sri Krsna, are His
devotees, who are identical with Him. He is complete with His entourageof devotees.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Krsna and His various personal expansions are nondifferent in
potential power. These expansions are associated with further secondaryexpansions, or servitor expansions, who are called devotees.
                                   TEXT 82                    bhakta adi krame kaila sabhara vandana
                    e-sabhara vandana sarva-subhera karana
                                 TRANSLATION     Now I have worshiped all the various levels of devotees. Worshiping
them is the source of all good fortune.
                                   PURPORT     To offer prayers to the Lord, one should first offer prayers to His
devotees and associates.
                                   TEXT 83                  prathama sloke kahi samanya mangalacarana
                     dvitiya slokete kari visesa vandana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the first verse I have invoked a general benediction, but in the
second I have prayed to the Lord in a particular form.
                                   TEXT 84
                          vande sri-krsna-caitanya-
                            nityanandau sahoditau                            gaudodaye puspavantau                           citrau sandau tamo-nudau
                                 TRANSLATION     "I offer my respectful obeisances unto Sri Krsna Caitanya and Lord
Nityananda, who are like the sun and moon. They have arisensimultaneously on the horizon of Gauda to dissipate the darkness ofignorance and thus wonderfully bestow benediction upon all."
                                  TEXT 85-86
                     vraie ye vihare purve krsna-balarama
                  koti-surya-candra jjni donhara njja-dhama
                        sei dui jagatere ha-iya sadaya
                      gaudadese purva-saile karila udaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Krsna and Balarama, the Personalities of Godhead, who formerly
appeared in Vrndavana and were millions of times more effulgent than thesun and moon, have arisen over the eastern horizon of Gaudadesa [WestBengal], being compassionate for the fallen state of the world.
                                   TEXT 87
                   sri-krsna-caitanya ara prabhu nityananda
                      yanhara prakase sarva jagat ananda
                                 TRANSLATION     The appearance of Sri Krsna Caitanya and Prabhu Nityananda has
surcharged the world with happiness.                                  TEXT 88-89
                   surya-candra hare yaiche saba andhakara
                    vastu prakasiya kare dharmera pracara
                       ei mata dui bhai jivera ajnana-
                   tamo-nasa kari' kaila tattva-vastu-dana
                                 TRANSLATION     As the sun and moon drive away darkness by their appearance and
reveal the nature of everything, these two brothers dissipate thedarkness of the living beings' ignorance and enlighten them withknowledge of the Absolute Truth.
                                   TEXT 90
                     ajnana-tamera nama kahiye 'kaitava'
                   dharma-artha-kama-moksa-vancha adi saba
                                 TRANSLATION     The darkness of ignorance is called kaitava, the way of cheating,
which begins with religiosity, economic development, sense gratificationand liberation.
                                   TEXT 91
          dharmah projjhita-kaitavo 'tra paramo nirmatsaranam satam
            vedyam vastavam atra vastu sivadam tapa-trayonmulanam             srimad-bhagavate mahamuni-krte kim va parair isvarah         sadyo hrdy avarudhyate 'tra krtibhih susrusubhis tat-ksanat
                                 TRANSLATION     "The great scripture Srimad-Bhagavatam, compiled by Mahamuni
Vyasadeva from four original verses, describes the most elevated andkindhearted devotees and completely rejects the cheating ways ofmaterially motivated religiosity. It propounds the highest principle ofeternal religion, which can factually mitigate the threefold miseries ofa living being and award the highest benediction of full prosperity andknowledge. Those willing to hear the message of this scripture in asubmissive attitude of service can at once capture the Supreme Lord intheir hearts. Therefore there is no need for any scripture other thanSrimad-Bhagavatam."
                                   PURPORT     This verse appears in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.1.2). The words
mahamuni-krte indicate that Srimad-Bhagavatam was compiled by the greatsage Vyasadeva, who is sometimes known as Narayana Mahamuni because he
is an incarnation of Narayana. Vyasadeva, therefore, is not an ordinaryman, but is empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He compiledthe beautiful Bhagavatam to narrate some of the pastimes of the SupremePersonality of Godhead and His devotees.     I n Srimad-Bhagavatam, a distinction between real religion andpretentious religion has been clearly made. According to this originaland genuine commentation on the Vedanta-sutra, there are numerouspretentious faiths that pass as religion but neglect the real essence ofreligion. The real religion of a living being is his natural inbornquality, whereas pretentious religion is a form of nescience thatartificially coversa living entity's pure consciousness under certainunfavorable conditions. Real religion lies dormant when artificialreligion dominates from the mental plane. A living being can awaken thisdormant religion by hearing with a pure heart.     The path of religion prescribed by Srimad-Bhagavatam is differentfrom all forms of imperfect religiosity. Religion can be considered inthe following three divisions: (1) the path of fruitive work, (2) thepath of knowledge and mystic powers, and (3) the path of worship anddevotional service.     The path of fruitive work (karma-kanda), even when decorated byreligious ceremonies meant to elevate one's material condition, is acheating process because it can never enable one to gain relief frommaterial existence and achieve the highest goal. A living entityperpetually struggles hard to rid himself of the pangs of materialexistence, but the path of fruitive work leads him to either temporaryhappiness or temporary distress in material existence. By pious fruitivework one is placed in a position where he can temporarily feel materialhappiness, whereas vicious activitieslead one to a distressful position of material want and scarcity.However, even if one is put into the most perfect situation of materialhappiness, he cannot in that way become free from the pangs of birth,death, old age and disease. A materially happy person is therefore inneed of the eternal relief that mundane religiosity in terms of fruitivework can never award.     The paths of the culture of knowledge (jnana-marga) and of mysticpowers (yoga- marga) are equally hazardous, for one does not know wherehe will go by following these uncertain methods. An empiric philosopherin search of spiritual knowledge may endeavor most laboriously for many,many births in mental speculation, but unless and until he reaches thestage of the purest quality of goodness--in other words, until hetranscends the plane of material speculation--it is not possible for himto know that everything emanates from the Personality of GodheadVasudeva. His attachment to the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lordmakes him unfit to rise to that transcendental stage of vasudevaunderstanding, and therefore because of his unclean state of mind heglides down again into material existence, even after having ascended tothe highest stage of liberation. This falldown takes place due to hiswant of a locus standi in the service of the Supreme Lord.     As far as the mystic powers of the yogis are concerned, they arealso material entanglements on the path of spiritual realization. OneGerman scholar who became a devotee of Godhead in India said thatmaterial science had already made laudable progress in duplicating themystic powers of the yogis. He therefore came to India not to learn themethods of the yogis' mystic powers but to learn the path of
transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord, as mentioned in thegreat scripture Srimad-Bhagavatam. Mystic powers can make a yogimaterially powerful and thus give temporary relief from the miseries ofbirth, death, old age and disease, as other material sciences can alsodo, but such mystic powers can never be a permanent source of relieffrom these miseries. Therefore, according to the Bhagavata school, thispath of religiosity is also a method of cheating its followers. InBhagavad-gita it is clearly defined that the most elevated and powerfulmystic yogiis one who can constantly think of the Supreme Lord withinhis heart and engage in the loving service of the Lord.     The path of worship of the innumerable devas, or administrativedemigods, is still more hazardous and uncertain than the above-mentionedprocesses of karma-kanda and jnana-kanda. This system of worshiping manygods, such as Durga, Siva, Ganesa, Surya and the impersonal Visnu form,is accepted by persons who have been blinded by an intense desire forsense gratification. When properly executed in terms of the ritesmentioned in the sastras, which are now very difficult to perform inthis age of want and scarcity, such worship can certainly fulfill one'sdesires for sense gratification, but the success obtained by suchmethods is certainly transient, and it is suitable only for a lessintelligent person. That is the verdict of Bhagavad-gita. No sane manshould be satisfied by such temporary benefits.     None of the above-mentioned three religious paths can deliver aperson from the threefold miseries of material existence, namely,miseries caused by the body and mind, miseries caused by other livingentities, and miseries caused by the demigods. The process of religiondescribed in Srimad-Bhagavatam, however, is able to give its followerspermanent relief from the threefold miseries.The Bhagavatam describesthe highest religious form--reinstatement of the living entity in hisoriginal position of transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord,which is free from the infections of desires for sense gratification,fruitive work, and the culture of knowledge with the aim of merging inthe Absolute to become one with the Supreme Lord.     Any process of religiosity based on sense gratification, gross orsubtle, must be considered a pretentious religion because it is unableto give perpetual protection to its followers. The word projjhita issignificant. pra means complete, and ujjhita indicates rejection.Religiosity in the shape of fruitive work is directly a method of grosssense gratification, whereas the process of culturing spiritualknowledge with a view to becoming one with the Absolute is a method ofsubtle sense gratification. All such pretentious religiosity based ongross or subtle sense gratification is completely rejected in theprocess of bhagavata-dharma, or the transcendental religion that is aneternal function for the living being.     Bhagavata-dharma, or the religious principle described in Srimad-Bhagavatam, of which Bhagavad-gita is a preliminary study, is meant forliberated persons of the highest order who attribute very little valueto the sense gratification of pretentious religiosity. The first andforemost concern of fruitive workers, elevationists,empiric philosophersand salvationists is to raise their material position. But devotees ofGodhead have no such selfish desires. They serve the Supreme Lord onlyfor His satisfaction. Sri Arjuna, wanting to satisfy his senses bybecoming a so-called nonviolent and pious man,atfirst decided nottofight. But when he was fully situated in the principles of bhagavata-
dharma, culminating in complete surrender unto the will of the SupremeLord, he changed his decision and agreed to fight for the satisfactionof the Lord. He then said:     nasto mohah smrtir labdha     tvat-prasaoan mayacyuta     sthito 'smi gata-sandehah     karisye vacanam tava"My dear Krsna, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone. I haveregained my memory by Your mercy, and I am now firm and free from doubtand am prepared to act according to Your instructions." (Bg. 18.73) Itis the constitutional position of a living entity to be situated in thispure consciousness. Any so-called religious process that interferes withthis unadulterated spirituai position of the living being must thereforebe considered a pretentious process of religiosity.     The real form of religion is spontaneous loving service to Godhead.This relationship of the living being with the Absolute Personality ofGodhead in service is eternal. The Personality of Godhead is describedas vastu, or the Substance, and the living entities are described asvastavas, or the innumerable samples of the Substance in relativeexistence.The relationship of these substantive portions with theSupreme Substance can never be annihilated, for it is an eternal qualityinherent in the living being.     By contact with material nature the living entities exhibit variedsymptoms of the disease of material consciousness. To cure this materialdisease is the supreme object of human life. The process that treatsthis disease is called bhagavata-dharma or sanatana-dharma--real religion. Th is is d esc ribed in th e pages of Srimad-Bhagavatam.Therefore anyone who, because of his background of pious activities inprevious lives, is anxious to hear, immediately realizes the presence ofthe Supreme Lord within his heart and fulfills the mission of his life.
                                   TEXT 92                  tara madhye moksa-vancha kaitava-pradhana
                   yaha haite krsna-bhakti haya antardhana
                                 TRANSLATION     The foremost process of cheating is to desire to achieve liberation
by merging in the Supreme, for this causes the permanent disappearanceof loving service to Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     The desire to merge in the impersonal Brahman is the subtlest type
of atheism. As soon as such atheism, disguised in the dress ofliberation, is encouraged, one becomes completely unable to traverse thepath of devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 93                "pra-sabdena moksabhisandhir api nirastah" iti                                 TRANSLATION
     "The prefix `pra' [in the verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam] indicates
that the desire for liberation is completely rejected."
                                   PURPORT     This is an annotation by Sridhara Svami, the great commentator on
Srimad-Bhagavatam.
                                   TEXT 94                krsna-bhaktira badhaka--yata subhasubha karma
                      seha eka jivera ajnana-tamo-dharma
                                 TRANSLATION     All kinds of activities, both auspicious and inauspicious, that are
detrimental to the discharge of transcendental loving service to LordSri Krsna are actions of the darkness of ignorance.
                                   PURPORT     The poetical comparison of Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityananda to the
sun and moon is very significant. The living entities are spiritualsparks, and their constitutional position is in devotional service tothe Supreme Lord in full Krsna consciousness. So-called pious activitiesand other ritualistic performances, pious or impious, as well as thedesire to escape from material existence, are all considered to becoverings of these spiritual sparks. The living entities must get freefrom these superfluous coverings and fully engage in Krsnaconsciousness.The purpose of the appearance of Lord Caitanya and LordNityananda is to dispel the darkness of the soul. Before Theirappearance, all these superfluous activities of the living entities werecovering Krsna consciousness, but after the appearance of these twobrothers, people's hearts are becoming cleansed, and they are againbecoming situated in the real position of Krsna consciousness.
                                   TEXT 95                      yanhara prasade ei tamo haya nasa
                    tamo nasa kari' kare tattvera prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     By the grace of Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityananda, this darkness of
ignorance is removed, and the truth is brought to light.
                                   TEXT 96
                tattva-vastu--krsna, krsna-bhakti, prema-rupa
                     nama-sankirtana--saba ananda-svarupa                                 TRANSLATION
     The Absolute Truth is Sri Krsna, and loving devotion to Sri Krsna
exhibited in pure love is achieved through congregational chanting ofthe holy name, which is the essence of all bliss.
                                   TEXT 97
                    surya candra bahirera tamah se vinase
                    bahir-vastu ghata-pata-adi se prakase
                                 TRANSLATION     The sun and moon dissipate the darkness of the external world and
thus reveal external material objects like pots and plates.
                                   TEXT 98
                      dui bhai hrdayera ksali' andhakara
                    dui bhagavata-sange karana saksatkara
                                 TRANSLATION     But these two brothers [ Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityananda]
dissipate the darkness of the inner core of the heart, and thus Theyhelp one meet the two kinds of bhagavatas [persons or things inrelationship with the Personality of Godhead].
                                   TEXT 99
                     eka bhagavata bada--bhagavata-sastra
                   ara bnagavata--bhak ta bhakti-rasa-patra
                                 TRANSLATION     One of the bhagavatas is the great scripture Srimad-Bhagavatam, and
the other is the pure devotee absorbed in the mellows of lovingdevotion.
                                   TEXT 100
                    dui bhagavata dvara diiya bhakti-rasa
                     tanhara hrdaye tanra preme haya vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Through the actions of these two bhagavatas the Lord instills the
mellows of transcendental loving service into the heart of a livingbeing, and thus the Lord, in the heart of His devotee, comes under thecontrol of the devotee's love.                                   TEXT 101
                    eka adbhuta--sama-kale donhara prakasa
                  ara adbhuta--citta-guhara tamah kare nasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The first wonder is that both brothers appear simultaneously, and
the other is that They illuminate the innermost depths of the heart.
                                   TEXT 102
                      ei candra surya dui parama sadaya
                      jagatera bhagye gaude karila udaya
                                 TRANSLATION     These two, the sun and moon, are very kind to the people of the
world. Thus for the good fortune of all, They have appeared on thehorizon of Bengal.
                                   PURPORT     The celebrated ancient capital of the Sena dynasty, which was known
as Gaudadesa or Gauda, was situated in what is now the modern districtof Maldah. Later this capital was transferred to the ninth or centralisland on the western side of the Ganges at Navadvipa, which is nowknown as Mayapur and was then called Gaudapura. Lord Caitanya appearedthere, and Lord Nityananda came there and joined Him from the districtof Birbhum. They appeared on the horizon of Gaudadesa to spread thescience of Krsna consciousness, and it is predicted that as the sun andmoon gradually move west, the movement They began five hundred years agowill come to the western civilizations by Their mercy.     Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu drive away the five kindsof ignorance of th e con d itioned souls. I n th e Mahabharata, Udyoga-parva, F orty-th ird Chapter,these five kinds of ignorance aredescribed. They are (1) accepting the body to be the self, (2) makingmaterial sense gratification one's standard of enjoyment, (3) beinganxious due to material identification, (4) lamenting and (5)thinkingthat there is anything beyond the Absolute Truth. The teachingsof Lord Caitanya eradicate these five kinds of ignorance. Whatever onesees or otherwise experiences one should know to be simply an exhibitionof the Supreme Personality of Godhead's energy. Everything is amanifestation of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 103                     sei dui prabhura kari carana vandana
                   yanha ha-ite vighna-nasa abhista-purana
                                 TRANSLATION     Let us therefore worship the holy feet of these two Lords. Thus one
can be rid of all difficulties on the path of self-realization.
                                   TEXT 104
                      ei dui sloke kaila mangala-vandana
                     trtiya slokera artha suna sarva jana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have invoked the benediction of the Lords with these two verses.
Now please hear attentively the purport of the third.
                                   TEXT 105
                 vak ta vya-bah ulya, grantha-vistarera dare
                  vistare na varni, sarartha kahi alpaksare
                                 TRANSLATION     I purposely avoid extensive description for fear of increasing the
bulk of this book. I shall describe the essence as concisely aspossible.
                                   TEXT 106
                   "mitam ca saram ca vaco hi vagmita" iti                                 TRANSLATION     "Essential truth spoken concisely is true eloquence."
                                   TEXT 107
                    sunile khandibe cittera ajnanadi dosa
                    krsne gadha prema habe, paibe santosa
                                 TRANSLATION     Simply hearing submissively will free one's heart from all the
faults of ignorance, and thus one will achieve deep love for Krsna. Thisis the path of peace.
                                 TEXT 108-109
                   sri-caitanya-nityananda-advaita-mahattva
                  tanra bhakta-bhakti-nama-prema-rasa-tattva                    bhinna bhinna likhiyachi kariya vicara
                     sunile janibe saba vastu-tattva-sara
                                 TRANSLATION     If one patiently hears about the glories of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, Sri Nityananda Prabhu and Sri Advaita Prabhu--and Theirdevotees, devotional activities, names, fame, and the mellows of Theirtranscendental loving exchanges--one will learn the essence of theAbsolute Truth. Therefore I have described these [in Caitanya-caritamrta] with logic and discrimination.
                                   TEXT 110
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Adi-lila, First Chapter, describing the spiritual masters.
                                 Chapter Two
     This chapter explains that Lord Caitanya is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead Krsna Himself. Therefore, the Brahman effulgence is thebodily luster of Lord Caitanya, and the localized Supersoul situated inthe heart of every living entity is His partial representation. Thepurusa-avataras are also explained in this connection. Maha-Visnu is thereservoir of all conditioned souls, but as confirmed in theauthoritative scriptures, Lord Krsna is the ultimate fountainhead, thesource of numerous plenary expansions, including Narayana, who isgenerally accepted by Mayavadi philosophers to be the Absolute Truth.The Lord's manifestation of prabhava and vaibhava expansions, as well aspartial incarnations and incarnations with delegated powers, are alsoexplained. Lord Krsna's ages of boyhood and youth are discussed, and itis explained that His age at the beginning of youth is His eternal form.     The spiritual sky contains innumerable spiritual planets, theVaikunthas, which are manifestations of the Supreme Lord's internalenergy. Innumerable material universes are similarly exhibited by Hisexternal energy, and the living entities are manifested by His marginalenergy. Because Lord Krsna Caitanya is not different from Lord Krsna, Heis the cause of all causes; there is no cause beyond Him. He iseternal,and His form is spiritual. Lord Caitanya is directly the SupremeLord Krsna, as the evidence of authoritative scriptures proves. Thischapter stresses that a devotee must have knowledge of Krsna's personalform, His three principal energies, His pastimes and the relationship ofthe living entities with Him in order to advance in Krsna consciousness.                                    TEXT 1
                          sri-caitanya-prabhum vande
                           balo 'pi yaci anugrahat                            taren nana-mata-graha-                          vyaptam siddhanta-sagaram
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my obeisances to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, by whose mercy
even an ignorant child can swim across the ocean of conclusive truth,which is full of the crocodiles of various theories.
                                   PURPORT     By the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead SriCaitanya
Mahaprabhu, even an inexperienced boy with no educational culture can besaved from the ocean of nescience, which is full of various types ofphilosophical doctrines that are like dangerous aquatic animals. Thephilosophy of the Buddha, the argumentative presentations of thejnanis,the yoga systems of Patanjali and Gautama, and the systems ofphilosophers like Kanada, Kapila and Dattatreya are dangerous creaturesin the ocean of nescience. By the grace of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu onecan have real understanding of the essence of knowledge by avoidingthese sectarian views and accepting the lotus feet of Krsna as theultimate goal of life. Let us all worship Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhufor His gracious mercy to the conditioned souls.
                                    TEXT 2              krsnotkirtana-gana-nartana-kala-pathojani-bhrajjta
            sad-bhaktavaii-hamsa-cakra-madhupa-sreni-viharaspadam           karnanandi-kaia-dh vanir vahatu me jjh va-maru-prangane           sri-caitanya daya-nidhe ta va lasal-lila-sudha-svardhuni
                                 TRANSLATION     O my merciful Lord Caitanya, may the nectarean Ganges waters of
Your transcendental activities flow on the surface of my desert-liketongue. Beautifying these waters are the lotus flowers of singing,dancing and loud chanting of Krsna's holy name, which are the pleasureabodes of unalloyed devotees. These devotees are compared to swans,ducks and bees. The river's flowing produces a melodious sound thatgladdens their ears.
                                   PURPORT     Our tongues always engage in vibrating useless sounds that do not
help us realize transcendental peace. The tongue is compared to a desertbecause a desert needs a constant supply of refreshing water to make itfertile and fru itful. Water is the substance most needed in the desert.The transient pleasure derived from mundane topics of art, culture,politics, sociology, dry philosophy, poetry and so on is com pared to amere drop of water because although such topics have a qualitative
feature of transcendental pleasure, they are saturated with the modes ofmaterial nature. Therefore neither collectively nor individually canthey satisfy the vast requirements of the desert-like tongue. Despitecrying in various conferences, therefore, the desert-like tonguecontinues to be parched. For this reason, people from all parts of theworld must call for the devotees of Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, who arecompared to swans swimming around the beautiful lotus feet of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu or bees humming around His lotus feet intranscendental pleasure, searching for honey. The dryness of materialhappiness cannot be moistened by so-called philosophers who cry forBrahman, liberation and similar dry speculative objects. The urge of thesoul proper is different. The soul can be solaced only by the mercy ofLord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His many bona fide devotees, who neverleave the lotus feet of the Lord to become imitation Mahaprabhus, butall cling to His lotus feet like bees that never leave a honey-soakedlotus flower.     Lord Caitanya's movement of Krsna consciousness is full of dancingand singing about the pastimes of Lord Krsna. It is compared herein tothe pure waters of the Ganges, which are full of lotus flowers. Theenjoyers of these lotus flowers are the pure devotees, who are like beesand swans. They chant like the flowing of the Ganges, the river of thecelestial kingdom. The author desires such sweetly flowing waves tocover his tongue. He humbly compares himself to materialistic personswho always engage in dry talk from which they derive no satisfaction. Ifthey were to use their dry tongues to chant the holy name of the Lord--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,Rama Rama, Hare Hare--as exemplified by Lord Caitanya, they would tastesweet nectar and enjoy life.
                                    TEXT 3                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Sri
Nityananda. All glories to Advaitacandra, and all glories to thedevotees of Lord Gauranga.
                                    TEXT 4
                      trtiya slokera artha kari vivarana
                       vastu-nirdesa-rupa mangaiacarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me describe the meaning of the third verse [of the first
fourteen]. It is an auspicious vibration that describes the AbsoluteTruth.                                    TEXT 5
              yad advaitam brahmopanisadi tad apy asya tanu-bha
                ya atmantaryami purusa iti so 'syamsa-vibhavah             sad-aisvaryaih purno ya iha bhagavan sa svayam ayam              na caitanyat krsnaj jagati para-tattvam param iha
                                 TRANSLATION     What the Upanisads describe as the impersonal Brahman is but the
effulgence of His body, andthe Lord known as the Supersoul is but Hislocalized plenary portion. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Krsna Himself, full with six opulences. He is the Absolute Truth, and noother truth is greater than or equal to Him.
                                   PURPORT     The compilers of the Upanisads speak very highly of the impersonal
Brahman. The Upanisads, which are considered the most elevated portionof the Vedic literatures, are meant for persons who desire to get freefrom material association and who therefore approach a bona fidespiritual master for enlightenment. The prefix upa indicates that onemust receive knowledge about the Absolute Truth from a spiritual master.One who has faith in his spiritual master actually receivestranscendental instruction, and as his attachment for material lifeslackens, he is able to advance on the spiritual path. Knowledge of thetranscendental science of the Upanisads can free one from theentanglement of existence in the material world, and when thusliberated, one can be elevated to the spiritual kingdom of the SupremePersonality of Godhead by advancement in spiritual life.     The beginning of spiritual enlightenment is realization ofimpersonal Brahman. Such realization is effected by gradual negation ofmaterial variegatedness. I mpersonal Brahman realization is the partial,distant experience of the Absolute Truth that one achieves through therational approach. It is compared to one's seeing a hill from a distanceand taking it to be a smoky cloud. A hill is not a smoky cloud, but itappears to be one from a distance because of our imperfect vision. Inimperfect or smoky realization of the Absolute Truth, spiritualvariegatedness is conspicuous by its absence. This experience istherefore called advaita-vada, or realization of the oneness of theAbsolute.     The impersonal glowing effulgence of Brahman consists only of thepersonal bodily rays of the Supreme Godhead, Sri Krsna. Since SriGaurasundara, or Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, is identical with SriKrsna H imself, the Brahman effulgence consists of the rays of Histranscendental body.     Similarly, the Supersoul, which is called the Paramatma, is aplenary representation of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The antaryami, theSupersoul in everyone's heart, is the controller of all living entities.This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, wherein Lord Krsna says, sarvasyacaham hrdi sannivistah.- " I am situated i n everyone's heart." ( Bg. 15. 1 5) Bhagavad-gita also states ( Bg. 5.29), bhoktaram yajna-tapasamsarva- loka-mahesvaram, indicating that the Supreme Lord, acting in Hisexpansion as the Supersoul, is the proprietor of everything. Similarly,the Brahma-samhita states, anoantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham.- the
Lord is present everywhere, within the heart of every living entity andwithin each and every atom as well. Thus by this Supersoul feature theLord is all-pervading.     Furthermore, Lord Caitanya is also the master of all wealth,strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation because He is SriKrsna Himself. He is described as purna, or complete. In the feature ofLord Caitanya, the Lord is an ideal renouncer, just as Sri Rama was anideal king. He accepted the order of sannyasa and exemplifiedexceedingly wonderful principles in His own life. No one can compare toHim in the order of sannyasa. Although in Kali-yuga acceptance of thesannyasa order is generally forbidden, Lord Caitanya accepted it becauseHe is complete in renunciation. Others cannot imitate Him but can onlyfollow in His footsteps as far as possible. Those who are unfit for thisorder of life are strictly forbidden by the injunctions of the sastrasto accept it. Lord Caitanya, however, is complete in renunciation aswell as all other opulences. He is therefore the highest principle ofthe Absolute Truth.     By an analytical study of the truth of Lord Caitanya, one will findthat He is not different from the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna;no one is greater than or even equal to Him. In Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsnasays to Arjuna, mattah parataram nanyat kincid asti dhananjaya.- "Oconquerer of wealth [Arjuna], there is no truth superior to Me." (Bg.7.7) Thus it is here confirmed that there is no truth higher than LordSri Krsna Caitanya.     The impersonal Brahman is the goal of those who cultivate the studyof books of transcendental knowledge, and the Supersoul is the goal ofthose who perform the yoga practices. One who knows the SupremePersonality of Godhead surpasses realization of both Brahman andParamatma because Bhagavan is the ultimate platform of absoluteknowledge.     The Personality of Godhead is the complete form of sac-cid-ananda(full life, knowledge and bliss). By realization of the sat portion ofthe Complete Whole (unlimited existence), one realizes the impersonalBrahman of the Lord. By realization of the cit portion of the CompleteWhole (unlimited knowledge), one can realize the localized aspect of theLord, Paramatma. But neither of these partial realizations of theComplete Whole can help one realize ananda, or complete bliss. Withoutsuch realization of ananda, knowledge of the Absolute Truth isincomplete.     This verse of Caitanya-caritamrta by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami isconfirmed by a parallel statement in the Tattva-sandarbha by Srila JivaGosvami. In the Eighth Part of Tattva-sandarbha it is said that theAbsolute Truth is sometimes approached as impersonal Brahman, which,although spiritual, is only a partial representation of the AbsoluteTruth. Narayana, the predominating Deity in Vaikuntha, is to be known asan expansion of Sri Krsna, but Sri Krsna is the Supreme Absolute Truth,the object of the transcendental love of all living entities.
                                    TEXT 6                    brahma, atma, bhaga van--anuvada tina
                anga-prabha, amsa, svarupa--tina vidheya-cihna                                 TRANSLATION
     Impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma and the Personality of
Godhead are three subjects, and the glowing effulgence, the partialmanifestation and the original form are their three respectivepredicates.
                                    TEXT 7
                     anuvada age, pache vidheya sthapana
                     sei artha kahi, suna sastra-vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     A predicate always follows its subject. Now I shall explain the
meaning of this verse according to the revealed scriptures.
                                    TEXT 8
                   svayam bhaga van krsna, visnu-paratattva
                    purna-jnana purnananda parama mahattva
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna, the original form of the Personality of Godhead, is the
summum bonum of the all-pervading Visnu. He is all-perfect knowledge andall-perfect bliss. He is the Supreme Transcendence.
                                    TEXT 9
                   'nanda-suta' bali' yanre bhaga vate gai
                     sei krsna a vatirna caitanya-gosani
                                 TRANSLATION     He whom Srimad-Bhagavatam describes as the son of Nanda Maharaja
has descended to earth as Lord Caitanya.
                                   PURPORT     According to the rules of rhetorical arrangement for efficient
composition in literature, a subject should be mentioned before itspredicate. The Vedic literature frequently mentions Brahman, Paramatmaand Bhagavan, and therefore these three terms are widely known as thesubjects of transcendental understanding. But it is not widely knownthat what is approached as the impersonal Brahman is the effulgence ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's transcendental body. Nor is it widely knownthat the Supersoul, or Paramatma, is only a partial representation ofLord Caitanya, who is identical with Bhagavan Himself. Therefore thedescriptions of Brahman as the effulgence of Lord Caitanya, Paramatma asHis partial representation, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsnaas identical with Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu must be verified by evidence
from authoritative Vedic literatures.     The author wants to establish first that the essence of the Vedasis visnu-tattva, the Absolute Truth, Visnu, the all-pervading Godhead.The visnu-tattva has different categories, of which the highest is LordKrsna, the ultimate visnu-tattva, as confirmedin Bhagavad-gita and throughout the Vedic literature. I n the Srimad-Bhagavatam the same Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna is described asNandasuta, the son of King Nanda. Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami says thatNandasuta has again appeared as Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhubecause the conclusion of the Vedic literatu re is that there is nodifference between Lord Krsna and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This theauthor will prove. If it is thus proved that Sri Krsna is the origin ofall tattvas (truths), namely, Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan, and thatthere is no difference between Sri Krsna and Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, it will not be difficult to understand that Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu is also the same origin of all tattvas. The same AbsoluteTruth, as He is revealed to students of different realizations, iscalled Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan.
                                   TEXT 10                     prakasa-visese tenha dhare tina nama
                    brahma, paramatma ara svayam-bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     In terms of His various manifestations, He is known in three
features, called the impersonal Brahman, the localized Paramatma and theoriginal Personality of Godhead.
                                   PURPORT     Srila jiva Gosvami has explained the word bhagavan in his Bhagavat-
sandarbha. The Personality of Godhead, being full of all conceivable andinconceivable potencies, is the absolute Supreme Whole. ImpersonalBrahman is a partial manifestation of the Absolute Truth realized in theabsence of such complete potencies. The first syllable of the wordbhagavan is bha, which means "sustainer" and "protector." The nextletter, ga, means "leader," "pusher" and "creator." Va means "dwelling,,(all living beings dwell in the Supreme Lord, and the Supreme Lorddweils within the heart of every living being). Combining all theseconcepts, the word bhagavan carries the import of inconceivable potencyin knowledge, energy, strength, opulence, power and influence, devoid ofall varieties of inferiority. Without such inconceivable potencies, onecannot fully sustain or protect. Our modern civilization is sustained byscientific arrangements devised by many great scientific brains. We canjust imagine, therefore, the gigantic brain whose arrangements sustainthe gravity of the unlimited number of planets and satellites and whocreates the unlimited space in which they float. If one considers theintelligence needed to orbit man-made satellites, one cannot be fooledinto thinking that there is not a gigantic intelligence responsible forthe arrangements of the various planetary systems. There is no reason tobelieve that all the gigantic planets float in space without thesuperior arrangement of a superior intelligence.This subject is clearly
dealt with in Bhagavad- gita where the Personality of Godhead says, "Ienter into each planet, and by My energy they stay in orbit." (Bg.15.13) Were the planets not held in the grip of the Personality ofGodhead,they would all scatter like dust in the air. Modern scientistscan only impractically explain this inconceivable strength of thePersonality of Godhead.     The potencies of the syllables bha, ga and va apply in terms ofmany different meanings. Through His different potential agents, theLord protects and sustains everything, but He Himself personallyprotects and sustains only His devotees, just as a king personallysustains and protects his own children, while entrusting the protectionand sustenance of the state to various administrative agents. The Lordis the leader of His devotees, as we learn from Bhagavad-gita, whichmentions that the Personality of Godhead personally instructs His lovingdevotees how to make certain progress on the path of devotion and thussurely approach the kingdom of God. The Lord is also the recipient ofall the adoration offered by His devotees, for whom He is the objectiveand the goal. For His devotees the Lord creates a favorable conditionfor developing a sense of transcendental love of Godhead. Sometimes Hedoes this by taking away a devotee's material attachments by force andbaffling all his material protective agents, for thus the devotee mustcompletely depend on the Lord's protection. In this way the Lord provesHimself the leader of His devotees.     The Lord is not directly attached to the creation, maintenance anddestruction of the material world, for He is eternally busy in theenjoyment of transcendental bliss with His internal potentialparaphernalia. Yet as the initiator of the material energy as well asthe marginal potency (the living beings), He expands Himself as thepurusa-avataras, who are invested with potencies similar to His. Thepurusa- avataras are also in the category of bhagavat-tattva becauseeach and every one of them is identical with the original form of thePersonality of Godhead. The living entities are His infinitesimalparticles and are qualitatively one with Him. They are sent into thismaterial world for material enjoyment to fulfill their desires to beindependent individuals, but still they are subject to the supreme willof the Lord. The Lord deputes Himself in the state of Supersoul tosupervise the arrangements for such material enjoyment. The example of atemporary fair is quite appropriate in this connection. If the citizensof a state assemble in a fair to enjoy for a short period, thegovernment deputes a special officer to supervise it. Such an officer isinvested with all governmental power, and therefore he is identical withthe government. When the fair is over,there is no need of such anofficer, and he returns home. Such an officer is compared to theParamatma.     The living beings are not all in all. They are undoubtedly parts ofthe Supreme Lord and are qualitatively one with Him; yet they aresubjectto His control. Thusthey are never equal to the Lord or one with Him. The Lord whoassociates with the living being is the Paramatma or supreme livingbeing. No one, therefore, should view the tiny living beings and supremeliving being to be on an equal level.     The all-pervading truth which exists eternally during the creation,
maintenance and annihilation of the material world and in which theliving beings rest in trance is called the impersonal Brahman.
                                   TEXT 11                           vadanti tat tattva-vidas
                          tattvam yaj jnanam advayam                             brahmeti paramtmeti                            bhagavan iti sabdyate
                                 TRANSLATION     "Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth say that it
is nondual knowledge and is called impersonal Brahman, localizedParamatma and the Personality of Godhead."
                                   PURPORT     This Sanskrit verse appears as the eleventh verse of the First
Canto, Second Chapter, of Srimad-Bhagavatam, where Suta Gosvami answersthe questions of the sages headed by Saunaka Rsi concerning the essenceof all scriptural instructions. Tattva-vidah refers to persons who haveknowledge of the Absolute Truth. They can certainly understand knowledgewithout duality because they are on the spiritual platform. The AbsoluteTruth is known sometimes as Brahman, sometimes as Paramatma andsometimes as Bhagavan. Persons who are in knowledge of the truth knowthat one who tries to approach the Absolute simply by mental speculationwill ultimately realize the impersonal Brahman, and one who tries toapproach the Absolute through yoga practice will be able to realizeParamatma, but one who has complete knowledge and spiritualunderstanding realizes the spiritual form of Bhagavan, the Personalityof Godhead.     Devotees of the Personality of Godhead know that Sri Krsna, the sonof the King of Vraja, is the Absolute Truth. They do not discriminatebetween Sri Krsna's name, form, quality and pastimes. One who wants toseparate the Lord's absolute name, form and qualities must be understoodto be lacking in absolute knowledge. A pure devotee knows that when hechants the transcendental name Krsna, Sri Krsna is present astranscendental sound. He therefore chants with full respect andveneration. When he sees the forms of Sri Krsna, he does not seeanything different from the Lord. If one sees otherwise, he must beconsidered untrained in absolute knowledge. This lack of absoluteknowledge is called maya. One who is not Krsna conscious is ruled by thespell of maya under the control of a duality in knowledge. In theAbsolute, all manifestations of the Supreme Lord are nondual, just asthe multifarious forms of Visnu, the controller of maya, are nondual.Empiric philosophers who pursue the impersonal Brahman accept only theknowledge that the personality of the living entity is not differentfrom the personality of the Supreme Lord, and mystic yogis who try tolocate the Paramatma accept only the knowledge that the pure soul is notdifferent from the Supersoul. The absolute conception of a pure devotee,however, includes all others. A devotee does not see anything except inits relationship with Krsna, and therefore his realization is the most
perfect of all.
                                   TEXT 12                     tanhara angero suddna kirana-mandala
                     upanisat kahe tanre brahma sunirmaia
                                 TRANSLATION     What the Upanisads call the transcendental, impersonal Brahman is
the realm of the glowing effulgence of the same Supreme Person.
                                   PURPORT     A mantra of the Mundaka Upanisad (2.2.10-12) gives information
regarding the bodily effulgence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.It states:     hiranmaye pare kose     virajam brahma niskalam     tac chubhram jyotisam jyotis     tad yad atma-vido viduh     na tatra suryo bhati na candra-tarakam     nema vidyuto bhanti kuto'yam agnih     tam eva bhantam anubhati sarvam     tasya bhasa sarvam idam vibhati     brahmaivedam amrtam purastad brahma     pascad brahma daksinatas co ttarena     adhas cordh vam ca prasrtam brahmai-     vedam visvam idam varistham"In the spiritual realm, beyond the material covering, is the unlimitedBrahman effulgence, which is free from material contamination. Thateffulgent white light is understood by transcendentalists to be thelight of all lights. In that realm there is no need of sunshine,moonshine, fire or electricity for illumination. Indeed, whateverillumination appears in the material world is only a reflection of thatsupreme illumination. That Brahman is in front and in back, in thenorth, south, east and west, and also overhead and below. I n otherwords, that supreme Brahman effulgence spreads throughout both thematerial and spiritual skies."
                                   TEXT 13                   carma-cakse dekhe yaiche surya nirvisesa
                    jnana-marge laite nare krsnera visesa
                                 TRANSLATION     As with the naked eye one cannot know the sun except as a glowing
substance, merely by philosophical speculation one cannot understandLord Krsna's transcendental varieties.
                                   TEXT 14                   yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti-
                    kotisv asesa-vasudhadi-vibhuti-bhinnam                   tad brahma niskalam anantam asesa-bhutam                    go vlndam adi-purusam tam aham bhaiami
                                 TRANSLATION     "I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is endowed with great
power. The glowing effulgence of His transcendental form is theimpersonal Brahman, which is absolute, complete and unlimited and whichdisplays the varieties of countless planets, with their differentopulences, in millions and millions of universes.,,
                                   PURPORT     This verse appears in the Brahma-samhita (5.40). Each and every one
of the countless universes is full of innumerable planets with differentconstitutions and atmospheres. All these come from the unlimited nondualBrahman, or Complete Whole, which exists in absolute knowledge. Theorigin of that unlimited Brahman effulgence is the transcendental bodyof Govinda, who is offered respectful obeisances as the original andsupreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 15                    koti kotibrahmande ye brahmera vibhuti
                     sei brahma govindera haya anga-kanti
                                 TRANSLATION     The opulences of the impersonal Brahman spread throughout the
millions and millions of universes. That Brahman is but the bodilyeffulgence of Govinda.
                                   TEXT 16
                    sei govinda bhaji ami, tehon mora pati
                    tanhara prasade mora haya srsti-sakti
                                 TRANSLATION     I [Brahma] worship Govinda. He is my Lord. Only by His grace am I
empowered to create the universe.
                                   PURPORT     Although the sun is situated far away from the other planets, its
rays sustain and maintain them all. Indeed, the sun diffuses its heatand light all over the universe. Similarly, the supreme sun, Govinda,diffuses His heat and light everywhere in the form of His differentpotencies. The sun's heat and light are nondifferent from the sun. Inthe same way, the unlimited potencies of Govinda are nondifferent fromGovinda Himself. Therefore the all-pervasive Brahman is the all-
pervasive Govinda. Bhagavad-gita clearly mentions that the impersonalBrahman is dependent upon Govinda. That is the real conception ofabsolute knowledge.
                                   TEXT 17                             munayo vata-vasanah
                         sramana urddh va-man thinah                          brahmakhyam dhama te yanti                           santah sannyasino 'malah
                                 TRANSLATION     " Naked saints and san nyasis wh o undergo severe physical
penances, wh o can raise the semina to the brain, and who are completelyequipoised in Brahman can live in the realm known as Brahmaloka."
                                   PURPORT     I n this verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam ( 1 1.6.47), vata-vasanah
refers to mend icants who do not care about anything material, includingclothing, but who depend wholly on nature. Such sages do not cover theirbodies even in severe winter or scorching sunshine. They take greatpains not to avoid any kind of bodily suffering, and they live bybegging from door to door. They never discharge their semina, eitherknowingly or unknowingly. By such celibacy they are able to raise thesemina to the brain. Thus they become most intelligent and develop verysharp memories. Their minds are never disturbed or diverted fromcontemplation on the Absolute Truth, nor are they ever contaminated bydesire for material enjoyment. By practicing austerities under strictdiscipline, such mendicants attain a neutral state transcendental to themodes of nature and merge into the impersonal Brahman.
                                   TEXT 18                     atmantaryami yanre yoga-sastre kaya
                     seha govindera amsa vibhuti ye haya
                                 TRANSLATION     He who is described in the yoga-sastras as the indwelling Supersoul
[atma antaryami] is also a plenary portion of Govinda's personalexpansion.
                                   PURPORT     The Supreme Personality of Godhead is by nature joyful. His
enjoyments or pastimes are completely transcendental. He is on thefourth dimension of existence, for although the material world ismeasured by the limitations of length, breadth and height, the SupremeLord is completely unlimited in His body, form and existence. He is notpersonally attached to any of the affairs within the material cosmos.The material world is created by the expansion of His purusa-avatara,who directs the aggregate material energy and all the conditioned souls.
By understanding the three expansions of the purusa, a living entity cantranscend the position of knowing only the twenty-four elements of thematerial world.     One of the expansions of Maha-Visnu is Ksirodakasayi Visnu, theSupersoul within every living entity. As the Supersoul of the totalliving entities, or the second purusa, He is known as GarbhodakasayiVisnu. As the creator or originalcause of innumerable universes, or the first purusa, who is lying on theCausal Ocean, He is called Maha-Visnu. The three purusas direct theaffairs of the material world.     The authorized scriptures direct the individual souls to revivetheir relationship with the Supersoul. Indeed, the system of yoga is theprocess of transcending the influence of the material elements byestablishing a connection with the purusa known as Paramatma. One whohas thoroughly studied the intricacies of creation can know very easilythat this Paramatma is the plenary portion of the Supreme Be i ng, S riKrs n a.
                                   TEXT 19                    ananta sphatike yaiche eka surya bhase
                     taiche jive go vindera amsa prakase
                                 TRANSLATION     As the one sun appears reflected in countless jewels, so Govinda
manifests Himself [as Paramatma] in the hearts of all living beings.
                                   PURPORT     The sun is situated in a specific location but is reflected in
countless jewels and appears in innumerable localized aspects.Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although eternallypresent in His transcendental abode Goloka Vrndavana, is reflected ineveryone's heart as the Supersoul. In the Upanisads it is said that thejiva (living entity) and Paramatma (Supersoul) are like two birdssitting in the same tree. The Supersoul engages the living being inexecuting fruitive work as a result of his deeds in the past, but theParamatma has nothing to do with such engagements. As soon as the livingbeing ceases to act in terms of fruitive work and takes to the serviceof the Lord (Paramatma), coming to know of His supremacy, he isimmediately freed from all designations, and in that pure state heenters the kingdom of God known as Vaikuntha.     The Supersoul (Paramatma), the guide of the individual livingbeings, does not take part in fulfilling the desires of the livingbeings, but He arranges for their fulfillment by material nature. Assoon as an individual soul becomes conscious of his eternal relationshipwith the Supersoul and looks only toward Him, he at once becomes freefrom the entanglements of material enjoyment. Christian philosophers whodo not believe in the law of karma put forward the argument that it isabsurd for one to accept the results of past deeds of which he has noconsciousness. A criminal is first reminded of his misdeeds by witnessesin a law court, and then he is punished. If death is completeforgetfulness, why should a person be punished for his past misdeeds?
The conception of Paramatma is an invincible answer to these fallaciousarguments. The Paramatma is the witness of the past activities of theindividual living being. A man may not remember what he has done in hischildhood, but his father, who has seen him grow through differentstages of development, certainly remembers. Similarly, the living beingundergoes many changes of body through many lives, but the Supersoul isalso with him and remembers all his activities, despite his evolutionthrough different bodies.
                                   TEXT 20                              athava bahunaitena
                            kim jnatena tavariuna                          vistabhyaham idam krtsnam                            ekamsena sthito jagat
                                 TRANSLATION     [The Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, said: ] "What more shall I
say to you? I live throughout this cosmic manifestation merely by Mysingle plenary portion."
                                   PURPORT     Describing His own potencies to Arjuna, the Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna spoke this verse of Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 10.42).
                                   TEXT 21                      tam imam aham ajam sarira-bhaiam-
                     hroi hrdi dhisthitam atma-kaipitanam                       pratiorsam iva naikadharkam ekam                     samadhigato 'smi vidhuta-bheda-mohah
                                 TRANSLATION     [ Grandfather Bhisma said: ] "As the one su n appears differently
situated to different seers, so also do You, the unborn, appeardifferently represented as Paramatma in every living being. But when aseer knows himself to be one of Your own servitors, no longer does hemaintain such duality. Thus I am now able to comprehend Your eternalforms, knowing well the Paramatma to be only Your plenary portion."
                                   PURPORT     Th is verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam ( 1.9.42) was sp o ke n by B
hismadeva, the grandfather of the Kurus, when he was lying on a bed ofarrows at the last stage of his life. Arjuna, Krsna and numberlessfriends, admirers, relatives and sages had gathered on the scene asMaharaja Yudhisthira took moral and religious instructions from thedying Bhisma. Just as the final moment arrived for him, Bhisma spokethis verse while looking at Lord Krsna.     Just as the one sun is the object of vision of many different
persons, so the one partial representation of Lord Krsna who lives inthe heart of every living entity as Paramatma is a variously perceivedobject. One who comes intimately in touch with Lord Krsna by engaging inHis eternal service sees the Supersoul as the localized partialrepresentation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhisma knew theSupersoul to be a partial expansion of Lord Krsna, whom he understood tobe the supreme unborn transcendental form.
                                   TEXT 22                     seita govinda saksac caitanya gosani
                     jiva nistarite aiche dayalu ara nai
                                 TRANSLATION     That Govinda personally appears as Caitanya Gosani. No other Lord
is as merciful in delivering the fallen souls.
                                   PURPORT     Having described Govinda in terms of His Brahman and Paramatma
features, now the author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta advances hisargument to prove that Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the identicaipersonality. The same Lord Sri Krsna, in the garb of a devotee of SriKrsna, descended to this mortal world to reclaim the fallen human beingswho had misunderstood the Personality of Godhead even after the ex p lanation of Bhagavad-gita. I n Bhagavad-gita the Pe rso nal ity of G odhead S ri Krsna directly instructed that the Supreme is a person.Impersonal Brahman is His glowing effulgence, Paramatma is His partialrepresentation, and all men are there. fore advised to follow the pathof Sri Krsna, leaving aside all mundane "isms." Offenders misunderstoodthis instruction, however, because of their poor fund of knowledge. Thusby His causeless, unlimited mercy Sri Krsna came again as Sri CaitanyaGosani.     The author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta most e mphatically stressesthat Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Sri Krsna Himself. He is not anexpansion of the prakasa or viiasa forms of Sri Krsna; He is the svayam-rupa, Govinda. Apart from the relevant scriptural evidence forwarded bySrila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, there are innumerable statementsregarding Lord Caitanya's being the Supreme Lord Himself. The followingexamples may be cited:     ( 1) F rom the Caitanya Upanisad.- gaurah sarvatma maha-purusomahatma maha- yogi tri-gunatitah sattva-r\po bhaktim loke kasyati. "LordGaura, who is the allpervading Supersoul, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, appears as a great saint and powerful mystic who is above thethree modes of nature and is the emblem of transcendental activity. Hedisseminates the cult of devotion throughout the world."     (2) From the Svetasvatara Upanisad:     tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram     tam devatanam paramam ca daivatam     patim patinam paramam parastad     vidama devam bhuvanesam idyam"O Supreme Lord,You are the Supreme Mahesvara, the worshipable Deity of
all the demigods and the Supreme Lord of all lords.You are thecontroller of all controllers, the Personality of Godhead, the Lord ofeverything worshipable." (Svet. Up. 6.7)     mahan prabhur vai purusah     sattvasyaisa pra vartakah     sunirmalam imam praptim     isano jyotlr avyayah"The Supreme Personality of Godhead is Mahaprabhu, who disseminatestranscendental enlightenment. Just to be in touch with Him is to be incontact with the indestructible brahmajyoti." (Svet. Up. 3. 1 2)     (3) From the Mundaka Upanisad (3.1.3)..     yada pasyah pasyate rukma-varnam     kartaram isam purusam brahma-yonim"One who sees that golden-colored Personality of Godhead, the SupremeLord, the supreme actor, who is the source of the Supreme Brahman, isliberated."     (4) F rom Srimad-Bhagavatam:     dhyeyam sada paribhava-ghnam abhista-doham-     tirthaspadam siva-virinci-nutam saranyam     bhrtyarti-ham pranata-pala-bhavabdhi potam     vande maha-purusa te caranaravindam"We offer our respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Him, theLord, upon whom one should always meditate. He destroys insults to Hisdevotees. He removes the distresses of His devotees and satisfies theirdesires. He, the abode of all holy places and the shelter of all sages,is worshipable by Lord Siva and Lord Brahma. He is the boat of thedemigods for crossing the ocean of birth and death." (SB. 11.5.33)     tyaktva sudustyaia-surepsita-rajya-laksmim     dharmistha arya-vacasa yad agad aranyam     maya-mrgam dayitayepsitam an vadhavad     vande maha-purusa te caranaravindam"We offer our respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of the Lord,upon whom one should always meditate. He left His householder life,leaving aside His eternal consort, whom even the denizens of heavenadore. He went into the forest to deliver the fallen souls, who are putinto illusion by material energy." (SB. 11.5.34)     Prahlada said:     ittham nr-tiryag-isi-de va jhasavatarair     lokan vibhavayasi hamsi jagat-pratipan     dharmam maha-purusa pasi yuganuvrttam-     channah kaiau yad abhavas tri-yugo 'tha sa tvam"My Lord, You kill all the enemies of the world in Yourmultifariousincarnations in the families of men, animals, demigods, rsis, aquaticsand so on. Thus You illuminate the worlds with transcendental knowledge. In the Age of Kali, OMahapurusa, You sometimes appear in a covered incarnation. Therefore Youare known as Triyuga [one who appears in only three yugas]." (SB.7.9.38)     (5) From the Krsna-yamala. punya-kse tre nava-dvioe bhavisyamisaci-sutah. " I shall appear in the holy land of Navadvipa as the son ofSacidevi."     (6) From the Vayu purana. Kalau sankirtanarambhe bhavisyami saci-
sutah. "In the Age of Kali when the sankirtana movement is inaugurated,I shall descend as the son of Sacidevi."     (7) From the Brahma-yama1a.-     athavaham dharadhame     bhutva mad-bhakta-r\pa-dhrk     mayayam ca bhavisyami     kaiau sankirtanagame"Sometimes I personally appear on the surface of the world in the garbof a devotee. Specifically, I appear as the son of Saci in Kali-yuga tostart the sankirtana movement."     (8), From the Ananta-samhita.-     ya eva bhagavan krsno     radhika-prana-valiabhah     sistyadau sa jagan-natho     gaura asm mahesvari"The Supreme Person, Sri Krsna Himself, who is the life of SriRadharani, and is the Lord of the universe in creation, maintenance andannihilation, appears as Gaura, O Mahesvari."
                                   TEXT 23                       para-vyomete vaise narayana nama
                   sad-aisvarya-purna laksmi-kanta bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Narayana, who dominates the transcendental world, is full in
six opulences. He is the Personality of Godhead, the Lord of the goddessof fortune.
                                   TEXT 24
                       veda, bhagavata, upanisat, agama
                 `prna-tattva' yanre kahe, nani yan- ra sama
                                 TRANSLATION     The Personality of Godhead is He who is described as the Absolute
Whole in the Vedas, Bhagavatam, Upanisads and other transcendentalliteratures. No one is equal to Him.
                                   PURPORT     There are innumerable authoritative statements in the Vedas
regarding the personal feature of the Absolute Truth. Some of them areas follows:     (1) From the Rk-samhita (1.22.20):     tad visnoh paramam padam     sada pasyanti srayah     diviva caksuratatam"The Personality of Godhead Visnu is the Absolute Truth, whose lotusfeet all the demigods are always eager to see. Like the sun-god, Hepervades everything by the rays of His energy. He appears impersonal to
imperfect eyes."     (2) From the Narayanatharva-sira Upanisad: narayanad evasamutpadyante narayanat pravartante narayane praliyante. atha nityonarayanah. narayana evedamsarvam yad bhtam yac ca bhavyam. suddho devaeko narayano na dvitivo 'sti kascit. "It is from Narayana only thateverything is generated, by Him only that everything is maintained, andin Him only that everything is annihilated. Therefore Narayana iseternally existing. Everything that exists now or will be created in thefuture is nothing but Narayana, who is the unadulterated Deity. There isonly Narayana and nothing else."     (3) From the Narayana Upanisad: yatah prasutajagatah prasuta."Narayana is the source from whom all the universes emanate."     (4) From the Hayasirsa-pancaratra.- paramatma harir devah. " Hariis the Su preme Lord."     (5) From the Bhagavatam (11.3.34-35):     narayanabhidhanasya     brahmanah paramatmanah      nistham arhatha no vaktum     y\yam hi brahma-vittamah"O best of the brahmanas, please tell us of the position of Narayana,who is also known as Brahman and Paramatma."     sthity-udbhava-pralaya-hetur ahetur asya     yat svapna-iagara-susuptisu sad bahis ca     dehendriyasu-hrdayani caran tl yena     sanjivitani tad avehi param narendra"O King, know Him who is causeless and yet is the cause of creation,maintenance and annihilation. He exists in the three states ofconsciousness--namely waking, dreaming and deep sleep--as well as beyondthem. He enlivens the body, the senses, the breath of life, and theheart, and thus they move. Know Him to be supreme."
                                   TEXT 25                   bhakti-yoge bhakta paya yanhara darsana
                     srya yena savigraha dekhe deva-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     Through their service, devotees see that Personality of Godhead,
just as the denizens of heaven see the personality of the sun.
                                   PURPORT     The Supreme Personality of Godhead has His eternal form, which
cannot be seen by material eyes or mental speculation. Only bytranscendental devotional service can one understand the transcendentalform of the Lord. The comparison is made here to the qualifications forviewing the personal features of the sun-god. The sungod is a personwho, although not visible to our eyes, is seen from the higher planetsby the demigods, whose eyes are suitable for seeing through the glaringsunshine that surrounds him. Every planet has its own atmosphereaccording to the influence of the arrangement of material nature. It istherefore necessary to have a particular type of bodily construction toreach a particular planet. The inhabitants ofearth may be able to reach the moon, but the inhabitants of heaven can
reach even the fiery sphere called the sun. What is impossible for manon earth is easy for the demigods in heaven because of their differentbodies. Similarly, to see the Supreme Lord one must have the spiritualeyes of devotional service. The Personality of Godhead is unapproachableby those who are habituated to speculation about the Absolute Truth interms of experimental scientific thought, without reference to thetranscendental vibration. The ascending approach to the Absolute Truthends in the realization of impersonal Brahman and the localizedParamatma but not the Supreme Transcendental Personality.
                                   TEXT 26                    jnana-yoga-marge tanre bhaje yei saba
                     brahma-atma-rupe tanre kare anubhava
                                 TRANSLATION     Those who walk the paths of knowledge and yoga worship only Him,
for it is Him they perceive as the impersonal Brahman and localizedParamatma-.
                                   PURPORT     Those who are fond of mental speculation (jnana-marga) or want to
meditate in mysticyoga to find the Absolute Truth must approach theimpersonal effulgence of the Lord and His partial representationrespectively. Such persons cannot realize the eternal form of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 27                       upasana-bhede jnni isvara-mahima
                       ataeva surya tanra diyeta upama
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus one may understand the glories of the Lord through different
modes of worship, as the example of the sun illustrates.
                                   TEXT 28
                     sei narayana krsnera svarupa-abheda
                      eka-i vigraha, kintu akara-vibheda
                                 TRANSLATION     Narayana and Sri Krsna are the same Personality of Godhead, but
although They are identical, Their bodily features are different.
                                   TEXT 29
                   inhota dvi-bhuia, tinho dhare cari hatha                    inho venu dhare, tinho cakradika satha
                                 TRANSLATION     This Personality of Godhead [Sri Krsna] has two hands and holds a
flute, whereas the other [ Narayana] has four hands, with conch, wheel,mace and lotus.
                                   PURPORT     Narayana is identical to Sri Krsna. They are in fact the same
person manifested differently, like a high court judge who isdifferently situated in his office and at home. As Narayana the Lord ismanifested with four hands, but as Krsna He is manifested with twohands.
                                   TEXT 30                      narayanas tvam na hi sarva-dehinam
                        atmasy adhisakhila-loka-saksi                      narayano 'ngam nara-bh\ jaiayanat                       tac capi satyam fla tavaiva maya
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Lord of lords, You are the seer of all creation. You are indeed
everyone's dearest life. Are You not, therefore, my father, Narayana?Narayana refers to one whose abode is in the water born from Nara[Garbhodakasayi Visnu ], and that Narayana is Your plenary portion. AllYour plenary portions are transcendental. They are absolute and are notcreations of maya."
                                   PURPORT     Th is statement, which is from Srimad-Bhagavatam ( 10.14.1 4), was
spoken by Lord Brahma in his prayers to Lord Krsna after the Lorddefeated him by displaying His mystic powers. Brahma had tried to testLord Krsna to see if He were really the Supreme Personality of Godheadplaying as a cowherd boy. Brahma stole all the other boys and their cowsfrom the pasturing grounds, but when he returned to the pastures he sawthat all the boys and cows were still there, for Lord Krsna had createdthem all again. When Brahma saw this mystic power of Lord Krsna, headmitted defeat and offered prayers to the Lord, addressing Him as theproprietor and seer of everything in the creation and as the Supersoulwho is within each and every living entity and is dear to all. That LordKrsna is Narayana, the father of Brahma, because Lord Krsna's plenaryexpansion Garbhodakasayi Visnu, after placing Himself on the GarbhaOcean, created Brahma from His own body. MahaVisnu in the Causal Oceanand Ksirodakasayi Visnu, the Supersoul in everyone's heart, are alsotranscendental expansions of the Supreme Truth.
                                   TEXT 31                    sisu vatsa hari' brahma kari aparadha                       aparadha ksamaite magena prasada
                                 TRANSLATION     After Brahma had offended Krsna by stealing His playmates and cows,
he begged the Lord's pardon for his offensive act and prayed for theLord's mercy.
                                   TEXT 32
                   tomara nabhi-padma haite amara janmodaya
                      tumi pita-mata, ami tomara tanaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "I took birth from the lotus that grew from Your navel. Thus You
are both my father and my mother, and I am Your son.
                                   TEXT 33
                      pita mata bdakera na laya aparadha
                     aparadha ksama, more karaha prasada
                                 TRANSLATION     "Parents never take seriously the offenses of their children. I
therefore beg Your pardon and ask for Your benediction."
                                   TEXT 34
                  krsna kanena--brahma, tomara pita narayana
                     ami gopa, tumi kaiche amara nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Krsna said: "O Brahma, your father is Narayana. I am but a
cowherd boy. How can you be My son?"
                                   TEXT 35
                    brahma baiena, tumi ki na hao narayana
                      tumi narayana--suna tahara karana
                                 TRANSLATION     Brahma replied, "Are You not Narayana? You are certainly Narayana.
Please listen as I state the proofs.
                                   TEXT 36                     prakrtaprakrta-srstye yatajiva-rupa
                       tahara ye atma tumi mula-svarupa
                                 TRANSLATION     "All the living beings within the material and spiritual worlds are
ultimately born of You, for You are the Supersoul of them all.
                                   PURPORT     The cosmic manifestation is generated by the interaction of the
three modes of material nature. The transcendental world has no suchmaterial modes, although it is nevertheless full of spiritualvariegatedness. In that spiritual world there are also innumerableliving entities, who are eternally liberated souls engaged intranscendental loving service to Lord Krsna. The conditioned souls whoremain within the material cosmic creation are subjected to thethreefold miseries and pangs of material nature. They exist in differentspecies of life because they are eternally averse to transcendentalloving devotion to the Supreme Lord.     Sankarsana is the original source of all living entities becausethey are all expansions of His marginal potency. Some of them areconditioned by material nature, whereas others are under the protectionof the spiritual nature. The material nature is a conditionalmanifestation of spiritual nature, just as smoke is a conditional stageof fire. Smoke is dependent on fire, but in a blazing fire there is noplace for smoke. Smoke disturbs, but fire serves. The serving spirit ofthe residents of the transcendental world is displayed in five varietiesof relationships with the Supreme Lord, who is the central enjoyer. Inthe material world everyone is a self-centered enjoyer of mundanehappiness and distress. One considers himself the lord of everything andtries to enjoy the illusory energy, but he is not successful because heis not independent; he is but a minute particle of the energy of LordSankarsana. All living beings exist under the control of the SupremeLord, who is therefore called Narayana.
                                   TEXT 37                   prthvi yaiche ghata-kuiera karana asraya
                     jivera nioana tumi, tumi sarvasraya
                                 TRANSLATION     "As the earth is the original cause and shelter of all pots made of
earth, so You are the ultimate cause and shelter of all living beings.
                                   PURPORT     As the vast earth is the source for the ingredients of all earthen
pots, so the supreme soul is the source for the complete substance ofall individual living entities. The cause of all causes, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, is the cause of the living entities. This isconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita (7.10) where the Lord says, bijam mam sarva-bhutanam ("I am the seed of all living entities"), and in the Upanisads,
which say, nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam ("the Lord is the supremeleader among all the eternal living beings").     The Lord is the reservoir of all cosmic manifestation, animate andinanimate. The advocates of visistadvaita-vada ph ilosophy ex plain theVedanta-sutra by saying that although the living entity has two kinds ofbodies--subtle (consisting of mind, intelligence and false ego) andgross (consisting of the five basic elements)--and although he thuslives in three bodily dimensions (gross, subtle and spiritual)--he isnevertheless a spiritual soul. Similarly, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead who emanates the material and spiritual worlds is the SupremeSpirit. As an individual spirit soul is almost identical to his grossand subtle bodies, so the Supreme Lord is almost identical to thematerial and spiritual worlds- The material world, full of conditionedsouls trying to lord it over matter, is a manifestation of the externalenergy of the Supreme Lord, and the spiritual world, full of perfectservitors of the Lord, is a manifestation of His internal energy- Sinceall living entities are minute sparks of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, He is the Supreme Soul in both the material and spiritualworlds- The Vaisnavas following Lord Caitanya stress the doctrine ofacintya-bhedabheda-tattva, wh ich states that the Supreme Lord, beingthe cause and effect of everything, is inconceivably, simultaneously onewith His manifestations of energy and different from them.
                                   TEXT 38                    `nara'-sabde kahe sarva jivera nicaya
                      `ayana'-sabdete kahe tahara asraya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The word `nara' refers to the aggregate of all the living beings,
and the word `ayana' refers to the refuge of them all.
                                   TEXT 39
                        ataeva tumi hao mula narayana
                       ei eka hetu, suna dvitiya karana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are therefore the original Narayana. This is one reason;
please listen as I state the second.
                                   TEXT 40
                       jivera isvara--purusadi avatara
                    tanha saba haite tomara aisvarya apara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The direct Lords of the living beings are the purusa incarnations.
But Your opulence and power are more exalted than Theirs.
                                   TEXT 41
                       ataeva adhisvara tumi sarva pita
                      tomara saktite tanra jagat-raksita
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore You are the primeval Lord, the original father of
everyone. They [the purusas] are protectors of the universes by Yourpower.
                                   TEXT 42
                       narera ayana yate karaha palana
                        ataeva hao tumi muia narayana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Since You protect those who are the shelters of all living beings,
You are the original Narayana.
                                   PURPORT     The controlling Deities of the living beings in the mundane worlds
are the three purusa-avataras. But the potent energy displayed by SriKrsna is far more extensive than that of the purusas. Sri Krsna istherefore the original father and Lord who protects all creativemanifestations through His various plenary portions- Since He sustainseven the shelters of the collective living beings, there is no doubtthat Sri Krsna is the original Narayana.
                                   TEXT 43                       trtiya karana suna sri-bhagavan
                   ananta brahmanda bahu vaikunthadi dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     "O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead! Kindly hear my third
reason. There are countless universes and fathomless transcendentalVaikunthas.
                                   TEXT 44
                    ithe yata jiva, tara trai-kalika karma
                   taha dekha, saksi tumi, jana saba marma
                                 TRANSLATION     "Both in this material world and in the transcendental world, You
see all the deeds of all living beings, in the past, present and future.Since You are the witness of all such deeds, You know the essence ofeverything.
                                   TEXT 45
                     tomara darsane sarva jagatera sthiti
                    tumi na dekhile karo nahi sthiti gati
                                 TRANSLATION     "All the worlds exist because You oversee them. None can live, move
or have their being without Your supervision.
                                   TEXT 46
                       narera ayana yate kara darasana
                        tahateo hao tumi mula narayana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You oversee the wanderings of all living beings. For this reason
also, You are the primeval Lord Narayana."
                                   PURPORT     Sri Krsna, in His Paramatma feature, lives in the hearts of all
living beings in both the transcendental and mundane creations- AsParamatma, He witnesses all actions the living beings perform in allphases of time, namely past, present and future. Sri Krsna knows whatthe living beings have done for hundreds and thousands of past births,He sees what they are doing now, and therefore He knows the results oftheir present actions that will fructify in the future. As stated inBhagavad-gita, the entire cosmic situation is created as soon as Heglances over the material energy Nothing can exist without Hissuperintendence- Since He sees even the abode for rest of the collectiveliving beings, He is the original Narayana-
                                   TEXT 47                 krsna kahena--brahma, tomara na bujhi vacana
                      jiva-hrdi, jale vaise sei narayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna said: "Brahma, I cannot understand what you are saying. Lord
Narayana is He who sits in the hearts of all living beings and lies downin the waters of the Karana Ocean."                                   TEXT 48
                      brahma kahe--jaiejive yei narayana
                     se saba tomara amsa--e satya vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Brahma replied: "What I have said is true. The same Lord Narayana
who lives on the waters and in the hearts of all living beings is but aplenary portion of You.
                                   TEXT 49
                     karanabdhi-garbhodaka-ksirodaka-sayi
                    maya-dvare srsti kare, tate saba mayi
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Karanodakasayi, Garbhodakasayi and Ksirodakasayi forms of
Narayana all create in cooperation with the material energy. In this wayThey are attached to maya.
                                   TEXT 50
                      sei tina jaia-sayi sarva-antaryami
                    brahmanda-vrndera atma ye purusa-nami
                                 TRANSLATION     "These three Visnus lying in the water are the Supersoul of
everything. The Supersoul of all the universes is known as the firstpurusa.
                                   TEXT 51
                    niranya-garbhera atma garbhodaka-sayi
                     vyasti-jiva-antaryami ksirodaka-sayi
                                 TRANSLATION     bhodakasayi Visnu is the Supersoul of the aggregate of living
entities, and Ksirodakasayi Visnu is the Supersoul of each individualliving being.
                                   TEXT 52
                    e sabhara darsanete ache maya-ganciha
                     turiya krsnera nahi mayara sambandha
                                 TRANSLATION     "Superficially we see that these purusas have a relationship with
maya, but above them, in the fourth dimension, is Lord Krsna, who has nocontact with the material energy.
                                   PURPORT     The three purusas--Karanodakasayi Visnu, Garbhodakasayi Visnu and
Ksirodakasayi Visnu--all have a relationship with the material energy,called maya, because through maya They create the material cosmos. Thesethree purusas, who lie on the Karana, Garbha and Ksira waters, are theSupersoul of everything that be--Karanodakasayi Visnu is the Supersoulof the collective universes, Garbhodakasayi Visnu is the Supersoul ofthe collective living beings, and Ksirodakasayi Visnu is the Supersoulof all individual living entities. Because all of Them are somehowattracted to the affairs of the material energy, They can be said tohave some affection for maya. But the transcendental position of SriKrsna Himself is not even slightly tinged by maya. His transcendentalstate is called turiva, or the fourth-dimensional stage-
                                   TEXT 53                           virad hiranya-garbhas ca
                            karanam cety upadhayah                           isasya yat tribhir hinam                            turiyam tat pracaksate
                                 TRANSLATION     " `In the material world the Lord is designated as virat,
hiranyagarbha and karana. But beyond these three designations, the Lordis ultimately in the fourth dimension.'
                                   PURPORT     The phenomenal manifestation of the supreme whole, the noumenal
soul of everything, and the cause or causal nature are all butdesignations of the purusas, who are responsible for material creation.The transcendental position surpasses these designations and istherefore called the position of the fourth dimension. This is aquotation from Sridhara Svami's commentary on the Eleventh Canto,Fifteenth Chapter, verse 1 6, of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
                                   TEXT 54                     yadyapi tinera maya ia-iya vyavahara
                   tathapi tat-sparsa nahi, sabhe maya-para
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although these three features of the Lord deal directly with the
material energy, none of them are touched by it. They are all beyondillusion.                                   TEXT 55
                              etad isanam isasya
                          prakrti-stho'pi tad-gunaih                          na yujyate sadatma-sthair                           yatha buddhis tad-asraya
                                 TRANSLATION     " `This is the opulence of the Lord: Although situated in the
material nature, He is never affected by the modes of nature. Similarly,those who have surrendered to Him and fixed their intelligence upon Himare not influenced by the modes of nature.'
                                   PURPORT     This text is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.1 1.38). Those who have
taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead do notidentify with the material world, even while living in it. Pure devoteesmay deal with the three modes of material nature, but because of theirtranscendental intelligence in Krsna consciousness, they are notinfluenced by the material qualities. The spell of material activitiesdoes not attract such devotees. Therefore, the Supreme Lord and Hisdevotees acting under Him are always free from material contamination.
                                   TEXT 56                      sei tina janera tumi parama asraya
                     tumi muia narayana--ithe ki samsaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are the ultimate shelter of these three plenary portions. Thus
there is not the slightest doubt that You are the primeval Narayana.
                                   PURPORT     Brahma has confirmed that Lord Krsna is the Supreme, the source of
the three manifestations known as Ksirodakasayi Visnu, GarbhodakasayiVisnu and Karanodakasayi Visnu (Maha-Visnu). For His pastimes, LordKrsna has four original manifestations--namely, Vasudeva, San karsana,Pradyumna and Aniruddha. The first purusa-avatara, Maha-Visnu in theCausal Ocean, who is the creator of the aggregate material energy, is anexpansion of San karsana; the second purusa, Garbhodakasayi Visnu, is anexpansion of Pradyumna; and the third purusa, Ksirodakasayi Visnu, is anexpansion from Aniruddha. All these are within the category ofmanifestations of Narayana, who is a manifestation of Sri Krsna.
                                   TEXT 57                      sei tinera amsi paravyoma-narayana
                   tenha tomara viiasa, tumi mula-narayana                                 TRANSLATION
     "The source of these three features is the Narayana in the
spiritual sky. He is Your vilasa expansion. Therefore You are theultimate Narayana."
                                   TEXT 58
                   ataeva brahma-vakye--paravyoma-narayana
                   tenho krsnera viiasa--ei tattva-vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore according to the authority of Brahma, the Narayana who is
the predominating Deity in the transcendental world is but the vilasafeature of Krsna. This has now been conclusively proved.
                                   TEXT 59
                    ei sloka tattva-iaksana bhagavata-sara
                     paribhasa-rupe ihara sarvatradhikara
                                 TRANSLATION     The truth indicated in this verse [text 30] is the essence of
Srimad-Bhagavatam. This conclusion, through synonyms, applieseverywhere.
                                   TEXT 60
                   brahma, atma, bhaga van--krsnera vihara
                     e artha najani' mrkha artha kare ara
                                 TRANSLATION     Not knowing that Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan are all features
of Krsna, foolish scholars speculate in various ways.
                                   TEXT 61
                       a vatari narayana, krsna avatara
                    tenha catur-bhuja, inha manusya -akara
                                 TRANSLATION     Because Narayana has four hands whereas Krsna looks just like a
man, they say that Narayana is the original God whereas Krsna is but anincarnation.
                                   PURPORT     Some scholars argue that Narayana is the original Personality of
Godhead of whom Krsna is an incarnation because Sri Krsna has two handswhereas Narayana has four- Such unintelligent scholars do not understandthe features of the Absolute-
                                   TEXT 62                      ei-mate nana-rupa kare purva-paksa
                     tahare niriite bhagavata-padya daksa
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way their arguments appear in various forms, but the poetry
of the Bhagavatam expertly refutes them all.
                                   TEXT 63
                           vadanti tat tattva-vidas
                          tattvam yai jnanam advayam                             brahmeti paramatmeti                            bhagavan iti sabdyate
                                 TRANSLATION     "Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth say that it
is nondual knowledge and is called impersonal Brahman, localizedParamatma and the Personality of Godhead."
                                   PURPORT     This text is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11).                                   TEXT 64                       suna bhai ei sioka karaha vicara
                    eka mukhya-tattva, tina tahara pracara
                                 TRANSLATION     My dear brothers, kindly listen to the explanation of this verse
and consider its meaning: the one original entity is known in His threedifferent features.
                                   TEXT 65
                  advaya jnana tattva-vastu krsnera svar\pa
                   brahma, atma, bnagavan--tina tanra r\pa
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna Himself is the one undivided Absolute Truth, the
ultimate reality. He manifests Himself in three features--as Brahman,Paramatma and Bhagavan.
                                   PURPORT     In the verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam cited above (SB. 1.2.11), the
principal word, bhagavan, indicates the Personality of Godhead, andBrahman and Paramatma are concomitants deducted from the AbsolutePersonality, as a government and its ministers are deductions from thesupreme executive head- I n other words, theprincipal truth is exhibited in three different phases. The AbsoluteTruth, the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna (Bhagavan), is also known asBrahman and Paramatma, although all these features are identical-
                                   TEXT 66                    ei siokera arthe tumi haila nirvacana
                       ara eka suna bhagavatera vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     The import of this verse has stopped you from arguing. Now listen
to another verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
                                   TEXT 67
                            ete camsa-kaiah pumsah
                          kisnas tu bhagavan svayam                            indrari-vyakulam iokam                             mrdayanti yuge yuge
                                 TRANSLATION     "All these incarnations of Godhead are either plenary portions or
parts of the plenary portions of the purusa-avataras. But Krsna is theSupreme Personality of Godhead Himself. In every age He protects theworld through His different features when the world is disturbed by theenemies of Indra."
                                   PURPORT     This statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.3.28) definitely negates the
concept that Sri Krsna is an avatara of Visnu or Narayana- Lord SriKrsna is the original Personality of Godhead, the supreme cause of allcauses- This verse clearly indicates that incarnations of thePersonality of Godhead such as Sri Rama, Nrsimha and Varaha allundoubtedly belong to the Visnu group, but all of Them are eitherplenary portions or portions of plenary portions of the originalPersonality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna-
                                   TEXT 68                     saba avatarera kari samanya-iaksana
                   tara madhye krsna-candrera karila ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Bhagavatam describes the symptoms and deeds of the incarnations
in general and counts Sri Krsna among them.
                                   TEXT 69
                     tabe sta gosani mane pana bada bhaya
                     yara ye iaksana taha karila niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     This made Suta Gosvami greatly apprehensive. Therefore he
distinguished each incarnation by its specific symptoms.
                                   TEXT 70
                      avatara saba--purusera kaia, amsa
                     svayam-bhagavan kisna sarva-avatamsa
                                 TRANSLATION     All the incarnations of Godhead are plenary portions or parts of
the plenary portions of the purusa-avataras, but the primeval Lord isSri Krsna. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the fountainhead ofall incarnations.
                                   TEXT 71
                 prva-paksa kahe--tomara bhala ta' vyakhyana
                     paravyoma-narayana svayam-bhaga van
                                 TRANSLATION     An opponent may say: "This is your interpretation, but actually the
Supreme Lord is Narayana, who is in the transcendental realm.
                                   TEXT 72
                     tenha asi' krsna-r\pe karena avatara
                      ei artha sioke dekhi ki ara vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     "He [Narayana] incarnates as Lord Krsna. This is the meaning of the
verse as I see it. There is no need for further consideration."                                   TEXT 73
                      tare kahe--kene kara kutarkanumana
                  sastra-viruddhartha kabhu na haya pramana
                                 TRANSLATION     To such a misguided interpreter we may reply: "Why should you
suggest such fallacious logic? An interpretation is never accepted asevidence if it opposes the principles of scripture."
                                   TEXT 74
                             anuvadam anuktva tu
                             na vidheyam udirayet                          na hy aiabdhaspadam kincit                            kutracit pratitisthati
                                 TRANSLATION     "One should not state a predicate before its subject, for it cannot
thus stand without proper support."
                                   PURPORT     This rhetorical rule appears in the Ekadasi-tattva, Thirteenth
Canto, in connection with the metaphorical use of words. An unknownobject should not be put before the known subject because the object hasno meaning if the subject is not first given.
                                   TEXT 75                      anuvada na kahiya na kahi vidheya
                       age anuvada kahi, pascad vidheya
                                 TRANSLATION     If I do not state a subject, I do not state a predicate. First I
speak the former and then I speak the latter.
                                   TEXT 76
                    `vidheya' kahiye tare, ye vastu ajnata
                     `anu vada' kahi tare, yei haya jnata
                                 TRANSLATION     The predicate of a sentence is what is unknown to the reader,
whereas the subject is what is known to him.                                   TEXT 77
                    yaiche kahi,--ei viora parama pandita
                   viora--anuvada, ihara vidheya--panditya
                                 TRANSLATION     For example, we may say: "This vipra is a greatly learned man." In
this sentence, the vipra is the subject, and the predicate is hiserudition.
                                   TEXT 78
                    vipratva vikhyata tara panditya ajnata
                     atae va viora age, panditya pascata
                                 TRANSLATION     The man's being a vipra is known, but his erudition is unknown.
Therefore the person is identified first and his erudition later.
                                   TEXT 79
                     taiche inha avatara saba haila jnata
                       kara avatara?--ei vastu avjjnata
                                 TRANSLATION     In the same way, all these incarnations were known, but whose
incarnations they are was unknown.
                                   TEXT 80
                      `ete'-sabde avatarera age anuvada
                   `purusera amsa' pach e vidheya-sam vada
                                 TRANSLATION     First the word "ete" ["these"] establishes the subject [the
incarnations]. Then "plenary portions of the purusa-avataras" follows asthe predicate.
                                   TEXT 81
                   taiche krsna avatara-bhitare haiia jnata
                      tanhara visesa jnana sei aviinata
                                 TRANSLATION     In the same way, when Krsna was first counted among the
incarnations, specific knowledge about Him was still unknown.
                                   TEXT 82
                       ataeva `krsna'-sabda age anuvada
                  `svayam-bhagavatta' piche vidheya-sam vada
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore first the word "krsna" appears as the subject, followed
by the predicate, describing Him as the original Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 83
                 krsnera svayam-bhagavatta--iha haila sadhya
                   svayam-bhagavanera krsnatva haiia badhya
                                 TRANSLATION     This establishes that Sri Krsna is the original Personality of
Godhead. The original Personality of Godhead is therefore necessarilyKrsna.
                                   TEXT 84
                     krsna yadi amsa haita, amsi narayana
                      tabe viparita haita sutera vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Had Krsna been the plenary portion and Narayana the primeval Lord,
the statement of Suta Gosvami would have been reversed.
                                   TEXT 85
                      narayana amsi yei svayam-bhagavan
                   tenha sri-krsna--aiche karita vyakhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus he would have said: "Narayana, the source of all incarnations,
is the original Personality of Godhead. He has appeared as Sri Krsna."
                                   TEXT 86
                  bhrama, pramada, vipra-lipsa, karanapatava
                      arsa-vjjna-vakye nhi dosa ei saba                                 TRANSLATION
     Mistakes, illusions, cheating and defective perception do not occur
in the sayings of the authoritative sages.
                                   PURPORT     Srimad-Bhagavatam has listed the avatras, the plenary expansions of
the purusa, and Lord Krsna appears among them. But the Bhagavatamfurther explains Lord Krsna's specific position as the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Since Lord Krsna is the original Personality ofGodhead, reason and argument establish that His position is alwayssupreme.     Had Krsna been a plenary expansion of Narayana, the original versewould have been differently composed; indeed, its order would have beenreversed. But there cannot be mistakes, illusion, cheating or imperfectperception in the words of liberated sages. Therefore there is nomistake in this statement that Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personaiity ofGodhead. The Sanskrit statements of Srimad-Bhnavatam are alltranscendental sou nds. Srila Vyasadeva revealed these statements afterperfect realization, and therefore they are perfect, for liberated sageslike Vyasadeva never commit errors in their rhetorical arrangements-Unless one accepts this fact, there is no use in trying to obtain helpfrom the revealed scriptures.     Bhrama refers to false knowledge or mistakes, such as accepting arope as a snake or an oyster shell as gold- pramada refers toinattention or misunderstanding of reality, and vipra-iipsa is thecheating propensity- Karanapatava refers to imperfectness of thematerial senses- There are many examples of such imperfection- The eyescannot see that which is very distant or very small. One cannot even seehis own eyelid, which is the closestthing to his eye, and if one isdisturbed by a disease like jaundice, he sees everything to be yellow.Similarly,the ears cannot hear distant sounds- Since the Personality ofGodhead and His plenary portions and self-realized devotees are alltranscendentally situated, they cannot be misled by such deficiencies-
                                   TEXT 87                   viruddhartha kaha tumi, kahite kara rosa
                    tomara arthe avimrsta- vidheyamsa-dosa
                                 TRANSLATION     You say something contradictory and become angry when this is
pointed out. Your explanation has the defect of a misplaced object. Thisis an unconsidered adjustment.
                                   TEXT 88
                   yanra bhagavatta haite anyera bhagavatta
                   `svayam-bhagavan'-sabdera tahatei satta
                                 TRANSLATION     Only the Personality of Godhead, the source of all other
Divinities, is eligible to be designated svayam bhagavan, or theprimeval Lord.
                                   TEXT 89
                    dipa haite yaiche bahu dipera jvalana
                       mula eka dioa taha kariye ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     When from one candle many others are lit, I consider that one the
original.
                                   PURPORT     The Brahma-samhita, Chapter Five, verse 46, states that the visnu-
tattva, or the principle of the Absolute Personality of Godhead, is likea lamp because the expansions equal their origin in all respects- Aburning lamp can light innumerable other lamps that are not inferior,but still one lamp must be considered the original. Similarly, theSupreme Personality of Godhead expands Himself in the plenary forms ofthe visnu-tattva, but although they are equally powerful, the originalpowerful Personality of Godhead is considered the source-This examplealso explainsthe appearance of qualitative incarnations like Lord Siva and LordBrahma--Acco rd i ng to S ril a J iv a G osvami, sambhos tu tamo-dhisthanatvat kajjalamaya- suksma-dipa-sikha-sthaniyasya na tathasamyam. "The sambhu-tattva, or the principle of Lord Siva, is like alamp covered with carbon because of his being in charge of the mode ofignorance- The illumination from such a lamp is very minute-Thereforethe power of Lord Siva cannot compare to that of the Visnu principle."
                                   TEXT 90                    taiche saba avatarera krsna se karana
                    ara eka sioka suna, kuvyakhya-khandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna, in the same way, is the cause of all causes and all
incarnations. Please hear another verse to defeat allmisinterpretations.
                                  TEXT 91-92
                            atra sargo visargas ca
                            sthanam posanam tayah                             man vantaresanukatha                            nirodho muktir asrayah                          dasamasya visuddhy-artham
                             navanam iha laksanam                            varnayanti mahatmanah                            srutenarthena canjasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "Here [in Srimad-Bhagavatam] ten subjects are described: (1) the
creation of the ingredients of the cosmos, (2) the creations of Brahma,(3) the maintenance of the creation, (4) special favor given to thefaithful, (5) impetuses for activity, (6) prescribed duties for law-abiding men, (7) a description of the incarnations of the Lord, (8) thewinding up of the creation, (9) liberation from gross and subtlematerial existence, and (10) the ultimate shelter, the SupremePersonality of Godhead. The tenth item is the shelter of all the others.To distinguish this ultimate shelter from the other nine subjects, themahajanas have described these nine, directly or indirectly, throughprayers or direct explanations."
                                   PURPORT     These verses from Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.10.1-2) list the ten subject
matters dealt with in the text of the Bhagavatam. Of these, the tenth isthe substance, and the other nine are categories derived from thesubstance- These ten subjects are listed as follows-     (1) Sarga--the first creation by Visnu, the bringing forth of thefive gross material elements, the five objects of sense perception,theten senses, the mind, intelligence, false ego and the total materialenergy or universal form-     (2) Visarga--the secondary creation, or the work of Brahma inproducing the moving and unmoving bodies in the universe (brahmanda)-     (3) Sthana--the maintenance of the universe by the Personality ofGodhead, Visnu- Visnu's function is more important and His glory greaterthan Brahma's and Lord Siva's, for although Brahma is the creator andLord Siva the destroyer, Visnu is the maintainer-     (4) posana--special care and protection for devotees by the Lord-As a king maintains his kingdom and subjects but nevertheless givesspecial attention to the members of his family, so the Personality ofGodhead gives special care to His devotees who are souls completelysurrendered to Him-     (5) Uti--the urge for creation or initiative power that is thecause of all inventions, according to the necessities of time, space andobjects     (6) Manvantara--the regulative principles for living beings whodesire to achieve perfection in human life- The rules of Manu, asdescribed in the Manu-samhita, guide the way to such perfection-     (7) Isanukatha.- scriptural information regarding the Personalityof Godhead, His incarnations on earth and the activities of Hisdevotees. Scriptures dealing with these subjects are essential forprogressive human life.     (8) Nirodha: the winding up of all energies employed in creation.Such potencies are emanations from the Personality of Godhead whoeternally lies in the Karana Ocean- The cosmic creations, manifestedwith His breath, are again dissolved in due course-     (9) Mukti: liberation of the conditioned souls encaged by the gross
and subtle coverings of body and mind- When freed from all materialaffection, the soul, giving up the gross and subtle material bodies, canattain the spiritual sky in his original spiritual body and engage intranscendental loving service to the Lord in Vaikunthaloka or Krsnaloka-When the soul is situated in his original constitutional position ofexistence, he is said to be liberated. It is possible to engage intranscendental loving service to the Lord and becomejivan-mukta,aliberated soul, even while in the material body-     (10) Asraya: the Transcendence, the summum bonum, from whomeverything emanates, upon whom everything rests and in whom everythingme rges after annihilation- He is the source and support of all- Theasraya is also called the Su pre me B ra h m an, as i n th e Vedanta-sutra (athato brahma jijnasa, janmady asya yatah). Srimad-Bhagavatamespecial ly d escri bes th is S u p re me B rah m an as the asraya- SriKrsna is this asraya, and therefore the greatest necessity of life is tostudy the science of Krsna-     Srimad-Bhagavatam accepts Sri Krsna as the shelter of allmanifestations because Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,is the ultimate source of everything, the supreme goal of all.     Two different principles are to be considered herein--namely,asraya, the object providing shelter, and asrita, the dependentsrequiring shelter- The \srita exist under the original principle, theasraya. The first nine categories, described in the first nine cantos ofSrimad-Bhagavatam, from creation to liberation, including the purusa-avataras, the incarnations, the marginal energy or living entities, andthe external energy or material world, are all asrita. The p raye rs ofSrimad-Bhagavatam, however, aim for the asraya-tattva, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. The great souls expert in describingSrimad-Bhagavatam have very diligently delineated the other ninecategories, sometimes by direct narrations and sometimes by indirectnarrations such as stories- The real purpose of doing this is to knowperfectly the Absolute Transcendence, Sri Krsna, for the entirecreation, both material and spiritual, rests on the body of Sri Krsna-
                                   TEXT 93                      asraya janite kahi e nava padartha
                     e navera utpatti-hetu sei asrayartha
                                 TRANSLATION     To know distinctly the ultimate shelter of everything that be, I
have described the other nine categories. The cause for the appearanceof these nine is rightly called their shelter.
                                   TEXT 94
                   krsna eka sarvasraya, krsna sarva-dhama
                     krsnera sarire sarva-visvera visrama
                                 TRANSLATION     The Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna is the shelter and abode of
everything. All the universes rest in His body.
                                   TEXT 95
                            dasame dasamamlaksyam
                             asritasraya-vigraham                          sri-krsnakhyam param dhama                            jagad-dhama namami tat
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam reveals the tenth object, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the shelter of all surrenderedsouls. He is known as Sri Krsna, and He is the ultimate source of allthe universes. Let me offer my obeisances unto Him."
                                   PURPORT     This quotation comes from Sridhara Svami's commentary on the first
verse of the Te nth Canto, Chapter One, of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
                                   TEXT 96                    krsnera s varupa, ara saktitraya-jnana
                    yanra haya, tanra nahi krsnete ajnana
                                 TRANSLATION     One who knows the real feature of Sri Krsna and His three different
energies cannot remain ignorant about Him.
                                   PURPORT     Srila J iva Gosvami states in his Bhagavat-sandarbha ( 1 6) that by
His potencies, which act in natural sequences beyond the scope of thespeculative human mind, the Supreme Transcendence, the summum bonum,eternally and simultaneously exists in four transcendental features: Hispersonality, His impersonal effulgence, His potential parts and parcels(the living beings), and the principal cause of all causes. The SupremeWhole is compared to the sun, which also exists in four features, namelythe personality of the sun-god, the glare of his glowing sphere, the sunrays inside the sun planet, and the sun's reflections in many otherobjectsThe ambition to corroborate the existence of the transcendentalAbsolute Truth by limited conjectural endeavors cannot be fulfilled,because He is beyond the scope of our limited speculative minds. In anhonest search for truth, we must admit that His powers are inconceivableto our tiny brains. The exploration ofspace has demanded the work of the greatest scientists of the world, yetthere are countless problems regarding even fundamental knowledge of thematerial creation that bewilder scientists who confront them. Suchmaterial knowledge is far removed from the spiritual nature, andtherefore the acts and arrangements of the Absolute Truth are, beyond
all doubts, inconceivable.     The primary potencies of the Absolute Truth are mentioned to bethree: internal, external and marginal. By the acts of His internalpotency, the Personality of Godhead in His original form exhibits thespiritual cosmic manifestations known as the eternal Vaikunthalokas,which exist eternally, even after the destruction of the material cosmicmanifestation. By His marginal potency the Lord expands Himself asliving beings who are part of Him, just as the sun distributes its raysin all directions. By His external potency the Lord manifests thematerial creation, just as the sun with its rays creates fog. Thematerial creation is but a perverse reflection of the eternal Vaikunthanature.     These three energies of the Absolute Truth are also described inthe Visnu Purana, where it is said that the living being is equal inquality to the internal potency, whereas the external potency isindirectly controlled by the chief cause of all causes- Maya, theillusory energy, misleads a living being as fog misleads a pedestrian byblocking off the light of the sun. Although the potency of maya isinferior in quaiity to the marginal potency, which consists of theliving beings, who are part and parcel of the Lord, it nevertheless hasthe power to control the living beings, just as fog can block theactions of a certain portion of the sun's rays although it cannot coverthe sun. The living beings covered by the illusory energy evolve indifferent species of life, with bodies ranging from that of aninsignificant ant to that of Brahma, the constructor of the cosmos- Thepradhana, the chief cause of all causes in the impersonal vision, isnone other than the Supreme Lord, whom one can see face to face in theinternal potency. He takes the material all-pervasive form by Hisinconceivable power. Although all three potencies--namely, internal,external and marginal--are essentially one in the ultimate issue, theyare different in action, like electric energy, which can produce bothcold and heat under different conditions. The external and marginalpotencies are so called under various conditions, but in the originalinternal potencies there are no such conditions, nor is it possible forthe conditions of the external potency to exist in the marginal, or viceversa- One who is able to understand the intricacies of all theseenergies of the Supreme Lord can no longer remain an empiricimpersonalist under the influence of a poor fund of knowledge.
                                   TEXT 97                   krsnera s varupera haya sad-vidha vilasa
                  prabhava-vaibha va-rupe dvl-vidha prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna enjoys Himself in six primary
expansions. His two manifestations are prabhava and vaibhava.
                                   PURPORT     Now the author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta turns to a description of
the Personality of Godhead Krsna in His innumerable expansions- The Lordprimarily expands Himself in two categories, namely prabhava and
vaibhava. The prabhava forms are fully potent like Sri Krsna, and thevaibhava forms are partially potentThe prabhava forms are manifested inrelation with potencies, but the vaibhava forms are manifested inrelation with excellences. The potent prabhava manifestations are alsoof two varieties: temporary and eternal- The Mohini, Hamsa and Suklaforms are manifested only temporarily, in terms of a particular age-Among the other pr\bhavas, who are not very famous according to thematerial estimation, are Dhanvantari, Rsabha, Vyasa, Dattatreya andKapila- Among the vaibhava-prak\sa forms are Kurma, Matsya, Nara-Narayana, Varaha, Hayagriva, Prsnigarbha, Baladeva, Yajna, Vibhu,Satyasena, Hari, Vaikuntha, Ajita, Vamana, Sarvabhauma, Rsabha,Visvaksena, Dharmasetu, Sudhama, Yogesvara and Brhadbhanu-
                                   TEXT 98                     amsa-saktyavesa-rupe dvi-vidhavatara
                    balya pauganda dharma dui ta' prakara
                                 TRANSLATION     His incarnations are of two kinds, namely partial and empowered. He
appears in two ages--childhood and boyhood.
                                   PURPORT     The villasa forms are six in number- Incarnations are of two
varieties, namely saktyavesa (e m powe red) an d amsavesa ( partial)-These i ncar natio n s also com e within the category of prabhava andvaibhava manifestations- Childhood and boyhood are two special featuresof the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, but His permanent feature isHis eternal form as an adolescent youth. The original Personality ofGodhead Sri Krsna is always worshiped in this eternal adolescent form.
                                   TEXT 99                     kisora-svarupa krsna svayam avatari
                    krida kare ei chaya-rupe visva bhari'
                                 TRANSLATION     The Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, who is eternally an
adolescent, is the primeval Lord, the source of all incarnations. Heexpands Himself in these six categories of forms to establish Hissupremacy throughout the universe.
                                   TEXT 100
                      ei chaya-rupe haya ananta vibheda
                    ananta-rupe eka-rupa, nahi kichu bheda
                                 TRANSLATION     In these six kinds of forms there are innumerable varieties.
Although they are many, they are all one; there is no difference betweenthem.
                                   PURPORT     The Personality of Godhead manifests Himself in six different
features: (1) pr\bhava, (2) vaibhava, (3) em powered incarnations, (4)partial i ncarn ations, (5) childhood and (6) boyhood. The Personalityof Godhead Sri Krsna, whose permanent feature is adolescence, enjoys Histranscendental proclivities by performing pastimes in these six forms.In these six features there are unlimited divisions of the Personalityof Godhead's forms. The jivas, or living beings, are differentiatedparts and parcels of the Lord. They are all diversities of the onewithout a second, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 101                  cic-chak ti, svarupa-sakti, antaranga nama
                   tahara vaibhava ananta vaikunthaoi dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     The cit-sakti, which is also called svarupa-sakti or antaranga-
sakti, displays many varied manifestations. It sustains the kingdom ofGod and its paraphernalia.
                                   TEXT 102
                     maya-sakti, bahiranga, jagat-karana
                   tahara vaibhava ananta brahmandera gana
                                 TRANSLATION     The external energy, called maya-sakti, is the cause of innumerable
universes with varied material potencies.
                                   TEXT 103
                   jiva-sakti tatasthakhya, nahi yara anta
                    mukhya tina sakti, tara vibheda ananta
                                 TRANSLATION     The marginal potency, which is between these two, consists of the
numberless living beings. These are the three principal energies, whichhave unlimited categories and subdivisions.
                                   PURPORT     The internal potency of the Lord, which is called cit-sakti or
antaranga-sakti, exhibits variegatedness in the transcendental Vaikunthacosmos. Besides ourselves, there are unlimited numbers of liberated
living beings who associate with the Personality of Godhead in Hisinnumerable features. The material cosmos displays the external energy,in which the conditioned living beings are provided all liberty to goback to the Personality of Godhead after leaving the materialtabernacle. The Svetasvatara Upanisad (6.8) i n forms us:     na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate     na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate     parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate     svabhavikijnana-bala-kriya ca"The Supreme Lord is one without a second. He has nothing to dopersonally, nor does He have material senses. No one is equal to Him norgreater than Him. He has unlimited, variegated potencies of differentnames, which exist within Him as autonomous attributes and provide Himfull knowledge, power and pastimes."
                                   TEXT 104                     e-mata svarupa-gana, ara tina sakti
                  sabhara asraya krsna, krsne sabhara sthiti
                                 TRANSLATION     These are the principal manifestations and expansions of the
Personality of Godhead and His th ree energies. They are all emanatio nsfrom Sri Krsna, the Transcendence. They have their existence in Him.
                                   TEXT 105
                    yadyapi brahmanda-ganera purusa asraya
                     sei purusadi sabhara krsna mulasraya
                                 TRANSLATION     Although the three purusas are the shelter of all the universes,
Lord Krsna is the original source of the purusas.
                                   TEXT 106
                   s vayam bhagavan krsna, krsna sarvasraya
                    parama isvara krsna sarva-sastre kaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna is the original primeval
Lord, the source of all other expansions. All the revealed scripturesaccept Sri Krsna as the Supreme Lord.
                                   TEXT 107
                            isvarah paramah krsnah                            sac-cid anda-vigrahah
                            anadir adir go vindah                             sarva-karana-karanam
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has
an eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has noother origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes."
                                   PURPORT     This is the first verse of the Fifth Chapter of Brahma-samhita.                                   TEXT 108                    e saba siddhanta tumi jana bhala-mate
                      tabu purva-paksa kara ama calaite
                                 TRANSLATION     You know all the conclusions of the scriptures very well. You
create these logical arguments just to agitate me.
                                   PURPORT     A learned man who has thoroughly studied the scriptures cannot
hesitate to accept Sri Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ifsuch a man argues about this matter, certainly he must be doing so toagitate the minds of his opponents.
                                   TEXT 109                     sei krsna a vatari vrajendra-kumara
                      apane caitanya-rupe kaila avatara
                                 TRANSLATION     That same Lord Krsna, the fountainhead of all incarnations, is
known as the son of the King of Vraja. He has descended personally asLord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 110
                   atae va caitanya gosani paratattva-sima
                   tanre ksiroda-sayi kahi, ki tanra mahima
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore Lord Caitanya is the Supreme Absolute Truth. To call Him
Ksirodakasayi Visnu does not add to His glory.                                   TEXT 111
                    sei ta' bhaktera vakya nahe vyabhicri
                     sakala sambhave tante, yate avatari
                                 TRANSLATION     But such words from the lips of a sincere devotee cannot be false.
All possibilities abide in Him, for He is the primeval Lord.
                                   TEXT 112
                     avatarira dehe saba avatarera sthiti
                    keho kona-mate kahe, yemana yara mati
                                 TRANSLATION     All other incarnations are potentially situated in the original
body of the primeval Lord. Thus according to one's opinion, one mayaddress Him as any one of the incarnations.
                                   PURPORT     It is not contradictory for a devotee to call the Supreme Lord by
any one of the various names of His plenary expansions because theoriginal Personality of Godhead includes all such categories. Since theplenary expansions exist within the original person, one may call Him byany of these names. I n the Sri Caitanya-bhagavata (Madhya 6.95) LordCaitanya says, "I was lying asleep in the ocean of milk, but I wasawakened by the call of Nada, Sri Advaita Prabhu." Here the Lord refersto His form as Ksirodakasayi Visnu.
                                   TEXT 113                      krsnake kahaye keha--nara-nrayana
                      keho kahe, krsna haya sakst vamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Some say that Sri Krsna is directly Nara-Narayana. Others say that
He is directly Vamana.
                                   TEXT 114
                    keho kahe, krsna ksiroda-sayi a vatara
                     asambhava nahe, satya vacana sabara
                                 TRANSLATION     Some say that Krsna is the incarnation of Ksirodakasayi Visnu. None
of these statements is impossible; each is as correct as the others.                                   PURPORT
     The Laghu-bhagavatamrta states:
     atae va puranadau kecin nara-sakhatmatam     mahendranujatam kecit kecit ksirabdhi-sayitam     sahasra-sirsatam kecit kecid vaikuritha-nathatam     bruyuh krsnasya munayas tat-tad-vrtty-anugaminah     (Laghu-bhagavatamrta 5.383)"According to the intimate relationships between Sri Krsna, the primevalLord, and His devotees, the puranas describe Him by various names.Sometimes He is called Narayana; sometimes Upendra (Vamana), the youngerbrother of I ndra, King of heaven; and sometimes Ksirodakasayi Visnu.Sometimes He is called the thousandhooded Sesa Naga and sometimes theLord of Vaikuntha."
                                   TEXT 115                     keho kahe, para-vyome narayana hari
                     sakala sambha ve krsne, yate avatari
                                 TRANSLATION     Some call Him Hari, or the Narayana of the transcendental world.
Everything is possible in Krsna, for He is the primeval Lord.
                                   TEXT 116
                    saba srota-ganera kari carana vandana
                    e saba siddhanta suna, kari' eka mana
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my obeisances unto the feet of all who hear or read this
discourse. Kindly hear with attention the conclusion of all thesestatements.
                                   PURPORT     Prostrating himself at the feet of his readers, the author of Sri
Caitanya-caritamrta entreats them in all humility to hear with raptattention these conclusive arguments regarding the Absolute Truth. Oneshould not fail to hear such arguments because only by such knowledgecan one perfectly know Krsna.
                                   TEXT 117                     siddhanta baliya citte na kara alasa
                     iha ha-ite krsne lage sudrdha manasa
                                 TRANSLATION     A sincere student should not neglect the discussion of such
conclusions, considering them controversial, for such discussionsstrengthen the mind. Thus one's mind becomes attached to Sri Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     There are many students who, in spite of reading Bhagavad-gita,
misunderstand Krsna because of imperfect knowledge and conclude Him tobe an ordinary historical personality. This one must not do. One shouldbe particularly careful to understand the truth about Krsna. If becauseof laziness one does not come to know Krsna conclusively, one will bemisguided about the cult of devotion, like those who declare themselvesadvanced devotees and imitate the transcendental symptoms sometimesobserved in liberated souls. Although the use of thoughts and argumentsis a most suitable process for inducing an uninitiated person to becomea devotee, neophytes in devotional service must always alertlyunderstand Krsna through the vision of the revealed scriptures, the bonafide devotees and the spiritual master. Unless one hears about Sri Krsnafrom such authorities, one cannot make advancement in devotion to SriKrsna. The revealed scriptures mention nine means of attainingdevotional service, of which the first and foremost is hearing fromauthority. The seed of devotion cannot sprout u nless watered by theprocess of hearing and chanting. One should submissively receive thetranscendental messages from spiritually advanced sources and chant thevery same messages for one's own benefit as well as the benefit of one'saudience.     When Brahma described the situation of pure devotees freed from theculture of empiric philosophy and fruitive actions, he recommended theprocess of hearing from persons who are on the path of devotion.Following in the footsteps of such liberated souls, who are able tovibrate real transcendental sound, can lead one to the highest stage ofdevotion, and thus one can become a maha-bhagavata. From the teachingsof Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to Sanatana Gosvami we learn:     sastra-yuktye sunipuna, drdha-sraddha yanra     `uttama-adhikari' sei taraye samsara     (Cc. Madhya 22.65) "A person who is expert in understanding theconclusion of the revealed scriptures and who fully surrenders to thecause of the Lord is actually able to deliver others from the clutchesof material existence." Srila Rupa Gosvami, in his Upadesamrta, advisesthat to make rapid advancement in the cult of devotional service oneshould be very much active and should persevere in executing the dutiesspecified in therevealed scriptures and confirmed by the spiritual master. Accepting thepath of liberated souls and the association of pure devotees enrichessuch activities.     Imitation devotees, who wish to advertise themselves as elevatedVaisnavas and who therefore imitate the previous acaryas but do notfollow them in principle, are condemned in the words of Srimad-Bhagavatam as stone-hearted. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura hascommented on their stone-hearted condition as follows: bahir asru-pulakayoh sator api yad dhrdayam na vikriyeta tad asma-saram itikanisthdhikarlnam e va asru-pulakadi-mattve 'pi asma-sara-hrdayatayanindaisa. "Those who shed tears by practice but whose hearts have notchanged are to be known as stone-hearted devotees of the lowest grade.Their imitation crying, induced by artificial practice, is always
condemned." The desired change of heart referred to above is visible inreluctance to do anything not congenial to the devotional way. To createsuch a change of heart, conclusive discussion about Sri Krsna and Hispotencies is absolutely necessary. False devotees may think that simplyshedding tears will lead one to the transcendental plane, even if onehas not had a factual change in heart, butsuch a practice is useless ifthere is no transcendental realization. False devotees, lacking theconclusion of transcendental knowledge, think that artificially sheddingtears will deliver them. Similarly, other false devotees thinkthatstudying books of the previous acaryas is unadvisable, like studyingdry empiric philosophies. But Srila Jiva Gosvami, following the previousacaryas, has inculcated the conclusions of the scriptures in the sixtheses called the Sat-sandarbhas. False devotees who have very littleknowledge of such conclusions fail to achieve pure devotion for want ofzeal in accepting the favorable directions for devotional service givenby self-realized devotees. Such false devotees are like impersonalists,who also consider devotional service no better than ordinary fruitiveactions.
                                   TEXT 118                    caitanya-mahima jani e saba siddhante
                   citta drdha hana lage mahima-jnana haite
                                 TRANSLATION     By such conclusive studies I know the glories of Lord Caitanya.
Only by knowing these glories can one become strong and fixed inattachment to Him.
                                   PURPORT     One can know the glories of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu only by
reaching, in knowledge, a conclusive decision about Sri Krsna,strengthened by bona fide study of the conclusions of the acaryas.
                                   TEXT 119                    caitanya-prabhura mahima kahibara tare
                      krsnera mahima kahi kariya vistare
                                 TRANSLATION     Just to enunciate the glories of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, I have
tried to describe the glories of Sri Krsna in detail.
                                   TEXT 120
                     caitanya-gosanira ei tattva-nirupana
                   svayam-bhaga van krsna vrajendra-nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     The conclusion is that Lord Caitanya is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, the son of the King of Vraja.
                                   TEXT 121
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Ad i-Iila, Second Chapter, describing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as theSupreme Personality of Godhead.
                                Chapter Three
     In this chapter the author has fuily discussed the reason for the
descent of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Supreme Personality of Godhead,Lord Sri Krsna, after displaying His pastimes as Lord Krsna, thought itwise to make His advent in the form of a devotee to explain personallythe transcendental mellow reciprocations of service and love betweenHimself and His servants, friends, parents and fianc\ees. According tothe Vedic literature, the foremost occupational duty for humanity inthis age of Kali is nama-sankirtana, or congregational chanting of theholy name of the Lord. The incarnation for this age especially preachesthis process, but only Krsna Himself can explain the confidential lovingservice performed in the four principal varieties of loving affairsbetween the Supreme Lord and His devotees. Lord Krsna thereforepersonally appeared, with His plenary portions, as Lord Caitanya. Asstated in this chapter, only for that purpose did Lord Krsna appearpersonally in Navadvipa in the form of Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu.     Krsnadasa Kaviraja has herein presented much authentic evidencefrom Srimad- Bhagavatam and other scriptures to substantiate theidentity of Lord Caitanya with Sri Krsna Himself. He has describedbodily symptoms in Lord Caitanya that are visible only in the person ofthe Supreme Lord, and he has proved that Lord Caitanya appeared with Hispersonal associates like Sri Nityananda, Advaita, Gadadhara, Srivasa andother devotees to preach the special significance of chanting HareKrsna. The appearance of Lord Caitanya is both significant andconfidential. He can be appreciated only by pure devotees and onlythrough the process of devotional service. The Lord tried to conceal Hisidentity as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by representing Himselfas a devotee, but His pure devotees can recognize Him by His specialfeatures. The Vedas and puranas foretell the appearance of LordCaitanya, but still He is sometimes called, significantly, the concealeddescent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.     Advaita Acarya was a contemporary of Lord Caitanya's father. He
felt sorry for the condition of the world because even after LordKrsna's appearance, no one had interest in devotional service to Krsna.This forgetfulness was so overwhelming that Advaita Prabhu was convincedthat no one but Lord Krsna Himself could enlighten people aboutdevotional service to the Supreme Lord. Therefore Advaita requested LordKrsna to appear as Lord Caitanya. Offering tulasi leaves and Gangeswater, He cried for the Lord's appearance. The Lord, being satisfied byHis pure devotees, descends to satisfy them. As such, being pleased byAdvaita Acarya, Lord Caitanya appeared.
                                    TEXT 1              sri-caitanya-prabhum vande yat-padasraya-viryatah
              sangrhnaty akara-vratad ajnah siddhanta-san-manin
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. By the
potency of the shelter of His lotus feet, even a fool can collect thevaluable jewels of conclusive truth from the mines of the revealedscriptures.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Caitanya. All glories to Lord Nityananda. All
glories to Advaitacandra. And all glories to all the devotees of LordCaitanya.
                                    TEXT 3
                     trtiya slokera artha kaila vivarana
                   caturtha slokera artha suna bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have given the purport of the third verse. Now, O devotees,
please listen to the meaning of the fourth with full attention.
                                    TEXT 4
                 anarpita-carim cirat karunayavatirnah kalau
              samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasam sva-bhakti-sriyam                harih purata-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandioitah                sada hrdaya-kandare sphuratu vah saci-nandanah                                 TRANSLATION
     "May that Lord, who is known as the son of Srimati Sacidevi, be
transcendentally situated in the innermost core of your heart.Resplendent with the radiance of molten gold, He has descended in theage of Kali by His causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation hasever offered before: the most elevated mellow of devotional service, themellow of conjugal love."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from the Vidagdha-madhava, a drama compiled and
edited by Srila Rupa Gosvami.
                                    TEXT 5                    purna bhagavan krsna vrajendra-kumara
                       goloke vrajera saha nitya vihara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna, the son of the King of Vraja, is the Supreme Lord. He
eternally enjoys transcendental pastimes in His eternal abode, Goloka,which includes Vrajadhama.
                                   PURPORT     In the previous chapter it has been established that Krsna, the son
of Vrajendra (the King of Vraja), is the Supreme Personality of Godheadwith six opulences. He eternally enjoystranscendentally variegatedopulences on His planet, which is known as Goloka. The eternal pastimesof the Lord in the spiritual planet Krsnaloka are called aprakata, orunmanifested pastimes, because they are beyond the purview of theconditioned souls. Lord Krsna is always present everywhere, but when Heis not present before our eyes, He is said to be aprakata, orunmanifested.
                                    TEXT 6                       brahmara eka dine tinho eka-bara
                     avatirna hana karena prakata vihara
                                 TRANSLATION     Once in a day of Brahma, He descends to this world to manifest
Histranscendental pasti mes.
                                    TEXT 7
                 satya, treta, dvapara, kali, cari-yuga jani
                      sei cari-yuge divya eka-yuga mani
                                 TRANSLATION     We know that there are four ages [ yugas], namely Satya, Treta,
Dvapara and Kali. These four together comprise one divya-yuga.
                                    TEXT 8
                     ekattara catur-yuge eka man vantara
                 caudda man vantara brahmara di vasa bhitara
                                 TRANSLATION     Seventy-one divya-yugas constitute one manvantara. There are
fourteen manvantaras in one day of Brahma.
                                   PURPORT     A manvantara is the period controlled by one Manu. The reign of
fourteen Manus equals the length of one day (twelve hours) in the lifeof Brahma, and the night of Brahma is of the same duration. Thesecalculations are given in the authentic astronomy book known as theSurya-siddhanta. This book was compiled by the great professor ofastronomy and mathematics Bimal Prasad Datta, later known asBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami, who was our merciful spiritualmaster. He was honored with the title Siddhanta Sarasvati for writingthe Surya-siddhanta, and the title Gosvami Maharaja was added when heaccepted sannyasa, the renounced order of life.
                                    TEXT 9                  `vaivasvata'-nama ei sap tama man van tara
                       sataisa catur-yuga tahara antara
                                 TRANSLATION     The present Manu, who is the seventh, is called Vaivasvata [the son
of Vivasvan]. Twenty-seven divya-yugas [27 x 4,320,000 solar years] ofhis age have now passed.
                                   PURPORT     The names of the fourteen Manus are as follows: (1) Svayambhuva,
(2) Svarocisa, (3) Uttama, (4) Tamasa, (5) Raivata, (6) Caksusa, (7)Vaivasvata, (8) Savarni, (9) Daksa-savarni, (10) Brahma-savarni, (1 1)Dharma-savarni, ( 1 2) Rudraputra ( Rud rasavarni), (1 3) Raucya, orDeva-savarni, (14) and Bhautyaka, or Indra-savarni.
                                   TEXT 10                     astavimsa catur-yuge dvaparera sese
                     vrajera sahite haya krsnera prakase
                                 TRANSLATION     At the end of the Dvapara-yuga of the twenty-eighth divya-yuga,
Lord Krsna appears on earth with the full paraphernalia of His eternalVrajadhama.
                                   PURPORT     Now is the term of Vaivasvata Manu, during which Lord Caitanya
appears. First Lord Krsna appears at the close of the Dvapara-yuga ofthe twenty-eighth divya-yuga,and then Lord Caita nya appears in the Kali-yuga of the same divya-yuga.Lord Krsna and Lord Caitanya appear once in each day of Brahma, or oncein fourteen manvantaras, each of seventy-one divya-yugas in duration.     From the beginning of Brahma's day of 4,320,000,000 years, sixManus appear and disappear before Lord Krsna appears. Thus 1,975,320,000years of the day of Brahma elapse before the appearance of Lord Krsna.This is an astronomical calculation according to solar years.
                                   TEXT 11                 dasya, sakhya, vatsalya, srngara--cari rasa
                   cari bhavera bhakta yata krsna tara vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Servitude [dasya], friendship [sakhya], parental affection
[vatsalya] and conjugal love [srngara] are the four transcendentalmellows [ rasas]. By the devotees who cherish these four mellows, LordKrsna is subdued.
                                   PURPORT     Dasya, sakhya, vatsalya and srngara are the transcendental modes of
loving service to the Lord. Santa-rasa, or the neutral stage, is notmentioned in this verse because although in santa-rasa one considers theAbsolute Truth the sublime great, one does not go beyond thatconception. Santa-rasa is a very grand idea for materialisticphilosophers, but such idealistic appreciation is only the beginning; itis the lowest among the relationships in the spiritual world. Santa-rasais not given much importance because as soon as there is a slightunderstanding between the knower and the known, active lovingtranscendental reciprocations and exchanges begin. Dasya-rasa is thebasic relationship between Krsna and His devotees; therefore this verseconsiders dasya the first stage of transcendental devotional service.
                                   TEXT 12                     dasa-sakha-pita-mata-kanta-gana lana
                    vraje krida kare krsna premavista hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Absorbed in such transcendental love, Lord Sri Krsna enjoys in
Vraja with His devoted servants, friends, parents and conjugal lovers.                                   PURPORT
     The descent of Sri Krsna, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, is
very purposeful. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that one who knows thetruth about Sri Krsna's descent and His various activities is at onceliberated and does not have to fall again to this existence of birth anddeath after he leaves his present material body. In other words, one whofactually understands Krsna makes his life perfect. Imperfect life isrealized in material existence, in five different relationships we sharewith everyone within the material world: neutrality, servitorship,friendship, filial love, and amorous love between husband and wife, orlover and beloved. These five enjoyable relationships within thematerial world are perverted reflections of relationships with theAbsolute Personality of Godhead in the transcendental nature. ThatAbsolute Personality, Sri Krsna, descends to revive the five eternallyexisting relationships. Thus He manifests His transcendental pastimes inVraja so that people may be attracted into that sphere of activities andleave aside their imitation relationships with the mundane. Then, afterfully exhibiting all such activities, the Lord disappears.
                                   TEXT 13                    yathesta vihari' krsna kare antardhana
                      antardhana kari' mane kare anumana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna enjoys His transcendental pastimes as long as He wishes,
and then He disappears. After disappearing, however, He thinks thus:
                                   TEXT 14
                    cira-kala nahi kari prema-bhakti dana
                     bhakti vina jagatera nahi avasthana
                                 TRANSLATION     "For a long time I have not bestowed unalloyed loving service to Me
upon the inhabitants of the world. Without such loving attachment, theexistence of the material world is useless.
                                   PURPORT     The Lord seldom awards pure transcendental love, but without such
pure love of God, freed from fruitive activities and empiricspeculation, one cannot attain perfection in life.
                                   TEXT 15                     sakala jagate more kare vidhi-bhakti
                  vidhi-bhaktye vraja-bhava paite nahi sakti
                                 TRANSLATION     "Everywhere in the world people worship Me according to scriptural
injunctions. But simply by following such regulative principles onecannot attain the loving sentiments of the devotees in Vrajabhumi.
                                   TEXT 16
                     aisvarya jnanete saba jagat misrlta
                    aisvarya-sithila-preme nahi mora prita
                                 TRANSLATION     "Knowing My opulences, the whole world looks upon Me with awe and
veneration. But devotion made feeble by such reverence does not attractMe.
                                   PURPORT     After His appearance, Lord Krsna thought that He had not
distributed the transcen de ntal pe rso nal d eal i ngs with H is devotees i n dasya, sakhya, vatsalya an d madhurya. One may understandthe science of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from the Vedicliterature and thus become a devotee of the Lord and worship Him withinthe regulative principles described in the scriptures, but one will notknow in this way how Krsna is served by the residents of Vrajabhumi. Onecannot understand the dealings of the Lord in Vrndavana simply byexecuting the ritualistic regulative principles mentioned in thescriptures. By following scriptural injunctions one may enhance hisappreciation for the glories of the Lord, but there is no chance for oneto enter personal dealings with Him. Giving too much attention tounderstanding the exalted glories of the Lord reduces the chance ofone's entering personal loving affairs with the Lord. To teach theprinciples of such loving dealings, the Lord decided to appear as LordCaitanya.
                                   TEXT 17                     aisvarya jnane vidhi-bhaiana kariya
                   vaikunthake yaya catur-vidha mukti pana
                                 TRANSLATION     "By performing such regulated devotional service in awe and
veneration, one may go to Vaikuntha and attain the four kinds ofliberation.
                                   TEXT 18
                    sarsti, sarupya, ara samipya, salokya
                   sayujya na laya bhakta yate brahma-aikya
                                 TRANSLATION     "These liberations are sarsti [achieving opulences equal to those
of the Lord], sarupya [having a form the same as the Lord's], samipya[living as a personal associate of the Lord] and salokya [living on aVaikuntha planet]. Devotees never accept sayujya, however, since that isoneness with Brahman.
                                   PURPORT     Those engaged in devotional service according to the ritualistic
principles mentioned in the scriptures attain these different kinds ofliberation. But although such devotees can attain sarsti, sarupya,samipya and salokya, they are not concerned with these liberations, forsuch devotees are satisfied only in rendering transcendental lovingservice to the Lord. The fifth kind of liberation, sayujya, is neveraccepted even by devotees who perform only ritualistic worship. Toattain sayujya, or merging into the Brahman effulgence of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, is the aspiration of the impersonalists. Adevotee never cares for sayujya liberation.
                                   TEXT 19                   yuga-dharma pra vartaimu nama-sankirtana
                    cari bhava-bhakti oiya nacamu bhu vana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I shall personally inaugurate the religion of the age--nama-
sankirtana, the congregational chanting of the holy name. I shall makethe world dance in ecstasy, realizing the four mellows of lovingdevotional service.
                                   TEXT 20
                      apani karimu bhakta-bhava angikare
                     apani acari' bhakti sikhaimu sabare
                                 TRANSLATION     "I shall accept the role of a devotee, and I shall teach devotional
service by practicing it Myself.
                                   PURPORT     When one associates with a pure devotee, he becomes so elevated
that he does not aspire even for sarsti, sarupya, samipya or salokya,because he feels that such liberation is a kind of sense gratification.Pure devotees do not ask anything from the Lord for their personalbenefit. Even if offered personal benefits, pure devotees do not acceptthem, because their only desire is to satisfy the Supreme Personality ofGodhead by transcendental loving service. No one but the Lord Himselfcan teach this highest form of devotional service. Therefore, when theLord took the place of the incarnation of Kali-yuga to spread theglories of chanting Hare Krsna--the system of worship recommended in
this age--He also distributed the processof devotional service performedon the platform of transcendental spontaneous love. To teach the highestprinciples of spiritual life, the Lord Himself appeared as a devotee inthe form of Lord Caitanya.
                                   TEXT 21                    apane na kaile dharma sikhana na yaya
                    ei ta' siddhanta gita-bhaga vate gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Unless one practices devotional service himself, he cannot teach
it to others. This conclusion is indeed confirmed throughout the Gitaand Bhagavatam.
                                   TEXT 22
                            yada yada hi dharmasya
                           glanir bha vati bharata                           abhyutthanam adharmasya                            tadatmanam srjamy aham
                                 TRANSLATION     "Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O
descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at thattime I descend Myself."
                                   TEXT 23
                             paritranaya sadhunam
                             vinasaya ca duskrtam
                           dharma-samsthapanarthaya
                            sambha vami yuge yuge
                                 TRANSLATION     " `To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well
as to reestablish the principles of religion, I Myself appear,millennium after millennium.'
                                   PURPORTand 25, which follow, are also from Bhagavad-gita (3.24, 21).                                   TEXT 24                              utsideyur ime loka
                           na kuryam karma ced aham                           sankarasya ca karta syam
                            upahanyam imah prajah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `If I did not show the proper principles of religion, all these
worlds would fall into ruin. I would be a cause of unwanted populationand would spoil all these living beings.'
                                   TEXT 25
                           yad yad acarati sresthas
                            tat tad e vetaro janah                            sa yat pramanam kurute                             lokas tad anuvartate
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Whatever actions a great man performs, common people follow. And
whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues.,
                                   TEXT 26
                   yuga-dharma-pra vartana haya amsa haite
                     ama vina anye nare vraja-prema dite
                                 TRANSLATION     "My plenary portions can establish the principles of religion for
each age. No one but Me, however, can bestow the kind of loving serviceperformed by the residents of Vraja.
                                   TEXT 27
                           san tv a vatara bahavah
                      pan kaja-nabhasya sarvato bhadrah                          krsnad anyah ko va latasv                             api premado bhavati
                                 TRANSLATION     " `There may be many all-auspicious incarnations of the Personality
of Godhead, but who other than Lord Sri Krsna can bestow love of Godupon the surrendered souls?,
                                   PURPORT     This quotation from Bilvamangala Thakura is found in the Laghu-
bhagavatamrta (1.5.37).
                                   TEXT 28                     tahate apana bhakta-gana kari' sange
                     prthivite avatari' karimu nana range
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore in the company of My devotees I shall appear on earth
and perform various colorful pastimes."
                                   TEXT 29
                   eta bhavi' kali-kale prathama sandhyaya
                     avatirna haila krsna apani nadiyaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking thus, the Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna Himself,
descended at Nadia early in the age of Kali.
                                   PURPORT     The prathama-sandhya is the beginning of the age. According to
astronomical calculation, the age is divided into twelve parts. Thefirst of these twelve divisions is known as the prathama-sandhya. Theprathama-sandhya and sesa-sandhya, the last division of the precedingage, form the junction of the two ages. According to the Surya-siddhanta, the prathama-sandhya of the Kali-y uga lasts 36,000 solaryears. Lord Caitanya appeared in the prathama-sandhya after 4,586 solaryears of Kaliyuga had passed.
                                   TEXT 30                     caitanya-simhera nava-dvipe avatara
                  simha-griva, simha-virya, simhera hunkara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the lionlike Lord Caitanya has appeared in Navadvipa. He has
the shoulders of a lion, the powers of a lion, and the loud voice of alion.
                                   TEXT 31
                    sei simha vasuk jivera hrdaya-kandare
                     kalmasa-dvirada nase yanhara hunkare
                                 TRANSLATION     May that lion be seated in the core of the heart of every living
being. Thus with His resounding roar may He drive away one's elephantinevices.                                   TEXT 32
                   prathama lilaya tanra `visvambhara' nama
                   bhakti-rase bharila, dharila bhuta-grama
                                 TRANSLATION     In His early pastimes He is known as Visvambhara because He floods
the world with the nectar of devotion and thus saves the living beings.
                                   TEXT 33
                    dubhrn dhatura artha--posana, dharana
                   pusila, dharila prema diya tri-bhu vana
                                 TRANSLATION     The verbal root "dubhrn" [which is the root of the word
"visvambhara"] indicates nourishing and maintaining. He [ Lord Caitanya]nourishes and maintains the three worlds by distributing love of God.
                                   TEXT 34
                 sesa-Iilaya dhare nama `sri-krsna-caitanya'
                   sri-krsna janaye saba visva kaila dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     In His later pastimes He is known as Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya. He
blesses the whole world by teaching about the name and fame of Lord SriKrsna.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya remained a householder only until His twenty-fourth
year had passed.Then He entered the renounced order and remainedmanifest in this material world until His forty-eighth year. Thereforesesa-lila, or the final portion of His activities, lasted twenty-fouryears.     Some so-called Vaisnavas say that the renounced order of life isnot accepted in the Vaisnava sampradaya, or disciplic succession, fromLord Caitanya. This is not a very intelligent proposition. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu took the sannyasa order from Sripada Kesava Bharati, whobelonged to the Sankara sect, which approves of only ten names forsannyasis. Long before the advent of Sripada Sankaracarya, however, thesannyasa order existed i n the Vaisnava li ne of Visnusvami. I n theVisnusvami Vaisnava sampradaya, there are ten different kinds ofsannyasa names and 108 different names for sannyasis who accept the tri-danda, the triple staff of sannyasa. This is approved by the Vedicrules. Therefore Vaisnava sannyasa was existent even before theappearance of Sankaracarya, although those who know nothing aboutVaisnava sannyasa unnecessarily declare that there is no sannyasa in the
Vaisnava sampradaya.     During the time of Lord Caitanya, the influence of Sankaracarya insociety was very strong. People thought that one could accept sannyasaonly in the disciplic succession of Sankaracarya. Lord Caitanya couldhave performed His missionary activities as a householder, but He foundhouseholder life an obstruction to His mission. Therefore He decided toaccept the renounced order, sannyasa. Since His acceptance of sannyasawas also designed to attract public attention, Lord Caitanya, notwishing to disturb the social convention, took the renounced order oflife from a sannyasi in the disciplic succession of Sankaracarya,although sannyasa was also sanctioned in the Vaisnava sampradaya.     In the Sankara-sampradaya there are ten different names awarded tosannyasis: (1) Tirtha, (2) Asrama, (3) Vana, (4) Aranya, (5) Giri, (6)Parvata, (7) Sagara, (8) Sarasvati, (9) Bharati and (10) Puri. Beforeone enters sannyasa, he has one of the various names for a brahmacari,the assistant to a sannyasi. Sannyasis with the titles Tirtha and Asramagenerally stay at Dvaraka, and their brahmacari name is Svarupa. Thoseknown by the names Vana and Aranya stay at Purusottama, or JagannathaPuri, and their brahmacari name is Prakasa. Those with the names Giri,Parvata and Sagara generally stay at Badarikasrama, and their brahmacariname is Ananda. Those with the titles Sarasvati, Bharati and Puriusually live at Srngeri in South India, and their brahmacari name isCaitanya.     Sripada Sankaracarya established four monasteries in India, in thefour directions north, south, east and west, and he entrusted them tofour sannyasis who were his disciples. Now there are hundreds of branchmonasteries under these four principal monasteries,and although there isan official symmetry amongthem,there are many differences in theirdealings. The four different sects of these monasteries are known asAnandavara, Bhogavara, Kitavara and Bhumivara, and in course of timethey have developed different ideas and different siogans.     According to the regulation of the disciplic succession, one whowishes to enter the renounced order in Sankara's sect must first betrained as a brahmacari under a bona fide sannyasi, The branmacari'sname is ascertained according to the group to which the sannyasibelongs. Lord Caitanya accepted sannyasa from Kesava Bharati. When Hefirst approached Kesava Bharati, He was accepted as a brahmacari withthe name Sri Krsna Caitanya Brahmacari. After He took sannyasa, Hepreferred to keep the name Krsna Caitanya.     The great authorities in the disciplic succession had not offeredto explain why Lord Caitanya refused to take the name Bharati after Hetook sannyasa from a Bharati, until Srila Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiGosvami Maharaja volunteered the explanation that because a sannyasi inthe Sankara-sampradaya thinks that he has become the Supreme, LordCaitanya, wanting to avoid such a misconception, kept the name Sri KrsnaCaitanya, placing Himself as an eternal servitor. A brahmacari issupposed to serve the spiritual master; therefore He did not negate thatrelationship of servitude to His spiritual master. Accepting such aposition is favorabie for the relationship between the disciple and thespiritual master.     The authentic biographies also mention that Lord Caitanya acceptedthe danda (rod) and begging pot, symbolic of the sannyasa order, at thetime He took sannyasa.                                   TEXT 35
                    tanra yugavatara jani' garga mahasaya
                    krsnera nama-karane kariyache nirnaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Knowing Him [ Lord Caitanya] to be the incarnation for the Kali-
yuga, Gargamuni, during the naming ceremony of Krsna, predicted Hisappearance.
                                   TEXT 36
                          asan varnas trayo hy asya
                            grhnato'nuyugam tanuh                           suklo raktas tatha pita                            idanim krsnatam gatah
                                 TRANSLATION     "This boy [ Krsna] has three other colors--white, red and yellow--
as He appears in different ages. Now He has appeared in a transcendentalblackish color."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.8.1 3).                                   TEXT 37                   sukla, rakta, pita-varna--ei tina dyuti
                   satya-tre ta-kali-kale dharena sri-pati
                                 TRANSLATION     White, red and yellow--these are the three bodily lusters that the
Lord, the husband of the goddess of fortune, assumes in the ages ofSatya, Treta and Kali respectively.
                                   TEXT 38
                    idanim dvapare tinho haila krsna-varna
                      ei saba sastragama-puranera marma
                                 TRANSLATION     Now, in the Dvapara-yuga, the Lord had descended in a blackish hue.
This is the essence of the statements in the Puranas and other Vedicliteratures with reference to the context.                                   TEXT 39
                           dvapare bhaga van syamah
                             pita-vasa njjayudhah                          sri-vatsadibhir ankais ca                            laksanair upalaksitah
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the Dvapara-yuga the Personality of Godhead appears in a
blackish hue. He is dressed in yellow, He holds His own weapons, and Heis decorated with the     , Kaustubha jewel and marks of Srivatsa. This is how His symptomsare described."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.27), spoken by Saint
Karabhajana, one of the nine royal mystics who explained to King Nimithe different features of the Lord in different ages.
                                   TEXT 40                    kali-yuge yuga-dharma--namera pracara
                    tathi Iagi' pita-varna caitanyavatara
                                 TRANSLATION     The religious practice for the age of Kali is to broadcast the
glories of the holy name. Only for this purpose has the Lord, in ayellow color, descended as Lord Caitanya.
                                   PURPORT     In this age of Kali the practical system of religion for everyone
is the chanting of the name of Godhead. This was introduced in this ageby Lord Caitanya. Bhakti- yoga actually begins with the chanting of theholy name, as confirmed by Madhvacarya in his commentary on the MundakaUpanisad. He quotes this verse fro m the Narayana-samhita:     dvapariyair janair visnuh pancaratrais tu ke valaih     kalau tu nama-matrena p\jyate bhagavan harih"In the Dvapara-yuga people should worship Lord Visnu only by theregulative principles of the Narada-pancaratra and other such authorizedbooks. In the age of Kali, however, people should simply chant the holynames of the Supreme Personality of Godhead." The Hare Krsna mantra isspecifically mentioned in many Upanisads, such as the Kali-santaranaUpanisad, where it is said:     hare krsna hare krsna krsna krsna hare hare     hare rama hare rama rama rama hare hare     iti sodasakam namnam kali-kalmasa-nasanam     natah parataropayah sarva-vedesu drsyate"After searching through all the Vedic literature one cannot find amethod of religion more sublime for this age than the chanting of HareKrsna."                                   TEXT 41
                    tapta-hema-sama-kanti, prakanda sarira
                  nava-megha jjni kantha-dh vani ye gambhira
                                 TRANSLATION     The luster of His expansive body resembles molten gold. The deep
sound of His voice conquers the thundering of newly assembled clouds.
                                   TEXT 42
                      dairghya- vistare yei apanara hata
                    cari hasta haya `maha-purusa' vikhyata
                                 TRANSLATION     One who measures four cubits in height and in breadth by his own
hand is celebrated as a great personality.
                                   TEXT 43
                   `nyagrodha-parimandala' haya tanra nama
                nyagrodha-parimandala-tanu caitanya guna-dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     Such a person is called "nyagrodha-parimandala." Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who personifies all good qualities, has the body of anyagrodha-parimandala.
                                   PURPORT     No one other than the Supreme Lord Himself, who has engaged the
conditioned souls by His own illusory energy, can possess these bodilyfeatures. These features certainly indicate an incarnation of Visnu andno one else.
                                   TEXT 44                       ajanulambita-bhuja kamala-locana
                     tilaphula jini-nasa, sudhamsu-vadana
                                 TRANSLATION     His arms are long enough to reach His knees, His eyes are just like
lotus flowers, His nose is like a sesame flower, and His face is asbeautiful as the moon.
                                   TEXT 45                 san ta, danta, krsna-bhakti-nistha-parayana
                   bhakta-vatsala, susila, sarva-bhute sama
                                 TRANSLATION     He is peaceful, self-controlled and fully devoted to the
transcendental service of Lord Sri Krsna. He is affectionate toward Hisdevotees, He is gentle, and He is equally disposed toward all livingbeings.
                                   TEXT 46
                    candanera angada-bala, candana-bhusana
nrtya-kale pari' karena krsna-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     He is decorated with sandalwood bangles and armlets and anointed
with the pulp of sandalwood. He especially wears these decorations todance in Sri Krsna sankirtana.
                                   TEXT 47
                     ei saba guna lana muni vaisampayana
                     sahasra-name kaila tanra nama-ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     Recording all these qualities of Lord Caitanya, the sage
Vaisampayana included His name in the Visnu-sahasra-nama.
                                   TEXT 48
                      dui lila caitanyera--adi ara sesa
                       dui Iilaya cari cari nama visesa
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Lord Caitanya have two divisions--the early
pastimes [adi-Iila] and later pastimes [sesa-lila]. He has four names ineach of these two Iilas.
                                   TEXT 49
                           su varna- varno hemango
                            varangas candanangadi                          sannyasa-krc chamah santo                            nistha-santi-pardyanah                                 TRANSLATION
     "In His early pastimes He appears as a householder with a golden
complexion. His limbs are beautiful, and His body, smeared with the pulpof sandalwood, seems like molten gold. In His later pastimes He acceptsthe sannyasa order, and He is equipoised and peaceful. He is the highestabode of peace and devotion, for He silences the impersonalistnondevotees."
                                   PURPORT     Th is is a ve rse from the Mahabharata (Dana-dharma, Visnu-sahasra-
nama-stotra). I n his com mentary on the Visnu-sahasra-nama called theNamartha-sudhabhidha, Sril a Baladeva Vid yabhusan a, co m men ti ng upon this verse, asserts that Lord Caitanya is the Supreme personality ofGod head according to the evidence of the Upanisads. He explains thatsuvarna- varnah means a golden complexion. He also quotes the Vedicinjunction yadapasyah pasyate rukma-varnam kartaram isam purusam brahma-yonim. Rukma-varnam. kartaram isam refers to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead as having a complexion the color of molten gold. purusam meansthe Supreme Lord, and brahma-yonim indicatesthat He is also the SupremeBrahman. This evidence, too, proves that Lord Caitanya is the SupremePersonality of Godhead Krsna. Another meaning of the description of theLord as having a golden hue is that Lord Caitanya's personality is asfascinating as gold is attractive. Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana hasexplained that the word varanga means "exquisitely beautiful."     Lord Caitanya accepted sannyasa, leaving aside His householderlife, to preach His mission. He has equanimity in different senses.First, He describes the confidential truth of the Personality ofGodhead, and second, He satisfies everyone by knowledge and attachmentto Krsna. He is peaceful because He renounces all topics not related tothe service of Krsna. Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana has explained that theword nistha indicates His being rigidly fixed in chanting the holy nameof Sri Krsna. Lord Caitanya subdued all disturbing opponents ofdevotional service, especially the monists, who are actually averse tothe personal feature of the Supreme Lord.
                                   TEXT 50                    vyakta kari' bhagavate kahe bara bara
                    kali-yuge dharma--nama-sankirtana sara
                                 TRANSLATION     In Srimad-Bhagavatam it is repeatedly and clearly said that the
essence of religion in the age of Kali is the chanting of the holy nameof Krsna.
                                   TEXT 51
                              iti dvapara urvisa
                           stu vanti jagad-isvaram                            nana-tan tra-vidhanena                             kalav api yatha srnu
                                 TRANSLATION     "O King, in this way people in Dvapara-yuga worshiped the Lord of
the universe. In Kali-yuga they also worship the Supreme Personality ofGodhead by the regulations of the revealed scriptures. Kindly now hearof that from me.
                                   PURPORT     This verse is spoken by Saint Karabhajana in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1
1.5.31).
                                   TEXT 52                           krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam
                           sangopangastra-parsadam                          yajnaih sankirtana-prayair                            yaianti hi sumedhasah
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the age of Kali, intelligent persons perform congregational
chanting to worship the incarnation of Godhead who constantly sings thename of Krsna. Although His complexion is not blackish, He is KrsnaHimself. He is accompanied by His associates, servants, weapons andconfidential companions."
                                   PURPORT     This text is fromSrimad-Bhagavatam (1 1.5.32). Srila Jiva Gosvami
has explained this verse in his commentary on the Bhagavatam known asthe Krama-sandarbha, wherein he says that Lord Krsna also appears with agolden complexion. That golden Lord Krsna is Lord Caitanya, who isworshiped by intelligent men in this age. That is confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam by Gargamuni, who said that although the child Krsna wasblackish, He aiso appears in three other colors--red, white and yellow.He exhibited His white and red complexions in the Satya and Treta agesrespectively. He did not exhibit the remaining color, yellow-gold, untilHe appeared as Lord Caitanya, who is known as Gaurahari.     Srila J iva Gosvami explains that krsna-varnam means Sri KrsnaCaitanya. Krsna-varna and Krsna Caitanya are equivalent. The name Krsnaappears with both Lord Krsna and Lord Caitanya Krsna. Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu is the Supreme Personality of God head, but He always engagesin describing Krsna and thus enjoying transcendental bliss by chantingand remembering His name and form. Lord Krsna Himself appears as LordCaitanya to preach the highest gospel.      Lord Caitanya always chantsthe holy name of Krsna and describes it also, and because He is KrsnaHimself, whoever meets Him will automatically chant the holy name ofKrsna and later describe it to others. He injects one withtranscendental Krsna consciousness, which merges the chanter intranscendental bliss. In all respects, therefore, He appears beforeeveryone as Krsna, either by personality or by sound. Simply by seeingLord Caitanya one at once remembers Lord Krsna. One may therefore accept
Him as visnu-tattva. In other words, Lord Caitanya is Lord KrsnaHimself.     Sangopangastra-parsadam fu rth er i nd i cates that Lord Caitan yais Lord Krsna. His body is aiways decorated with ornaments of sandalwoodand with sandalwood paste. By His superexcellent beauty He subdues allthe people of the age. In other descents the Lord sometimes used weaponsto defeat the demoniac, but in this age the Lord subdues them with Hisall-attractive figure as Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Srila Jiva Gosvamiexplains that His beauty is His astra, or weapon, to subdue the demons.Because He is all-attractive, it is to be understood that all thedemigods lived with Him as His companions. His acts were uncommon andHis associates wonderful. When He propagated the sankirtana movement, Heattracted many great scholars and acaryas, especially in Bengal andOrissa. Lord Caitanya is always accompanied by His best associates likeLord Nityananda, Advaita, Gadadhara and Srivasa.     Srila Jiva Gosvami cites a verse from the Vedic literature whichsays that there is no necessity of performing sacrificial demonstrationsor ceremonial functions. He comments that instead of engaging in suchexternal, pompous exhibitions, all people, regardless of caste, color orcreed, can assemble together and chant Hare Krsna to worship LordCaitanya. Krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam indicates that prominence should begiven to the name of Krsna. Lord Caitanya taught Krsna consciousness andchanted the name of Krsna. Therefore, to worship Lord Caitanya, everyoneshould together chant the maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, KrsnaKrsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Topropagate worship in churches, temples or mosques is not possible,because people have lost interest in that. But anywhere and everywhere,people can chant Hare Krsna. Thus worshiping Lord Caitanya, they canperform the highest activity and fulfill the highest religious purposeof satisfying the Supreme Lord.     Srila Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, a famous disciple of Lord Caitanya,said: "The principle of transcendental devotional service having beenlost, Sri Krsna Caitanya has appeared to deliver again the process ofdevotion. He is so kind that He is distributing love of Krsna. Everyoneshould be attracted more and more to His lotus feet, as humming bees areattracted to a lotus flower."
                                   TEXT 53                     suna, bhai, ei saba caitanya-mahima
                      ei sloke kahe tanra mahimara sima
                                 TRANSLATION     My dear brothers, please hear all these glories of Lord Caitanya.
This verse clearly summarizes His activities and characteristics.
                                   TEXT 54
                    `krsna' ei dui varna sada yanra mukhe
                    athava, krsnake tinho varne nija sukhe                                 TRANSLATION
     The two syllables "krs-na" are always in His mouth; or, He
constantly describes Krsna with great pleasure.
                                   TEXT 55
                   krsna-varna-sabdera artha dui ta pramana
                     krsna vinu tanra mukhe nahi aise ana
                                 TRANSLATION     These are two meanings of the word "krsna-varna." Indeed, nothing
else but Krsna issues from His mouth.
                                   TEXT 56
                      keha tanre bale yadi krsna-varana
                       ara visesane tara kare nivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     If someone tries to describe Him as being of blackish complexion,
the next adjective [tvisa akrsnam] immediately restricts him.
                                   TEXT 57
                     deha-kantye haya tenho akrsna-varana
                        akrsna-vamne kahe pita-varana
                                 TRANSLATION     His complexion is certainly not blackish. Indeed, His not being
blackish indicates that His complexion is yellow.
                                   TEXT 58
             kalau yam vidvamsah sphutam abhiyaiante dyuti-bharad
              akrsnangam krsnam makha-vidhibhir utkirtanamayaih               upasyam ca prahur yam akhila-caturthasrama jusam                 sa devas caitanyakrtir atitaram nah krpayatu
                                 TRANSLATION     "By performing the sacrifice of congregational chanting of the holy
name, learned scholars in the age of Kali worship Lord Krsna, who is nownon-blackish because of the great upsurge of the feelings of SrimatiRadharani. He is the only worshipable Deity for the paramahamsas, whohave attained the highest stage of the fourth order [sannyasa]. May thatSupreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Caitanya, show us His great
causeless mercy."
                                   PURPORT     This text, as well as text 63 and text 66, is from the Stava-mala
of Srila Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 59                   pratyaksa tanhara tapta-kancanera dyuti
                    yanhara chataya nase ajnana-tamastati
                                 TRANSLATION     One can vividly see His glowing complexion of molten gold, which
dispels the darkness of ignorance.
                                   TEXT 60
                      jivera kalmasa-tamo nasa karibare
                      anga-upanga-nama nana astra dhare
                                 TRANSLATION     The sinful life of the living beings results from ignorance. To
destroy that ignorance, He has brought various weapons, such as Hisplenary associates, His devotees and the holy name.
                                   TEXT 61
                   bhaktira virodhi karma-dharma va adharma
                    tahara `kalmasa' nama, sei maha-tamah
                                 TRANSLATION     The greatest ignorance consists of activities, whether religious or
irreligious, that are opposed to devotional service. They are to beknown as sins [kalmasa].
                                   TEXT 62
                   bahu tuli' hari bali' prema-drstye caya
                     kariya kalmasa nasa premete bhasaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Raising His arms, chanting the holy name and looking upon all with
deep love, He drives away all sins and floods everyone with love ofGodhead.                                   TEXT 63
                 smitalokah sokam harati jagatam yasya parito
                giram tu prarambhah kusala-patalim pallavayati               padalambhah kam va pranayati na hi prema-nivaham                 sa devas caitanyakrtir atitaram nah krpayatu
                                 TRANSLATION     "May the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of Lord Sri
Caitanya bestow His causeless mercy upon us. His smiling glance at oncedrives away all the bereavements of the world, and His very wordsenliven the auspicious creepers of devotion by expanding their leaves.Taking shelter of His lotus feet invokes transcendental love of God atonce."
                                   TEXT 64
                    sri-anga, sri-mukha yei kare darasana
                    tara papa-ksaya haya, paya prema-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Anyone who looks upon His beautiful body or beautiful face becomes
freed from all sins and obtains the wealth of love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 65
                    anya a vatare saba sainya-sastra sange
                     caitanya-krsnera sainya anga-upange
                                 TRANSLATION     In other incarnations the Lord descended with armies and weapons,
but in this incarnation His soldiers are His plenary parts andassociates.
                                   TEXT 66
               sadopasyah sriman dhrta-manuja-kayaih pranayitam
             vahadbhir gir- vanair girisa-paramesthi-prabhrtibhih             sva-bhaktebhyah suddham nija-bhajana-mudram upadisan              sa caitanyah kim me punar api drsor yasyati padam
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is always the most worshipable Deity
of the demigods, including Lord Siva and Lord Brahma, who came in thegarb of ordinary men, bearing love for Him. He instructs His own puredevotional service to His own devotees. Will He again be the object of
my vision)."
                                   TEXT 67
                    angopanga astra kare sva-karya-sadhana
                   `anga'-sabdera artha ara suna diya mana
                                 TRANSLATION     His plenary parts and associates perform the work of weapons as
their own specific duties. Please hear from me another meaning of theword "anga."
                                   TEXT 68
                    `anga'-sabde amsa kahe sastra-paramana
                     angera a vaya va `upanga'-vyakhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     According to the evidence of the revealed scriptures, a bodily limb
[anga] is also called a part [amsa], and a part of a limb is called apartial part [upanga].
                                   TEXT 69
                      narayanas tvam na hi sarva-dehinam
                        atmasy adhisakhila-loka-saksi                      narayano 'ngam nara-bhu jalayanat                       tac capi satyam na tavaiva maya
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Lord of lords, You are the seer of all creation. You are indeed
everyone's dearest life. Are You not, therefore, my father, Narayana?`Narayana' refers to one whose abode is in the water born from Nara[Garbhodakasayi Visnu], and that Narayana is Your plenary portion. AllYour plenary portions are transcendental. They are absolute and are notcreations of maya."
                                   PURPORT     This text was spo ken to Lord Krsna by Brah ma in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam (10.14.14).
                                   TEXT 70                       jala-sayi antaryamiyei narayana
                     seho tomara amsa, tumi mula narayana                                 TRANSLATION
     The manifestation of the Narayana who predominates in everyone's
heart, as well as the Narayana who lives in the waters [Karana, Garbhaand Ksira], is Your plenary portion. You are therefore the originalNarayana.
                                   TEXT 71
                   `anga'-sabde amsa kahe, seho satya haya
                    maya-karya nahe--saba cid-ananda-maya
                                 TRANSLATION     The word "anga" indeed refers to plenary portions. Such
manifestations should never be considered products of material nature,for they are all transcendental, full of knowledge and full of bliss.
                                   PURPORT     In the material world, if a fragment is taken from an original
object, the original object is reduced by the removal of that fragment.But the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not at all affected by theactions of maya. The Isopanisad says:     om purnam adah purnam idam     purnat purnam udacyate      purnasya purnam adaya     purnam evavasisyate"The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete, and because He iscompletely perfect, all emanations from Him, such as this phenomenalworld, are perfectly equipped as complete wholes. Whatever is producedof the complete whole is also complete in itself. Because He is thecomplete whole, even though so many complete units emanate from Him, Heremains the complete baiance." (Sri Isopanisad, Invocation)     In the realm of the Absolute, one plus one equals one, and oneminus one equals one. Therefore one should not conceive of a fragment ofthe Supreme Lord in the material sense. In the spiritual world there isno influence of the material energy or material calculations offragments. In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita the Lord says thatthe living entities are His parts and parcels. There are innumerableliving entities throughout the material and spiritual universes, butstill Lord Krsna is full in Himself. To think that God has lost Hispersonality because His many parts and parcels are distributed all overthe universe is an illusion. That is a material calculation. Suchcalculations are possible only under the influence of the materialenergy, maya. In the spiritual world the material energy is conspicuousonly by its absence.     In the category of visnu-tattva there is no loss of power from oneexpansion to the next,any more than there is a loss of illumination asone candle kindles another. Thousands may be kindled by an originalcandle, and all will have the same candle power. In this way it is to beunderstood that although all the visnu-tattvas, from Krsna and LordCaitanya to Rama, Nrsimha, Varaha and so on, appear with differentfeatures in different ages, all are equally invested with supreme
potency.     Demigods such as Lord Brahma and Lord Siva come in contact with thematerial energy, and their power and potency are therefore of differentgradations. All the incarnations of Visnu, however, are equal inpotency, for the influence of maya cannot even approach them.
                                   TEXT 72                   advaita, nityananda--caitanyera dui anga
                      angera a vayava-gana kahiye upanga
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Prabhu and Sri Nityananda Prabhu are both plenary
portions of Lord Caitanya. Thus They are the limbs [angas] of His body.The parts of these two limbs are called the upangas.
                                   TEXT 73
                    angopanga tiksna astra prabhura sahite
                      sei saba astra haya pasanda dalite
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the Lord is equipped with sharp weapons in the forms of His
parts and plenary portions. All these weapons are competent enough tocrush the faithless atheists.
                                   PURPORT     The word pasanda is very significant here. One who compares the
Supreme Personality of Godhead to the demigods is known as a pasanda.pasandas try to bring the Supreme Lord down to a mundane level.Sometimes they create their own imaginary God or accept an ordinaryperson as God and advertise him as equal to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. They are so foolish that they present someone as the nextincarnation of Lord Caitanya or Krsna although His activities are allcontradictory to those of a genuine incarnation, and thus they fool theinnocent public. One who is intelligent and who studies thecharacteristics of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with reference tothe Vedic context cannot be bewildered by the pasandas.     Pasandas, or atheists, cannot understand the pastimes of theSupreme Lord or transcendental loving service to the Lord. They thinkthat devotional service is no better than ord inary fru itive activities(karma). As Bhagavad-gita (4.8) confirms, however, the SupremePersonality of Godhead and His devotees, saving the righteous andchastising the m iscreants (paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam),always curb these nonsensical atheists. Miscreants always want to denythe Supreme Personality of Godhead and put stumbling blocks in the pathof devotional service. The Lord sends His bona fide representatives andappears Himself to curb this nonsense.                                   TEXT 74
                     nityananda gosani saksat hala-dhara
                     advaita acarya gosani saksat isvara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Nityananda Gosani is directly Haladhara [ Lord Balarama], and
Advaita Acarya is the Personality of Godhead Himself.
                                   TEXT 75
                     srivasadi parisada sainya sange lana
                      dui sena-pati bule kirtana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     These two captains, with Their soldiers such as Srivasa Thakura,
travel everywhere, chanting the holy name of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 76
                     pasanda-dalana-vana nityananda raya
                      acarya-hunkare papa-pasandi palaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda's very features indicate that He is the subduer of
the unbelievers. All sins and unbelievers flee from the loud shouts ofAdvaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 77
                   sankirtana-pravartaka sri-krsna-caitanya
                   sankirtana-yajne tanre bhaje, sei dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya is the initiator of sankirtana [
congregational chanting of the holy name of the Lord]. One who worshipsHim through sankirtana is fortunate indeed.
                                   TEXT 78
                    sei ta' sumedha, ara kubuddhi samsara
                   sarva-yajna haite krsna-nama-yajna sara
                                 TRANSLATION     Such a person is truly intelligent, whereas others, who have but a
poor fund of knowledge, must endure a cycle of repeated birth and death.Of all sacrificial performances, the chanting of the Lord's holy name isthe most sublime.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the father and inaugurator of the
sankirtana movement. One who worships Him by sacrificing his life,money, intelligence and words for the sankirtana movement is recognizedby the Lord and endowed with His blessings. All others may be said to befoolish, for of all sacrifices in which a man may apply his energy, asacrifice made for the sankirtana movement is the most glorious.
                                   TEXT 79                     koti asva-medha eka krsna nama sama
                    yei kahe, se pasandi, dande tare yama
                                 TRANSLATION     One who says that ten million asvamedha sacrifices are equal to the
chanting of the holy name of Lord Krsna is undoubtedly an atheist. He issure to be punished by Yamaraja.
                                   PURPORT     In the list of the ten kinds of offenses in chanting the holy name
of the Supreme Personality of God head, Hare Krsna, the eighth offenseis dharma-vrata-tyaga- hutadi-sarva-subha-kriya-samyam api pramadah. O ne s h o u Id n eve r co n si d e r th e chanting of the holy name ofGodhead equal to pious activities like giving charity to brahmanas orsaintly persons, opening charitable educational institutions,distributing free foodstuffs and so on. The results of pious activitiesdo not equal the results of chanting the holy name of Krsna.     The Vedic scriptures say:     go-koti-danam grahane khagasya     prayaga-gangodaka-kalpa-vasah     yajnayutam meru-su varna-danam     govinda-kirter na samam satamsaih"Even if one distributes ten million cows in charity during an eclipseof the sun, lives at the confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna formillions of years, or gives a mountain of gold in sacrifice to thebrahmanas, he does not earn one hundredth part of the merit derived fromchanting Hare Krsna." In other words, one who accepts the chanting ofHare Krsna to be some kind of pious activity is completely misled. Ofcourse, it is pious; but the real fact is that Krsna and His name beingtranscendental, are far above all mundane pious activity. Pious activityis on the material platform, but chanting of the holy name of Krsna iscompletely on the spiritual plane. Therefore, although pasandis do notunderstand this, pious activity can never compare to the chanting of theholy name.
                                   TEXT 80                `bhaga vata-sandarbha'-granthera mangalacarane
                  e-sloka jiva-gosani kariyachena vyakhyane
                                 TRANSLATION     In the auspicious introduction of Bhagavata-sandarbha, Srila Jiva
Gosvami has given the following verse as an explanation.
                                   TEXT 81
                          antah krsnam bahir gauram
                            darsitangadi-vaibhavam                          kalau sankirtanadyaih sma                           krsna-caitanyam asritah
                                 TRANSLATION     `I take shelter of Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is
outwardly of a fair complexion but is inwardly Krsna Himself. In thisage of Kali He displays His expansions [ His angas and upangas] byperforming congregational chanting of the holy name of the Lord."
                                   PURPORT     Srila Jiva Gosvami has placed the verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam q
uoted i n text 52 (krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam...) as the ausp ici ous introd u ction to h is Bhagavata-sandarbha or Sat-sandarbha. He hascomposed this text (81), which is, in effect, an explanation of theBhagavatam verse, as the second verse of the same work. The verse fromSrimad-Bhagavatam was enunciated by Karabhajana, one of the nine greatsages, and it is elaborately explained by the Sarva-samvaoini, JivaGosvami's commentary on his own Sat-sandarbha.     Antah krsna refers to one who is always thinking of Krsna. Thisattitude is a predominant feature of Srimati Radharani. Even though manydevotees always think of Krsna, none can surpass the gopis, among whomRadharani is the leader in thinking of Krsna. Radharani's Krsnaconsciousness surpasses that of all other devotees. Lord Caitanyaaccepted the position of Srimati Radharani to understand Krsna;therefore He was always thinking of Krsnain the same way as Radharani.By thinking of Lord Krsna, He always overlapped Krsna.     Sri Krsna Caitanya, who was outwardly very fair, with a complexionlike molten gold, simultaneously manifested His eternal associates,opulences, expansions and incarnations. He preached the process ofchanting Hare Krsna, and those who are under His lotus feet areglorious.
                                   TEXT 82                      upa-puraneha suni sri-krsna-vacana
                  krpa kari vyasa prati kariyachena kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Upa-puranas we hear Sri Krsna showing His mercy to Vyasadeva
by speaking to him as follows.
                                   TEXT 83
                           aham eva kvacid brahman
                            sannyasasramam asritah                            hari-bhaktim grahayami                            kalau papa-hatan naran
                                 TRANSLATION     "O learned brahmana, sometimes I accept the renounced order of life
to induce the fallen people of the age of Kali to accept devotionalservice to the Lord."
                                   TEXT 84
                  bhaga vata, bharata-sastra, agama, purana
                   caitanya-krsna-a vatare prakata pramana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srimad-Bhagavatam, Mahabharata, the Puranas and other Vedic
literatures all give evidence to prove that Lord Sri Krsna CaitanyaMahaprabhu is the incarnation of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 85
                   pratyakse dekhaha nana prakata prabhava
                      alaukika karma, alaukika anubhava
                                 TRANSLATION     One can also directly see Lord Caitanya's manifest influence in His
uncommon deeds and uncommon Krsna conscious realization.
                                   TEXT 86
                     dekhiya na dekhe yata abhaktera gana
                      uluke na dekhe yena suryera kirana
                                 TRANSLATION     But faithless unbelievers do not see what is clearly evident, just
as owls do not see the rays of the sun.
                                   TEXT 87                  tvam sila-rupa-caritaih parama-prakrstaih
                 sattvena sattvikataya prabalais ca sastraih                  prakhyata-daiva-paramartha-vidam matais ca                   naivasura-prakrtayah prabhavanti boddhum
                                 TRANSLATION     "O my Lord, those influenced by demoniac principles cannot realize
You, although You are clearly the Supreme by dint of Your exaltedactivities, forms, character and uncommon power, which are confirmed byall the revealed scriptures in the quality of goodness and thecelebrated transcendentalists in the divine nature."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the Stotra-ratna (12) of Yamunacarya, the
spiritual master of Ramanujacarya. The authentic scriptures describe thetranscendental activities, features, form and qualities of Krsna, andKrsna explains Himself in Bhagavad-gita, the most authentic scripture inthe world. He is further explained in Srimad- Bhagavatam, which isconsidered the explanation of Vedanta-sutra. Lord Krsna is accepted asthe Supreme Personality of Godhead by these authentic scriptures, notsimply by vox populi. In the modern age a certain class of fools thinkthat they can vote anyone into the position of God, as they can vote aman into the position of a political executive head. But thetranscendental Supreme Personality of Godhead is perfectly described inthe authentic scriptures. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that only foolsderide Him, thinking that anyone can speak like Krsna.     Even according to historical references, Krsna's activities aremost uncommon. Krsna has affirmed, "I am God," and He has actedaccordingly. Mayavadis think that everyone can claim to be God, but thatis their illusion, for no one else can perform such extraordinaryactivities as Krsna. When He was a child on the lap of His mother, Hekilled the demon Putana. Then He killed the demons Trnavarta, Vatsasuraand Baka. When He was a little more grown up, He killed the demonsAghasura and Rsabhasura. Therefore God is God from the very beginning.The idea that someone can become God by meditation is ridiculous. Byhard endeavor one may realize his godly nature, but he will never becomeGod. The asuras, or demons, who think that anyone can become God, arecondemned.     The authentic scriptures are compiled by personalities likeVyasadeva, Narada, Asita and Parasara, who are not ordinary men. All thefollowers of the Vedic way of life have accepted these famouspersonalities, whose authentic scriptures conform to the Vedicliterature. Nevertheless, the demoniac do not believe their statements,and they purposely oppose the Supreme Personality of Godhead and Hisdevotees. Today it is fashionable for common men to write whimsicalwords as so-cailed incarnations of God and be accepted as authentic byother common men. This demoniac mentality is condemned in the SeventhChapter of Bhagavad-gita, wherein itis said thatthose who are miscreantsand the lowest of mankind, who are fools and asses, cannot accept theSupreme Personality of Godhead because of their demoniac nature. Theyare compared to ulukas, or owls, who cannot open their eyes in thesunlight. Because they cannot bear sunlight, they hide themselves from
it and never see it. They cannot believe that there is suchillumination.
                                   TEXT 88                     apana lukaite krsna nana yatna kare
                    tathapi tanhara bhakta jnnaye tanhare
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Krsna tries to hide Himself in various ways, but
nevertheless His pure devotees know Him as He is.
                                   TEXT 89
                     ullanghita-trividha-sima-samatisayi-
                   sambhavanam tava parivradhima-svabhavam                      maya-balena bhavatapi niguhyamanam                   pasyanti kecid anisam tvad-ananya-bhavah
                                 TRANSLATION     "O my Lord, everything within material nature is limited by time,
space and thought. Your characteristics, however, being unequaled andunsurpassed, are always transcendental to such limitations. Yousometimes cover such characteristics by Your own energy, butnevertheless Your unalloyed devotees are always able to see You underall circumstances."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is also quoted from the Stotra-ratna (13) of
Yamunacarya. Everything covered by the influence of maya is within thelimited boundaries of space, time and thought. Even the greatestmanifestation we can conceive, the sky, also has limitations. From theauthentic scriptures, however, it is evident that beyond the sky is acovering of seven layers, each ten times thicker than the one precedingit. The covering layers are vast, but with or without coverings, spaceis limited. Our power tothink aboutspace and time is also limited. Timeis eternal; we may imagine billions and trillions of years, but thatwill still be an inadequate estimate of the extent of time. Ourimperfect senses, therefore, cannot think of the greatness of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, nor can we bring Him within thelimitations of time or our thinking power. His position is accordinglydescribed by the word ullanghita. He is transcendental to space, timeand thought; although He appears within them, He existstranscendentally. Even when the Lord's transcendental existence isdisguised by space, time and thought, however, pure devotees of theSupreme Lord can see Him in His personal features beyond space, time andthought. In other words, even though the Lord is not visible to the eyesof ordinary men, those who are beyond the covering layers because oftheir transcendental devotional service can still see Him.     The sun may appear covered by a cloud, but actually it is the eyes
of the tiny people below the cloud that are covered, not the sun. Ifthose tiny people rose above the cloud in an airplane, they could thensee the sunshine and the sun without impediment. Similarly, although thecovering of maya is very strong, Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita.-     daivi hy esa gunamayi     mama maya duratyaya     mam eva ye prapadyante     mayam etam taranti te"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of materialnature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Mecan easily cross beyond it." (Bg. 7.14) To surpass the influence of theillusory energy is very difficult, but those who are determined to catchhold of the lotus feet of the Lord are freed from the clutches of maya.Therefore, pure devotees can understand the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, but demons, because of their miscreant behavior, cannotunderstand the Lord, in spite of seeing the many revealed scriptures andthe uncommon activities of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 90                     asura-svabhave krsne kabhu nahijane
                    lukaite nare krsna bhakta jana-sthane
                                 TRANSLATION     Those whose nature is demoniac cannot know Krsna at any time, but
He cannot hide Himself from His pure devotees.
                                   PURPORT     People who develop the nature of asuras like Ravana and
Hiranyakasipu can never know Krsna, the Personality of Godhead, bychallenging the authority of Godhead. But Sri Krsna cannot hide Himselffrom His pure devotees.
                                   TEXT 91                         dvau bhuta-sargau loke'smin
                              daiva asura eva ca                          visnu-bhaktah smrto daiva                            asuras tad-vioaryayah
                                 TRANSLATION     "There are two classes of men in the created world. One consists of
the demoniac and the other of the godly. The devotees of Lord Visnu arethe godly, whereas those who are just the opposite are called demons."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the Padma Purana. Visnu-bhaktas, or devotees
in Krsna consciousness, are known as devas (demigods). Atheists, who donot believe in God or who declare themselves God, are asuras (demons).
Asuras always engage inatheistic material activities, exploring ways to utilize the resourcesof matter to enjoy sense gratification. The visnu-bhaktas, Krsnaconscious devotees, are also active, buttheir objective is to satisfythe Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotional service. Superficiallyboth classes may appear to work in the same way, but their purposes arecompletely opposite because of a difference in consciousness. Asuraswork for personal sense gratification, whereas devotees work for thesatisfaction of the Supreme Lord. Both work conscientiously, but theirmotives are different.     The Krsna consciousness movement is meant for devas, or devotees.Demons cannot take part in Krsna conscious activities, nor can devoteesin Krsna consciousness take part in demoniac activities or work likecats and dogs simply for sense gratification. Such activity does notappeal to those in Krsna consciousness. Devotees accept only the barenecessities of life to keep themselves fit to act in Krsnaconsciousness. The balance of their energy is used for developing Krsnaconsciousness, through which one can be transferred to the abode ofKrsna by always thinking of Him, even at the point of death.
                                   TEXT 92                    acarya gosani prabhura bhakta-avatara
                     krsna-a vatara-hetu yanhara hunkara
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya Gosvami is an incarnation of the Lord as a devotee.
His loud calling was the cause for Krsna's incarnation.
                                   TEXT 93
                     krsna yadi prthivite karena avatara
                     prathame karena guru-vargera sancara
                                 TRANSLATION     Whenever Sri Krsna desires to manifest His incarnation on earth,
first He creates the incarnations of His respectable predecessors.
                                   TEXT 94
                      pita mata guru adi yata manya-gana
                   prathame karena sabara prthivite janama
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus respectable personalities such as His father, mother, and
spiritual master all take birth on earth first.                                   TEXT 95
                    madhava-isvara-puri, saci, jagannatha
                    advaita acarya prakata haila sei satha
                                 TRANSLATION     Madhavendra Puri, Isvara Puri, Srimati Sacimata and Srila
Jagannatha Misra all appeared with Sri Advaita Acarya.
                                   PURPORT     Whenever the Supreme Personality of Godhead descends in His human
form, He sends ahead all His devotees, who act as His father, teacherand associates in many roles. Such personalities appear before thedescent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Before the appearance ofLord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, there appeared His devotees like SriMadhavendra Puri; His spiritual master, Sri Isvara Puri; His mother,Srimati Sacidevi; His father, Sri J agannatha Misra; and Sri AdvaitaAcarya.
                                   TEXT 96                    prakatiya dekhe acarya sakala samsara
                   krsna-bhakti gandha-hma visaya-vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya having appeared, He found the world devoid of
devotional service to Sri Krsna because people were engrossed inmaterial affairs.
                                   TEXT 97
                   keha pape, keha punye kare visaya-bhoga
                   bhakti-gandha nahi, yate yaya bhava-roga
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone was engaged in material enjoyment, whether sinfully or
virtuously. No one was interested in the transcendental service of theLord, which can give total relief from the repetition of birth anddeath.
                                   PURPORT     Advaita Acarya saw the entire world to be engaged in activities of
material piety and impiety, without a trace of devotional service orKrsna consciousness anywhere. The fact is that in this material worldthere is no scarcity of anything except Krsna consciousness. Materialnecessities are supplied by the mercy of the Supreme Lord. We sometimesfeel scarcity because of our mismanagement, but the real problem is thatpeople are out of touch with Krsna consciousness. Everyone is engaged inmaterial sense gratification, but people have no plan for making an
ultimate solution to their real problems, namely, birth, disease, oldage and death. These four material miseries are called bhava-roga, ormaterial diseases. They can be cured only by Krsna consciousness.Therefore Krsna consciousness is the greatest benediction for humansociety.
                                   TEXT 98                    loka-gati dekhi' acarya karuna-hrdaya
                    vicara karena, lokera kaiche hita haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the activities of the world, the Acarya felt compassion and
began to ponder how he could act for the people's benefit.
                                   PURPORT     This sort of serious interest in the welfare of the public makes
one a bona fide acarya. An acarya does not exploit his followers. Sincethe acarya is a confidential servitor of the Lord, his heart is alwaysfull of compassion for humanity in its suffering. He knows that allsuffering is due to the absence of devotional service to the Lord, andtherefore he always tries to find ways to change people's activities,making them favorable for the attainment of devotion. That is thequalification ofan acarya. Although Sri Advaita Prabhu Himself was powerful enough to dothe work, as a submissive servitor He thought that without the personalappearance of the Lord, no one could improve the fallen condition ofsociety. In the grim clutches of maya, the first-class prisoners of thismaterial world wrongly think themselves happy because they are rich,powerful, resourceful and so on. These foolish creatures do not knowthat they are nothing but play dolls in the hands of material nature andthat at any moment material nature's pitiless intrigues can crush todust all their plans for godless activities. Such foolish prisonerscannot see that however they improve their position by artificial means,the calamities of repeated birth, death, disease and old age are alwaysbeyond the jurisdiction of their control. Foolish as they are, theyneglect these major problems of life and busy themselves with falsethings that cannot help them solve their real problems. They know thatthey do not want to suffer death or the pangs of disease and old age,but under the influence of the illusory energy, they are grosslynegligent and therefore do nothing to solve the problems. This is calledmaya. People held in the grip of maya are thrown into oblivion afterdeath, and as a result of their karma, in the next life they become dogsor gods, although most of them become dogs. To become gods in the nextlife, they must engage in the devotional service of the SupremePersonality of Godhead; otherwise, they are sure to become dogs or hogsin terms of the laws of nature.     The third-class prisoners, being less materially opulent than thefirst-class prisoners, endeavor to imitate them, for they also have noinformation of the real nature of their imprisonment. Thus they also aremisled by the iilusory material nature. The function of the acarya,however, is to change the activities of both the first-class and third-
class prisoners for their real benefit. This endeavor makes him a verydear devotee of the Lord, who says clearly in Bhagavad-gita that no onein human society is dearer to Him than a devotee who constantly engagesin His service by finding ways to preach the message of Godhead for thereal benefit of the world. The so-called acaryas of the age of Kali aremore concerned with exploiting the resources of their followers thanmitigating their miseries; but Sri Advaita Prabhu, as an ideal acarya,was concerned with improving the condition of the world situation.
                                   TEXT 99                     apani sri-krsna yadi karena avatara
                      apane acari' bhakti karena pracara
                                 TRANSLATION     It Sri Krsna were to appear as an incarnation, He Himself could
preach devotion by His personal example.
                                   TEXT 100
                     nama vinu kali-kale dharma nahi ara
                     kali-kale kaiche habe krsna avatara
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this age of Kali there is no religion other than the chanting
of the holy name of the Lord, but how in this age will the Lord appearas an incarnation?
                                   TEXT 101
                     suddha-bhave kariba krsnera aradhana
                      nirantara sadainye kariba nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I shall worship Krsna in a purified state of mind. I shall
constantly petition Him in humbleness.
                                   TEXT 102
                     aniya krsnere karon kirtana sancara
                     tabe se `advaita' nama saphala amara
                                 TRANSLATION     "My name, `Advaita,' will be fitting if I am able to induce Krsna
to inaugurate the movement of the chanting of the holy name."                                   PURPORT
     The nondualist Mayavadi philosopher who falsely believes that he is
nondifferent from the Lord is unable to call Him like Advaita Prabhu.Advaita Prabhu is nondifferent from the Lord, yet in His relationshipwith the Lord He does not merge in Him but eternally renders serviceunto Him as a plenary portion. This is inconceivable for Mayavadisbecause they think in terms of mundane sense perception and thereforethink that nondualism necessitates losing one's separate identity. It isclear from this verse, however, that Advaita Prabhu, although retainingHis separate identity, is nondifferent from the Lord.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu preached the philosophy of inconceivable,simultaneous oneness with the Lord and difference from Him. Conceivabledualism and monism are conceptions of the imperfect senses, which areunable to reach the Transcendence because the Transcendence is beyondthe conception of limited potency. The actions of Sri Advaita Prabhu,however, give tangible proof of inconceivable nondualism. One whotherefore surrenders unto Sri Advaita Prabhu can easily follow thephilosophy of inconceivable simultaneous dualism and monism.
                                   TEXT 103                       krsna vasa karibena kon aradhane
                     vicarite eka sioka aila ta-nra mane
                                 TRANSLATION     While He was thinking about how to propitiate Krsna by worship, the
following verse came to his mind.
                                   TEXT 104
                             tulasi-dala-matrena
                             jalasya culukena va                            vikrinite svam atmanam                          bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalah
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sri Krsna, who is very affectionate toward His devotees, sells
Himself to a devotee who offers merely a tulasi leaf and a palmful ofwater."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the Gautamiya-tantra.                                 TEXT 105-106                     ei slokartha acarya karena vicarana
                       krsnake tulasi-jala deya yeijana
                   tara rna sodhite krsna karena cintana--                 `jala-tulasira sama kichu ghare nahi dhana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya considered the meaning of the verse in this way: Not
finding any way to repay the debt He owes to one who offers Him a tulasileaf and water, Lord Krsna thinks, "There is no wealth in My possessionthat is equal to a tulasi leaf and water."
                                   TEXT 107
                      tabe atma veci' kare rnera sodhana
                      eta bhavi' acarya karena aradhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the Lord liquidates the debt by offering His own self to the
devotee. Considering this, the Acarya began worshiping the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     Through devotional service one can easily please Lord Krsna with a
leaf of the tulasi plant and a little water. As the Lord says inBhagavad-gita (9.26), a leaf, a flower, a fruit or some water (patrampuspam phalam toyam), when offered with devotion, very much pleases Him.He universally accepts the services of His devotees. Even the poorest ofdevotees in any part of the world can secure a small flower, fruit orleaf and a little water, and if these offerings, and especially tulasileaves and Ganges water, are offered to Krsna with devotion, He is verysatisfied. It is said that Krsna is so pleased by such devotionalservice that He offers Himself to His devotee in exchange for it. SrilaAdvaita Acarya knew this fact, and therefore He decided to call for thePersonality of Godhead Krsna to descend by worshiping the Lord withtulasi leaves and the water of the Ganges.
                                   TEXT 108                     ganga jala, tulasi-manjari anuksana
                    krsna-pada-padma bhavi' kare samarpana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking of the lotus feet of Sri Krsna, He constantly offered
tulasi buds in water from the Ganges.
                                   TEXT 109
                     krsnera ah vana kare kariya hunkara
                        e-mate krsnere karaila avatara
                                 TRANSLATION     He appealed to Sri Krsna with loud calls and thus made it possible
for Krsna to appear.
                                   TEXT 110
                      caitanyera avatare ei mukhya hetu
                     bhaktera icchaya avatare dharma-setu
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore the principal reason for Sri Caitanya's descent is this
appeal by Advaita Acarya. The Lord, the protector of religion, appearsby the desire of His devotee.
                                   TEXT 111
                   tvam bhakti-yoga-paribhavita-hrt-saroja
                   asse sruteksita-patho nanu natha pumsam                    yad yad dhiya ta urugaya vlbhavayanti                    tat tad vapuh pranayase sad-anugrahaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "O my Lord, You always dwell in the vision and hearing of Your pure
devotees. You also live in their lotuslike hearts, which are purified bydevotional service. O my Lord, who are glorified by exalted prayers, Youshow special favor to Your devotees by manifesting Yourself in theeternal forms in which they welcome You."
                                   PURPORT     This text from Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.9.1 1) is a prayer by Lord
Brahma to the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna for His blessings inthe work of creation. Knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godheadcan be understood from the descriptions of the Vedic scriptures. Forexample, the Brahma-samhita describes that in the abode of Lord Krsna,which is made of cintamani (touchstone), the Lord, acting as a cowherdboy, is served by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune.Mayavadis think that the devotees have imagined the form of Krsna, butthe authentic Vedic scriptures have actually described Krsna and Hisvarious transcendental forms.     The word sruta in sruteksita-pathah refers to the Vedas, and iksitaindicates that the way to understand the Supreme Personality of Godheadis by proper study of the Vedic scriptures. One cannot imagine somethingabout God or His form. Such imagination is not accepted by those who areserious about enlightenment. Here Brahma says that one can know Krsnathrough the path of properly understanding the Vedic texts. If bystudying the form, name, qualities, pastimes and paraphernalia of theSupreme Godhead one is attracted to the Lord, he can execute devotionalservice, and the form of the Lord will be impressed in his heart andremain transcendentally situated there. Unless a devotee actuallydevelops transcendental love for the Lord, it is not possible for him tothink always of the Lord within his heart. Such constant thought of the
Lord isthe sublime perfection of the yogic process, as Bhagavad-gitaconfirms in the Sixth Chapter, stating that anyone absorbed in suchthought is the best of all yogis. Such transcendental absorption isknown as samadhi. A pure devotee who is always thinking of the SupremePersonality of Godhead is the person qualified to see the Lord.     One cannot speak of Urugaya (the Lord, who is glorified by sublimeprayers) unless one is transcendentally elevated. The Lord hasinnumerable forms, as the Brahma-samhita co n fi rms (advaitam acyutamanadim ananta-rupam). T h e L o rd expands Himself in innumerable svamsaforms. When a devotee, hearing about these innumerable forms, becomesattached to one and always thinks of Him, the Lord appears to him inthat form. Lord Krsna is especially pleasing to devotees for whom He isalways present in the heart because of their highly elevatedtranscendental love.
                                   TEXT 112                    ei slokera artha kahi sanksepera sara
                    bhaktera icchaya krsnera sarva avatara
                                 TRANSLATION     The essence of the meaning to this verse is that Lord Krsna appears
in all His innumerable eternal forms because of the desires of His puredevotees.
                                   TEXT 113
                    caturtha slokera artha haila suniscite
                     avatirna haila gaura prema prakasite
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have surely determined the meaning of the fourth verse. Lord
Gauranga [Lord Caitanya] appeared as an incarnation to preach unalloyedlove of God.
                                   TEXT 114
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
describing the causes for the descent of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.                                 Chapter Four
     In this chapter of the epic Caitanya-caritamrta, Krsnadasa Kaviraja
Gosvami has stressed that Lord Caitanya appeared for three principalpurposes of His own. The first purpose was to relish the position ofSrimati Radharani, who is the prime reciprocator of transcendental loveof Sri Krsna. Lord Krsna is the reservoir of transcendental lovingtransactions with Srimati Radharani. The subject of those lovingtransactions is the Lord Himself, and Radharani is the object. Thus thesubject, the Lord, wanted to relish the loving mellow in the position ofthe object, Radharani.     The second reason for His appearance was to understand thetranscendental mellow of Himself. Lord Krsna is all sweetness.Radharani's attraction for Krsna is sublime, and to experience thatattraction and understand the transcendental sweetness of Himself, Heaccepted the mentality of Radharani.     The third reason that Lord Caitanya appeared was to enjoy the blisstasted by Radharani. The Lord thought that undoubtedly Radharani enjoyedHis company and He enjoyed the company of Radharani, but the exchange oftranscendental mellow between the spiritual couple was more pleasing toSrimati Radharanithan to Sri Krsna. Radharani felt more transcendentalpleasure in the company of Krsna than He could understand without takingHer position, but for Sri Krsna to enjoy in the position of SrimatiRadharani was impossible because that position was completely foreign toHim. Krsna is the transcendental male, and Radharaniis thetranscendental female. Therefore, to know the transcendental pleasure ofloving Krsna, Lord Krsna Himself appeared as Lord Caitanya, acceptingthe emotions and bodily luster of Srimati Radharani.     Lord Caitanya appeared to fulfill these confidential desires andalso to preach the special significance of chanting Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare, and to answer the call of Advaita Prabhu. These were secondaryreasons.     Sri Svarupa Damodara Gosvami was the principal figure among LordCaitanya's confidential devotees. The records of his diary have revealedthese confidentiai purposes of the Lord. These revelations have beenconfirmed by the statements of Srila Rupa Gosvamiin his various prayersand poems.     This chapter also specifically describes the difference betweenlust and love. The transactions of Krsna and Radha are completelydifferent from material lust. Therefore the author has very clearlydistinguished between them.
                                    TEXT 1                            sri-caitanya-prasadena
                            tad-rupasya vinirnayam                           balo 'pi kurute sastram                            distva vraja-vilasinah
                                 TRANSLATION     By the mercy of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, even a foolish child can
fully describe the real nature of Lord Krsna, the enjoyer of thepastimes of Vraja, according to the vision of the revealed scriptures.
                                   PURPORT     One can ascertain the meaning of this Sanskrit sloka only when one
is endowed with the causeless mercy of Lord Caitanya. Lord Sri Krsna,being the absolute Personality of Godhead, cannot be exposed to themundane instruments of vision. He reserves the right not to be exposedby the intellectual feats of nondevotees. Notwithstanding this truth,even a small child can easily understand Lord Sri Krsna and Histranscendental pastimes in the land of Vrndavana by the grace of LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 2                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glory to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. All glory to Lord
Nityananda. All glory to Sri Advaita Acarya. And all glory to all thedevotees of Lord Caitanya.
                                    TEXT 3
                    caturtha slokera artha kaila vivarana
                    pancama slokera artha suna bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have described the meaning of the fourth verse. Now, O devotees,
kindly hear the explanation of the fifth verse.
                                    TEXT 4
                      mula-slokera artha karite prakasa
                       artha Iagaite age kahiye abhasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Just to explain the original verse, I shall first suggest its
meaning.
                                    TEXT 5
                     caturtha slokera artha ei kaila sara
                       prema-nama pracarite ei avatara                                 TRANSLATION
     I have given the essential meaning of the fourth verse: this
incarnation descends to propagate the chanting of the holy name andspread love of God.
                                    TEXT 6
                      satya ei hetu, kintu eho bahiranga
                      ara eka hetu, suna, ache antaranga
                                 TRANSLATION     Although this is true, this is but the external reason for the
Lord's incarnation. Please hear one other reason--the confidentialreason--for the Lord's appearance.
                                   PURPORT     In the Third Chapter, fourth verse, it has been clearly said that
Lord Caitanya appeared to distribute love of Krsna and the chanting ofHis transcendental holy name, Hare Krsna. That was the secondary purposeof Lord Caitanya's appearance. The real reason is different, as we shallsee in this chapter.
                                    TEXT 7                     purve yena prthivira bhara haribare
                    krsna avatirna haila sastrete pracare
                                 TRANSLATION     The scriptures proclaim that Lord Krsna previously descended to
take away the burden of the earth.
                                    TEXT 8
                  svayam-bhagavanera karma nahe bhara-harana
                    sthiti-karta visnu karena jagat-palana
                                 TRANSLATION     To take away this burden, however, is not the work of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The maintainer, Lord Visnu, is the one whoprotects the universe.
                                    TEXT 9
                     kintu krsnera yei haya avatara-kala
                     bhara-harana-kala tate ha-ila misala                                 TRANSLATION
     But the time to lift the burden of the world mixed with the time
for Lord Krsna's incarnation.
                                   PURPORT     We have information from Bhagavad-gita that the Lord appears at
particular intervals to adjust a time-worn spiritual culture. Lord SriKrsna appeared at the end of Dvapara-yuga to regenerate the spiritualculture of human society and also to manifest His transcendentalpastimes. Visnu is the authorized Lord who maintains the created cosmos,and He is also the principal Deity who makes adjustments for improperadministration in the cosmic creation. Sri Krsna is the primeval Lord,and He appears not to make such administrative adjustments but only toexhibit His transcendental pastimes and thus attract the fallen soulsback home, back to Godhead. However, the time for administrativerectification and the time for Lord Sri Krsna's appearance coincided atthe end of the last Dvapara-yuga. Therefore when Sri Krsnaappeared,Visnu, the Lord of maintenance, also merged in Him because allthe plenary portions and parts of the absolute Personality of Godheadmerge in Him during His appearance.
                                   TEXT 10                       purna bhagavan avatare yei kale
                       ara saba avatara tante asi' mile
                                 TRANSLATION     When the complete Supreme Personality of Godhead descends, all
other incarnations of the Lord meet together within Him.
                                  TEXT 11-12
                   narayana, catur-vyuha, matsyady-avatara
                    yuga-man vantaravatara, yata ache ara
                      sabe asi' krsna-ange haya avatirna
                      aiche avatare krsna bhagavan purna
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Narayana, the four primary ex pansions [ Vasudeva, Sankarsana,
Pradyumna and Aniruddha], Matsya and the other lila incarnations, theyuga-avataras and the manvantara incarnations--and as many otherincarnations as there are--all descend in the body of Lord Krsna. Inthis way the complete Supreme Godhead, Lord Krsna Himself, appears.
                                   TEXT 13
                     ataeva visnu takhana krsnera sarire                     visnu-dvare kare krsna asura-samhare
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time, therefore, Lord Visnu is present in the body of Lord
Krsna, and Lord Krsna kills the demons through Him.
                                   TEXT 14
                        anusanga-karma ei asura-marana
                    ye lagi' avatara, kahi se mula karana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the killing of the demons is but secondary work. I shall now
speak of the main reason for the Lord's incarnation.
                                  TEXT 15-16
                      prema-rasa-niryasa karite asvadana
                   raga-marga bhakti loke karite pracarana
                      rasika-sekhara krsna parama-karuna
                       ei dui hetu haite icchara udgama
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord's desire to appear was born from two reasons: He wanted to
taste the sweet essence of the mellows of love of God, and He wanted topropagate devotional service in the world on the platform of spontaneousattraction. Thus He is known as supremely jubilant and as the mostmerciful of all.
                                   PURPORT     During the period of Lord Krsna's appearance the killing of asuras
or nonbelievers such as Kamsa and Jarasandha was done by Visnu, who waswithin the person of Sri Krsna. Such apparent killing by Lord Sri Krsnawas a matter of course as an incidental activity, but the real purposeof Lord Krsna's appearance was to stage a dramatic performance of Histranscendental pastimes at Vrajabhumi, thus exhibiting the highest limitof transcendental mellow in the exchanges of reciprocal love between theliving entity and the Supreme Lord. These reciprocal exchanges ofmellows are called raga-bhakti, or devotional service to the Lord intranscendental rapture. Lord Sri Krsna wants to make known to all theconditioned souls that He is more attracted by raga-bhakti than vidhi-bhakti, or devotio nal se rvice u nder scheduled regulations. It is saidin the Vedas, raso vai sah.- the Absolute Truth is the reservoir for allkinds of reciprocal exchanges of loving sentiments. He is aisocauselessly merciful, and He wants to bestow upon us this privilege ofraga.bhakti. Thus He appeared as His own internal energy. He was notforced to appear by any extraneous force.                                   TEXT 17
                     aisvarya-jnanete saba jagat misrita
                   ais varya-sithila-preme nahi mora prita
                                 TRANSLATION     "All the universe is filled with the conception of My majesty, but
love weakened by that sense of majesty does not satisfy Me.
                                   TEXT 18
                       amare isvara mane, apanake hina
                      tara preme vasa ami na ha-i adhina
                                 TRANSLATION     "If one regards Me as the Supreme Lord and himself as a
subordinate, I do not become subservient to his love, nor can it controlMe.
                                   TEXT 19
                    amake ta' ye ye bhakta bhaie yei bhave
                   tare se se bhave bhaii,--e mora svabhave
                                 TRANSLATION     "In whatever transcendental mellow My devotee worships Me, I
reciprocate with him. That is My natural behavior.
                                   PURPORT     The Lord, by His inherent nature, reveals Himself before His
devotees according to their inherent devotional service. The Vrndavanapastimes demonstrated that although generally people worship God withreverence, the Lord is more pleased when a devotee thinks of Him as hispet son, personal friend or most dear fianc\e and renders service untoHim with such natural affection. The Lord becomes a subordinate objectof love in such transcendental relationships. Such pure love of Godheadis unadulterated by any tinge of superfluous nondevotional desires andis not mixed with any sort of fruitive action or empiric philosophicalspeculation. It is pure and natural love of Godhead, spontaneouslyaroused in the absolute stage. This devotional service is executed in afavorable atmosphere freed from material affection.
                                   TEXT 20                          ye yatha mam prapadyan te
                          tams tathaiva bhajnmy aham                            mama vartmanuvartante                           manusyah partha sarvasah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `In whatever way My devotees surrender unto Me, I reward him
accordingly. Everyone follows My path in all respects, O son of Prtha.'
                                   PURPORT     In the Fourth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna affirms that
formerly (some philosophy of the Gita to the sun-god. The message wasreceived through the chain of disciplic succession, but in course oftime, the chain being broken somehow or other, Lord Sri Krsna appearedagain and taught Arjuna the truths of Bhagavad-gita. At that time theLord spoke this verse (Bg. 4.1 1) to His friend Arjuna.
                                  TEXT 21-22                   mora putra, mora sakha, mora prana-pati
                     ei-bhave yei more kare suddha-bhakti
                      apanake bada mane, amare sama-hina
                       sei bhave ha-i ami tahara adhina
                                 TRANSLATION     "If one cherishes pure loving devotion to Me, thinking of Me as his
son, his friend or his beloved, regarding himself as great andconsidering Me his equal or inferior, I become subordinate to him.
                                   PURPORT     In Caitanya-caritamrta three kinds of devotional service are
described--namely, bhakti (ordinary devotio nal service), suddha-bhakti,(pure devotional service) and viddha-bhakti (mixed devotionalservice).     When devotional service is executed with some material purpose,involving fruitive activities, mental speculations or mystic yoga, it iscalled mixed or ad u Iterated devotional service. Besid es bhakti-yoga,Bhagavad-gita also describes karma-yoga, jnana-yoga and dhyana-yoga.Yoga means lin king with the Su preme Lord, which is possible onlythrough devotion. Fruitive activities ending in devotional service,philosophical speculation ending in devotional service, and the practiceof mysticism ending in devotional service are known respectively askarma-yoga, jnana- yoga and dhyana-yoga. But such devotional service isadulterated by the three kinds of material activities.     For those grossly engaged in identifying the body as the self,pious activity, or karma-yoga, is recommended. For those who identifythe mind with the self, philosophical speculation, or jnana-yoga, isrecommended. But devotees standing on the spiritual platform have noneed of such material conceptions of adulterated devotion. Adulterateddevotional service does not directly aim for love of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Therefore service performed strictly inconformity with the revealed scriptures is better than such viddha-bhakti because it is free from all kinds of material contamination. It
is executed in Krsna consciousness, solely to please the SupremePersonality of Godhead.     Those who are spontaneously devoted to the Lord and have no aimsfor material gain are called attracted devotees. They are spontaneouslyattracted to the service of the Lord, and they follow in the footstepsof self-realized souls. Their pure devotion (suddha-bhakti), manifestedfrom pure love of Godhead, surpasses the regulative principles of theauthoritative scriptures. Sometimes loving ecstasy transcends regulativeprinciples; such ecstasy, however, is completely on the spiritualplatform and cannot be imitated. The regulative principles help ordinarydevotees rise to the stage of perfect love of Godhead. Pure love forKrsna is the perfection of pure devotion, and pure devotional service isidentical with spontaneous devotional service.     Flawless execution of regulative principles is exhibited in theVaikuntha planets. By strictly executing these principles one can beelevated to the Vaikuntha planets. But spontaneous pure loving serviceis found in Krsnaloka alone.
                                   TEXT 23                           mayi bhaktir hi bhutanam
                              amrtatvaya kalpate                          distya yad asin mat-sneho                            bhavatinam mad-apanah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Devotional service rendered to Me by the living beings revives
their eternal life. O My dear damsels of Vraja, your affection for Me isyour good fortune, for it is the only means by which you have obtainedMy favor.'
                                   PURPORT     Pure devotional service is represented in the activities of the
residents of Vrajabhumi (Vrndavana). During a solar eclipse, the Lordcame from Dvaraka and met the inhabitants of Vrndavana at Samanta-pancaka. The meeting was intensely painful for the damsels of Vrajabhumibecause Lord Krsna apparently left them toreside at Dvaraka. But the Lord obligingly acknowledged the puredevotional service of the damsels of Vraja by speaking this verse (SB.10.82.45).
                                   TEXT 24                    mata more putra-bhave karena bandhana
                       atihina jnane kare lalana palana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Mother sometimes binds Me as her son. She nourishes and protects
Me, thinking Me utterly helpless.                                   TEXT 25
                  sakha suddha-sakhye kare, skandhe arohana
                      tumi kon bada loka,--tumi ami sama
                                 TRANSLATION     "My friends climb on My shoulders in pure friendship, saying, `What
kind of big man are You? You and I are equal.'
                                   TEXT 26
                    priya yadi mana kari' karaye bhartsana
                     veda-stuti haite hare sei mora mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "If My beloved consort reproaches Me in a sulky mood, that steals
My mind from the reverent hymns of the Vedas.
                                   PURPORT     According to the Upanisads, all living entities are dependent on
the supreme living entity, the Personality of Godhead. As it is said,nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam eko bahunam yo vidadhati kaman.- oneeternal living entity supports all the other eternal living entities.Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead maintains all the otherliving entities, they remain subordinate to the Lord, even when joinedwith Him in the reciprocation of loving affairs. But in the course ofexchanging transcendental love of the highest purity, sometimes thesubordinate devotee tries to predominate over the predominator. One wholovingly engages with the Supreme Lord as if His mother or fathersometimes supersedes the position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Similarly, His fianc\ee or lover sometimes supersedes the position ofthe Lord. But such attempts are exhibitions of the highest love. Onlyout of pure love does the subordinate lover of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead chide Him. The Lord, enjoying this chiding, takes it verynicely. The exhibition of natural love makes such activities veryenjoyable. In worship of the Supreme Lord with veneration there is nomanifestation of such natural love because the devotee considers theLord his superior.     Regulative principles in devotional service are meant for those whohave not invoked their natural love of Godhead. When natural lovearises, all regulative methodsare surpassed, and pure love is exhibitedbetween the Lord and the devotee. Although on such a platform of lovethe devotee sometimes appears to predominate over the Lord or transgressregu lative principles, such dealings are far more advanced thanordinary dealings through regulative principles with awe and veneration.A devotee who is actually free from all designations due to completeattachment in love for the Supreme exhibits spontaneous love forGodhead, which is always superior to the devotion of regulativeprinciples.     The informal language used between lover and beloved is significant
of pure affection. When devotees worship their beloved as the mostvenerable object, spontaneous loving sentiments are observed to belacking. A neophyte devotee who follows the Vedic instructions thatregulate those who lack pure love of Godhead may superficially seem moreexalted than a devotee in spontaneous love of Godhead. But in fact suchspontaneous pure love is far superior to regulated devotional service.Such pure love of Godhead is always glorious in all respects, more sothan reverental devotional service rendered by a less affectionatedevotee.
                                  TEXT 27-28                     ei suddha-bhakta lana karimu avatara
                     kariba vividha-vidha adbhuta vihara
                    vaikunthadye nahi ye ye Iilara pracara
                    se se Iila kariba, yate mora camatkara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Taking these pure devotees with Me, I shall descend and sport in
various wonderful ways, unknown even in Vaikuntha. I shall broadcastsuch pastimes by which even I am amazed.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Krsna in the form of Lord Caitanya ed ucates His devotees to
develop progressively to the stage of pure devotional service. Thus Heappears periodically as a devotee to take part in various wonderfulactivities depicted in His sublime philosophy and teachings.     There are innumerable Vaikuntha planets in the spiritual sky, andin all of them the Lord accepts the service rendered by His eternaldevotees in a reverential mood. Therefore Lord Sri Krsna presents Hismost confidential pastimes as He enjoys them in His transcendentalrealm. Such pastimes are so attractive that they attract even the Lord,and thus He relishes them in the form of Lord Caitanya.
                                   TEXT 29                     mo-visaye gopi-ganera upapati bhave
                      yoga-maya karibeka apana-prabhave
                                 TRANSLATION     "The influence of yogamaya will inspire the gopis with the
sentiment that I am their paramour.
                                   PURPORT     Yogamaya is the name of the internal potency that makes the Lord
forget Himself and become an object of love for His pure devotee indifferent transcendental mellows. This yogamaya potency creates aspiritual sentiment in the minds of the damsels of Vraja by which theythink of Lord Krsna as their paramour. This sentiment is never to be
compared to mundane illicit sexual love. It has nothing to do withsexual psychology, although the pure love of such devotees seems to besexual. One should knowfor certain that nothing can exist in this cosmicmanifestation that has no real counterpart in the spiritual field. Allmaterial manifestations are emanations of the transcendence. The eroticprinciples of amorous love reflected in mixed material values areperverted reflections of the reality of spirit, but one cannotunderstand the reality unless one is sufficiently educated in thespiritual science.
                                   TEXT 30                    amiha na jani taha, na jane gopi-gana
                  dunhara rupa-gune dunhara nitya hare mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Neither the gopis nor I shall notice this, for our minds will
always be entranced by one another's beauty and qualities.
                                   PURPORTIn the Vaikuntha planets are predominated by Narayana. His devotees
features He does, and the exchange of devotion there is on the platformof reverence. But above all these Vaikuntha planets is Goloka, orKrsnaloka, where the original Personality of Godhead, Krsna, fullymanifests His pleasure potency in free loving affairs. Since thedevotees in the material world know almost nothing about these affairs,the Lord desires to show these affairs to them.     In Goloka Vrndavana there is an exchange of love known as parakiya-rasa. It is something like the attraction of a married woman for a manother than her husband. In the material world this sort of relationshipis most abominable because it is a perverted reflection of theparakiya-rasa in the spiritual world, where it is the highest kind of lovingaffair. Such feelings between the devotee and the Lord are presented bythe influence of yogamaya. Bhagavad-gita states that devotees of the highest grade are u nd er the care of daiva-maya, or yogamaya. Mahatmanastu mam partha daivim prakrtim asritah (Bg. 9. 13). Those who areactually great souls (mahatmas) are fully absorbed in Krsnaconsciousness, always engaged in the service of the Lord. They are underthe care of daiviprakrti, or yogamaya. Yogamaya creates a situation inwhich the devotee is prepared to transgress all regulative principlessimply to love Krsna. A devotee naturally does not like to transgressthe laws of reverence for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but by theinfluence of yogamaya he is prepared to do anything to love the SupremeLord better.     Those under the spell of the material energy cannot at allappreciate the activities of yogamaya, for a conditioned soul can hardlyunderstand the pure reciprocation between the Lord and His devotee. Butby executing devotional service under the regulative principles, one canbecome very highly elevated and then begin to appreciate the dealings ofpure love under the management of yogamaya.     I n the spiritual loving sentiment induced by the yogamaya potency,
both Lord Sri Krsna and the damsels of Vraja forget themselves inspiritual rapture. By the influence of such forgetfulness, theattractive beauty of the gopis plays a prominent part in thetranscendental satisfaction of the Lord, who has nothing to do withmundane sexology. Because spiritual love of Godhead is above everythingmundane, the gopis supeficially seem to transgress the codes of mundanemorality. This perpetually puzzles mundane moralists. Therefore yogamayaacts to cover the Lord and His pastimes from the eyes of mundaners, asconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita, where the Lord says that He reserves theright of not being exposed to everyone.     The acts of yogamaya make it possible for the Lord and the gopis,in loving ecstasy, to sometimes meet and sometimes separate. Thesetranscendental loving affairs of the Lord are unimaginable toempiricists involved in the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth.Therefore the Lord Himself appears before the mundaners to bestow uponthem the highest form of spiritual realization and also personallyrelish its essence. The Lord is so merciful that He Himself descends totake the fallen souls back home to the kingdom of Godhead, where theerotic principles of Godhead are eternally relished in their real form,distinct from the perverted sexual love so much adored and indulged inby the fallen souls in their diseased condition. The reason the Lorddisplays the rasa-Iila is essentially to induce all the fallen souls togive up their diseased morality and religiosity, and to attract them tothe kingdom of God to enjoy the reality. A person who actuallyunderstands what the rasa-Iila is will certainly hate to indulge inmundane sex life. For the realized soul, hearing the Lord's rasa-lilathrough the proper channel will result in complete abstinence frommaterial sexual pleasure.
                                   TEXT 31                    dharma chadi' rage dunhe karaye milana
                 kabhu mile, kabhu na mi1e,--daivera ghatana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Pure attachment will unite us even at the expense of moral and
religious duties [dharma]. Destiny will sometimes bring us together andsometimes separate us.
                                   PURPORT     The gopis came out to meet Krsna in the dead of night when they
heard the sound of Krsna's flute. Srila Rupa Gosvami has accordinglycomposed a nice verse that describes the beautiful boy called Govindastanding by the bank of the Yamuna with His flute to His lips in theshining moonlight. Those who want to enjoy life in the materialistic wayof society, friendship and love should not go to the Yamuna to see theform of Govinda. The sound of Lord Krsna's flute is so sweet that it hasmade the gopis forget all about their reiationships with their kinsmenand flee to Krsna in the dead of night.     By leaving home in that way, the gopis have transgressed the Vedicregulations of household life. This indicates that when natural feelingsof love for Krsna become fully manifest, a devotee can neglect
conventional social rules and regulations. In the material world we aresituated in designative positions only, but pure devotional servicebegins when one is freed from all designations. When love for Krsna isawakened, then the designative positions are overcome.     The spontaneous attraction of Sri Krsna for His dearest parts andparcels generates an enthusiasm that obliges Sri Krsna and the gopis tomeet together. To celebrate this transcendental enthusiasm, there isneed of a sentiment of separation between the lover and beloved. In thecondition of material tribulation, no one wants the pangs of separation.But in the transcendental form, the very same separation, being absolutein its, nature, strengthens the ties of love and enhances the desire ofthe lover and beloved to meet. The period of separation, evaluatedtranscendentally, ismore relishable than the actual meeting, which lacks the feelings ofincreasing anticipation because the lover and beloved are both present.
                                   TEXT 32                     ei saba rasa-niryasa kariba as vada
                    ei dvare kariba saba bhaktere prasada
                                 TRANSLATION     "I shall taste the essence of all these rasas, and in this way I
shall favor all the devotees.
                                   TEXT 33
                    vrajera nirmala raga suni' bhakta-gana
                  raga-marge bhaje yena chadi' dharma-karma
                                 TRANSLATION     "Then, by hearing about the pure love of the residents of Vraja,
devotees will worship Me on the path of spontaneous love, abandoning allrituals of religiosity and fruitive activity."
                                   PURPORT     Many realized souls, such as Raghunatha dasa Gosvami and King
Kulasekhara, have recommended with great emphasis that one develop thisspontaneous love of Godhead, even at the risk of transgressing all thetraditional codes of morality and religiosity. Sri Raghunatha dasaGosvami, one of the six Gosvamis of Vrndavana, has written in hisprayers called the Manah-siksa that one should simply worship Radha andKrsna with all attention. Na dharmam nadharmam sruti-gana-niruktam kilakuru: one should not be much interested in performing Vedic rituals orsimply following rules and regulations.     King Kulasekhara has written similarly, in his book Mukunda-mala-stotra:     nastha dharme na vasu-nicaye naiva kamopabhoge     yad bhavyam tad bhavatu bhagavan purva-karmanurupam     etat prarthyam mama bahu-matam janma janmantare 'pi
     tvat-padambho-ruha- vuga-gata niscala bhaktir astu"I have no attraction for performing religious rituals nor holding anyearthly kingdom. I do not care for sense enjoyments; let them appear anddisappear in accordance with my previous deeds. My only desire is to befixed in devotional service to the lotus feet of the Lord, even though Imay continue to take birth here life after life."
                                   TEXT 34                             anugrahaya bhaktanam
                            manusam deham asritah                            bhajate tadrsih krida                          yah srutva tat-paro bhavet
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna manifests His eternal humanlike form and performs His
pastimes to show mercy to the devotees. Having heard such pastimes, oneshould engage in service to Him."
                                   PURPORT     This text is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.37). The Supreme
Personality of Godhead has innumerable expansions of His transcendentalform who eternally exist in the spiritual world. This material world isonly a perverted reflection of the spiritual world, where everything ismanifested without inebriety. There everything is in its originalexistence, free from the domination of time. Time cannot deteriorate orinterfere with the conditions in the spiritual world, where differentmanifestations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are the recipientsof theworship of different living entities in their constitutional spiritualpositions. In the spiritual world all existence is unadulteratedgoodness. The goodness found in the material world is contaminated bythe modes of passion and ignorance.     The saying that the human form of life is the best position fordevotional service has its special significance because only in thisform can a living entity revive his eternal relationship with theSupreme Personality of Godhead. The human form is considered the higheststate in the cycle of the species of life in the material world. If onetakes advantage of this highest kind of material form, one can regainhis position of devotional service to the Lord.     Incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead appear in allthe species of life, although this is inconceivable to the human brain.The Lord's pastimes are differentiated according to the appreciatingcapacity of the different types of bodies of the living entities. TheSupreme Lord bestows the most merciful benediction to human society whenHe appears in His human form. It is then that humanity gets theopportunity to engage in different kinds of eternal service to the Lord.     Special natural appreciation of the descriptions of a particularpastime of Godhead indicates the constitutional position of a livingentity. Adoration, servitorship, friendship, parental affection andconjugal love are the five primary relationships with Krsna. The highestperfectional stage of the conjugal relationship, enriched by many
sentiments, gives the maximum relishable mellow to the devotee.     The Lord appears in different incarnations--as a fish, tortoise andboar, as Parasurama, Lord Rama, Buddha and so on--to reciprocate thedifferent appreciations of living entities in different stages ofevolution. The conjugal relationship of amorous love called parakiya-rasa is the unparalleled perfection of love exhibited by Lord Krsna andHis devotees.     A class of so-called devotees known assahajiyas try to imitate theLord's pastimes, although they have no understanding of the amorous lovein His expansions of pleasure potency. Their superficial imitation cancreate havoc on the path for the advancement of one's spiritualrelationship with the Lord. Material sexual indulgence can never beequated with spiritual love, which is in unadulterated goodness. Theactivities of the sahaiiyas simply lower one deeper into the materialcontamination of the senses and mind. Krsna's transcendental pastimesdisplay eternal servitorship to Adhoksaja, the Supreme Lord, who isbeyond all conception through material senses. Materialistic conditionedsouls do not understand the transcendental exchanges of love, but theylike to indulge in sense gratification in the name of devotionalservice. The activities of the Supreme Lord can never be understood byirresponsible persons who think the pastimes of Radha and Krsna to beordinary affairs. The rasa dance is arranged by Krsna's internal potencyyogamaya, and it is beyond the grasp of the materially affected person.Trying to throw mud into transcendence with their perversity, thesahajiyas misinterpret the sayings tat- paratvena nirmalam an d tat-parobhavet. B y m isi n te rp re ti n g tadrsih kridah, the y want toindulge in sex while pretending to imitate Lord Krsna. But one mustactually understand the imports of the words through the intelligence ofthe authorized gosvamis. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura, in his prayers tothe Gosvamis, has explained his inability to understand such spiritualaffairs.      rupa-raghunatha-pade ha-ibe akuti     kabe hama bujhaba se yugala-piriti"When I shall be eager to understand the literature given by theGosvamis, then I shall be able to understand the transcendental loveaffairs of Radha and Krsna." In other words, unless one is trained underthe disciplic succession of the Gosvamis, one cannot understand Radhaand Krsna. The conditioned souls are naturally averse to understandingthe spiritual existence of the Lord, and if they try to know thetranscendental nature of the Lord's pastimes while they remain absorbedin materialism, they are sure to blunder like the sahajiyas.
                                   TEXT 35                    'bhavet' kriya vidhilin, sei iha kaya
                   kartavya avasya ei, anyatha pratya vaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Here the use of the verb "bhavet," which is in the imperative mood,
tells us that this certainly must be done. Noncompliance would beabandonment of duty.
                                   PURPORT     This imperative is applicable to pure devotees. Neophytes will be
able to understand these affairs only after being elevated by regulateddevotional service under the expert guidance of the spiritual master.Then they too will be competent to hear of the love affairs of Radha andKrsna.     As long as one is in material conditional life, strict disciplineis required in the matter of moral and immoral activities. The absoluteworld is transcendental and free from such distinctions because thereinebriety is not possible. But in this material world a sexual appetitenecessitates distinction between moral and immoral conduct. There are nosexual activities in the spiritual world. The transactions between loverand beloved in the spiritual world are pure transcendental love andunadulterated bliss.     One who has not been attracted by the transcendental beauty of rasawill certainly be dragged down into material attraction, thus to act inmaterial contamination and progress to the darkest region of hellishlife. But by understanding the conjugal love of Radha and Krsna one isfreed from the grip of attraction to material so-calledlove between man and woman. Similarly if one understands the pureparental love of Nanda and Yasoda for Krsna, he will be saved from beingdragged into material parental affection. If one accepts Krsna as thesupreme friend, the attraction of material friendship will be finishedfor him, and he will not be dismayed by so-called friendship withmundane wranglers. If he is attracted by servitorship to Krsna, he willno longer have to serve the material body in the degraded status ofmaterial existence with the false hope of becoming master in the future.Similarly, one who sees the greatness of Krsna in neutrality willcertainly never again seek the so-called relief of impersonalist orvoidist philosophy. If one is not attracted by the transcendental natureof Krsna, one is sure to be attracted to material enjoyment, thus tobecome implicated in the clinging network of virtuous and sinfulactivities and continue material existence by transmigrating from onematerial body to another. Only in Krsna consciousness can one achievethe highest perfection of life.
                                  TEXT 36-37                    ei vancha yaiche krsna-prakatya-karana
                      asura-samhara--anusanga prayojana
                    ei mata caitanya-krsna purna bhaga van
                    yuga-dharma-pravartana nahe tanra kama
                                 TRANSLATION     Just as these desires are the fundamental reason for Krsna's
appearance whereas destroying the demons is only an incidentalnecessity, so for Sri Krsna Caitanya, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, promulgating the dharma of the age is incidental.
                                   TEXT 38                     kona karane yabe haila avatare mana
                    yuga-dharma-kala haila se kale milana
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord desired to appear for another reason, the time for
promulgating the religion of the age also arose.
                                   TEXT 39
                      dui hetu avatari' lana bhakta-gana
                      apane asvade prema-nama-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus with two intentions the Lord appeared with His devotees and
tasted the nectar of prema with the congregational chanting of the holyname.
                                   TEXT 40
                      sei dvare acandale kirtana sancare
                   nama-prema-mala ganthi' paraila samsare
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus He spread kirtana even among the untouchables. He wove a
wreath of the holy name and prema with which He garlanded the entirematerial world.
                                   TEXT 41
                     ei-mata bhakta-bhava kari' angikara
                      apani acari' bhakti karila pracara
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, assuming the sentiment of a devotee, He preached
devotional service while practicing it Himself.
                                   PURPORT     When Rupa Gosvami met Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Prayaga
(Allahabad), he offered his respectful obeisances by submitting thatLord Caitanya was more magnanimous than any other avatara of Krsnabecause He was distributing love of Krsna. His mission was to enhancelove of Godhead. In the human form of life the highestachievement is toattain the platform of love of Godhead. Lord Caitanya did not invent asystem of religion, as people sometimes assume. Religious systems aremeantto show the existence of God, who is then generally approached asthe cosmic order-supplier. But Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'stranscendental mission is to distribute love of Godhead to everyone.
Anyone who accepts God as the Supreme can take to the process ofchanting Hare Krsna and become a lover of God. Therefore Lord Caitanyais the most magnanimous. This munificent broadcasting of devotionalservice is possible only for Krsna Himself. Therefore Lord Caitanya isKrsna.     In Bhagavad-gita Krsna has taught the philosophy of surrender tothe Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who has surrendered to theSupreme can make further progress by learning to love Him. Therefore theKrsna consciousness movement propagated by Lord Caitanya is especiallymeant for those who are cognizant of the presence of the SupremeGodhead, the ultimate controller of everything. His mission is to teachpeople how to dovetail themselves into engagements of transcendentalloving service. He is Krsna teaching His own service from the positionof a devotee. The Lord's acceptance of the role of a devotee in theeternal form of Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu is another of the Lord'swonderful features. A conditioned soul cannot reach the absolutePersonality of Godhead by his imperfect endeavor, and therefore it iswonderful that Lord Sri Krsna, in the form of Lord Gauranga, has made iteasy for everyone to approach Him.     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami has described Lord Caitanya as KrsnaHimself with the attitude of Radharani, or a combination of Radha andKrsna. His intention is to taste Krsna's sweetness in transcendentallove. Lord Caitanya does not care to think of Himself as Krsna, becauseHe wants the position of Radharani. We should remember this. A class ofso-called devotees called the naoiya-nagari or gaura-nagari pretend thatthey have the sentiment of gopis toward Lord Caitanya, but they do notrealize that He placed Himself not as the enjoyer, Krsna, but as theenjoyed, the devotee of Krsna. The concoctions of unauthorized personspretending to be bona fide have not been accepted by Lord Caitanya.Presentations such as those of the gaura-nagari are only disturbances tothe sincere execution of the mission of Lord Caitanya. Lord Caitanya isundoubtedly Krsna Himself, and He is always nondifferent fro m Srim atiRad hara ni. B ut the emotio n tech n ically called vioralambha-bhava,which the Lord adopted for confidential reasons, should not be disturbedin the name of service. A mundaner should not unnecessarily intrude intoaffairs of transcendence and thereby displease the Lord. One must alwaysbe on guard against this sort of devotional anomaly. A devotee is notmeant to create disturbances to Krsna. As Srila Rupa Gosvami hasexplained, devotional service is anukulyena, or favorable to Krsna.Acting unfavorably toward Krsna is not devotion. Kamsa was the enemy ofKrsna. He always thought of Krsna, but he thought of Him as an enemy.One should always avoid such unfavorable so-called service.     Lord Caitanya has accepted the role of Radharani, and we shouldsupport that position, as Svarupa Damodara did in the Gambhira (thehouse of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Puri). He always reminded LordCaitanya of Radha's feelings of separation as they are described in theSrimad-Bhagavatam, and Lord Caitanya appreciated his assistance. But thegaura-nagaris, who place Lord Caitanya in the position of enjoyer andthemselves as His enjoyed, are not approved by Lord Caitanya or by LordCaitanya's followers. Instead of being blessed, the foolish imitatorsare left completely apart. Their concoctions are against the principlesof Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The doctrine of transcendentalenjoyment by Krsna cannot be mixed up with the doctrine oftranscendental feeling of separation from Krsna in the role of
Radharani.
                                   TEXT 42                   dasya, sakhya, vatsalya, ara ye srngara
                   cari prema, catur-vidha bhakta-i adhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Four kinds of devotees are the receptacles of the four kinds of
mellows in love of God, namely servitude, friendship, parental affectionand conjugal love.
                                   TEXT 43
                   njja niia bhava sabe srestha kari' mane
                     njja-bhave kare krsna-sukha asvadane
                                 TRANSLATION     Each kind of devotee feels that his sentiment is the most
excellent, and thus in that mood he tastes great happiness with LordKrsna.
                                   TEXT 44
                    tatastha ha-iya mane vicara yadi kari
                   saba rasa haite s?rngare adhika madhuri
                                 TRANSLATION     But if we compare the sentiments in an impartial mood, we find that
the conjugal sentiment is superior to all in sweetness.
                                   PURPORT     No one is higher or lower than anyone else in transcendental
relationships with the Lord, for in the absolute realm everything isequal. But although these relationships are absolute, there are alsotranscendental differences between them. Thus the transcendentalrelationship of conjugal love is considered the highest perfection.
                                   TEXT 45                           yathottaram asau svada-
                             visesollasamayy api                            ratir vasanaya svadvi                            bhasate kapi kasyacit
                                 TRANSLATION     "Increasing love is experienced in various tastes, one above
another. But that love which has the highest taste in the gradualsuccession of desire manifests itself in the form of conjugal love."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srila Rupa Gosvami s Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
(2.5.38).
                                   TEXT 46                      ataeva madhura rasa kahi tara nama
                  svakiya-parakiya-bhave dvi-vidha samsthana
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore I call it madhura-rasa. It has two further divisions,
namely wedded and unwedded love.
                                   TEXT 47
                       parakiya-bhave ati rasera ullasa
                      vraia vina ihara anyatra nahi vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     There is a great increase of mellow in the unwedded conjugal mood.
Such love is found nowhere but in Vraja.
                                   TEXT 48
                    vraia-vadhu-ganera ei bhava niravadhi
                    tara madhye sri-radhaya bhavera avadhi
                                 TRANSLATION     This mood is unbounded in the damsels of Vraja, but among them it
finds its perfection in Sri Radha.
                                   TEXT 49
                    praudha nirmala-bhava prema sarvottama
                     krsnera madhurya-rasa-asvada-karana
                                 TRANSLATION     Her pure, mature love surpasses that of all others. Her love is the
cause of Lord Krsna's tasting the sweetness of the conjugalrelationship.                                   TEXT 50
                       ataeva sei bhava angikara kari'
                   sadhilena njja vancha gauranga-sri-hari
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore Lord Gauranga, who is Sri Hari Himself, accepted the
sentiments of Radha and thus fulfilled His own desires.
                                   PURPORT     Of the four kinds of reciprocation of loving service--dasya,
sakhya, vatsalya and madhurya--madhurya is considered the fullest. Butthe conjugal relationship is further divided into two varieties, namelysvakiya and parakiya. Svakiya is the relationship with Krsna as aformally married husband, and parakiya is the relationship with Krsna asa paramour. Expert analysts have decided that the transcendental ecstasyof the parakiya mellow is better because it is more enthusiastic. Thisphase of conjugal love is found in those who have surrendered to theLord in intense love, knowing well that such illicit love with aparamour is not morally approved in society. The risks involved in suchlove of Godhead make this emotion superior to the relationship in whichsuch risk is notinvolved. The validity of such risk, however, ispossible only in the transcendental realm. Svakiya and parakiya conjugallove of Godhead have no existence in the material world, and parakiya isnot exhibited anywhere in Vaikuntha, but only in the portion of GolokaVrndavana known as Vraja.     Some devotees think that Krsna is eternally the enjoyer in GolokaVrndavana but only sometimes comes to the platform of Vraja to enjoyparakiya-rasa. The sixGosvamis of Vrndavana, however, have explained that Krsna's pastimes inVraja are eternal, like His other activities in Goloka Vrndavana. Vrajais a confidential part of Goloka Vrndavana. Krsna exhibited His Vrajapastimes on the surface of this world, and similar pastimes areeternally exhibited in Vraja in Goloka Vrndavana, where parakiya-rasa isever existent.     In the Third Chapter of this epic, Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvamihas explicitly accepted the fact that Krsna appears in this materialworld at the end of the Dvapara age of the twenty-eighth catur-yuga ofVaivasvata Manu and brings with Him His Vrajadhama, which is the eternalabode of His highest pastimes. As the Lord appears by His own internalpotency, so He also brings all His paraphernalia by the same internalpotency, without extraneous help. It is further stated here in Caitanya-caritamrta that the parakiya sentiment is existent only in thattranscendental realm and nowhere else. This highest form of ecstasy canexistonly in the most confidential part of the transcendental world, butby the causeless mercy of the Lord we can have a peep into thatinvisible Vraja.     The transcendental mellow relished by the gopis in Vraja issuperexcellently featured in Srimati Radharani. Mature assimilation ofthe transcendental humor of conjugal love is represented by SrimatiRadharani, whose feelings are incomprehensible even to the Lord Himself.The intensity of Her loving service is the highest form of ecstasy. Noone can surpass Srimati Radharani in relishing the transcendental mellow
qualities of the Lord. Therefore the Lord Himself agreed to assume theposition of Radharani in the form of Lord Sri Gauranga. He then relishedthe highest position of parakiya-rasa, as exhibited in thetranscendental abode of Vraja.
                                   TEXT 51                  suresanam durgam gatir atisayenopanisadam
                 muninam sarvasvam pranata-pataimam madhurima                viniryasah premno nikhila-pasu-palambuja-drsam              sa caitanyah kim me punar api drsor yasyati padam
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Caitanya is the shelter of the demigods, the goal of the
Upanisads, the be-all and end-all of the great sages, the beautifulshelter of His devotees, and the essence of love for the lotus-eyedgopis. Will He again be the object of my vision?"
                                   TEXT 52
                 aparam kasyapi pranayi jana-vrndasya kutuki
               rasa-stomam hrtva madhuram upabhoktum kamapi yah               rucam svam avavre dyutim ina tadiyam prakatayan                 sa devas caitanyakrtir atitaram nah krpayatu
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Krsna desired to taste the limitless nectarean mellows of the
love of one of His multitude of loving damsels [Sri Radha], and so Hehas assumed the form of Lord Caitanya. He has tasted that love whilehiding His own dark complexion with Her effulgent yellow color. May thatLord Caitanya confer upon us His grace."
                                   PURPORT     Texts 51 and 52 are from the Stava-mala of Srila Rupa Gosvami.                                   TEXT 53                  bhava-grahanera hetu kaila dharma-sthapana
                    tara mukhya hetu kahi, suna sarva jana
                                 TRANSLATION     To accept ecstatic love is the main reason He appeared and
reestablished the religious system for this age. I shall now explainthat reason. Everyone please listen.
                                   TEXT 54                      mula hetu age slokera kaila abhasa
                      ebe kahi sei slokera artha prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Having first given hints about the verse describing the principal
reason why the Lord appeared, now I shall manifest its full meaning.
                                   TEXT 55
               radha krsna-pranaya-vikrtir nladini saktir asmad
                ekatmanav api bhuvi pura deha-bhedam gatau tau            caitanyakhyam prakatam adhuna tad-dvayam caikyam aptam              radha-bhava-dyuti-su valitam naumi krsna-s varupam
                                 TRANSLATION     "The loving affairs of Sri Radha and Krsna are transcendental
manifestations of the Lord's internal pleasure-giving potency. AlthoughRadha and Krsna are one in Their identity, They separated Themselveseternally. Now these two transcendental identities have again united, inthe form of Sri Krsna Caitanya. I bow down to Him, who has manifestedHimself with the sentiment and complexion of Srimati Radharani althoughHe is Krsna Himself."
                                   PURPORT     This text is from the diary of Srila Svarupa Damodara Gosvami. It
appears as the fifth of the first fou rteen verses of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta.
                                   TEXT 56                    radha-krsna eka atma, dui deha dhari'
                      anyonye vilase rasa asvadana kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     Radha and Krsna are one and the same, but They have assumed two
bodies. Thus They enjoy each other, tasting the mellows of love.
                                   PURPORT     The two transcendentalists Radha and Krsna are a puzzle to
materialists. The above description of Radha and Krsna from the diary ofSrila Svarupa Damodara Gosvami is a condensed explanation, but one needsgreat spiritual insight to understand the mystery of these twopersonalities. One is enjoying in two. Sri Krsna is the potent factor,and Srimati Radharani is the internal potency. According to Vedantaphilosophy, there is no difference between the potent and potency; theyare identical. We cannot differentiate between one and the other, anymore than we can separate fire from heat.     Everything in the Absolute is inconceivable in relative existence.
Therefore in relative cognizance it is very difficult to assimilate thistruth of the oneness between the potent and the potency. The philosophyof inconceivable oneness and difference propounded by Lord Caitanya isthe only source of understanding for such intricacies of transcendence.     In fact, Radharani is the internal potency of Sri Krsna, and Sheeternally intensifies the pleasure of Sri Krsna. Impersonalists cannotunderstand this without the help of a maha-bhagavata devotee. The veryname Rad ha suggests th at S he is eternally the topmost mistress of thecomforts of Sri Krsna. As such, She is the medium transmitting theliving entities' service to Sri Krsna. Devotees in Vrndavana thereforeseek the mercy of Srimati Radharani in order to be recognized as lovingservitors of Sri Krsna.     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally approaches the fallenconditioned souls of the iron age to deliver the highest principle oftranscendental relationships with the Lord. The activities of LordCaitanya are primarily in the role of the pleasuregiving portion of Hisinternal potency.     The absolute Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, is the omnipotentform of transcendental existence, knowledge and bliss in full. Hisinternal potency is exhibited first as sat, or existence--or, in otherwords, as the portion that expands the existence function of the Lord.The same potency while displaying full knowledge is called cit, orsamvit, which expands the transcendental forms of the Lord. Finally, thesame potency while playing as a pleasure-giving medium is known ashladini, or the transcendental blissful potency. Thus the Lord manifestsHis internal potency in three transcendental divisions.
                                   TEXT 57                       sei dui eka ebe caitanya gosani
                     rasa asvadite donhe haila eka-thani
                                 TRANSLATION     Now, to enJoy rasa, They have appeared in one body as Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 58
                      ithi Iagi' age kari tara vivarana
                    yaha haite haya gaurera mahima-kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore I shall first delineate the position of Radha and Krsna.
From that the glory of Lord Caitanya will be known.
                                   TEXT 59
                    m-dhika hayena krsnera pranaya-vikara
                    svarupa-sakti--`hladini' nama yanhara                                 TRANSLATION
     Srimati Radhika is the transformation of Krsna's love. She is His
internal energy called hladini.
                                   TEXT 60
                      hladini karaya krsne anandasvadana
                     hladinira dvara kare bhaktera posana
                                 TRANSLATION     That hladini energy gives Krsna pleasure and nourishes His
devotees.
                                   PURPORT     Srila J iva Gosvami has elaborately discussed the hladini potency
in his priti- sandarbha. He says that the Vedas clearly state, "Onlydevotional service can lead one to the Personality of Godhead. Onlydevotional service can help a devotee meet the Supreme Lord face toface. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is attracted by devotionalservice, and as such the ultimate supremacy of Vedic knowledge rests inknowing the science of devotional service."     What is the particular attraction that makes the Supreme Lordenthusiastic to accept devotional service, and what is the nature ofsuch service? The Vedic scriptures inform us that the SupremePersonality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, is selfsufficient, and thatmaya, nescience, can never influence Him at all. As such, the potencythat overcomes the Supreme must be purely spiritual. Such a potencycannot be anything of the material manifestation. The bliss enjoyed bythe Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be of material compositionlike the impersonalist conception of the bliss of Brahman. Devotionalservice is reciprocation between two, and therefore it cannot be locatedsimply within one's self. Therefore the bliss of self-realization,brahmananda, cannot be equated with devotional service.     The Supreme Personality of Godhead has three kinds of internalpotency, namely the hladini or pleasure potency, sandhini or existentialpotency, and samvit, or cognitive potency. I n the Visnu purana(1.12.69) the Lord is addressed as follows: "0 Lord, You are the supportof everything. The three attributes hladini, sandhini and samvit existin You as one spiritual energy. But the material modes, which causehappiness, misery and mixtures of the two,do not exist in You, for Youhave no material qualities."     Hlaoini is the personal manifestation of the blissfulness of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, by which He enjoys pleasure. Because thepleasure potency is perpetuaily present in the Supreme Lord, the theoryof the impersonalist that the Lord appears in the material mode ofgoodness cannot be accepted. The impersonalist conclusion is against theVedic version that the Lord possesses a transcendental pleasure potency.When the pleasure potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead isexhibited by His grace in the person of a devotee,that manifestation iscalled love of God. Love of God is another epithet of the pleasure
potency of the Lord. Therefore devotional service reciprocated betweenthe Lord and His devotee is an exhibition of the transcendental pleasurepotency of the Lord.     The potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that alwaysenriches Him with transcendental bliss is not material, but theSankarites have accepted it as such because they are ignorant of theidentity of the Supreme Lord and His pleasure potency. Those ignorantpersons cannot understand the distinction between impersonal spiritualbliss and the variegatedness of the spiritual pleasure potency. Thehlaoini potency gives the Lord all transcendental pleasure, and the Lordbestows such a potency upon His pure devotee.
                                   TEXT 61                   sac-cid-ananda, purna, krsnera s varupa
                    eka-i cic-chakti tanra dhare tina rupa
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna's body is eternal [sat], full of knowledge [cit] and
full of bliss [ananda]. His one spiritual energy manifests three forms.
                                   TEXT 62
                     anandamse hladini sad-amse sandhini
                   cid-amse sam vit--yare jnana kari' mani
                                 TRANSLATION     Hladini is His aspect of bliss; sandhini, of eternal existence; and
samvit, of cognizance, which is also accepted as knowledge.
                                   PURPORT     I n h is th esis Bhagavat-sandarbha (ve rse 102), Sril a J iva G
osva mi ex plai n s th e potencies of the Lord as follows. Thetranscendental potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by which Hemaintains His existence is called sandhini. The transcendental potencyby which He knows Himself and causes others to know Him is calledsamvit. The transcendental potency by which He possesses transcendentalbliss and causes His devotees to have bliss is called hladini.     The total exhibition of these potencies is called visuddha-sattva,and this platform of spiritual variegatedness is displayed even in thematerial world,when the Lord appears here. The pastimes andmanifestations of the Lord in the material world are therefore not atall material; they belong to the pure transcendental state. Bhagavad-gita confirms that anyone who understands the transcendental nature ofthe Lord's appearance, activities and disappearance becomes eligible forfreedom from material bondage upon quitting the present materialtabernacle. He can enter the spiritual kingdom to associate with theSupreme Personality of Godhead and reciprocate the hladini potency intransactions between him and the Lord. In the mundane mode of goodnessthere are tinges of passion and ignorance. Therefore mundane goodness,
being mixed, is called misra-sattva. But the transcendentalvariegatedness of visuddha-sattva is completely free from all mundanequalities. Visuddha-sattva is therefore the proper atmosphere in whichto experience the Personality of Godhead and His transcendentalpastimes. Spiritual variegatedness is eternally independent of allmaterial conditions and is nondifferent from the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, both being absolute. The Lord and His devotees simultaneouslyperceive the hladinipotency directly by the power of samvit.     The material modes of nature control the conditioned souls, but theSupreme Personality of Godhead is never influenced by these modes, asall Vedic literatures directly and indirectly corroborate. Lord KrsnaHimself says in the Eleventh Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, sattvam rajastama iti guna jivasya naiva me: "The material modes of goodness, passionand ignorance are connected with the conditioned souls, but never withMe, the Supreme Personality of Godhead." The Visnu purana confirms thisas follows:     sattvadayo na santise     yatra na prakrta gunah     sa suddhah sarva-suddhebhyah     puman adyah prasidatu"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, is beyond the threequalities goodness, passion and ignorance. No material qualities existin Him. May that original person, Narayana, who is situated in acompletely transcendental position, be pleased with us." In the TenthCanto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, Indra praised Krsna as follows:     visuddha-sattvam tava dhama santam     tapomayam dh vasta-rajas-tamaskam     mayamayo 'yam guna-sampravaho     na vidyate te'grahananubandhah"My dear Lord, Your abode is visuddha-sattva, always undisturbed by thematerial qualities, and the activities there are in transcendentalloving service unto Your feet. The goodness, austerity and penance ofthe devotees enhance such activities, which are always free from thecontamination of passion and ignorance. Material qualities cannot touchYou under any circumstances." (SB. 10.27.4)      When not manifested,the modes of material nature are said to be in goodness. When they areexternally manifested and active in producing the varieties of materialexistence, they are said to be in passion. And when there is a lack ofactivity and variegatedness, they are said to be in ignorance. I n otherwords, the pensive mood is goodness, activity is passion, and inactivityis ignorance. Above all these mundane qualitative manifestations isvisuddha-sattva. When it is predominated by sandhini it is perceivableas the existence of all that be. When predominated by samvit, it isperceived as knowledge in transcendence. And when predominated byhladini it is perceived as the most confidential love of Godhead.Visuddha-sattva, the simultaneous manifestation of these three in one,is the main feature of the kingdom of God.     The Absolute Truth is therefore the substance of reality, eternallymanifest in three energies. The manifestation of the internal energy ofthe Lord is the inconceivable variegatedness,the manifestation of themarginal energy is the living entity, and the manifestation of theexternal energy is the material cosmos. Therefore the Absolute Truthincludes these four principles--the Supreme Personality of GodheadHimself, His internal energy, His marginal energy and His external
energy. The form of the Lord and the expansions of His form as svayam-rupa and vaibhava-prakasa are directly the enjoyers of the internalenergy, which is the eternal exhibitor of the spiritual world, the mostconfidential of the manifestations of energy. The externalmanifestation, the material energy, provides the covering bodies of theconditioned living entities, from Brahma down to the insignificant ant.This covering energy is manifested under the three modes of materialnature and appreciated in various ways by living entities in both thehigher and lower forms of life.     Each of the three divisions of the internal potency--the sandhinisamvit and hladini energies--influences one of the external potencies bywhich the conditioned souls are conducted. Such influence manifests thethree qualitative modes of material nature, proving definitely that theliving entities, the margmal potency, are eternally servitors of theLord and are therefore controlled by either the internal or the externalpotency.
                                   TEXT 63                           hladini sandhini sam vit
                          tvayy eka sarva-samsthitau                             hlada-tapakari misra                            tvayi no guna-varjite
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Lord, You are the support of everything. The three attributes
hladini, sandhini and samvit exist in You as one spiritual energy. Butthe material modes, which cause happiness, misery and mixtures of thetwo, do not exist in You, for You have no material qualities."
                                   PURPORT     This text is from the Visnu purana (1.12.69).                                   TEXT 64                  sandhinira sara amsa--`suddha-sattva' nama
                    bhagavanera satta haya yahate visrama
                                 TRANSLATION     The essential portion of the sandhini potency is suddha-sattva.
Lord Krsna's existence rests upon it.
                                   TEXT 65
                   mata, pita, sthana, grha, sayyasana ara
                    e-saba krsnera suddha-sattvera vikara
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna's mother, father, abode, house, bedding, seats and so on are
all transformations of suddha-sattva.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Krsna's father, mother and household affairs are all displayed
in the same visuddha-sattva existence. A living entity situated in thestatus of pure goodness can understand the form, quality and otherfeatures of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna consciousnessbegins on the platform of pure goodness. Although there is a faintrealization of Krsna at first, Krsna is actually realized as Vasudeva,the absolute proprietor of omnipotence or the prime predominating Deityof all potencies. When the living entity is situated in visuddha-sattva,transcendental to the three material modes of nature, he can perceivethe form, quality and other features of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead through his service attitude. The status of pure goodness is theplatform of understanding, for the Supreme Lord is always in spiritualexistence.     Krsna is always all-spiritual. Aside from the parents of thePersonality of Godhead, all the other paraphernalia of His existence isalso essentially a manifestation of sandhini sakti, or a transformationof visuddha-sattva. To make this more clear, it may be said that thissandhinisakti of the internal potency maintains and manifests all thevariegatedness of the spiritual world. In the kingdom of God, the Lord'sservants and maidservants, His consorts, His father and mother andeverything else are all transformations of the spiritual existence ofsandhini sakti. The existential sandhinisakti in the external potencysimilarly expands all the variegatedness of the material cosmos, fromwhich we can have a glimpse of the spiritual field.
                                   TEXT 66                     sattvam visuddham vasude va-saboitam
                        yad iyate tatra puman apavrtah                      sattve ca tasmin bhagavan vasudevo                       hy adhoksajo me manasa vidhiyate
                                 TRANSLATION     "The condition of pure goodness [suddha-sattva], in which the
Supreme Personality of Godhead appears uncovered, is called vasudeva. Inthat pure state the Supreme Godhead, who is beyond the material sensesand who is known as Vasudeva, is perceived by my mind."
                                   PURPORT     This text from Srimad-Bhagavatam (4.3.23), spoken by Lord Siva when
he condemned Daksa, the father of Sati, as an opponent of Visnu,confirms beyond a doubt that Lord Krsna, His name, His fame, Hisqualities and everything in connection with His paraphernalia exist inthesandhinisakti of the Lord's internal potency.
                                   TEXT 67                   krsne bhaga vatta jnana--sam vitera sara
                     brahma jnanacika saba tara parivara
                                 TRANSLATION     The essence of the samvit potency is knowledge that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is Lord Krsna. All other kinds of knowledge, suchas the knowledge of Brahman, are its components.
                                   PURPORT     The activities of the samvit-sakti produce the effect of cognition.
Both the Lord and the living entities are cognizant. Sri Krsna, as theSupreme Personality of Godhead, has full knowledge of everythingeverywhere, and therefore there are no hindrances to His cognition. Hecan have knowledge merely by glancing over an object, whereasinnumerable impediments block the cognition of ordinary living beings.The cognition of the living beings has three divisions: directknowledge, indirect knowledge and perverted knowledge. Sense perceptionof material objects by the mundane senses, such as the eye, ear, noseand hand, always produces definitely perverted knowledge. This illusionis a presentation of the material energy, which is influenced by thesamvit-sakti in a perverted manner. Negative cognition of an objectbeyond the reach of sense perception is the way of indirect knowledge,which is not altogether imperfect but which produces only fragmentaryknowledge in the form of impersonal spiritual realization and monism.But when the samvit factor of cognition is enlightened by the hladinipotency of the same internal energy, they work together, and only thuscan one attain knowledge of the Personality of Godhead. The samvit-saktishould be maintained in that state. Material knowledge and indirectspiritual knowledge are by-products of the samvit-sakti.
                                   TEXT 68                  hladinira sara `prema; prema-sara `bhava'
                  bhavera parama-kastha, nama--`maha-bhava'
                                 TRANSLATION     The essence of the hladini potency is love of God, the essence of
love of God is emotion [bhava], and the ultimate development of emotionis mahabhava.
                                   PURPORT     The product of the hladinisakti is love of Godhead, which has two
divisions--namely, pure love of Godhead and adulterated love of Godhead.Only when the hladini sakti emanates from Sri Krsna and is bestowed uponthe living being to attract Him does the living being become a purelover of God. But when the same hlaoinisakti is adulterated by theexternal material energy and emanates from the living being, it does notattract Krsna; on the contrary, the living being becomes attracted bythe glamor of the material energy. At that time instead of becoming madwith love of Godhead, the living being becomes mad after material senseenjoyment, and because of his association with the qualitative modes of
material nature, he is captivated by its interactions of distressful,unhappy feelings.
                                   TEXT 69                    mahabhava-svar\pa Sri-radha-thakurani
                    sarva-guna-khani krsna-kanta-siromani
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Radha Thakurani is the embodiment of mahabhava. She is the
repository of all good qualities and the crest jewel among all thelovely consorts of Lord Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     The unadulterated action of the hladinisakti is displayed in the
dealings of the damsels of Vraja and Srimati Radharani, who is thetopmost participant in that transcendental group. The essence of thehladini sakti is love of Godhead, the essence of love of Godhead isbhava, or transcendental sentiment, and the highest pitch of that bhavais called mahabhava.Srimati Radharani is the personified embodiment ofthese three aspects of transcendental consciousness. She is thereforethe highest principle in love of Godhead and is the supreme lovableobject of Sri Krsna.
                                   TEXT 70                           tayor apy ubhayor madhye
                            radhika sarvathadhika                             mahabhava-svarupeyam                              gunair ativariyasi
                                 TRANSLATION     "Of these two gopis [ Radharani and Candravali], Srimati Radharani
is superior in all respects. She is the embodiment of mahabhava, and Shesurpasses all in good qualities."
                                   PURPORT     This text is verse 2 of the Ujjvala-nilamani of Srila Rupa Gosvami.                                   TEXT 71                  krsna-prema-bhavita yanra cittendriya-kaya
                    krsna-nija-sakti radha kridara sahaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Her mind, senses and body are steeped in love for Krsna. She is
Krsna's own energy, and She helps Him in His pastimes.                                   PURPORT
     Srimati Radharani is as fully spiritual as Krsna. No one should
consider Her to be material. She is definitely not like the conditionedsouls, who have mental bodies, gross and subtle, covered by materialsenses. She is all-spiritual, and both Her body and mind are of the samespiritual embodiment. Because Her body is spiritual, Her senses are alsospiritual. Thus Her body, mind and senses fully shine in love of Krsna.She is the personified hladinisakti (the pleasure-giving energy of theLord's internal potency), and therefore She is the only source ofenjoyment for Sri Krsna.     Sri Krsna cannot enjoy anything that is internally different fromHim. Therefore Radha and Sri Krsna are identical. The sandhini portionof Sri Krsna's internal potency has manifested the all-attractive formof Sri Krsna, and the same internal potency, in the hladini feature, haspresented Srimati Radharani, who is the attraction for the ail-attractive. No one can match Srimati Radharani in the transcendentalpastimes of Sri Krsna.
                                   TEXT 72                     ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis
                     tabhir ya eva njja-rupataya kalabhih                     goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhuto                    go vindam adi-purusam tam aham bhaiami
                                 TRANSLATION     "I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who resides in His own
realm, Goloka, with Radha, who resembles His own spiritual figure andwho embodies the ecstatic potency [hladini]. Their companions are Herconfidantes, who embody extensions of Her bodily form and who are imbuedand permeated with ever-blissful spiritual rasa.,,
                                   PURPORT     This text is from the Brahma-samhita (5.37).                                   TEXT 73                     krsnere karaya yaiche rasa asvadana
                     kridara sahaya yaiche, suna vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Now please listen to how Lord Krsna's consorts help Him taste rasa
and how they help in His pastimes.
                                  TEXT 74-75
                   krsna-kanta-gana dekhi tri-vidha prakara
                    eka laksmi-gana, pure mahisi-gana ara                     vrajangana-rupa, ara kanta-gana-sara
                    sri-radhika haite kanta-ganera vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     The beloved consorts of Lord Krsna are of three kinds: the
goddesses of fortune, the queens, and the milkmaids of Vraja, who arethe foremost of all. These consorts all proceed from Radhika.
                                   TEXT 76
                     a vatari krsna yaiche kare a vatara
                    amsini radha haite tina ganera vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     just as the fountainhead, Lord Krsna, is the cause of all
incarnations, so Sri Radha is the cause of all these consorts.
                                   TEXT 77
                     vaibhava-gana yena tanra anga-vibhti
                     bimba-pratibimba-rupa mahisira tati
                                 TRANSLATION     The goddesses of fortune are partial manifestations of Srimati
Radhika, and the queens are reflections of Her image.
                                   TEXT 78
                  laksmi-gana tanra vaibhava-vilasamsa-rupa
                     mahisi-gana vaibhava-prakasa-svarupa
                                 TRANSLATION     The goddesses of fortune are Her plenary portions, and they display
the forms of vaibhava-vilasa. The queens are of the nature of Hervaibhava-prakasa.
                                   TEXT 79
                    akara svabhava-bh ede vraia-devi-gana
                     kaya-vyuha-rupa tanra rasera karana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Vraja-devis have diverse bodily features. They are Her
expansions and are the instruments for expanding rasa.                                   TEXT 80
                      bahu kanta vina nahe rasera ullasa
                      Iilara sahaya lagi' bahuta prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Without many consorts, there is not such exultation in rasa.
Therefore there are many manifestations of Srimati Radharani to assistin the Lord's pastimes.
                                   TEXT 81
                   tara madhye vraie nana bhava-rasa-bhede
                      krsnake karaya rasadika-lilasvade
                                 TRANSLATION     Among them are various groups of consorts in Vraja who have
varieties of sentiments and mellows. They help Lord Krsna taste all thesweetness of the rasa dance and other pastimes.
                                   PURPORT     As already explained, Krsna and Radha are one in two. They are
identical. Krsna expands Himself in multi-incarnations and plenaryportions like the purusas. Similarly, Srimati Radharani expands Herselfin multi-forms as the goddesses of fortune, the queens and the damselsof Vraja. Such expansions from Srimati Radharani are all Her plenaryportions. All these womanly forms of Krsna are expansions correspondingto His plenary expansions of Visnu forms. These expansions have beencompared to reflected forms of the original form. There is no differencebetween the original and reflected forms. The female reflections ofKrsna's pleasure potency are as good as Krsna Himself.     The plenary ex pansions of Krsna's personality are called vaibhava-vilasa an d vaibhava-prakasa, and Radha's expansions are similarlydescribed. The goddesses of fortune are vaibhava-vilasa, and the queensare vaibhava-prakasa of Radharani. Thepersonal associates of Radharani, the damsels of Vraja, are directexpansions of Her body. As expansions of Her personai form andtranscendental disposition, they are agents of different reciprocationsof love in the pastimes of Lord Krsna, under the supreme direction ofSrimati Radharani. In the transcendental realm, enjoyment is fullyrelished in variety. The exuberance of transcendental mellow isincreased by the association of a large number of personalities similarto Radharani, who are also known asgopis or sakhis. The variety ofinnumerable mistresses is a source of relish for Sri Krsna, andtherefore these expansions from Srimati Radharani are necessary forenhancing the pleasure potency of Sri Krsna. Their transcendentalexchanges of love are the superexcellent affairs of the pastimes inVrndavana. By these expansions of Srimati Radharani s personal body, Shehelps Lord Krsna taste the rasa dance and similar other activities.Srimati Radharani, being the central petal of the rasa- lila flower, is
also known by the names found in the following verses.
                                   TEXT 82                    go vindanandini radha, go vinda-mohini
                    govinda-sarvasva, sarva-kanta-siromani
                                 TRANSLATION     Radha is the one who gives pleasure to Govinda, and She is also the
enchantress of Govinda. She is the be-all and end-all of Govinda, andthe crest jewel of all His consorts.
                                   TEXT 83
                            de vi krsnamayiprokta
                             radhika para-de vata                           sarva-laksmimayi sarva-                             kantih sanmohinipara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The transcendental goddess Srimati Radharani is the direct
counterpart of Lord Sri Krsna. She is the central figure for all thegoddesses of fortune. She possesses all the attractiveness to attractthe all-attractive Personality of Godhead. She is the primeval internalpotency of the Lord."
                                   PURPORT     Th is text is from the Brhad-gautamiya-tantra.                                   TEXT 84                    `de vi' kahi dyotamana, parama sundari
                   kim va, krsna-puja-kridara vasati nagari
                                 TRANSLATION     "Devi" means "resplendent and most beautiful." Or else it means
"the lovely abode of the worship and love sports of Lord Krsna."
                                   TEXT 85
                     krsnamayi--krsna yara bhitare bahire
                  yanha yanha netra pade tanha krsna sphure
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsnamayi" means "one whose within and without are Lord Krsna."
She sees Lord Krsna wherever She casts Her glance.                                   TEXT 86
                    kimva, prema-rasamaya krsnera svarupa
                     tanra sakti tanra saha haya eka-rupa
                                 TRANSLATION     Or, She is identical with Lord Krsna, for She embodies the mellows
of love. The energy of Lord Krsna is identical with Him.
                                   PURPORT     Krsnamayi has two different imports. First, a person who always
thin ks of Krsna both within and without and who always remembers onlyKrsna, wherever he goes or whatever he sees, is called krsnamayi. Also,since Krsna's personality is full of love, His loving potency,Radharani, being nondifferent from Him, is called krsnamayi.
                                   TEXT 87                    krsna-vancha-purti-rupa kare aradhane
                     ataeva `radhika' nama purane vakhane
                                 TRANSLATION     Her worship [aradhana] consists of fulfilling the desires of Lord
Krsna. Therefore the Puranas call Her Radhika.
                                   PURPORT     The name Radha is derived from the root word aradhana, which means
"worship." The personality who excelsall in worshiping Krsna maytherefore be calied Radhika, the greatest servitor.
                                   TEXT 88                              anayaradhito nunam
                            bhagavan harir isvarah                            yan no vihaya govindah                            prito yam anayad rahah
                                 TRANSLATION     "Truly the Personality of Godhead has been worshiped by Her.
Therefore Lord Govinda, being pleased, has brought Her to a lonely spot,leaving us all behind."
                                   PURPORT     This text is from the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.30.28).                                   TEXT 89                      ataeva sarva-pujya, parama-de vata
                      sarva-palika, sarva jagatera mata
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore Radha is parama-devata, the supreme goddess, and She is
worshipable for everyone. She is the protectress of all, and She is themother of the entire universe.
                                   TEXT 90
                `sarva-laksmi'-sabda purve kariyachi vyakhyana
                  sarva-laksmi-ganera tinho hana adhisthana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have already explained the meaning of "sarva-laksmi." Radha is
the original source of all the goddesses of fortune.
                                   TEXT 91
              kim va, `sarva-laksmi,--krsnera sad-vidha aisvarya
                  tanra adhisthatri sakti--sarva-sakti-varya
                                 TRANSLATION     Or"sarva-laksmi" indicates that She fully represents the six
opulences of Krsna. Therefore She is the supreme energy of Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 92
                    sarva-saundarya-kanti vaisaye yanhate
                  sarva-laksmi-ganera sobha haya yanha haite
                                 TRANSLATION     The word "sarva-kanti" indicates that all beauty and luster rest in
Her body. All the laksmis derive their beauty from Her.
                                   TEXT 93
                 kimva `kanti'-sabde krsnera saba iccha kahe
                     krsnera sakala vancha radhatei rahe
                                 TRANSLATION     "Kanti" may also mean "all the desires of Lord Krsna." All the
desires of Lord Krsna rest in Srimati Radharani.                                  TEXT 94
                    radhika karena krsnera vanchita purana
                   `sarva-kanti'-sabdera ei artha vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srimati Radhika fulfills all the desires of Lord Krsna. This is the
meaning of "sarva-kanti."
                                   TEXT 95
                      jagat-mohana krsna, tanhara mohini
                       atae va samastera para thakurani
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna enchants the world, but Sri Radha enchants even Him.
Therefore She is the supreme goddess of all.
                                   TEXT 96
                  radha--purna-sakti, krsna--purna-saktiman
                     dui vastu bheda nai, sastra-paramana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Radha is the full power, and Lord Krsna is the possessor of
full power. The two are not different, as evidenced by the revealedscriptures.
                                   TEXT 97
                   mrgamada, tara gandha--yaiche aviccheda
                    agni, jvalate--yaiche kabhu nahi bheda
                                 TRANSLATION     They are indeed the same, just as musk and its scent are
inseparable, or as fire and its heat are nondifferent.
                                   TEXT 98
                     radha-krsna aiche sada eka-i svarupa
                      lila-rasa asvadite dhare dui-r\pa
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Radha and Lord Krsna are one, yet They have taken two forms to
enjoy the mellows of pastimes.                                 TEXT 99-100
                     prema-bhakti sikhaite apane avatari
                     radha-bhava-kanti dui angikara kari'
                    sri-krsna-caitanya-r\pe kaila avatara
                    ei ta' pancama slokera artha paracara
                                 TRANSLATION     To promulgate prema-bhakti [devotional service in love of Godhead],
Krsna appeared as Sri Krsna Caitanya with the mood and complexion of SriRadha. Thus I have explained the meaning of the fifth verse.
                                   TEXT 101
                     sastha slokera artha karite prakasa
                      prathame kahiye sei slokera abhasa
                                 TRANSLATION     To explain the sixth verse, I shall first give a hint of its
meaning.
                                   TEXT 102
                     avatari' prabhu pracarila sankirtana
                    eho bahya hetu, purve kariyachi sucana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord came to propagate sankirtana. That is an external purpose,
as I have already indicated.
                                   TEXT 103
                      avatarera ara eka ache mukhya-biia
                    rasika-sekhara krsnera sei karya nija
                                 TRANSLATION     There is a principal cause for Lord Krsna's appearance. It grows
from His own engagements as the foremost enjoyer of loving exchanges.
                                   TEXT 104
                     ati gudha hetu sei tri-vidha prakara
                    damodara-s varupa haite yahara pracara                                 TRANSLATION
     That most confidential cause is threefold. Svarupa Damodara has
revealed it.
                                   TEXT 105
                    svarupa-gosani--prabhura ati antaranga
                    tahate janena prabhura e-saba prasanga
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Gosani is the most intimate associate of the Lord. He,
therefore, knows all these topics well.
                                   PURPORT     Prior to the Lord's acceptance of the renounced order, Purusottama
Bhattacarya, a resident of Navadvipa, desired to enter the renouncedorder of life. Therefore he left home and went to Benares, where heaccepted the position of brahmacarya from a Mayavadi sannyasi. When hebecame a brahmacari, he was given the name Sri Damodara Svarupa. He leftBenares shortly after, without taking sannyasa, and he came to Nilacala,Jagannatha Puri, where Lord Caitanya was staying. He met CaitanyaMahaprabhu there and dedicated his life for the service of the Lord. Hebecame Lord Caitanya's secretary and constant companion. He used toenhance the pleasure potency of the Lord by singing appropriate songs,which were very much appreciated. Svarupa Damodara could u nderstand thesecret mission of Lord Caitanya, and it was by his grace only that allthe devotees of Lord Caitanya could know the real purpose of the Lord.     Svarupa Damodara has been identified as Lalitadevi, the secondexpansion of Rad harani. However, the authoritative Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika of Kavi-karnapu ra describes Svarupa Damodara as the sameVisakhadeviwho serves the Lord in Goloka Vrndavana. Therefore it is tobe understood that Sri Svarupa Damodara is a direct expansion ofRadharani who helps the Lord experience the attitude of Radharani.
                                   TEXT 106                    radhikara bhava-murti prabhura antara
                    sei bhave sukha-duhkha uthe nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     The heart of Lord Caitanya is the image of Sri Radhika's emotions.
Thus feelings of pleasure and pain arise constantly therein.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya's heart was full of the feelings of Srimati
Radharani, and His appearance resembled Hers. Svarupa Damodara hasexplained His attitude as radha-bhava-murti, the attitude of Radharani. One who engages in sense
gratification on the material platform can hardly understand radha-bhava, but one who is freed from the demands of sense gratification canunderstand it. Radha-bhava must be understood from the Gosvamis, thosewho are actually controllers of the senses. From such authorized sourcesit is to be known that the attitude of Srimati Radharani is the highestperfection of conjugal love, which is the highest of the fivetranscendental mellows, and it is the complete perfection of love ofKrsna.     These transcendental affairs can be understood on two platforms.One is called elevated, and the other is called super-elevated. Theloving affairs exhibited in Dvaraka are the elevated form. The super-elevated position is reached in the manifestations of the pastimes ofVrndavana. The attitude of Lord Caitanya is certainly super-elevated.     From the life of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, an intelligent personengaged in pure devotional service can understand that He always feltseparation from Krsna within Himself. I n that separation He sometimesfelt that He had found Krsna and was enjoyingthe meeting.Thesignificance of this separation and meeting is very specific. If someonetries to understand the exalted position of Lord Caitanya withoutknowing this, he is sure to misunderstand it. One must first becomefully selfrealized. Otherwise he may misidentify the Lord as nagara, orthe enjoyer of the damsels of Vraja, thus committing the mistake ofrasabhasa, or overlapping understanding.
                                   TEXT 107                   sesa-lilaya prabhura klsna-viraha-unmada
                   bhrama-maya cesta, ara pralapa-maya vada
                                 TRANSLATION     In the final portion of His pastimes, Lord Caitanya was obsessed
with the madness of separation from Lord Krsna. He acted in erroneousways and talked deliriously.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Sri Caitanya exhibited the highest stage of the feelings of a
devotee in separation from the Lord. This exhibition was sublime becauseHe was completely perfect in the feelings of separation. Materialists,however, cannot understand this. Sometimes materialistic scholars thinkHe was diseased or crazy. Their problem is that they always engage inmaterial sense gratification and can never understandthe feelings of the devotees and the Lord. Materialists are mostabominable in their ideas. They think that they can enjoy directlyperceivable gross objects by their senses and that they can similarlydeal with the transcendental features of Lord Caitanya. But the Lord isunderstood only in pursuance of the principles laid down by theGosvamis, headed by Svarupa Damodara. Doctrines like those of thenaoiya- nagaris, a class of so-called devotees, are never presented byauthorized persons like Svarupa Damodara or the six Gosvamis.The ideasof the gauranga-nagaris are simply a mental concoction, and they arecompletely on the mental platform.                                   TEXT 108
                   radhikara bhava yaich e uddhava-darsane
                    sei bhave matta prabhu rahe ratri-dine
                                 TRANSLATION     J ust as Rad hika went mad at the sight of Udd hava, so Lord
Caitanya was obsessed day and night with the madness of separation.
                                   PURPORT     Those under the shelter of the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu can understand that His mode of worship of the Supreme LordKrsna in separation is the real worship of the Lord. When the feelingsof separation become very intense, one attains the stage of meeting SriKrsna.     So-called devotees like the sahajiyas cheaply imagine they aremeeting Krsna in Vrndavana. Such thinking may be useful, but actuallymeeting Krsna is possible through the attitude of separation taught bySri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 109                 ratre pralapa kare svarupera kan tha dhari'
                       avese apana bhava kahaye ughadi'
                                 TRANSLATION     At night He talked incoherently in grief with His arms around
Svarupa Damodara's neck. He spoke out His heart in ecstatic inspiration.
                                   TEXT 110
                     yabe yei bhava uthe prabhura antara
                      sei giti-sloke sukha dena damodara
                                 TRANSLATION     Whenever a particular sentiment arose in His heart, Svarupa
Damodara satisfied Him by singing songs or reciting verses of the samenature.
                                   TEXT 111
                      ebe karya nahi kichu e-saba vicare
                       age iha vivariba kariya vistare
                                 TRANSLATION     To analyze these pastimes is not necessary now. Later I shall
describe them in detail.
                                   TEXT 112
                  purve vraje krsnera tri-vidha vayo-dharma
                   kaumara, pauganda, ara kaisora atimarma
                                 TRANSLATION     Formerly in Vraja Lord Krsna displayed three ages, namely
childhood, boyhood and adolescence. His adolescence is especiallysignificant.
                                   TEXT 113
                     vatsalya-avese kaila kaumara saphala
                    pauganda saphala kaila lana sakhavala
                                 TRANSLATION     Parental affection made His childhood fruitful. His boyhood was
successful with His friends.
                                   TEXT 114
                      radhikadi lana kaila rasaoi-vilasa
                    vancha bhari' asvadila rasera niryasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In youth He tasted the essence of rasa, fulfilling His desires in
pastimes like the rasa dance with Srimati Radhika and the other gopis.
                                   TEXT 115
                      kaisora-vayase kama, jagat-sakala
                      rasadi-Iilaya tina karila saphala
                                 TRANSLATION     In His youth Lord Krsna made all three of His ages, and the entire
universe, successful by His pastimes of amorous love like the rasadance.
                                   TEXT 116
                            so 'pi kaisoraka-vayo
                            manayan madhu-sudanah                          reme stri-ratna-kutasthah
                             ksapasu ksapitahitah
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Madhusudana enjoyed His youth with pastimes on autumn nights
in the midst of the jewel-like milkmaids. Thus He dispelled all themisfortunes of the world."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the Visnu purana (5.1 3.60).                                   TEXT 117             vaca sucita-sarvari-rati-kala-pragalbhyaya radhikam-
             vrida-kuncita-locanam viracayann agre sakhinam asau            tad-vakso-ruha-citra-keli-makari-panditya-param gatah             kaisoram saphali-karoti kalayan kunje viharam harih
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Krsna made Srimati Radharani close Her eyes in shame before
Her friends by His words relating Their amorous activities on theprevious night. Then He showed the highest limit of cleverness indrawing pictures of dolphins in various playful sports on Her breasts.In this way Lord Hari made His youth successful by performing pastimesin the bushes with Sri Radha and Her friends."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.1.231) of Srila
Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 118                         harir esa na ced avatarisyan
                       mathurayam madhuraksi radhika ca                        abhavisyad iyam vrtha visrstir                       makarankas tu visesatas tadatra
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Paurnamasi, if Lord Hari had not descended in Mathura with
Srimati Radharani, this entire creation--and especially Cupid, thedemigod of love--would have been useless."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is spoken by Sri Vrndadevi in the Vidagdha-madhava (7.3)
of Srila Rupa Gosvami.
                                 TEXT 119-120                      ei mata purve krsna rasera sadana
                     yadyapi karila rasa-niryasa-carvana
                     tathapi nahila tina vanchita purana
                       taha asvadite yadi karila yatana
                                 TRANSLATION     Even though Lord Krsna, the abode of all mellows, had previously in
this way chewed the essence of the mellows of love, still He was unableto fulfill three desires, although He made efforts to taste them.
                                   TEXT 121
                   tanhara prathama vancha kariye vyakhyana
                    krsna kah e,--`ami ha-i rasera nidana
                                 TRANSLATION     I shall explain His first desire. Krsna says: "I am the primary
cause of all rasas.
                                   TEXT 122
                   purnananda-maya ami cinmaya purna-tattva
                      radhikara preme ama karaya unmatta
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am the full spiritual truth and am made of full joy, but the
love of Srimati Radharani drives Me mad.
                                   TEXT 123
                     na jnni radhara preme ache kata bala
                     ye bale amare kare sarvada vih vala
                                 TRANSLATION     I do not know the strength of Radha's love, with which She always
overwhelms Me.
                                   TEXT 124
                    radhikara prema--guru, ami--sisya nata
                      sada ama nana nrtye nacaya udbhata
                                 TRANSLATION     "The love of Radhika is My teacher, and I am Her dancing pupil. Her
prema makes Me dance various novel dances."
                                   TEXT 125
             kasmad vrnde priya-sakhi hareh pada-muiat kuto 'sau
               kundaranye kim iha kurute nrtya-siksam guruh kah            tam tvan-murtih prati-taru-latam dig-vidiksu sphuranti               sailusiva bhramati parito nartayanti sva-pascat
                                 TRANSLATION     "O my beloved friend Vrnda, where are you coming from?"
     "I am coming from the feet of Sri Hari."     "Where is He?"     "In the forest on the bank of Radhakunda."     "What is He doing there?"     "He is learning dancing."     "Who is His master?."     "Your image, Radha, revealing itself in every tree and creeper inevery direction, is roaming like a skillful dancer, making Him dancebehind."
                                   PURPORT     This text is from the Govinda-lilamrta (8.77) of Krsnadasa Kaviraja
Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 126                     nija-premasvade mora haya ye ahlada
                    taha ha'te koti-guna radha-premas vada
                                 TRANSLATION     "Whatever pleasure I get from tasting My love for Srimati
Radharani, She tastes ten million times more than Me by Her love.
                                   TEXT 127
                  ami yaiche paraspara viruddha-dharmasraya
                 radha-prema taiche sada viruddha-dharma-maya
                                 TRANSLATION     "just as I am the abode of all mutually contradictory
characteristics, so Radha's love is always full of similarcontradictions.
                                   TEXT 128                  radha-prema vibhu--yara badite nahi thani
                     tathapi se ksane ksane badaye sadai
                                 TRANSLATION     " Radha's love is all-pervading, leaving no room for expansion. But
still it is expanding constantly.
                                   TEXT 129
                      yaha vai guru vastu nahi suniscita
                    tathapi gurura dharma gaurava-variita
                                 TRANSLATION     "There is certainly nothing greater than Her love. But Her love is
devoid of pride. That is the sign of its greatness.
                                   TEXT 130
                    yaha haite sunirmala dvitiya nahi ara
                    tathapi sarvada vamya-vakra-vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Nothing is purer than Her love. But its behavior is always
perverse and crooked."
                                   TEXT 131
                      vibhur api kalayan sadabhivrddhim
                      gurur api gaura va-caryaya vihinah                        muhur upacita-vakrimapi suddho                       jayati mura-dvisi radhikanuragah
                                 TRANSLATION     "All glories to Radha's love for Krsna, the enemy of the demon
Mura. Although it is all-pervading, it tends to increase at everymoment. Although it is important, it is devoid of pride. And although itis pure, it is always beset with duplicity."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the Dana-keli-kaumudi (2) of Srila Rupa
Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 132                   sei premara sri-radhika parama `asraya'
                     sei premara ami ha-i kevala `visaya'                                 TRANSLATION
     "Sri Radhika is the highest abode of that love, and I am its only
object.
                                   TEXT 133
                       visaya-jntiya sukha amara asvada
                     ama haite koji-guna asrayera ahlada
                                 TRANSLATION     "I taste the bliss to which the object of love is entitled. But the
pleasure of Radha, the abode of that love, is ten million times greater.
                                   TEXT 134
                    asraya jati ya sukha paite mana dhaya
                      yatne asvadite nari, ki kari upaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My mind races to taste the pleasure experienced by the abode, but
I cannot taste it, even by My best efforts. How may I taste it?
                                   TEXT 135
                     kabhu yadi ei premara ha-iye asraya
                      tabe ei premanandera anubhava haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "If sometime I can be the abode of that love, only then may I taste
its joy.',
                                   PURPORT     Visaya and asraya are two very significant words relating to the
reciprocation between Krsna and His devotee. The devotee is called theasraya, and his beloved, Krsna, is the visaya. Different i ngred ientsare involved in the exchange of rove between the asraya and visaya,which are known as vibhava, anubhava, sattvika and vyabhicari Vibhava isd ivided into the two categories alambana and uddipana. Alambana may befurther divided into asraya and visaya. I n the loving affairs of Radhaand Krsna, Radharani is the asraya feature and Krsna the visaya. Thetranscendental consciousness of the Lord tells Him, "I am Krsna, and Iexperience pleasure as the visaya. The pleasure enjoyed by Radharani,the asraya, is many times greater than the pleasure I feel." Therefore,to feel the pleasure of the asraya category, Lord Krsna appeared as SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.                                   TEXT 136
                    eta cin ti' rahe krsna parama-kautuki
                     hrdaye badaye prema-lobha dhakdhaki
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking in this way, Lord Krsna was curious to taste that love.
His eager desire for that love increasingly blazed in His heart.
                                   TEXT 137
                       ei eka, suna ara lobhera prakara
                   sva-madhurya dekhi' krsna karena vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     That is one desire. Now please hear of another. Seeing His own
beauty, Lord Krsna began to consider.
                                   TEXT 138
                    adbhuta, ananta, purna mora madhurima
                     tri jagate ihara keha nahi paya sima
                                 TRANSLATION     "My sweetness is wonderful, infinite and full. No one in the three
worlds can find its limit.
                                   TEXT 139
                      ei prema-dvare nitya radhika ekali
                       amara madhuryamrta asvade sakali
                                 TRANSLATION     "Only Radhika, by the strength of Her love, tastes all the nectar
of My sweetness.
                                   TEXT 140
                  yadyapi nirmala radhara sat-prema-darpana
                   tathapi svacchata tara badhe ksane ksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although Radha's love is pure like a mirror, its purity increases
at every moment.                                   TEXT 141
                     amara madhurya nahi badhite avakase
                     e-darpanera age nava nava rupe bhase
                                 TRANSLATION     "My sweetness also has no room for expansion, yet it shines before
that mirror in newer and newer beauty.
                                   TEXT 142
                man-madh urya radhara prema--donhe hoda kari'
                    ksane ksane bade donhe, keha nahi hari
                                 TRANSLATION     "There is constant competition between My sweetness and the mirror
of Radha's love. They both go on increasing, but neither knows defeat.
                                   TEXT 143
                     amara madhurya nitya nava nava haya
                  s va-s va-prema-an ur\pa bhakte as vadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My sweetness is always newer and newer. Devotees taste it
according to their own respective love.
                                   TEXT 144
                     darpanadye dekhi' yadi apana madhuri
                      asvadite haya lobha, asvadite nari
                                 TRANSLATION     "If I see My sweetness in a mirror, I am tempted to taste it, but
nevertheless I cannot.
                                   TEXT 145
                       vicara kariye yadi as vada-upaya
                    radhika-svarupa ha-ite tabe mana dhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "If I deliberate on a way to taste it, I find that I hanker for the
position of Rad h i ka."
                                   PURPORT     Krsna's attractiveness is wonderful and unlimited. No one can
knowthe end of it. Srimati Radharani alone can relish such extensivenessfrom Her position in the asraya category. The mirror of SrimatiRadharani's transcendental love is perfectly clear, yet it appearsclearer and clearest in the transcendental method of understandingKrsna. In the mirror of Radharani's heart, the transcendental featuresof Krsna appear increasingly new and fresh. In other words, theattraction of Krsna increases in proportion to the understanding ofSrimati Radharani. Each tries to supersede the other. Neither wants tobe defeated in increasing the intensity of love. Desiring to understandRadharani's attitude of increasing love, Lord Krsna appeared as SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 146                    aparikalita-purvah kas camatkara-karr
                   sphurati mama gariyan esa madhurya-purah                 ayam aham api hanta preksya yam lubdha-cetah                   sarabhasam upabhoktum kamaye radhike va
                                 TRANSLATION     "Who manifests an abundance of sweetness greater than Mine, which
has never been experienced before and which causes wonder to all? Alas,I Myself, My mind bewildered upon seeing this beauty, impetuously desireto enjoy it like Srimati Rad harani."
                                   PURPORT     This text is from the Lalita-madhava (8.34) of Srila Rupa Gosvami.
It was spoken by Lord Krsna when He saw the beauty of His own reflectionin a jeweled fountain in Dvaraka.
                                   TEXT 147                    krsna-madh uryera eka s vabhavika bala
                      krsna-adi nara-nari karaye cancala
                                 TRANSLATION     The beauty of Krsna has one natural strength: it thrills the hearts
of all men and women, beginning with Lord Krsna Himself.
                                   TEXT 148
                     sravane. darsane akarsaye sarva-mana
                      apana asvadite krsna karena yatana                                 TRANSLATION
     All minds are attracted by hearing His sweet voice and flute, or by
seeing His beauty. Even Lord Krsna Himself makes efforts to taste thatsweetness.
                                   TEXT 149
                      e madhuryamrta pana sada yei kare
                   trsna-santi nahe, trsna badhe nirantare
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirst of one who always drinks the nectar of that sweetness is
never satisfied. Rather, that thirst increases co nstantly.
                                   TEXT 150
                      atrpta ha-iya kare vidhira nindana
                     avidagdha vidhi bhala na jane srjana
                                 TRANSLATION     Such a person, being unsatisfied, begins to blaspheme Lord Brahma,
saying that he does not know the art of creating well and is sim plyinexperienced.
                                   TEXT 151
                     koti netra nahi dila, sabe dila dui
                    tahate nimesa,--krsna ki dekhiba muni
                                 TRANSLATION     He has not given millions of eyes to see the beauty of Krsna. He
has given only two eyes, and even those eyes blink. How then shall I seethe lovely face of Krsna?
                                   TEXT 152
                        atati yad bhavan ahni kananam
                        trutir yugayate tvam apasyatam                       kutila-kuntalam sri-mukham ca te                       jada udiksatam paksma-krd drsam
                                 TRANSLATION     [The gopis say:] "O Krsna, when You go to the forest during the day
and we do not see Your sweet face, which is surrounded by beautifulcurling hairs, half a second becomes as long as an entire age for us.And we consider the creator, who has put eyelids on the eyes we use for
seeing You, to be simply a fool."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is spoken by the gopis in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.31.15).                                   TEXT 153                  gopyas ca krsnam upalabhya cirad abhistam
                  yat-preksane drsisu paksma-krtam sapan ti                  drgbhir hrdi-krtam alam parirabhya sarvas                   tad-bhavam apur api nitya-yuiam durapam
                                 TRANSLATION     "The gopis saw their beloved Krsna at Kuruksetra after a long
separation. They secured and embraced Him in their hearts through theireyes, and they attained a joy so intense that not even perfect yogis canattain it. The gopis cursed the creator for creating eyelids thatinterfered with their vision."
                                   PURPORT     This text is from Srimad-Bhagavatam ( 10.82.40).                                   TEXT 154                   krsnavalokana vina ne tra phala nahi ana
                     yei jana krsna dekhe, sei bhagyavan
                                 TRANSLATION     There is no other consummation for the eyes than the sight of
Krsna. Whoever sees Him is most fortunate indeed.
                                   TEXT 155
                   aksanvatam phalam idam na param vidamah
                   sakhyah pasun anu vivesayator vayasyaih                    vaktram vrajesa-sutayor anuvenu justam                   yair va nioitam anurakta-kataksa-moksam
                                 TRANSLATION     [The gopis say: ] "O friends, those eyes that see the beautiful
faces of the sons of Maharaja Nanda are certainly fortunate. As thesetwo sons enter the forest, surrounded by Their friends, driving the cowsbefore Them, They hold Their flutes to Their mouths and glance lovinglyupon the residents of Vrndavana. For those who have eyes, we think thereis no greater object of vision."
                                   PURPORT     Like the gopis, one can see Krsna continuously if one is fortunate
enough. In the Brahma-samhita it is said that sages whose eyes have beensmeared with the ointment of pure love can see the form of Syamasundara(Krsna) continuously in the centers of their hearts. This text fromSrimad-Bhagavatam (10.21.7) was sung by the gopis on the advent of thesarat season.
                                   TEXT 156                   gopyas tapah kim acaran yad amusya rupam
                  Iavanya-saram asamordh vam ananya-siddham                   drgbhih pibanty anusa vabhinavam durapam                    ekanta-dhama yasasah sriya aisvarasya
                                 TRANSLATION     [The women of Mathura say:] "What austerities must the gopis have
performed? With their eyes they always drink the nectar of the face ofLord Krsna, which is the essence of loveliness and is not to be equaledor surpassed. That loveliness is the only abode of beauty, fame andopulence. It is self-perfect, ever fresh and extremely rare."
                                   PURPORT     T h is text fro m Srimad-Bhagavatam ( 10.44. 1 4) was spo ke n by
the wome n of Mathura when they saw Krsna and Balarama in the arena withKing Kamsa's great wrestlers Mustika and Canura.
                                   TEXT 157                   apurva madhuri krsnera, apurva tara bala
                      yahara sravane mana haya talamala
                                 TRANSLATION     The sweetness of Lord Krsna is unprecedented, and its strength is
also unprecedented. Simply by hearing of such beauty, the mind becomesunsteady.
                                   TEXT 158
                     krsnera madhurye krsne upajaya lobha
                    samyak asvadite nare, mane rahe ksobha
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna's own beauty attracts Lord Krsna Himself. But because He
cannot fully enjoy it, His mind remains full of sorrow.
                                   TEXT 159                    ei ta' dvitiya hetura kahila vivarana
                       trtiya hetura ebe sunaha laksana
                                 TRANSLATION     This is a description of His second desire. Now please listen as I
describe the third.
                                   TEXT 160
                     atyanta-nig\dha ei rasera siddhan ta
                      svarupa-gosani matra janena ekanta
                                 TRANSLATION     This conclusion of rasa is extremely deep. Only Svarupa Damodara
knows much about it.
                                   TEXT 161
                    yeba keha anya jane, seho tanha haite
                  caitanya-gosanira tenha atyanta marma yate
                                 TRANSLATION     Anyone else who claims to know it must have heard it from him, for
he was the most intimate companion of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 162
                    gopi-ganera premera `rudha-bhava' nama
                   visuddha nirmala prema, kabhu nahe kama
                                 TRANSLATION     The love of the gopis is called rudha-bhava. It is pure and
spotless. It is not at any time lust.
                                   PURPORT     As already explained, the position of the gopis in their loving
dealings with Krsna is transcendental. Their emotion is called rudha-bhava. Although it is apparently like mundane sex, one should notconfuse it with mundane sexual love, for it is pure and unadulteratedlove of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 163                            premaiva gopa-ramanam
                           kama ity agamat pratham                           ity uddhavadayo'py etam                          vanchanti bhagavat-priyah
                                 TRANSLATION     "The pure love of the gopis has become celebrated by the name
`lust'. The dear devotees of the Lord, headed by Sri Uddhava, desire totaste that love."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.285,286).                                   TEXT 164                   kama, prema,--donhakara vibhinna iaksana
                   lauha ara hema yaiche svarupe vilaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lust and love have different characteristics, just as iron and gold
have different natures.
                                   PURPORT     One should try to discriminate between sexual love and pure love,
for they belong to different categories, with a gulf of differencebetween them. They are as different from one another as iron is fromgold.
                                   TEXT 165                  atmendriya-priti-vancha--tare bali 'kama'
                  krsnendriya-priti-iccha dhare `prema' nama
                                 TRANSLATION     The desire to gratify one's own senses is kama [lust], but the
desire to please the senses of Lord Krsna is prema [love].
                                   PURPORT     The revealed scriptures describe pure love as follows:
     sarvatha dh vamsa-rahitam     saty api dh vamsa-karane     yad bhava-ban dhanam yun oh     sa prema parikirtitah"If there is ample reason for the dissolution of a conjugal relationshipand yet such a dissolution does nottake place, such a relationship ofintimate love is called pure."     The predominated gopis were bound to Krsna in such pure love. Forthem there was no question of sexual love based on sense gratification.Their only engagement in life was to see Krsna happy in all respects,regardless of their own personal interests. They dedicated their soulsonly for the satisfaction of the Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna.There was not the slightest tinge of sexual love between the gopis and
Krsna.     The author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta asserts with authority thatsexual love is a matter of personal sense enjoyment. All the regulativeprinciples in the Vedas pertaining to desires for popularity,fatherhood, wealth and so on are different phases of sensegratification. Acts of sense gratification may be performed under thecover of public welfare, nationalism, reiigion, altruism, ethical codes,Biblical codes, health directives, fruitive action, bashfulness,tolerance, personal comfort, liberation from material bondage, progress,family affection or fear of social ostracism or legal punishment, butall these categories are different subdivisions of one substance--sensegratification. All such good acts are performed basically for one,s ownsense gratification, for no one can sacrifice his personal interestwhile discharging these much-advertised moral and religious principles.But above all this is a transcendental stage in which one feels himselfto be only an eternal servitor of Krsna, the absolute Personality ofGodhead. All acts performed in this sense of servitude are called purelove of God because they are performed for the absolute sensegratification of Sri Krsna. However, any act performed for the purposeof enjoying its fruits or results is an act of sense gratification. Suchactions are visible sometimes in gross and sometimes in subtle forms.
                                   TEXT 166                    kamera tatparya--njja-sambhoga kevala
                 krsna-sukha-tatparya-matra prema ta' prabala
                                 TRANSLATION     The object of lust is only the enjoyment of one's own senses. But
love caters to the enjoyment of Lord Krsna, and thus it is verypowerful.
                                 TEXT 167-169
                 loka-dharma, veda-dharma, deha-dharma, karma
                 lajja, dhairya, deha-sukha, atma-sukha-marma
                      dustyaja arya-patha, njja parjjana
                    sva-jane karaye yata tadana-bhartsana
                    sarva-tyaga kari' kare krsnera bhaiana
                     krsna-sukha-hetu kare prema-se vana
                                 TRANSLATION     Social customs, scriptural injunctions, bodily demands, fruitive
action, shyness, patience, bodily pleasures, self-gratification and thepath of varnasrama dharma, which is difficult to give up--the gopis haveforsaken all these, as well as their own relatives and their punishmentand scolding, for the sake of serving Lord Krsna. They render lovingservice to Him for the sake of His enjoyment.                                   TEXT 170
                       ihake kahiye krsne ordha anuraga
                 svaccha dhauta-vastre yaiche nahi kona daga
                                 TRANSLATION     That is called firm attachment to Lord Krsna. It is spotlessly
pure, like a clean cloth that has no stain.
                                   PURPORT     The author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta advises everyone to give up
all engagements of sense gratification and, like the gopis, dovetailoneself entirely with the will of the Supreme Lord. That is the ultimateinstruction of Krsna in Bhagavad-gita. We should be prepared to doanything and everything to please the Lord, even at the risk ofviolating the Vedic principles or ethical laws. That is the standard oflove of Godhead. Such activities in pure love of Godhead are as spotlessas white linen that has been completely washed. Srila BhaktivinodaThakura warns us in this connection that we should not mistakenly thinkthat the idea of giving up everything implies the renunciation of dutiesnecessary in relation to the body and mind. Even such duties are notsense gratification if they are undertaken in a spirit of service toKrsna.
                                   TEXT 171                       ataeva kama-preme bahuta antara
                  kama--andha-tamah, prema--nirmala bhaskara
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore lust and love are quite different. Lust is like dense
darkness, but love is like the bright sun.
                                   TEXT 172
                     ataeva gopi-gan era nani kama-gandha
                  krsna-sukha Iagi matra, krsna se sambandha
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus there is not the slightest taint of lust in the gopis' love.
Their relationship with Krsna is only for the sake of His enjoyment.
                                   TEXT 173
                     yat te sujnta-caranamburuham stanesu
                   bhitah sanaih priya dadhimahi karkasesu                   tenatavim atasi tad vyathate na kim svit
                 kurpadibhir bhramati dhir bhavad-a vusam nah
                                 TRANSLATION     "O dearly beloved! Your lotus feet are so softthat we place them
gently on our breasts, fearing that Your feet will be hurt. Our liferests only in You. Our minds, therefore, are filled with anxiety thatYour tender feet might be wounded by pebbles as You roam about on theforest path."
                                   PURPORT     This text from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.31.1 9) was spoken by the
gopis when Krsna left them in the midst of the rasa-lila.
                                   TEXT 174                    atma-sukha-duhkhe gopira nahika vicara
                    krsna-sukha-hetu cesta mano-vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     The gopis do not care for their own pleasures or pains. All their
physical and mental activities are directed toward offering enjoyment toLord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 175
                     krsna lagi' ara saba kare parityaga
                     krsna-sukha-hetu kare suddha anuraga
                                 TRANSLATION     They renounced everything for Krsna. They have pure attachment to
giving Krsna pleasure.
                                   TEXT 176
                       e vam mad-arthojjhita-loka-veda-
                      svanam hi vo mayy anuvrttaye'balah                       maya paroksam bhaiata tirohitam                     masuyitum marhatha tat priyam priyah
                                 TRANSLATION     "O My beloved gopis, you have renounced social customs, scriptural
inJunctions and your relatives for My sake. I disappeared behind youonly to increase your concentration upon Me. Since I disappeared foryour benefit, you should not be displeased with Me."
                                   PURPORT     This text from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.32.21) was spoken by Lord
Krsna when He returned to the arena of the rasa-lila.
                                   TEXT 177                     krsnera pratjjna eka ache prva haite
                   ye yaiche bhaje, krsna tare bhaje taiche
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna has a promise from before to reciprocate with His
devotees according to the way they worship Him.
                                   TEXT 178
                           ye yatha mam prapadyante
                          tams tathaiva bhajnmy aham                            mama vartmanuvartante                           manusyah partha sarvasah
                                 TRANSLATION     "In whatever way My devotees surrender unto Me, I reward them
accordingly. Everyone follows My path in all respects, O son of Prtha."
                                   PURPORT     Krsna was never ungrateful to the gopis, for as He declares to
Arjuna in this verse from Bhagavad-gita (4.11), He reciprocates with Hisdevotees in proportion to the transcendental loving service they renderunto Him. Everyone follows the path that leads toward Him, but there aredifferent degrees of progress on that path, and the Lord is realized inproportion to one's advancement. The path is one, but the progress inapproaching the ultimate goal is different, and therefore the proportionof realization of this goal--namely the absolute Personality of Godhead--is also different. The gopis attained the highest goal, and LordCaitanya affirmed that there is no higher method of worshiping God thanthat followed by the gopis.
                                   TEXT 179                   se pratiina bhanga haiia gopira bhajane
                    tahate pramana krsna-sri-mukha-vacane
                                 TRANSLATION     That promise has been broken by the worship of the gopis, as Lord
Krsna Himself admits.
                                   TEXT 180                      na paraye 'ham niravadya-samyuiam
                      sva-sadhu-krtyam vibudhayusapi vah                      ya mabhaian duriaya-geha-srnkhalah                     samvrscya tad vah pratiyatu sadhuna
                                 TRANSLATION     "O gopis, I am not able to repay My debt for your spotless service,
even within a lifetime of Brahma. Your connection with Me is beyondreproach. You have worshiped Me, cutting off all domestic ties, whichare difficult to break. Therefore please let your own glorious deeds beyour compensation."
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.32.22) was spoken by Sri
Krsna Himself when He returned to the gopis upon hearing their songs ofseparation.
                                   TEXT 181                    tabe ye dekhiye gopira nija-dehe prita
                    seho ta' krsnera lagi, janiha niscita
                                 TRANSLATION     Now whatever affection we see the gopis show in their own bodies,
know it for certain to be only for the sake of Lord Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     The selfless love of Godhead exhibited by the gopis cannot have any
parallel. We should not, therefore, misunderstand the careful ness ofthe gopis in their personal decoration. The gopis dressed themselves asbeautifully as possible, just to make Krsna happy by seeing them. Theyhad no ulterior desires. They dedicated their bodies, and everythingthey possessed, to the service of Sri Krsna, taking for granted thattheir bodies were meant for His enjoyment. They dressed themselves onthe understanding that Krsna would be happy by seeing and touching them.
                                   TEXT 182                     `ei deha kailun ami krsne samarpana
                    tanra dhana tanra iha sambhoga-sadhana
                                 TRANSLATION     [The gopis think: ] "I have offered this body to Lord Krsna. He is
its owner, and it brings Him enjoyment.
                                   TEXT 183
                    e-deha-darsana-sparse krsna-santosana'                     ei Iagi' kare dehera mariana-bhusana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna finds joy in seeing and touching this body." It is for this
reason that they cleanse and decorate their bodies.
                                   TEXT 184
                            njjangam api ya gopyo
                              mameti samupasate                          tabhyah param na me partha                            nigudha-prema-bhajanam
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Arjuna, there are no greater receptacles of deep love for Me
than the gopis, who cleanse and decorate their bodies because theyconsider them Mine."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is spoken by Lord Krsna in the Adi purana.                                   TEXT 185                    ara eka adbhuta gopi-bhavera svabhava
                     buddhira gocara nahe yahara prabhava
                                 TRANSLATION     There is another wonderful feature of the emotion of the gopis. Its
power is beyond the comprehension of the intelligence.
                                   TEXT 186
                      gopi-gana kare yabe krsna-darasana
                   sukha-vancha nahi, sukha haya koti-guna
                                 TRANSLATION     When the gopis see Lord Krsna, they derive unbounded bliss,
although they have no desire for such pleasure.
                                   TEXT 187
                    gopika-darsane krsnera ye ananda haya
                      taha haite ko ti-guna gopiasvadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The gopis taste a pleasure ten million times greater than the
pleasure Lord Krsna derives from seeing them.
                                   PURPORT     The wonderful characteristics of the gopis are beyond imagination.
They have no desire for personal satisfaction, yet when Krsna is happyby seeing them, that happiness of Krsna makes thegopis a million timesmore happy than Krsna Himself.
                                   TEXT 188                     tan sabara nahi njja-sukha-anurodha
                    tathapi badhaye sukha, padila virodha
                                 TRANSLATION     The gopis have no inclination for their own enjoyment, and yet
their Joy increases. That is indeed a contradiction.
                                   TEXT 189
                    e virodhera eka matra dekhi samadhana
                    gopikara sukha klsna-sukhe paryavasana
                                 TRANSLATION     For this contradiction I see only one solution: the joy of the
gopis lies in the joy of their beloved Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     The situation of the gopis is perplexing, for although they did not
want personal happiness, it was imposed upon them. The solution to thisperplexity is that Sri Krsna's sense of happiness is limited by thehappiness of the gopis. Devotees at Vrndavana therefore try to serve thegopis, namely Radharani and Her associates. If one gains the favor ofthe gopis, he easily gains the favor of Krsna because on therecommendation of the gopis Krsna at once accepts the service of adevotee. Lord Caitanya, therefore, wanted to please the gopis instead ofKrsna. But His contemporaries misunderstood Him, and for this reasonLord Caitanya renounced the order of householder life and became asannyasi.
                                   TEXT 190                   gopika-darsane klsnera badhe praphullata
                     se madhurya badhe yara nahika samata
                                 TRANSLATION     When Lord Krsna sees the gopis, His joy increases, and His
unparalleled sweetness increases also.                                   TEXT 191
                     amara darsane krsna paila eta sukha
                    ei sukhe gopira praph ulla anga-mukha
                                 TRANSLATION     [The gopis think:] "Krsna has obtained so much pleasure by seeing
me." That thought increases the fullness and beauty of their faces andbodies.
                                   TEXT 192
                  gopi-sobha dekhi' krsnera sobha badhe yata
                  krsna-sobha dekhi' gopira sobha badhe tata
                                 TRANSLATION     The beauty of Lord Krsna increases at the sight of the beauty of
the gopis. And the more the gopis see Lord Krsna's beauty, the moretheir beauty increases.
                                   TEXT 193
                       ei-mata paraspara pade hudahudi
                    paraspara badhe, keha mukha nahi mudi
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way a competition takes place between them in which no one
acknowledges defeat.
                                   TEXT 194
                   kintu krsnera sukha haya gopi-rupa-gune
                   tanra sukhe sukha-vrddhi haye gopi-gane
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna, however, derives pleasure from the beauty and good qualities
of the gopis. And when the gopis see His pleasure, the joy of the gopisincreases.
                                   TEXT 195
                      ataeva sei sukha krsna-sukha pose
                      ei hetu gopi-preme nahi kama-dose                                 TRANSLATION
     Therefore we find that the joy of the gopis nourishes the Joy of
Lord Krsna. For that reason the fault of lust is not present in theirlove.
                                   PURPORT     By looking at the beautiful gopis Krsna becomes enlivened, and this
enlivens the gopis, whose youthful faces and bodies blossom. This competition of increasing beauty between the gopis and Krsna, which iswithout limitations, is so delicate that sometimes mundane moralistsmistake these dealings to be purely amorous. Butthese affairs are not atall mu ndane, because the gopis' intense desire to satisfy Krsnasurcharges the entire scene with pure love of Godhead, with not a spotof sexual indulgence.
                                   TEXT 196               upetya pathi sundari-tatibhir abhir abhyarcitam
               smitankura-karambitair natad-apanga-bhangisataih                stana-stavaka-sancaran-nayana-cancarikan calam                 vraje vijayinam bhaje vipina-desatah kesavam
                                 TRANSLATION     "I worship Lord Kesava. Coming back from the forest of Vraja, He is
worshiped by the gopis, who mount the roofs of their palaces and meetHim on the path with a hundred manners of dancing glances and gentlesmiles. The corners of His eyes wander, like large black bees, aroundthe gopis' breasts."
                                   PURPORT     This statement appears in the Kesavastaka (8) of the Stava-mala,
compiled by Srila Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 197                    ara eka gopi-premera s vabhavika cihna
                    ye prakare haya prema kama-gandha-hina
                                 TRANSLATION     There is another natural symptom of the gopis' love that shows it
to be without a trace of lust.
                                   TEXT 198
                    gopi-preme kare krsna-madhuryera pusti
                    madhurye badhaya prema hana maha-tusti
                                 TRANSLATION     The love of the gopis nourishes the sweetness of Lord Krsna. That
sweetness in turn increases their love, for they are greatly satisfied.
                                   TEXT 199
                      priti- visayanande tad-asrayananda
                   tanha nahi njja-sukha-vanchara sambandha
                                 TRANSLATION     The happiness of the abode of love is in the happiness of the
object of that love. This is not a relationship of desire for personalgratification.
                                 TEXT 200-201
                     nirupadhi prema yanha, tanha ei riti
                      priti- visaya-sukhe asrayera priti
                    nija-premanande krsna-se vananda badhe
                 se anandera prati bhaktera haya maha-krodhe
                                 TRANSLATION     Whenever there is unselfish love, that is its style. The reservoir
of love derives pleasure when the lovable object is pleased. When thepleasure of love interferes with the service of Lord Krsna, the devoteebecomes angry toward such ecstasy.
                                   PURPORT     As mentioned above, the gopis are the predominated lovers, and Sri
Krsna is the predominator, the beloved. The love of the predominatednourishes the love of the predominator. The gopis had no desire forselfish enjoyment. Their feeling of happiness was indirect, for it wasdependent on the pleasure of Krsna. Causeless love of Godhead is alwaysso. Such pure love is possible only when the predominated is made happyby the happiness of the predominator. Such unadulterated love isexemplified when the lover deprecates her happiness in service thathinders her from discharging it.
                                   TEXT 202                      anga-stambharambham uttungayantam
                       premanandam daruko nabhyanandat                        kamsarater vijane yena saksad                         aksooiyan antarayo vyadhayi
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sri Daruka did not relish his ecstatic feelings of love, for they
caused his limbs to become stunned and thus obstructed his service offanning Lord Krsna."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (3.2.62).                                   TEXT 203                           go vinda-preksanaksepi-
                            baspa-purabhivarsinam                            uccair anindad anandam                              aravinda-vilocana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The lotus-eyed Radharani powerfully condemned the ecstatic love
that caused a flow of tears that hindered Her sight of Govinda."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is also from Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.3.54).                                   TEXT 204                   ara suddha-bhakta krsna-prema-seva vine
                   sva-sukhartha salokyadi na kare grahane
                                 TRANSLATION     Furthermore, pure devotees never forsake the loving service of Lord
Krsna to aspire for their own personal pleasure through the five kindsof liberation.
                                   PURPORT     A pure devotee of Krsna who loves Him exclusively will flatly
refuse to accept any sort of liberation, beginning from merging in thebody of the Lord and extending to the other varieties of liberation,such as equality of form, opulence or abode and the opulence of livingnear the Lord.
                                   TEXT 205                            mad-guna-sruti-matrena
                             mayi sarva-guhasaye                            mano-gatir avicchinna                          yatha gangambhaso 'mbudhau
                                 TRANSLATION     "Just as the celestial waters of the Ganges flow unobstructed into
the ocean, so when My devotees simply hear of Me, their minds come toMe, who resides in the hearts of all."
                                   TEXT 206
                           laksanam bhakti-yogasyra
                            nirgunasya hy udahrtam                             ahaituky avyavahita                           ya bhak tih purusottame
                                 TRANSLATION     "These are the characteristics of transcendental loving service to
Purusottama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead: it is causeless, and itcannot be obstructed in any way."
                                   TEXT 207
                           salokya-sarsti-sar\pya-
                            samipyaikatvam apy uta                            diyamanam na grhnanti                            vina mat-sevanam janah
                                 TRANSLATION     "My devotees do not accept salokya, sarsti, sarupya, samipya or
oneness with Me--even if I offer these liberations--in preference toserving Me."
                                   PURPORT     These three verses from Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.29.11-13) were spoken
by Lord Krsna in the form of Kapiladeva.
                                   TEXT 208                            mat-sevaya pratitam te
                             salokyadi-catustayam                            necchanti sevaya prnah                           kuto 'nyat kala-viplutam
                                 TRANSLATION     "My devotees, having fulfilled their desires by serving Me, do not
accept the four kinds of salvation that are easily earned by suchservice. Why then should they accept any pleasures that are lost in thecourse of time?"
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.67) was spoken by the Lord
in connection with the characteristics of Maharaja Ambarisa. Merginginto the existence of the Absolute is as temporary as living in thecelestial kingdom. Both of them are controlled by time; neither positionis permanent.
                                   TEXT 209                    kama-gandha-hina svabhavika gopi-prema
                  nirmala, ujjvala, suddha yena dagdha hema
                                 TRANSLATION     The natural love of the gopis is devoid of any trace of lust. It is
faultless, bright and pure like molten gold.
                                   TEXT 210
                   krsnera sahaya, guru, bandhava, preyasi
                    gopika hayena priya sisya, sakhi dasi
                                 TRANSLATION     The gopis are the helpers, teachers, friends, wives, dear
disciples, confidantes and serving maids of Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 211
                             sahaya guruvah sisya
                          bhujisya bandhavah striyah                           satyam vadami te partha                          gopyah kim me bhavanti na
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Partha, I speak to you the truth. The gopis are My helpers,
teachers, disciples, servants, friends and consorts. I do not know whatthey are not to Me."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the Gopi-premamrta.                                   TEXT 212                    gopika jnnena krsnera manera vanchita
                     prema-se va-paripati, ista-samihita
                                 TRANSLATION     The gopis know Krsna's desires, and they know how to render perfect
loving service for His enjoyment. They perform their service expertlyfor the satisfaction of their beloved.
                                   TEXT 213
                         man-mahatmyam mat-saparyam-
                         mac-chraddham man-mano-gatam                            jananti gopikah partha                           nanye jananti tattvatah
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Partha, the gopis know My greatness, My loving service, respect
for Me, and My mentality. Others cannot really know these."
                                   PURPORT     This verse was spoken by Lord Krsna to Arjuna in the Adi purana.                                   TEXT 214                     sei gopi-gana-madhye uttama radhika
                   rupe, gune, saubhagye, preme sarvadhika
                                 TRANSLATION     Among the gopis, Srimati Radhika is the foremost. She surpasses all
in beauty, in good qualities, in good fortune, and, above all, in love.
                                   PURPORT     Among all the gopis,Srimati Radharani is the most exalted. She is
the most beautiful, the most qualified, and above all the greatest loverof Krsna.
                                   TEXT 215                           yatha radha priya visnos
                          tasyah kundam priyam tatha                            sarva-gopisu saivaika                           visnor atyanta-vallabha
                                 TRANSLATION     "Just as Radha is dear to Lord Krsna, so Her bathing place [ Radha-
kunda] is dear to Him. She alone is His most beloved of all the gopis."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from the padma purana.                                   TEXT 216                          trai-lokye prthivi dhanya
                            yatra vrndavanam puri                            tatrapi gopikah partha                            yatra radhabhidha mama
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Partha, in all the three planetary systems, this earth is
especially fortunate, for on earth is the town of Vrndavana. And therethe gopis are especially glorious because among them is My SrimatiRadhara-ni."
                                   PURPORT     This verse, spoken by Lord Krsna to Arjuna, is cited from the Adi
Purana.
                                   TEXT 217                    radha-saha krida- rasa-vrddhira karana
                       ara saba gopi-gana rasopakarana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the other gopis help increase the joy of Krsna's pastimes with
Radharani. The gopis act as the instruments of Their mutual enjoyment.
                                   PURPORT     It is said that the gopis are divided into five groups, namely the
sakhis, nitya- sakhis, prana-sakhis, priya-sakhis a n d parama-prestha-sakhis. All th ese fai rcomplexioned associates of Srimati Radharani,the Queen of Vrndavana-dhama, are expert artists in evoking eroticsentiments in Krsna. The parama-prestha-sakhis are eight in number, andin the ecstatic dealings of Krsna and Radha they side sometimes withKrsna and at other times with Radharani, just to create a situation inwhich it appears that they favor one against the other. That makes theexchange of mellows more palatable.
                                   TEXT 218                   krsnera vallabha radha krsna-prana-dhana
                     tanha vinu sukha-hetu nahe gopi-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     Radha is the beloved consort of Krsna, and She is the wealth of His
life. Without Her, the gopis cannot give Him pleasure.
                                   TEXT 219
                            kamsarir api samsara-                           vasana-baddha-srnkhalam
                            radhain adhaya hrdaye                            tatyaja vraja-sundarih
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Krsna, the enemy of Kamsa, left aside the other gopis during
the rasa dance and took Srimati Radharani to His heart, for She is thehelper of the Lord in realizing the essence of His desires."
                                   PURPORT     I n this verse from the Gita-govinda (3.1), Jayadeva Gosvami
describes Sri Krsna's leaving the rasa-lila to search for SrimatiRadharani.
                                   TEXT 220                    sei radhara bhava lana caitanyavatara
                    yuga-dharma nama-prema kaila paracara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya appeared with the sentiment of Radha. He preached the
dharma of this age--the chanting of the holy name and pure love of God.
                                   TEXT 221
                     sei bhave nija-vancha karila purana
                       avatarera ei vancha mula-karana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the mood of Srimati Radharani, He also fulfilled His own
desires. This is the principal reason for His appearance.
                                   TEXT 222
                  sri-krsna-caitanya gosani vrajendra-kumara
                     rasa-maya-murti krsna saksat srngara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya is Krsna [Vrajendra-kumara], the embodiment
of rasas. He is amorous love personified.
                                   TEXT 223
                       sei rasa asvadite kaila avatara
                      anusange kaila saba rasera pracara                                 TRANSLATION
     He made His appearance to taste that conjugal mellow and
incidentally to broadcast all the rasas.
                                   TEXT 224
               visvesam anuranjanena janayann anandam indivara-
            sreni-syamala-komalair upanayann angair anango tsavam          svacchandam vraja-sundaribhir abhitah pratyangam alingitah           srngarah sakhi murtiman iva madhau mugdho harih kridati
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friends, just see how Sri Krsna is enjoying the season of
spring! With the gopis embracing each of His limbs, He is like amorouslove personified. With His transcendental pastimes, He enlivens all thegopis, and the entire creation. With His soft bluish-black arms andlegs, which resemble blue lotus flowers, He has created a festival forCupid."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the Gita-govinda (1.11).                                   TEXT 225                   sri-krsna-caitanya gosani rasera sadana
                       asesa-visese kaila rasa asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya is the abode of rasa. He Himself tasted the
sweetness of rasa in endless ways.
                                   TEXT 226
                    sei dvare pravartaila kali-yuga-dharma
                      caitanyera dase jnne ei saba marma
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus He initiated the dharma for the age of Kali. The devotees of
Lord Caitanya know all these truths.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya is Sri Krsna Himself, the absolute enjoyer of the
love of the gopis. He Himself assumes the role of the gopis to taste thepredominated happiness of transcendental mellows. He appeared in thatmode, but simultaneously He propagated the religious process for thisage in a most fascinating way. Only the confidential devotees of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu can understand this transcendental secret.
                                 TEXT 227-228                    advaita acarya, nityananda, srinivasa
                    gaoadhara, damodara, murari, haridasa
                    ara yata caitanya-krsnera bhakta-gana
                    bhakti-bhave sire dhari sabara carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya, Nityananda, Srivasa Pand ita, Gadadhara, Svaru pa
Damodara, Murari Gupta, Haridasa and all the other devotees of Sri KrsnaCaitanya--bowing down with devotion, I hold their lotus feet on my head.
                                   PURPORT     The author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta teaches us that we must offer
our respectful obeisances to all such pure confidential devotees of LordCaitanya if we indeed want to know Him in truth.
                                   TEXT 229                       sastha-slokera ei kahila abhasa
                    mula slokera artha suna kariye prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     I have given a hint of the sixth verse. Now please hear as I reveal
the meaning of that original verse.
                                   TEXT 230
                sri-radhayah pranaya-mahima kidrso vanayaiva-
                svadyo yenadbhuta-madhurima kiarso va maai vah              saukhyam casya mad-anubhavatah kidrsam veti lobhat             tad-bhavadhyah samajani sacigarbha-sindhau harin duh
                                 TRANSLATION     "Desiring to understand the glory of Radharani's love, the
wonderful qualities in Him that She alone relishes through Her love, andthe happiness She feels when She realizesthe sweetness of His love, theSupreme Lord Hari, richly endowed with Her emotions, appears from thewomb of Srimati Sacidevi, as the moon appears from the ocean."
                                   TEXT 231
                  e saba siddhanta g\dha,--kahite na yuyaya
                     na kahile, keha ihara anta nahi paya                                 TRANSLATION
     All these conclusions are unfit to disclose in public. But if they
are not disclosed, no one will understand them.
                                   TEXT 232
                       ataeva kahi kichu karina nigudha
                   bujhibe rasika bhakta, na bujhibe mudha
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore I shall mentio n them, revealing only their essence, so
that loving devotees will understand them but fools will not.
                                   TEXT 233
                    hrdaye dharaye ye caitanya-nityananda
                      e-saba siddhante sei paibe ananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Anyone who has captured Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord
Nityananda Prabhu in his heart will become blissful by hearing all thesetranscendental conclusions.
                                   TEXT 234
                     e saba siddhanta haya amrera pallava
                    bhak ta-gana-kokilera sarvada vallabha
                                 TRANSLATION     All these conclusions are like the newly grown twigs of a mango
tree; they are always pleasing to the devotees, who in this way resemblecuckoo birds.
                                   TEXT 235
                     abhakta-ustrera ithe na haya pravesa
                      tabe citte haya mora ananda-visesa
                                 TRANSLATION     The camel-like nondevotees cannot enter into these topics.
Therefore there is special jubilation in my heart.
                                   TEXT 236                    ye lagi kahite bhaya, se yadi na jane
                     iha va-i kiba sukha ache tribhuvane
                                 TRANSLATION     For fear of them I do not wish to speak, but if they do not
understand, then what can be happier in all the three worlds?
                                   TEXT 237
                      ataeva bhakta-gane kari namaskara
                     nihsanke kahiye, tara hauk camatkara
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore after offering obeisances to the devotees, for their
satisfaction I shall speak without hesitating.
                                   TEXT 238
                       krsnera vicara eka achaye antare
                     purnananda-purna-rasa-rupa kahe more
                                 TRANSLATION     Once Lord Krsna considered within His heart: "Everyone says that I
am complete bliss, full of all rasas.
                                   TEXT 239
                     ama ha-ite anandita haya tribhuvana
                      amake ananda dibe--aiche kon jana
                                 TRANSLATION     "All the world derives pleasure from Me. Is there anyone who can
give Me pleasure?
                                   TEXT 240
                      ama haite yara haya sata sata guna
                       sei jana ahladite pare mora mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who has a hundred times more qualities than Me could give
pleasure to My mind.                                   TEXT 241
                     ama haite guni bada jagate asambhava
                       ekali radhate taha kari anubhava
                                 TRANSLATION     "One more qualified than Me is impossible to find in the world. But
in Radha alone I feel the presence of one who can give Me pleasure.
                                 TEXT 242-243
                     ko ti-kama jini' rupa yadyapi amara
                    asamordh va-madhurya--samya nahi yara
                      mora rupe apyayita haya tribhuvana
                      radhara darsane mora judaya nayana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although My beauty defeats the beauty of ten million cupids,
although it is unequaled and unsurpassed and although it gives pleasureto the three worlds, seeing Radharani gives pleasure to My eyes.
                                   TEXT 244
                     mora vamsi-gite akarsaye tribhuvana
                      radhara vacane hare amara sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The vibration of My transcendental flute attracts the three
worlds, but My ears are enchanted by the sweet words of SrimatiRadharani.
                                   TEXT 245
                     yadyapi amara gandhe jagat sugandha
                   mora citta-prana hare radha-anga-gandha
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although My body lends fragrance to the entire creation, the scent
of Radharani's limbs captivates My mind and heart.
                                   TEXT 246
                       yadyapi amara rase jagat sarasa
                      radhara adhara-rasa ama kare vasa                                 TRANSLATION
     "Although the entire creation is full of different tastes because
of Me, I am charmed by the nectarean taste of the lips of SrimatiRadharani.
                                   TEXT 247
                     yadyapi amara sparsa kotindu-sitala
                      radhikara sparse ama kare susitala
                                 TRANSLATION     "And although My touch is cooler than ten million moons, I am
refreshed by the touch of Srimati Radhika.
                                   TEXT 248
                       ei mata jagatera sukhe ami hetu
                       radhikara rupa-guna amara jivatu
                                 TRANSLATION     "Thus although I am the source for the happiness of the entire
world, the beauty and attributes of Sri Radhika are My life and soul.
                                   TEXT 249
                        ei mata anubhava amara pratita
                     vicari' dekhiye yadi, saba viparita
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this way My affectionate feelings for Srimati Radharani may be
understood, but on analysis I find them contradictory.
                                   TEXT 250
                      radhara darsane mora judaya nayana
                      amara darsane radha sukhe ageyana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My eyes are fully satisfied when I look upon Srimati Radharani,
but by looking upon Me, She becomes even more advanced in satisfaction.
                                   TEXT 251
                      paraspara venu-gite haraye cetana                      mora bnrame tamalere kare alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The flutelike murmur of the bamboos rubbing against one another
steals Radharani's consciousness, for She thinks it to be the sound ofMy flute. And She embraces a tamala tree, mistaking it for Me.
                                   TEXT 252
                     krsna-alingana painu, janama saphale
                    krsna-sukne magnarahe vrksa kari' kole
                                 TRANSLATION     " `I have gotten the embrace of Sri Krsna,' She thinks, `so now My
life is fulfilled.' Thus She remains immersed in pleasing Krsna, takingthe tree in Her arms.
                                   TEXT 253
                      anukula-vate yadi paya mora gandha
                     udiya padite cahe, preme haya andha
                                 TRANSLATION     "When a favorable breeze carries to Her the fragrance of My body,
She is blinded by love and tries to fly into that breeze.
                                   TEXT 254
                      tambula-carvita yabe kare asvadane
                     ananda-samudre dabe, kichui na jane
                                 TRANSLATION     "When She tastes the betel chewed by Me, She merges in an ocean of
joy and forgets everything else.
                                   TEXT 255
                      amara sangame radha paya ye ananda
                    sata-mukhe bali, tabu na pai tara anta
                                 TRANSLATION     "Even with hundreds of mouths I could not express the
transcendental pleasure She derives from My association.                                   TEXT 256
                    lila-ante sukhe inhara angera madhuri
                     taha dekhi' sukhe aini apana pasari
                                 TRANSLATION     "Seeing the luster of Her complexion after Our pastimes together, I
forget My own identity in happiness.
                                   TEXT 257
                   donhara ye sama-rasa, bharata-muni mane
                      amara vrajera rasa seha nahi jnne
                                 TRANSLATION     "The sage Bharata has said that the mellows of lover and beloved
are equal. But he does not know the mellows of My Vrndavana.
                                   PURPORT     According to expert sexologists like Bharata Muni, both male and
female enjoy equally in material sexual pleasure. But in the spiritualworld the relationships are different, although this is unknown tomundane experts.
                                   TEXT 258                      anyera sangame ami yata sukha pai
                     taha haite radha-sukha sata adhikai
                                 TRANSLATION     "The happiness I feel when meeting Radharani is a hundred times
greater than the happiness I get from meeting others."
                                   TEXT 259
              nirdhutamrta-madhuri-parimalah kalyani bim badharo
          vak tram pankaja-saurabham kuharita-slagha-bhidas te girah           angam candana-sitalam tanur iyam saundarya-sarvasva-bhak             tvam asadya mamedam indriya-kulam radhe muhur modate
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear auspicious Radharani, Your body is the source of all
beauty. Your red lips are softer than the sense of immortal sweetness,Your face bears the aroma of a lotus flower, Your sweet words defeat thevibrations of the cuckoo, and Your limbs are cooler than the pulp ofsandalwood. All My transcendental senses are overwhelmed in ecstaticpleasure by tasting You, who are completely decorated by beautiful
qualities."
                                   PURPORT     This verse, spoken by Lord Krsna to Radha, is recorded in the
Lalita-madhava (9.9) of Srila Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 260          rupe kamsa-harasya lubdha-nayanam sparse 'tihrsyat-tvacam
             vanyam utkalita-srutim parimale samhrsta-nasa-putam           arajyad-rasanam kiladhara-pute nyan can-mukhambho-ruham-           dambh odgirna-mahadhrtim bahir api prodyad-vikarakulain
                                 TRANSLATION     "Her eyes are enchanted by the beauty of Lord Krsna, the enemy of
Kamsa. Her body thrills in pleasure at His touch. Her ears are alwaysattracted to His sweet voice, Her nostrils are enchanted by Hisfragrance, and Her tongue hankers for the nectar of His soft lips. Shehangs down her lotuslike face, exercising self-control only by pretense,but She cannot help showing the external signs of Her spontaneous lovefor Lord Krsna."
                                   PURPORT     Thus Srila Rupa Gosvami describes the countenance of Radharani.                                   TEXT 261                      tate jnni, mote ache kona eka rasa
                      amara mohini radha, tare kare vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "Considering this, I can understand that some unknown mellow in Me
controls the entire existence of My captivator, Srimati Radharani.
                                   TEXT 262
                     ama haite radha paya ye jatiya sukha
                       taha asvadite ami sadai unmukha
                                 TRANSLATION     "1 am always eager to taste the joy that Radharani derives from Me.
                                   TEXT 263
                      nana yatna kari ami, nari asvaaite
                 sei sukha-madhurya-ghrane lobha badhe citte                                 TRANSLATION
     "In spite of various efforts, I have not been able to taste it. But
My desire to relish that pleasure increases as I smell its sweetness.
                                   TEXT 264
                       rasa asvadite ami kaiia avatara
                     prema-rasa asvadiba vividha prakara
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have appeared in the world to taste mellows. I shall taste the
mellows of pure love in various ways.
                                   TEXT 265
                   raga-marge bhakta bhakti kare ye prakare
                       taha sikhaiba lila-acarana-dvare
                                 TRANSLATION     "I shall teach devotional service, which springs from the
spontaneous love of the devotees, by demonstrating it Myself with Mypastimes.
                                   TEXT 266
                       ei tina trsna mora nahila purana
                      viiatiya-bhave nahe taha asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     "But these three desires have not been satisfied, for one cannot
enjoy them in a contrary position.
                                   TEXT 267
                     radhikara bhava-kan ti angikara vine
                      sei tina sukha kabhu nahe asvadane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Unless I accept the luster of the ecstatic love of Sri Radhika,
these three desires cannot be fulfilled.
                                   TEXT 268                   radha-bhava angikari' dhari' tara varn a
                      tina-sukha asvadite haba avatirna
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore, assuming Radharani's sentiments and bodily complexion,
I shall descend to fulfill these three desires."
                                   TEXT 269
                    sarva-bhave kaila kisna ei ta' niscaya
                       hena-kale aila yugavatara-samaya
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Lord Krsna came to a decision. Simultaneously,the time
came for the incarnation of the age.
                                   TEXT 270
                     sei-kale sri-advaita karena aradhana
                     tanhara hunkare kaila krsne akarsana
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time Sri Advaita was earnestly worshiping Him. Advaita
attracted Him with His loud calls.
                                 TEXT 271-272
                      pita-mata, guru-gana, age avatari'
                    radhikara bhava- varna angikara kari'
                 nava-dvioe saci-garbha-suddha-dugdha-sindhu
                    tahate prakata haiia klsna purna indu
                                 TRANSLATION     First Lord Krsna made His parents and elders appear. Then Krsna
Himself, with the sentiments and complexion of Radhika, appeared inNavadvipa, like the full moon, from the womb of mother Saci, which islike an ocean of pure milk.
                                   TEXT 273
                   ei ta' karilun sastha slokera vyakhyana
                  sri-rupa-gosanira pada-padma kari' dhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     Meditating on the lotus feet of Sri Rupa Gosvami, I have thus
explained the sixth verse.
                                   TEXT 274
                      ei dui slokera ami ye karila artha
                  sri-rupa-gosanira slo ka pramana samartha
                                 TRANSLATION     I can support the explanation of these two verses [verses 5 and 6
of the First Chapter] with Sri Rupa Gosvami's verse.
                                   TEXT 275
                 aparam kasyapi pranayi jana-vrndasya kutuki
               rasa-stomam hrtva madhuram upabhoktum kamapi yah               rucam svam avavre dyutim iha tadiyam prakatayan                 sa devas caitanyakrtir atitaram nah krpayatu
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Krsna desired to taste the limitless nectarean mellows of the
love of one of His multitude of loving damsels [Sri Radha], and so Hehas assumed the form of Lord Caitanya. He has tasted that love whilehiding His own dark complexion with Her effulgent yellow color. May thatLord Caitanya confer upon us His grace."
                                   PURPORT     Th is is th e th i rd ve rse of th e seco n d Caitanyastaka of
Srila R upa Gosva mi's Stava-mala.
                                   TEXT 276                mangalacaranam krsna-caitanya-tattva-laksanam
                 prayojanam cavatare sloka-satkair nirupitam
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the auspicious invocation, the essential nature of the truth
of Lord Caitanya, and the need for His appearance have been set forth insix verses.
                                   TEXT 277
                      sri-rupa-raghunath a-pade yara asa
                     caitanya-caritamrta kah e krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Adi- lila, Fourth Chapter, describing the con fidential reasons for theappearance o f Lord Caitanya.
                                 Chapter Five
     This chapter is chiefly devoted to describing the essential nature
and glories of Sri Nityananda Prabhu. Lord Sri Krsna is the absolutePersonality of Godhead, and His first expansion in a form for pastimesis Sri Balarama.     Beyond the limitation of this material world is the spiritual sky,paravyoma, which has many spiritual planets, the supreme of which iscalled Krsnaloka. Krsnaloka, the abode of Krsna, has three divisions,which are known as Dvaraka, Mathura and Gokula. In that abode thePersonality of Godhead expands Himself into four plenary portions--Krsna, Balarama, Pradyumna (the transcendental Cupid) and Aniruddha.They are known as the original quadruple forms.     In Krsnaloka is a transcendental place known as Svetadvipa orVrndavana. Below Krsnaloka, in the spiritual sky, are the Vaikunthaplanets. On each Vaikuntha planet a four-handed Narayana, expanded fromthe first quadruple manifestation, is present. The Personality ofGodhead known as Sri Balarama in Krsnaloka is the original Sankarsana(attracting Deity), and from this Sankarsana expands another Sankarsana,called Maha-Sankarsana, who resides in one of the Vaikuntha planets. ByHis internal potency, Maha-Sankarsana maintains the transcendentalexistence of all the planets in the spiritual sky, where all the livingbeings are eternally liberated souls. The influence of the materialenergy is conspicuous there by its absence. On those planets the secondquadruple manifestation is present.     Outside of the Vaikuntha planets is the impersonal manifestation ofSri Krsna, which is known as the Brahmaloka. On the other side of theBrahmaloka is the spiritual karana-samudra, or Causal Ocean. Thematerial energy exists on the other side of the Causal Ocean, withouttouching it. In the Causal Ocean is Maha-Visnu, the original purusaexpansion from Sankarsana. This Maha-Visnu places His glance over thematerial energy, and by a reflection of His transcendental body Heamalgamates Himself within the material elements.     As the source of the material elements, the material energy isknown aspradhana, and as the source of the manifestations of thematerial energy it is known as maya. But material nature is inert inthat she has no independent power to do anything. She is empowered tomake the cosmic manifestation by the glance of Maha-Visnu. Therefore thematerial energy is not the original cause of the material manifestation.Rather,the transcendental glance of Maha-Visnu over material natureproduces that cosmic manifestation.     Maha-Visnu again enters every universe as the reservoir of allliving entities, Garbhodakasayi Visnu. From Garbhodakasayi Visnu expandsKsirodakasayi Visnu, the Supersoul of every living entity.Garbhodakasayi Visnu also has His own Vaikuntha planet in every
universe, where He lives as the Supersoul or supremecontroller of the universe. Garbhodakasayi Visnu reclines in the midstof the watery portion of the universe and generates the first livingcreature of the universe, Brahma. The imaginary universal form is apartial manifestation of Garbhodakasayi Visnu.     In the Vaikuntha planet in every universe is an ocean of milk, andwithin that ocean is an island calied Svetadvipa, where Lord Visnulives. Therefore this chapter describes two Svetadvipas--one in theabode of Krsna and the other in the ocean of milk in every universe. TheSvetadvipa in the abode of Krsna is identical with Vrndavana-dhama,which is the place where Krsna appears Himself to display His lovingpastimes. In the Svetadvipa within every universe is a Sesa form ofGodhead who serves Visnu by assuming the form of His umbrella, slippers,couch, pillows, garments, residence, sacred thread, throne and so on.     Lord Baladeva in Krsnaloka is Nityananda Prabhu. ThereforeNityananda Prabhu is the original Sankarsana, and Maha-Sankarsana andHis expansions as the purusas in the universes are plenary expansions ofNityananda Prabhu.     In this chapter the author has described the history of his leavinghome for a personal pilgrimage to Vrndavana and his achieving allsuccess there. In this description it is revealed that the author'soriginal paternal home and birthplace were in the district of Katwa,inthe village of J hamatapura, which is near Naihati. Krsnadasa Kaviraja'sbrother invited Sri Minaketana Ramadasa, a great devotee of LordNityananda, to his home, but a priest named Gunarnava Misra did notreceive him well, and Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami's brother, notrecognizing the glories of Lord Nityananda, also took sides with thepriest. Therefore Ramadasa became sorry, broke his flute and went away.This was a great disaster for the brother of Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.But on that very night Lord Nityananda Prabhu Himself graced KrsnadasaKaviraja Gosvami in a dream and ordered him to leave on the next day forVrndavana.
                                    TEXT 1                         vande 'nantadbhutaisvaryam-
                           sri-nityanandam isvaram                           yasyecchaya tat-svarupam                              ajnenapi nirupyate
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my obeisances to Lord Sri Nityananda, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose opulence is wonderful and unlimited. ByHis will, even a fool can understand His identity.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. All glories to Lord
Nityananda. All glories to Advaita Acarya. And all glories to all thedevotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 3
                  ei sat-sloke kahila krsna-caitanya-mahima
                   panca-sloke kahi nityananda-tattva-sima
                                 TRANSLATION     I have described the glory of Sri Krsna Caitanya in six verses.
Now, in five verses, I shall describe the glory of Lord Nityananda.
                                    TEXT 4
                     sarva-avatari krsna svayam bhagavan
                      tanhara dviti ya deha sri.balarama
                                 TRANSLATION     The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the fountainhead of
all incarnations. Lord Balarama is His second body.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Sri Krsna, the absolute Personality of Godhead, is the
primeval Lord, the original form of Godhead, and His first expansion isSri Balarama. The Personality of Godhead can expand Himself ininnumerable forms. The forms that have unlimited potency are calledsvamsa, and forms that have limited potencies (the living entities) arecalled vibhinnamsa.
                                    TEXT 5                    eka-i svarupa donhe, bhinna-matra kaya
                     adya kaya-vyuha, krsna-lilara sahaya
                                 TRANSLATION     They are both one and the same identity. They differ only in form.
He is the first bodily expansion of Krsna, and He assists in LordKrsna's transcendental pastimes.
                                   PURPORT     Balarama is a svamsa expansion of the Lord, and therefore there is
no difference in potency between Krsna and Balarama. The only differenceis in Their bodily structure. As the first expansion of Godhead,Balarama is the chief Deity among the first quadruple forms, and He isthe foremost assistant of Sri Krsna in His transcendental activities.                                    TEXT 6
                  sei krsna--nava-dvioe sri-caitanya-candra
                      sei balarama--sange sri-nityananda
                                 TRANSLATION     That original Lord Krsna appeared in Navadvipa as Lord Caitanya,
and Balarama appeared with Him as Lord Nityananda.
                                    TEXT 7
                         sankarsanah karana-toya-sayi
                        garbhoda-sayi ca payobdhi-sayi                      sesas ca yasyamsa-kalah sa nitya--                       nandakhya-ramah saranam mamastu
                                 TRANSLATION     May Sri Nityananda Rama be the object of my constant remembrance.
Sankarsana, SesaNaga and the Visnus who lie on the Karana Ocean, GarbhaOcean and ocean of milk are His plenary portions and the portions of Hisplenary portions.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Svarupa Damodara Gosvami has recorded this verse in his diary
to offer his respectful obeisances to Lord Nityananda Prabhu. This versealso appears as the seventh of the first fo urteen verses of SriCaitanya-caritamrta.
                                    TEXT 8                     sri-balarama gosani mula-sankarsana
                   panca-rupa dhari' karena krsnera se vana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Balarama is the original Sankarsana. He assumes five other
forms to serve Lord Krsna.
                                    TEXT 9
                      apan e karena krsna-iilara sahaya
                    srsti-lila-karya kare dhari' cari kaya
                                 TRANSLATION     He Himself helps in the pastimes of Lord Krsna, and He does the
work of creation in four other forms.                                   TEXT 10
                   srsty-adika se va,--tanra ajnara palana
                   `sesa'-rupe kare krsnera vividha sevana
                                 TRANSLATION     He executes the orders of Lord Krsna in the work of creation, and
in the form of Lord Sesa He serves Krsna in various ways.
                                   PURPORT     According to expert opinion, Balarama, as the chief of the original
quadruple forms, is also the original Sankarsana. Balarama, the firstexpansion of Krsna, ex pands Himself in five forms: (1) Maha-Sankarsana, (2) Karanabd h isayi, (3) Garbhodakasayi, (4) Ksirodakasayi,and (5) Sesa. These five plenary portions are responsible for both thespiritual and material cosmic manifestations. In these five forms LordBalarama assists Lord Krsna in His activities. The first four of theseforms are responsible for the cosmic manifestations, whereas Sesa isresponsible for personal service to the Lord. Sesa is called Ananta, orunlimited, because He assists the Personality of Godhead in Hisunlimited expansions by performing an unlimited variety of services. SriBalarama is the servitor Godhead who serves Lord Krsna in all affairs ofexistence and knowledge. Lord Nityananda Prabhu, who is the sameservitor Godhead, Balarama, performs the same service to Lord Gaurangaby constant associatio n.
                                   TEXT 11                     sarva-rupe asvadaye krsna-se vananda
                     sei balarama--gaura-sange nityananda
                                 TRANSLATION     In all the forms He tastes the transcendental bliss of serving
Krsna. That same Balarama is Lord Nityananda, the companion of LordGaurasundara.
                                   TEXT 12
                    saptama slokera artha kari cari-sloke
                    yate nityananda-tattva jane sarva-loke
                                 TRANSLATION     I have explained this seventh verse in four subsequent verses. By
these verses all the world can know the truth about Lord Nityananda.
                                   TEXT 13                        mayatite vyapi vaikuntha-loke
                     purnaisvarye sri-catur-vyuha-madhye                      rupam yasyodbhati sankarsanakhyam                      tam sri-nityananda-rainam prapadye
                                 TRANSLATION     I surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Nityananda Rama, who is
known as Sankarsana in the midst of the catur-vyuha [consisting ofVasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha]. He possesses fullopulences and resides in Vaikunthaloka, far beyond the materialcreation.
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Sri Svarupa Damodara Gosvami's diary. It
appears as the eigh th of the fi rst fou rtee n ve rses of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta.
                                   TEXT 14                    prakrtira para `para vyoma'-name dhama
                  krsna- vigraha yaiche vibhuty-adi-gunavan
                                 TRANSLATION     Beyond the material nature lies the realm known as paravyoma, the
spiritual sky. Like Lord Krsna Himself, it possesses all transcendentalattributes, such as the six opulences.
                                   PURPORT     According to Sankhya philosophy, the material cosmos is composed of
twentyfour elements: the five gross material elements, the three subtlematerial elements, the five knowledge-acquiring senses, the five activesenses, the five objects of sense pleasure, and the mahat-tattva (thetotal material energy). Empiric philosophers, unable to go beyond theseelements, speculate that anything beyond them must be avyakta, orinexplicable. But the world beyond the twenty-four elements is notinexplicable, for it is explained in Bhagavad-gita as the eternal(sanatana) nature. Beyond the manifested and unmanifested existence ofmateriai nature (vyaktavyakta) is the sanatana nature, which is calledthe paravyoma, or the spiritual sky. Since that nature is spiritual inquality, there are no qualitative differences there; everything there isspiritual, everything is good, and everything possesses the spiritualform of Sri Krsna Himself. That spiritual sky is the manifested internalpotency of Sri Krsna; it is distinct from the material sky manifested byHis external potency.     The all-pervading Brahman, the impersonal glowing ray of Sri Krsna,exists in the spiritual world with the Vaikuntha planets. We can getsome idea of that spiritual sky by a comparison to the material sky, forthe rays of the sun in the material sky can be compared to thebrahmajyoti, the glowing ray of the Personality of Godhead. In thebrahmajyoti there are unlimited Vaikuntha planets, which are spiritualand therefore self-luminous, with a glow many times greater than that of
the sun. The Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, His innumerable plenaryportions and the portions of His plenary portions dominate eachVaikuntha planet. In the highest region of the spiritual sky is theplanet called Krsnaloka, which has three divisions, namely Dvaraka,Mathura and Goloka.     To a gross materialist this kingdom of God, Vaikuntha, is certainlya mystery. But to an ignorant man everything is a mystery for want ofsufficient knowledge. The kingdom of God is not a myth. Even thematerial planets, which float over our heads in the millions andbillions, are still a mystery to the ignorant. Material scientists arenow attempting to penetrate this mystery, and a day may come when thepeople of this earth will be able to travel in outer space and see thevariegatedness of these millions of planets with their own eyes. Inevery planet there is as much material variegatedness as we find in ourown planet.     This planet earth is but an insignificant spot in the cosmicstructure. Yet foolish men, puffed up by a false sense of scientificadvancement, have concentrated their energy in a pursuit of so-calledeconomic development on this planet, not knowing of the variegatedeconomic facilities available on other planets. According to modernastronomy, the gravity of the moon is different from that of earth.Therefore if one goes to the moon he will be able to pick up largeweights and jump vast distances. In the Ramayana, Hanuman is describedas being able to lift huge weights as heavy as hills and jump over theocean. Modern astronomy has confirmed that this is indeed possible.     The disease of the modern civilized man is his disbelief ofeverything in the revealed scriptures. Faithless nonbelievers cannotmake progress in spiritual realization, for they cannot understand thespiritual potency. The small fruit of a banyan contains hundreds ofseeds, and in each seed is the potency to produce another banyan treewith the potency to produce millions more of such fruits. This law ofnature is visible before us, although how it works is beyond ourunderstanding. This is but an insignificant example of the potency ofGodhead; there are many similar phenomena that no scientist can explain.     Everything, in fact, is inconceivable, for the truth is revealedonly to the proper persons. Although there are varieties ofpersonalities, from Brahma down to the insignificant ant, all of whomare living beings, their development of knowledge is different.Therefore we have to gather knowledge from the right source. I ndeed, wecan get knowledge in reality only from the Vedic sources. The fourVedas, with their supplementary Puranas, the Mahabharata, the Ramayanaand their corollaries, which are known as smrtis, are all authorizedsources of knowledge. If we are at all to gather knowledge, we mustgather it from these sources without hesitation.     Revealed knowledge may in the beginning be unbelievable because ofour paradoxical desire to verify everything with our tiny brains, butthe speculative means of attaining knowledge is always imperfect. Theperfect knowledge propounded in the revealed scriptures is confirmed bythe great acaryas, who have left ample commentations upon them; none ofthese acaryas has disbelieved in the sastras. One who disbelieves in thesastras is an atheist, and we should not consult an atheist, howevergreat he may be. A staunch believer in the sastras, with all theirdiversities, is the right person from whom to gather real knowledge.Such knowledge may seem inconceivable in the beginning, but when put
forward by the proper authority its meaning is revealed, and then one nolonger has any doubts about it.
                                   TEXT 15                  sarvaga, anan ta, vibhu--vaikun thdi dhama
                    krsna, krsna-avatarera tahani visrama
                                 TRANSLATION     That Vaikuntha region is all-pervading, infinite and supreme. It is
the residence of Lord Krsna and His incarnations.
                                   TEXT 16
                    tahara upari-bhage `krsna-loka'-khyati
                 dvaraka-mathura-go kula--tri-vidhatve sthiti
                                 TRANSLATION     In the highest region of that spiritual sky is the spiritual planet
called Krsnaloka. It has three divisions--Dvaraka, Mathura, and Gokula.
                                   TEXT 17
                    sarvopari sri-gokula--vrajaloka-dhama
                   sri-goloka, sveta-dvipa, vrndavana nama
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Gokula, the highest of all, is also called Vraja, Goloka,
Svetadvipa and Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 18
                   sarvaga, ananta, vibhu, krsna-tanu-sama
                     upary-adho vyapiyache, nahika niyama
                                 TRANSLATION     Like the transcendental body of Lord Krsna, Gokula is all-
pervading, infinite and supreme. It expands both above and below,without any restriction.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Jiva Gosvami, the great authority and philosopher in the line
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, has discussed the abode of Krsna in hisKrsna-sandarbha. I n Bhagavad- gita the Lord refers to "My abode." SrilaJiva Gosvami, examining the nature of Krsna's abode, refers to the
Skanda purana, which states:     ya yatha bhu vi vartante     puryo bhagavatah priyah     tas tatha santi vaikunthe     tat-tal-lilartham adrtah"The abodes of Godhead in the material world, such as Dvaraka, Mathuraand Goloka, are facsimiles representing the abodes of Godhead in thekingdom of God, Vaikuntha-dhama." The unlimited spiritual atmosphere ofthat Vaikuntha-dhama is far above and beyond the material cosmos. Thisis confirmed in the Svayambhuva- tantra in a discussion between LordSiva and Parvati regarding the effect of chanting the mantra of fourteensyllables. There it is stated:     nana-kalpa-latakirnam     vaikuntham vyapakam smaret     adhah samyam gunanam ca     prakrtih sarva-karanam"While chanting the mantra, one should always remember the spiritualworld, which is very extensive and full of desire trees that can yieldanything one desires. Below that Vaikuntha region is the potentialmaterial energy, which causes the material manifestation." The places ofthe pastimes of Lord Krsna, such as Dvaraka, Mathura and Vrndavana,eternally and independently exist in Krsnaloka. They are the actualabode of Lord Krsna, and there is no doubtthat they are situated abovethe material cosmic manifestation.     The abode known as Vrndavana or Gokula is also known as Goloka. TheBrahma- samhlta describes that Gokula, the highest region of the kingdomof God, resembles a lotus flower with thousands of petals. The outerportion of that lotus-like planet is a square place known as Svetadvipa.In the inner portion of Gokula there is an elaborate arrangement for SriKrsna's residence with His eternal associates such as Nanda and Yasoda.That transcendental abode exists by the energy of Sri Baladeva, who isthe original whole of Sesa, or Ananta.The tantras also confirm thisdescription by stating that the abode of Sri Anantadeva, the plenaryportion of Baladeva, is called the kingdom of God. Vrndavana-dhama isthe innermost abode within the quadrangular realm of Svetadvipa, whichlies outside of the boundary of Gokula Vrndavana.     According to Jiva Gosvami, Vaikuntha is also called Brahmaloka. TheNarada- pancartra, in a statement concerning the mystery of Vijaya,describes:     tat sarvopari goloke     tatra lokopari s vayam     viharet paramanandi     go vindo 'tula-nayakah"The predominator of the gopis, Govinda, the principal Deity of Gokula,always enjoys Himself in a place called Goloka in the topmost part ofthe spiritual sky."     From the authoritative evidence cited by Jiva Gosvami we mayconclude that Krsnaloka is the supreme planet in the spiritual sky,which is far beyond the material cosmos. For the enjoyment oftranscendental variety, the pastimes of Krsna there have threedivisions, and these pastimes are performed in the three abodes Dvaraka,Mathura and Gokula. When Krsna descends to this universe, He enjoys thepastimes in places of the same name. These places on earth arenondifferent from those original abodes, for they are facsimiles of
those original holy places in the transcendental world. They are as goodas Sri Krsna Himself and are equally worshipable. Lord Caitanya declaredthat Lord Krsna, who presents Himself as the son of the King of Vraja,is worshipable, and Vrndavana-dhama is equally worshipable.
                                   TEXT 19                    brahmande prakasa tara krsnera icchaya
                      eka-i s varupa tara, nahi dui kaya
                                 TRANSLATION     That abode is manifested within the material world by the will of
Lord Krsna. It is identical to that original Gokula; they are not twodifferent bodies.
                                   PURPORT     The above-mentioned dhamas are movable, by the omnipotent will of
Lord Krsna. When Sri Krsna appears on the face of the earth, He can alsomake His dhamas appear, without changing their original structure. Oneshould not discriminate between the dhamas on the earth and those in thespiritual sky, thinking those on earth to be material and the originalabodes to be spiritual. All of them are spiritual. Only for us, whocannot experience anything beyond matter in our present conditionedstate, do the dhamas and the Lord Himself, in His arca form, appearbefore us resembling matter to give us the facility to see spirit withmaterial eyes. In the beginning this may be difficult for a neophyte tounderstand, but in due course, when one is advanced in devotionalservice, it will be easier, and he will appreciate the Lord's presencein these tangible forms.
                                   TEXT 20                    cintamani bhumi, kalpa-vrksa-maya vana
                    carma-cakse dekhe tare prapancera sama
                                 TRANSLATION     The land there is touchstone [cintamani], and the forests abound
with desire trees. Material eyes see it as an ordinary place.
                                   PURPORT     By the grace of the Lord His dhamas and He Himself can all be
present simultaneously, without losing their original importance. Onlywhen one fully develops in affection and love of Godhead can one seethose dhamas in their original appearance.     Srila Narottama dasa Thakura, a great acarya in the preceptorialline of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, has said for our benefit that onecan perfectly see the dhamas only when one completely gives up thementality of lording it over material nature. One's spiritual visiondevelops proportionately to one's giving up the debased mentality ofunnecessarily enjoying matter. A diseased person who has become diseased
because of a certain bad habit must be ready to follow the advice of thephysician, and as a natural sequence he must attempt to give up thecause of the disease. The patient cannot indulge in the bad habit and atthe same time expect to be cured by the physician. Modern materialcivilization, however, is maintaining a diseased atmosphere. The livingbeing is a spiritual spark, as spiritual as the Lord Himself. The onlydifference is that the Lord is great and the living being is small.Qualitatively they are one, but quantitatively they are different.Therefore, since the living being is spiritual in constitution, he canbe happy only in the spiritual sky, where there are unlimited spiritualspheres called Vaikunthas. A spiritual being conditioned by a materialbody must therefore try to get rid of his disease instead of developingthe cause of the disease.     Foolish persons engrossed in their material assets areunnecessarily proud of being leaders of the people, but they ignore thespiritual value of man. Such illusioned leaders make plans covering anynumber of years, but they can hardly make humanity happy in a stateconditioned by threefold miseries inflicted by material nature. Onecannot control the laws of nature by any amount of struggling. One mustat last be subject to death, nature's ultimate law. Death, birth, oldage and illness are symptoms of the diseased condition of the livingbeing. The highest aim of human life should therefore be to get freefrom these miseries and go back home, back to Godhead.
                                   TEXT 21                    prema-netre dekhe tara svarupa-prakasa
                     gopa-gopi-sange yanha krsnera vilasa
                                 TRANSLATION     But with the eyes of love of Godhead one can see its real identity
as the place where Lord Krsna performs His pastimes with the cowherdboys and cowherd girls.
                                   TEXT 22
                    cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksa-
                     laksavrtesu surabhir abhipaiayantam                  laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-se vyamanam                    govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
                                 TRANSLATION     "I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is
tending the cows, yielding all desires, in abodes built with spiritualgems and surrounded by millions of purpose trees. He is always servedwith great reverence and affection by hundreds and thousands ofgoddesses of fortune."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Brahma-samhita (5.29). This description of the
abode of Krsna gives us definite information of the transcendental placewhere not only is life eternal, blissful and full of knowledge, butthere are ample vegetables, milk, jewels, and beautiful homes andgardens tended by lovely damsels who are all goddesses of fortune.Krsnaloka is the topmost planet in the spiritual sky, and below it areinnu merable spheres, a description of which can be found in Srimad-Bhagavatam. I n the beginning of Lord Brahma's self-realization he wasshown a transcendental vision of the Vaikuntha spheres by the grace ofNarayana. Later, by the grace of Krsna, he was shown a transcendentalvision of Krsnalo ka. This transcendental vision is like the receptionof television from the moon via a mechanical system for receivingmodulated waves, but it is achieved by penance and meditation withinoneself.     The Srimad-Bhagavatam (Second Canto) states that in Vaikunthalokathe material modes of nature, represented by the qualities of goodness,passion and ignorance, have no influence. In the material world thehighest qualitative manifestation is goodness, which is characterized bytruthfulness, mental equilibrium, cleanliness, control of the senses,simplicity, essential knowledge, faith in God, scientific knowl-edge and so on. Nevertheless, all these qualities are mixed with passionand imperfection. But the qualities in Vaikuntha are a manifestationofGod's internal potency, and therefore they are purely spiritual andtranscendental, with no trace of material infection. No material planet,even Satyaloka, is comparable in quality to the spiritual planets, wherethe five inherent qualities of the material world--namely, ignorance,misery, egoism, anger and envy--are completely absent.     In the material world, everything is a creation. Anything we canthink of within our experience, including even our own bodies and minds,was created. This process of creation began with the life of Brahma, andthe creative principle is prevalent all over the material universebecause of the quality of passion. But since the quality of passion isconspicuous by its absence in the Vaikuntha planets, nothing there iscreated; everything there is eternally existent. And because there is nomode of ignorance, there is also no question of annihiiation ordestruction. In the material world one may try to make everythingpermanent by developing the abovementioned qualities of goodness, butbecause the goodness in the material world is mixed with passion andignorance, nothing here can exist permanently, despite all the goodplans of the best scientific brains. Therefore in the material world wehave no experience of eternity, bliss and fullness of knowledge. But inthe spiritual world, because of the complete absence of the qualitativemodes, everything is eternal, blissful and cognizant. Everything canspeak, everything can move, everything can hear, and everything can seein fully blessed existence for eternity. The situation being so,naturally space and time, in the forms of past, present and future, haveno influence there. In the spiritual sky there is no change because timehas no influence. Consequently, the influence of maya, the totalexternal energy, which induces us to become more and more materialisticand forget our relationship with God, is also absent there.     As spiritual sparks of the beams emanating from the transcendentalbody of the Lord, we are all permanently related with Him and equal toHim in quality. The material energy is a covering of the spiritualspark, but in the absence of that material covering, the living beingsin Vaikunthaloka are never forgetful of their identities; they are
eternally cognizant of their relationship with God in theirconstitutional position of rendering transcendental loving service tothe Lord. Because they constantly engage in the transcendentai serviceof the Lord, it is natural to conclude that their senses are alsotranscendental, for one cannot serve the Lord with material senses. Theinhabitants of Vaikunthaloka do not possess material senses with whichto lord it over material nature.     Persons with a poor fund of knowledge conclude that a place void ofmaterial qualities must be some sort of formless nothingness. Inreality, however, there are qualities in the spiritual world, but theyare different from the material qualities because everything there iseternal, unlimited and pure. The atmosphere there is self-illuminating,and thus there is no need of a sun, a moon or fire, electricity and soon. One who can reach that abode does not come back to the materialworld with a material body. There is no difference between atheists andthe faithful in the Vaikuntha planets because all who settle there arefreed from the material qualities, and thus suras and asuras becomeequally obedient loving servitors of the Lord.      The residents ofVaikuntha have brilliantly black complexions much more fascinating andattractive than the dull white and black complexions found in thematerial world. Their bodies, being spiritual, have no equals in thematerial world. The beauty of a bright cloud when lightning flashes onit merely hints at their beauty. Generally the inhabitants of Vaikunthadress in yellow clothing. Their bodies are delicate and attractivelybuilt, and their eyes are like the petals of lotus flowers. Like LordVisnu, the residents of Vaikuntha have four hands, decorated with aconchshell, wheel, club and lotus flower. Their chests are beautifullybroad and fully decorated with necklaces of a brilliant diamond-likemetal surrounded by costly jewels never to be found in the materialworld. The residents of Vaikuntha are always powerful and effulgent.Some of them have complexions like red coral cat's eyes and lotusflowers, and each of them has earrings of costly jewels. On their headsthey wear flowery crowns resembling garlands.     In the Vaikunthas there are airplanes, but they make no tumultuoussounds. Material airplanes are not at all safe; they can fall down andcrash at any time, for matter is imperfect in every respect. In thespiritual sky, however, the airplanes are also spiritual, and they arespiritually brilliant and bright. These airplanes do not fly businessexecutives, politicians or planning commissions as passengers, nor dothey carry cargo or postal bags, for these are all unknown there. Theseplanes are for pleasure trips only, and the residents of Vaikuntha flyin them with their heavenly beautiful fairyli ke consorts. Thereforethese airplanes, full of residents of Vaikuntha, both male and female,increase the beauty of the spiritual sky. We cannot imagine howbeautiful they are, but their beauty may be compared to the clouds inthe sky accompanied by silver branches of electric lightning. Thespiritual sky of Vaikunthaloka is always decorated in this way.     The full opulence of the internal potency of Godhead is alwaysresplendent in the Vaiku nthaloka, where goddesses of fortu ne are ever-increasingly attached to serving the lotus feet of the Personality ofGodhead. These goddesses of fortune, accompanied by their friends,always create a festive atmosphere of transcendental mirth. Alwayssinging the glories of the Lord, they are not silent even for a moment.     There are unlimited Vaikuntha planets in the spiritual sky, and the
ratio of these planets to the material planets in the material sky isthree to one. Thus the poor materialist is busy making politicaladjustments on a planetthatis mostinsignificant in God's creation. Tosay nothing of this planet earth,the whole universe, with innumerableplanets throughout the galaxies, is comparable to a single mustard seedin a bag full of mustard seeds. But the poor materialist makes plans tolive comfortably here and thus wastes his valuable human energy insomething that is doomed to frustration. Instead of wasting his timewith business speculations, he might have sought the life of plainliving and high spiritual thinking and thus saved himself from perpetualmaterialistic unrest.     Even if a materialist wants to enjoy developed material facilities,he can transfer himself to planets where he can experience materialpleasures much more advanced than those available on earth. The bestplan is to prepare oneself to return to the spiritual sky after leavingthe body. However, if one is intenton enjoying material facilities, onecan transfer himself to other planets in the material sky by utilizingyogic powers. The playful spaceships of the astronauts are but childishentertainments and are of no use for this purpose. The astanga-yogasystem is a materialistic art of controlling air by transferring it fromthe stomach to the navel, from the navel to the heart, from the heart tothe collarbone and from there to the eyeballs, from there to thecerebellum and from there to any desired planet. The velocities of airand light are taken into consideration by the material scientist, but hehas no information of the velocity of the mind and intelligence. We havesome limited experience of the velocity of the mind because in a momentwe can transfer our minds to places hundreds of thousands of miles away.Intelligence is even finer. Finer than intelligence is the soul, whichis not matter like mind and intelligence but is spirit or anti-matter.The soul is hundreds of thousands of times finer and more powerful thanintelligence. We can thus only imagine the velocity of the soul in itstraveling from one planet to another. Needless to say, the soul travelsby its own strength and not with the help of any kind of materialvehicle.     The bestial civilization of eating, sleeping, fearing and sense-gratifying has misled modern man into forgetting how powerful a soul hehas. As we have already described, the soul is a spiritual spark many,many times more illuminating, dazzling and powerful than the sun, moon,or electricity. Human life is spoiled when man does not realize his realidentity with his soul. Lord Caitanya appeared with Lord Nityananda tosave man from this type of misleading civilization.     Srimad-Bhagavatam also describes how yogis can travel to all theplanets in the universe. When the vital force is lifted to thecerebellum, there is every chance that this force will burst out fromthe eyes, nose, ears, etc., as these are places that are known as theseventh orbit of the vital force. But the yogis can block these holes bycomplete suspension of air. The yogi then concentrates the vital forcein the middle position, that is, between the eyebrows. At this position,the yogi can think of the planet into which he wants to enter afterleaving the body. He can then decide whether he wants to go to the abodeof Krsna in the transcendental Vaikunthas, from which he Will not berequired to descend into the material world, or to travel to higherplanets in the material universe. The perfect yogi is at liberty to do
either.     For the perfect yogi who has attained success in the method ofleaving his body in perfect consciousness, transferring from one planetto another is as easy as an ordinary man's walking to the grocery store.As already discussed,the material body is just a covering of thespiritual soul. Mind and intelligence are the undercoverings, and thegross body of earth, water, air and so on is the overcoating of thesoul. As such, any advanced soul who has realized himself by the yogicprocess, who knows the relationship between matter and spirit, can leavethe gross dress of the soul in perfect order and as he desires. By thegrace of God, we have complete freedom. Because the Lord is kind to us,we can live anywhere--either in the spiritual sky or in the materialsky, upon whichever planet we desire. However, misuse of this freedomcauses one to fall down into the material world and suffer the threefoldmiseries of conditioned life. The living of a miserable life in thematerial world by dint of the soul's choice is nicely illustrated byMilton in Paradise Lost. Similarly, by choice the soul can regainparadise and return home, back to Godhead.      At the critical time ofdeath, one can place the vital force between the two eyebrows and decidewhere he wants to go. If he is reluctant to maintain any connection withthe material world, he can, in less than a second, reach thetranscendental Vaikuntha and appear there completely in his spiritualbody, which will be suitable for him in the spiritual atmosphere. He hassimply to desire to leave the material world both in finer and ingrosser forms and then move the vital force to the topmost part of theskull and leave the body from the hole in the skull called the brahma-randhra. This is easy for one perfect in the practice of yoga.     Of course man is endowed with free will, and as such if he does notwant to free himself of the material world he may enjoy the life ofbrahma-pada (occupation of the post of Brahma) and visit Siddhaloka, theplanets of materially perfect beings who have full capacities to controlgravity, space and time. To visit these higher planets in the materialuniverse, one need not give up his mind and intelligence (finer matter),but need only give up grosser matter (the material body).     Each and every planet has its particular atmosphere, and if onewants to travel to any particular planet within the material universe,one has to adapt his material body to the climatic condition of thatplanet. For instance, if one wants to go from India to Europe, where theclimatic condition is different, one has to change his dressaccordingly. Similarly, a complete change of body is necessary if onewants to go to the transcendental planets of Vaikuntha. However, if onewants to go to the higher material planets, he can keep his finer dressof mind, intelligence and ego, but has to leave his gross dress (body)made of earth, water, fire, etc.     When one goes to a transcendental planet, it is necessary to changeboth the finer and gross bodies, for one has to reach the spiritual skycompletely in a spiritual form. This change of dress will take placeautomatically at the time of death if one so desires.     Bhagavad-gita confirms that one can attain his next material bodyaccording to his desires at the time he leaves his body. The desire ofthe mind carries the soul in a suitable atmosphere as the wind carriesaromas from one place to another. Unfortunately those who are not yogisbut gross materialists, who throughout their lives indulge in sensegratification, are puzzled by the disarrangement of the bodily and
mental condition at the time of death. Such gross sensualists,encumbered by the main ideas, desires and associations of the lives theyhave led, desire something against their interest and thus foolishlytake on new bodies that perpetuate their material miseries.     Systematic training of the mind and intelligence is thereforeneeded so thatatthe time of death one may consciously desire a suitablebody, either on this planet or another material planet or even atranscendental planet. A civilization that does not consider theprogressive advancement of the immortal soul merely fosters a bestiallife of ignorance.     It is foolish to thin k that every soul that passes away goes tothe same place. Either the soul goes to a place he desires at the timeof death, or upon leaving his body he is forced to accept a positionaccording to his acts in his previous life. The difference between thematerialist and theyogiis that a materialist cannot determine his nextbody, whereas a yogican consciously attain a suitable body for enjoymentin the higher planets. Throughout his life, the gross materialist who isconstantly after sense gratification spends all day earning hislivelihood to maintain his family, and at night he wastes his energy insex enjoyment or else goes to sleep thinking about all he has done inthe daytime.That is the monotonous life of the materialist. Althoughdifferently graded as businessmen, lawyers, politicians, professors,judges, coolies, pickpockets, laborers and so on, materialists allsimply engage in eating, sleeping, fearing and sense gratification andthus spoil their valuable lives pursuing luxury and neglecting toperfect their lives through spiritual realization.     Yogis, howeve r, try to perfect their lives, and therefo reBhagavad-gita enjoins that everyone should become a yogi. Yoga is thesystem for linking the soul in the service of the Lord. Only undersuperior guidance can one practice such yoga in his life withoutchanging his social position. As alread y d escribed, ayogi can goanywhere he desires without mechanical help, for a yogi can place hismind and intelligence within the air circulating inside his body,and bypracticing the art of breath control he can mix that air with the airthat blows all over the universe outside his body. With the help of thisuniversal air, a yogican travel to any planet and get a body suitablefor its atmosphere. We can understand this process by comparing it tothe eiectronic transmission of radio messages. With radio transmitters,sound waves produced at a certain station can travel all over the earthin seconds. But sound is produced from the ethereal sky, and as alreadyexplained, subtler than the ethereal sky is the mind, and finer than themind is the intelligence. Spirit is still finer than the intelligence,and by nature it is completely different from matter. Thus we can justimagine how quickly the spirit soul can travel through the universalatmosphere.     To come to the stage of manipulating finer elements like mind,intelligence and spirit, one needs appropriate training, an appropriatemode of life and appropriate association. Such training depends uponsincere prayers, devotional service, achievement of success in mysticperfection, and the successful merging of oneself in the activities ofthe soul and Supersoul. A gross materialist, whether he be an empiricphilosopher, a scientist, a psychologist or whatever, cannot attain suchsuccess through blunt efforts and word jugglery.     Materialists who perform yajnas, or great sacrifices, are
comparatively better than grosser materialists who do not know anythingbeyond laboratories and test tubes. The advanced materialists whoperform such sacrifices can reach the planet called Vaisvanara, a fieryplanet similar to the sun. On this planet, which is situated on the wayto Brahmaloka,the topmost planet in the universe, such an advancedmaterialist can free himself from all traces of vice and its effects.When such a materialist is purified, he can rise to the orbit of thepole star (Dhruvaloka). Within this orbit, which is called the Sisumaracakra, are situated the Aditya-lokas and the Vaikuntha planet withinthis universe.     A purified materialist who has performed many sacrifices, undergonesevere penances and given the major portion of his wealth in charity canreach such planets as Dhruvaloka, and if he becomes still more qualifiedthere, he can penetrate still higher orbits and pass through the navelof the universe to reach the planet Maharloka, where sages like BhrguMuni live. In Maharloka one can live even to the time of the partialannihilation of the universe. This annihilation begins when Anantadeva,from the lowest position in the universe, produces a great blazing fire.The heat of this fire reaches even Maharloka, and then the residents ofMaharloka travel to Brahmaloka, which exists for twice the d uration ofparardha time.     In Brahmaloka there is an unlimited number of airplanes that arecontrolled not by yantra (machine) but mantra (psychic action). Becauseof the existence of the mind and intelligence on Brahmaloka, itsresidents have feelings of happiness and distress, but there is no causeof lamentation from old age, death, fear or distress. They feelsympathy, however, for the suffering living beings who are consumed inthe fire of annihilation. The residents of Brahmaloka do not have grossmaterial bodies to change at death, but they transform their subtlebodies into spiritual bodies and thus enter the spiritual sky. Theresidents of Brahmaloka can attain perfection in three different ways.Virtuous persons who reach Brahmaloka by dint of their pious work becomemasters of various planets after the resurrection of Brahma, those whohave worshiped Garbhodakasayi Visnu are liberated with Brahma, and thosewho are pure devotees of the Personality of Godhead at once push throughthe covering of the universe and enter the spiritual sky.     The numberless universes exist together in foamlike clusters, andso only some of them are surrounded by the water of the Causal Ocean.When agitated by the glance of Karanodakasayi Visnu, material natureproduces the total elements, which are eight in number and whichgradually evolve from finer to gross. A part of ego is the sky, a partof which is air, a part of which is fire, a part of which is water, apart of which is earth. Thus one universe inflates to an area of fourbillion miles in diameter. A yogi who desires gradual liberation mustpenetrate all the different coverings of the universe, including thesubtle coverings of the three qualitative modes of material nature. Onewho does this never has to return to this mortal world.     According to Sukadeva Gosvami, the above description of thematerial and spiritual skies is neither imaginary nor utopian. Theactual facts are recorded in the Vedic hymns, and Lord Vasudevadisclosed them to Lord Brahma when Brahma satisfied Him. One can achievethe perfection of life only when he has a definite idea of Vaikuntha andthe Supreme Godhead. One should always think about and describe theSupreme Personality of Godhead, for this is recommended both in
Bhagavad-gita and in the Bhagavata Purana, which are two authorizedcommentaries upon the Vedas. Lord Caitanya has made all these subjectmatters easier for the fallen people of this age to accept, and SriCaitanya-caritamrta has therefore presented them for the easyunderstanding of all concerned.
                                   TEXT 23                    mathura-dvarakaya njja-rupa prakasiya
                     nana-rupe vilasaye catur-vyuha haina
                                 TRANSLATION     He manifests His own, form in Mathura and Dvaraka. He enjoys
pastimes in various ways by expanding into the quadruple forms.
                                   TEXT 24
                    vasudeva-sankarsana-pradyumnaniruddha
                   sarva-catur-vyuha-amsi turiya, visuddha
                                 TRANSLATION     Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are the primary q
uadruple forms from whom all other quadruple forms are manifested. Theyare all purely transcendental.
                                   TEXT 25
                     ei tina loke ktsna ke vala-lila-maya
                      njja-gana lana khele ananta samaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Only in these three places [Dvaraka, Mathura and Gokula] does the
all-sporting Lord Krsna perform His endless pastimes with His personalassociates.
                                   TEXT 26
                   para-vyoma-madhye kari' svarupa prakasa
                     narayana-r\pe karena vividha vilasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Vaikuntha planets of the spiritual sky the Lord manifests
His identity as Narayana and performs pastimes in various ways.
                                  TEXT 27-28                  svar\pa-vigraha krsnera ke vala dvi-bhuja
                      narayana-rupe sei tanu catur-bhuja
                  sankha-cakra-gada-padma, mahaisvarya-maya
                   sri-bhu-nila-sakti yanra carana se vaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna's own form has only two hands, but in the form of Lord
Narayana He has four hands. Lord Narayana holds a conchshell, disc, cluband lotus flower, and He is full of great opulence. The sri, bhu andnila energies serve at His lotus feet.
                                   PURPORT     In the Ramanuja and Madhva sects of Vaisnavism there are extensive
descriptions of the sri, bhu and nila energies. In Bengal the nilaenergy is sometimes called the lila energy. These three energies areemployed in the service of four-handed Narayana in Vaikuntha. Relatinghow three of the Alvaras, namely Bhuta-yogi, Sara-yogi and Bhranta-yogi,saw Narayana in person when they took shelter at the house of a brahmanain the village of Gehali, the Prapannamrta of the Sri-sampradayadescribes Narayana as follows:     tarksyadhirudham tadid-ambudabham     laksmi-dharam vaksasi pankallsam     hasta-dvaye sobhita-sankha-cakram     visnum dadrsur bhagavantam adyam     ajnnu-bahum kamaniya-gatram     parsva-dvaye sobhita-bhumi-nilam     pitambaram bhusana-bhusitangam     catur-bhujam candana-rusitangam"They saw the lotus-eyed Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,mounted on Garuda and holding Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, to Hischest. He resembled a bluish raincloud with flashing lightning, and intwo of His four hands He held a conchshell and disc. His arms stretcheddown to His knees, and all His beautiful limbs were smeared withsandalwood and decorated with glittering ornaments. He wore yellowclothes, and by either side stood His energies Bhumi and Nila."     There is the following reference to the sri, bhu and nila energiesin the Sri Isopanisad: maha-laksmir devesasya bhinnabhinna-rupacetanacetanatmika. sa de vi tri-vidha bhavati--sakty-atmana iccha-saktihkriya-saktih saksac-chaktir iti. iccha-saktis tri vidha bhavati--sri-bhumi-nilatmika. "Maha-Laksmi, the supreme energy of the Lord, isexperienced in different ways. It is divided into material and spiritualpotencies, and in both features it acts as the willing energy, creativeenergy and the internal energy. The willing energy is again divided intothree, namely sri bhu and nila."     Quoting from the revealed scriptures in his commentary on Bhagavad-gita (4.6), Madhvacarya has stated that mother material nature, which isconceived of as the illusory energy, Durga, has three divisions, namelysri, bhu and nila. She is the illusory energy for those who are weak inspiritual strength because such energies are created energies of LordVisnu. Although each energy has no direct relationship with theunlimited, they are subordinate to the Lord because the Lord is the
master of all energies.     I n h is Bhagavat-sandarbha (ve rse 80) S rila J iva G osvami Prabh u states: "The Padma Purana refers to the eternally auspicious abodeof Godhead, which is full in all opulences, including the energies sri,bhu and nila. The Maha-samhita, which discusses the transcendental nameand form of Godhead, also mentions Durga as the potency of Supersoul inrelationship with the living entities. The internal potency acts inrelation with His personal affairs, and the material potency manifeststhe three modes." Quoting elsewhere from the revealed scriptures, hestates that sri is the energy of Godhead that maintains the cosmicmanifestation, bhu is the creative energy of that cosmic creation, andnila, Durga, is the energy that destroys the creation. All theseenergies act in relation with the living beings, and thus they aretogether called jiva-ma-ya-.
                                   TEXT 29                    yadyapi kevala tanra krida-mtra dharma
                     tathaoijivere krpaya kare eka karma
                                 TRANSLATION     Although His pastimes are His only characteristic functions, by His
causeless mercy He performs one activity for the fallen souls.
                                   TEXT 30
                   salo kya-sainioya-sarsti-sarupya-prakara
                     cari m ukti diya kare jivera nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     He delivers the fallen living entities by offering them the four
kinds of liberation--salokya, samipya, sarsti and sarupya.
                                   PURPORT     There are two kinds of liberated souls--those who are liberated by
the favor of the Lord and those who are liberated by their own effort.One who gets liberation by his own effort is called an impersonalist,and he merges in the glaring effulgence of the Lord, the brahmajyoti.But devotees of the Lord who qualify themselves for liberation bydevotional service are offered four kinds of liberation, namely salokya(status equal to that of the Lord), samioya (constant association withthe Lord), sarsti (opulence equal to that of the Lord) and sarupya(features like those of the Lord).
                                   TEXT 31                    brahma-sayujya-muktera taha nahi gati
                   vaikuntha-bahire haya ta' sabara sthiti                                 TRANSLATION
     Those who attain brahma-sayujya liberation cannot gain entrance
into Vaikuntha; their residence is outside the Vaikuntha planets.
                                   TEXT 32
                   vaikuntha-bahire eka jyotir-maya mandala
                    krsnera angera prabha, parama ujjvala
                                 TRANSLATION     Outside the Vaikuntha planets is the atmosphere of the glowing
effulgence, which consists of the supremely bright rays of the body ofLord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 33
                    `siddha-loka' nama tara prakrtira para
                  cit-svar\pa, tanha nahi cic-chakti vikara
                                 TRANSLATION     That region is called Siddhaloka, and it is beyond material nature.
Its essence is spiritual, but it does not have spiritual varieties.
                                   TEXT 34
                     surya-mandala yena bahire nirvisesa
                     bhitare suryera ratha-adi sa visesa
                                 TRANSLATION     It is like the homogeneous effulgence around the sun. But inside
the sun are the chariots, horses and other opulences of the sun-god.
                                   PURPORT     Outside of Vai ku ntha, the abode of Krsna, wh ich is called
paravyoma, is the glaring effulgence of Krsna's bodily rays. This iscalled the brahmajyoti. The transcendental region of that effulgence iscalled Siddhaloka or Brahmaloka. When impersonalists achieve liberation,they merge in that Brahmaloka effulgence. This transcendental region isundoubtedly spiritual, but it contains no manifestations of spiritualactivities or variegatedness. It is compared to the glow of the sun.Within the sun's glow is the sphere of the sun, where one can experienceall sorts of varieties.
                                   TEXT 35                          kamad dvesad bhayat snehad                           yatha bhaktyesvare manah
                            avesya tad agham hitva                           bahavas tad gatim gatah
                                 TRANSLATION     "As through devotion to the Lord one can attain His abode, many
have attained that goal by abandoning their sinful activities andabsorbing their minds in the Lord through lust, envy, fear oraffection."
                                   PURPORT     As the powerful sun, by its glowing rays, can purify all kinds of
impurities, so the all-spiritual Personality of Godhead can purify allmaterial qualities in a person He attracts. Even if one is attracted byGodhead in the mode of material lust, such attraction is converted intospiritual love. of Godhead by His grace. Similarly, if one is related tothe Lord in fear and animosity, he also becomes purified by thespiritual attraction of the Lord. Although God is great and the livingentity small, they are spiritual individuals, and therefore as soon asthere is a reciprocal exchange by the living entity's free will, at oncethe great spiritual being attracts the small living entity, thus freeinghim from all material bondage. This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam(7.1.29).
                                   TEXT 36                            yad arinam priyanam ca
                            prapyam ekam ivoditam                          tad brahma-krsnayor aikyat                             kiranarkopama jusoh
                                 TRANSLATION     "Where it has been stated that the Lord's enemies and devotees
attain the same destination, this refers to the ultimate oneness ofBrahman and Lord Krsna. This may be understood by the example of the sunand the sunshine, in which Brahman is like the sunshine and KrsnaHimself is like the sun."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.278) of Srila
Rupa Gosvami, who further discusses this same topic in his Laghu-bhagavatamrta (1.5.41). There he refers to the Visnu Purana (4.15.1),where Maitreya Muni asked Parasara, in regard to Jaya and Vijaya, how itwas that Hiranyakasipu next became Ravana and enjoyed more materialhappiness than the demigods but did not attain salvation, although whenhe became Sisupala, quarreled with Krsna and was killed, he attainedsalvation and merged into the body of Lord Krsna. Parasara replied thatHiranyakasipu failed to recognize Lord Nrsimhadeva as Lord Visnu. Hethought that Nrsimhadeva was some living entity who had acquired suchopulence by various pious activities. Being overcome by the mode ofpassion, he considered Lord Nrsimhadeva an ordinary living entity, not
understanding His form. Nevertheless, because Hiranyakasipu was killedby the hands of Lord Nrsimhadeva, in his next life he became Ravana andhad proprietorship of unlimited opulence. As Ravana, with unlimitedmaterial enjoyment, he could not accept Lord Rama as the Personality ofGodhead. Therefore even though he was killed by Rama, he did not attain     , sayujya, or oneness with the body of the Lord. In his Ravana bodyhe was too much attracted by Rama's wife, Janaki, and because of thatattraction he was able to see Lord Rama. But instead of accepting LordRama as an incarnation of Visnu, Ravana thought Him an ordinary livingbeing. When killed by the hands of Rama, therefore, he got the privilegeof taking birth as Sisupala, who had such immense opulence that he couldthink himself a competitor to Krsna. Although Sisupala was alwaysenvious of Krsna, he frequently uttered the name of Krsna and alwaysthought of the beautiful features of Krsna. Thus by constantly thinkingand chanting of Krsna, even unfavorably, he was cleansed of thecontamination of his sinful activities. When Sisupala was killed by theSudarsana cakra of Krsna as an enemy, his constant remembrance of Krsnadissolved the reactions of his vices, and he attained salvation bybecoming one with the body of the Lord.     From this incident one can understand that even a person who thinksof Krsna as an enemy and is killed by Him may be liberated by becomingone with the body of Krsna. What then must be the destination ofdevotees who always thin k favorably of Krsna as their master or friend?These devotees must attain a situation better than Brahmaloka, theimpersonal bodily effulgence of Krsna. Devotees cannot be situated inthe impersonal Brahman effulgence, into which impersonalists desire tomerge. The devotees are placed in Vaikunthaloka or Krsnaloka.     This discussion between Maitreya Muni and Parasara Muni centered onwhether devotees come down into the material world in every millenniumlike Jaya and Vijaya, who were cursed by the Kumaras to that effect. I nthe course of these instructions to Maitreya about Hiranyakasipu, Ravanaand Sisupala, Parasara did not say that these demons were formerly Jayaand Vijaya. He simply described the transmigration through three lives.It is not necessary for the Vaikuntha associates of the SupremePersonality of Godhead to come to take the roles of His enemies in allthe millenniums in which He appears. The "falldown" of Jaya and Vijayaoccurred in a particular millennium; Jaya and Vijaya do not come down inevery millennium to act as demons. To think that some associates of theLord fall down from Vaikuntha in every millennium to become demons istotally incorrect.     The Supreme Personality of Godhead has all the tendencies that maybe found in the living entity, for He is the chief living entity.Therefore itis natural that sometimes Lord Visnu wants to fight. Just asHe has the tendencies to create, to enjoy, to be a friend, to accept amother and father, and so on, He also has the tendency to fight.Sometimes important landlords and kings keep wrestlers with whom theypractice mock fighting, and Visnu makes similar arrangements. The demonswho fight with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the material worldare sometimes His associates. When there is a scarcity of demons and theLord wants to fight, He instigates some of His associates of Vaikunthato come and play as demons. When it is said thatSisupala merged into thebody of Krsna, it should be noted that in this case he was not Jaya orVijaya; he was actually a demon.     I n his Brhad-bhagavatamrta, Srila Sanatana Gosvami has explained
that the attainment of salvation by merging into the Brahman effulgenceof the Lord cannot be accepted as the highest success in life, becausedemons like Kamsa, who were famous for killing brahmanas and cows,attained that salvation. For devotees such salvation is abominable.Devotees are actually in a transcendental position, whereas nondevoteesare candidates for hellish conditions of life. There is always adifference between the life of a devotee and the life of a demon, andtheir realizations are as different as heaven and hell.     Demons are always accustomed to be malicious toward devotees and tokill brahmanas and cows. For demons, merging in the Brahman effulgencemay be very glorious, but for devotees it is hellish. A devotee's aim inlife is to attain perfection in loving the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Those who aspire to merge into the Brahman effulgence are asabominable as demons. Devotees who aspire to associate with the SupremeLord to render Him transcendental loving service are far superior.
                                   TEXT 37                   taiche para-vyome nana cic-chakti-vilasa
                    nirvisesa jyotir-bimba bahire prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus in the spiritual sky there are varieties of pastimes within
the spiritual energy. Outside the Vaikuntha planets appears theimpersonal reflection of light.
                                   TEXT 38
                  nirvisesa-brah ma sei ke vala jyotir-maya
                      sayujyera adhikari tanha paya laya
                                 TRANSLATION     That impersonal Brahman effulgence consists only of the effulgent
rays of the Lord. Those fit for sayujya liberation merge into thateffulgence.
                                   TEXT 39
                           siddha-lokas tu tamasah
                            pare yatra vasan ti hi                          siddha brahma-sukhe magna                           daityas ca harina hatah
                                 TRANSLATION     "Beyond the region of ignorance [the material cosmic manifestation]
lies the realm of Siddhaloka. The Siddhas reside there, absorbed in thebliss of Brahman. Demons killed by the Lord also attain that realm."                                   PURPORT
     Tamah means darkness. The material world is dark, and beyond the
material world is light. In other words, after passing through theentire material atmosphere, one can come to the luminous spiritual sky,whose impersonal effulgence is known as Siddhaloka. Mayavadiphilosophers who aspire to merge with the body of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, as well as demoniac persons such as Karhsa andSisupala who are killed by Krsna, enter that Brahman effulgence. Yogiswho attain oneness through meditation according to the Patanjali yogasystem also reach Siddhaloka. This is a verse from the Brahmanda Purana.
                                   TEXT 40                     sei para-vyome narayanera cari pase
                    dvaraka-catur-vyuhera dvitiya prakase
                                 TRANSLATION     In that spiritual sky, on the four sides of Narayana, are the
second expansions of the quadruple expansions of Dvaraka.
                                   PURPORT     Within the spiritual sky is a second manifestation of the quadruple
forms of Dvaraka from the abode of Krsna. Among these forms, which areall spiritual and immune to the material modes, Sri Baladeva isrepresented as Maha-Sankarsana. The actions in the spiritual sky aremanifested by the internal potency in pure spiritual existence. Theyexpand in six transcendental opulences, which are all manifestations ofMaha-Sankarsana, who is the ultimate reservoir and objective of allliving entities. Although belonging to the marginal potency knownasjiva-sakti, the spiritual sparks known as the living entities aresubjected to the conditions of material energy. It is because thesesparks are related with both the internal and external potencies of theLord that they are known as belonging to the marginal potency.     In considering the quadruple forms of the absolute Personality ofGodhead, known as Vasudeva, San karsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, theimpersonalists, headed by Sripad San karacarya, have interpreted theaphorisms of the Vedanta- sutra in a way suitable for the impersonalistschool. To provide the intrinsic import of such aphorisms, however,Srila Rupa Gosvami, the leader of the six Gosvamis of Vrndavana, hasproperly replied to the impersonalists in his Laghu-bhagavatamrta, whichis a natural commentary on the aphorisms of the Vedanta-sutras.     The padma Purana, as quoted by Srila Rupa Gosvami in his Laghu-bhagavatamrta, describes that in the spiritual sky there are fourdirections, corresponding to east, west, north and south, in whichVasudeva, Sankarsana, Aniruddha and Pradyumna are situated. The sameforms are also situated in the material sky. The Padma Purana alsodescribes a place in the spiritual sky known as Vedavati-pura whereVasudeva resides. In the Visnuloka, which is above Satyaloka, Sankarsanaresides. Maha-Sankarsana is another name of Sankarsana. Pradyumna livesin Dvaraka-pura, and Aniruddha lies on the eternal bed of Sesa,generally known as ananta-sayya, in the island called Svetadvipa in the
ocean of milk.
                                   TEXT 41                    vasude va-sankarsana-pradyumnaniruddha
                  `dvitiya catur-vyuha' ei--turiya, visuddha
                                 TRANSLATION     Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha constitute this
second quadruple. They are purely transcendental.
                                   PURPORT     Sripad Sankaracarya has misleadingly explained the quadruple from
(catur-vyha) in his interpretation of the forty-second aphorism of theSecond Khanda of Chapter Two of the Vedanta-sutras (utpatty-asambhavat).In verses forty-one th rough fortyseven of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami answers Sripad Sankaracarya'smisleading objections to the personal feature of the Absolute Truth.     The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, is not likea material object that can be known by experimental knowledge or senseperception. In the Narada-pancaratra this fact has been explained byNarayana Himself to Lord Siva. But Sankaracarya, the incarnation ofSiva, under the order of Narayana, his master, had to mislead themonists, who favor ultimate extinction. In the conditioned stage ofexistence, all living entities have four basic defects, of which one isthe cheating propensity. Sankaracarya has carried this cheatingpropensity to the extreme to mislead the monists.     Actually, the quadruple forms explained in the Vedic literaturecannot be understood by the speculation of a conditioned soul. Thequadruple forms should therefore be accepted just as they are described.The authority of the Vedas is such that even if one does not understandsomething by his limited perception, he should accept the Vedicinjunction and not create interpretations to suit his imperfectunderstanding. I n his Sariraka-bhasya, however, Sankaracarya hasincreased the misunderstanding of the monists.     The quadruple forms have a spiritual existence that can be realizedin vasudeva- sattva (suddha-sattva), or unqualified goodness, whichaccompanies complete absorption in the understanding of Vasudeva. Thequadruple forms, who are full of the six opulences of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, are the enjoyers of the internal potency. Thinking the absolute Personality of Godhead to be povertystricken or tohave no potency--or, in other words, to be impotent--is simplyrascaldom. This rascaldom is the profession of the conditioned soul, andit increases his bewilderment. One who cannot understand thedistinctions between the spiritual world and material world has noqualification to examine or knowthe situation of the transcendentalquadruple forms. In his commentaries on the Second Khanda of theVedanta-sutra, Chapter Two, verses 42-45, His Holiness Sripad Sankaracarya has made a futile attempt to nullify the existence of thesequadruple forms in the spiritual world.     San karacarya says (verse 42) that devotees think the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Vasudeva, Sri Krsna, to be one, to be free frommaterial qualities and to have a transcendental body full of bliss andeternal existence. He is the ultimate goal of the devotees, who believethat the Supreme Personality of Godhead expands Himself into four othereternal transcendental forms--Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna andAniruddha. From Vasudeva, who is the primary expansion, come Sankarsana,Pradyumna and Aniruddha in that order. Another name of Vasudeva isParamatma, another name of Sankarsana isjiva (the living entity),another name of Pradyumna is mind, and another name of Aniruddha isahankara (false ego). Among these expansions, Vasudeva is considered theorigin of material nature. Therefore Sankaracarya says that San karsana,Pradyumna and Aniruddha must be creations of that original cause.     Great souls assert that Narayana, who is known as Paramatma, theSupersoul, is beyond material nature, and this is in accordance with thestatements of the Vedic literature. Mayavadis also agree that Narayanacan expand Himseif in various forms. Sankara says that he does notattempt to argue that portion of the devotees' understanding, but hemust protest the idea that Sankarsana is produced from Vasudeva,Pradyumna is produced from San karsana, and Aniruddha is produced fromPradyumna, for if Sankarsana is understood to represent the livingentities created from the body of Vasudeva, the living entities wouldhave to be noneternal. The living entities are supposed to be freed frommaterial contamination by engaging in prolonged temple worship of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, reading Vedic literature and performingyoga and pious activities to attain the Supreme Lord. But if the livingentities had been created from material nature at a certain point, theywould be noneternal and would have no chance to be liberated andassociate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When a cause isnullified, its results are nullified. In the Second Chapter of Vedanta-sutra, Acarya Vedavyasa has also refuted the conception that the livingbeings were ever born (natma sruter nityatvac ca tabhyah). Because thereis no creation for the living entities, they must be eternal.     Sankaracarya says (verse 43) that devotees think that Pradyumna,who is considered to represent the senses, has sprung from Sankarsana,who is considered to represent the living entities. But we cannotactually experience that a person can produce senses. Devotees aiso saythat from Pradyumna has sprung Aniruddha, who is considered to representthe ego. But Sankaracarya says that unless the devotees can show how egoand the means of knowledge can generate from a person, such anexplanation of the Vedanta-sutra cannot be accepted, for no otherphilosophers accept the sutras in that way.     Sankaracarya also says (verse 44) that he cannot accept thedevotees' idea that Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are equally aspowerful as the absolute Personality of Godhead, full in the sixopulences of knowledge, wealth, strength,     , fame, beauty and renunciation, and free from the flaw ofgeneration at a certain point. Even if They are full expansions, theflaw of generation remains. Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna andAniruddha, being distinct individual persons, cannot be one. Thereforeif They are accepted as absolute, full and equal, there would have to bemany Personalities of Godhead. But there is no need to accept that thereare many Personalities of Godhead, because acceptance of one omnipotentGod is sufficient for all purposes. The acceptance of more than one Godis contradictory to the conclusion that Lord Vasudeva, the absolute
Personality of Godhead, is one without a second. Even if we agree toaccept that the quadruple forms of Godhead are all identical, we cannotavoid the incongruous flaw of noneternity. Unless we accept that thereare some differences among the personalities, there is no meaning to theidea thatSankarsana is an expansion of Vasudeva, Pradyumna is anexpansion of Sankarsana, and Aniruddha is an expansion of Pradyumna.There must be a distinction between cause and effect. For example, a potis distinct from the earth from which itis made, and therefore we canascertain that the earth is the cause andthe pot is the effect. Without such distinctions, there is no meaning tocause and effect. Furthermore, the followers of the pancaratricprinciples do not accept any differences in knowledge and qualitiesbetween Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. The devoteesaccept all these expansions to be one, but why should they restrictoneness to these quadruple expansions? Certainly we shouid not do so,for all living entities, from Brahma to the insignificant ant, areexpansions of Vasudeva, as accepted in all the srutis and smrtis.     Sankaracarya also says (verse 45) that the devotees who follow thePancaratra state that God's qualities and God Himself, as the owner ofthe qualities, are the same. But how can the Bhagavata school state thatthe six opulences--wisdom, wealth, strength, fame, beauty andrenunciation--are identical with Lord Vasudeva? This is impossible.     In his Laghu-bhagavatamrta, verses 80-83, Srila Rupa Gosvami hasrefuted the charges directed against the devotees by Sripad Sankaracaryaregarding their explanation of the quadruple forms Vasudeva, Sankarsana,Pradyumna and Aniruddha. He says that these four expansions of Narayanaare present in the spiritual sky, where They are famous as Mahavastha.Among Them, Vasudeva is worshiped within the heart by meditation becauseHe is the predominating Deity of the heart, as explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam (4.3.23).     Sankarsana, the second expansion, is Vasudeva's personal expansionfor pastimes, and since He is the reservoir of all living entities, Heis sometimes called jiva. The beauty of Sankarsana is more than that ofinnumerable full moons radiating light beams. He is worshipable as theprinciple of ego. He has invested Anantadeva with all the potencies ofsustenance. For the dissolution of the creation, He also exhibitsHimself as the Supersoul in Rudra, irreligiosity, ahi (the snake),antaka (death) and the demons.     Pradyumna, the third manifestation, appears from Sankarsana. Thosewho are especially intelligent worship this Pradyumna expansion ofSankarsana as the principle of the intelligence. The goddess of fortunealways chants the glories of Pradyumna in the place known as Ilavrta-varsa, and she always serves Him with great devotion. His complexionappears sometimes golden and sometimes bluish like new monsoon clouds inthe sky. He is the origin of the creation of the material world,and Hehas invested His creative principle in Cupid. It is by His directiononly that all men and demigods and other living entities function withenergy for regeneration.     Aniruddha, the fourth of the quadruple expansions, is worshiped bygreat sages and psychologists as the principle of the mind. Hiscomplexion is similar to the bluish hue of a blue cloud. He engages inthe maintenance of the cosmic manifestation and is the Supersoul ofDharma (the deity of religiosity), Manu (the progenitor of mankind) andthe devatas (demigods). The Moksa-dharma Vedic scripture indicates that
Pradyumna is the Deity of the total mind, whereas Aniruddha is the Deityof the total ego, but previous statements regarding the quadruple formsare confirmed in the Pancaratra tantras in all respects.     I n the Laghu-bhagavatamrta, ve rses 44-66, the re is a I uc id explan ation of th e inconceivable potencies of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Negating San karacarya's statements, the Maha-varaha puranadeclares:      sarve nityah sasvatas ca     dehas tasya paratmanah     hanopadana-rahita     naiva prakrtijah kvacit"All the varied expansions of the Personality of Godhead aretranscendental and eternal, and all of them repeatedly descend to allthe different universes of the material creation. Their bodies, composedof eternity, bliss and knowledge, are everlasting; there is no chance oftheir decaying, for they are not creations of the material world. Theirforms are concentrated spiritual existence, always complete with allspiritual qualities and devoid of material contamination."     Confi rm ing these statemen ts, the Nrada-pancaratra asse rts:     manir yatha vibhagena     nila-pitadibhir yutah     r\pa-bhedam avapnoti     dhyana-bhedat tathacyutah"The infallible Personality of Godhead can manifest His body indifferent ways according to different modes of worship, just as thevaidurya gem can man ifest itself in various colors, such as blue andyellow." Each incarnation is distinct from all the others. This ispossible by the Lord's inconceivable potency, by which He cansimultaneously represent Himself as one, as various partial forms and asthe origin of these partial forms. Nothing is impossible for Hisinconceivable potencies.     Krsna is one without a second, but He manifests Himself indifferent bodies, as stated by Narada in the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam:     citram bataitad ekena     vapusa yugapat prthak     grhesu dvy-asta-sahasram-     striya eka udavahat"It is wonderful indeed that one Krsna has simultaneously becomedifferent Krsnas in 16,000 palaces to accept 16,000 queens as Hiswives." (SB. 10.69.2) The Padma Purana also explains:     sa devo bahudh\ bhutva     nirgunah purusottamah     ekibhuya punah sete     nirdoso harir adikrt"The same Personality of Godhead, Purusottama, the original person, whois always devoid of material qualities and contamination, can exhibitHimself in various forms and atthe same time lie down in one form."     I n the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said, yajanti tvan-mayas tvam vai bahu-murty-eka-murtikam.- "O my Lord, although Youmanifest Yourself in varieties of forms, You are one without a second.Therefore pure devotees concentrate upon You and worship only You." (SB.10.40.7) In the Kurma Purana it is said:     asthulas cananus caiva     sthulo 'nus caiva sarvatah
     avarnah sarvatah proktah     syamo raktanta-locanah"The Lord is personal although impersonal, He is atomic although great,and He is blackish and has red eyes although He is colorless." Bymaterial calculation all this may appear contradictory, but if weunderstand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead has inconceivablepotencies, we can accept these facts as eternally possible in Him. Inour present condition we cannot understand the spiritual activities andhow they occur, but although they are inconceivable in the materialcontext, we should not disregard such contradictory conceptions.     Although it is apparently inconceivable, it is quite possible forthe Absolute to reconcile all opposing elements. Srimad-Bhagavatamestablishes this in the Sixth Canto (6.9.34-37):     "O my Lord, Your transcendental pastimes and enjoyments all appearinconceivable because they are not limited by the causal and effectiveactions of material thought. You can do everything without performingbodily work. The Vedas say that the Absolute Truth has multifariouspotencies and does not need to do anything personally. My dear Lord, Youare entirely devoid of material qualities. Without anyone's help, Youcan create, maintain and dissolve the entire qualitative materialmanifestation, yet in all such activities You do not change. You do notaccept the results of Your activities, unlike ordinary demons anddemigods, who suffer or enjoy the reactions of their activities in thematerial world. Unaffected by the reactions of work, You eternally existwith Your full spiritual potency. This we cannot fully understand.     "Because You are unlimited in Your six opulences, no one can countYour transcendental qualities. Philosophers and other thoughtful personsare overwhelmed by the contradictory manifestations of the physicalworld and the propositions of logical arguments and judgments. Becausethey are bewildered by word jugglery and disturbed by the differentcalculations of the scriptures, their theories cannot touch You, who arethe ruler and controller of everyone and whose glories are beyondconception.     "Your inconceivable potency keeps You unattached to the mundanequalities. Surpassing all conceptions of material contemplation, Yourpure transcendental knowledge keeps You beyond all speculativeprocesses. By Your inconceivable potency, there is nothing contradictoryin You.     "People may sometimes think of You as impersonal or personal,butYou are one. For persons who are confused or bewildered, a rope maymanifest itself as different kinds of snakes. For similar confusedpersons who are uncertain about You, You create various philosophicalmethods in pursuance of their uncertain positions."     We should always remember the differences between spiritual andmaterial actions. The Supreme Lord, being all-spiritual, can perform anyact without extraneous help. In the material world, if we want tomanufacture an earthen pot, we need the ingredients, a machine and alsoa laborer. But we should not extend this idea to the actions of theSupreme Lord, for He can create anything in a moment without that whichappears necessary in our own conception. When the Lord appears as anincarnation to fulfill a particular purpose, this does not indicate thatHe is unable to fulfill it without appearing. He can do anything simplyby His will, but by His causeless mercy He appears to be dependent uponHis devotees. He appears as the son of Yasodamata not because He is
dependent on her care but because He accepts such a role by Hiscauseless mercy. When He appears for the protection of His devotees, Henaturally accepts trials and tribulations on their behalf.     In Bhagavad-gita it is said that the Lord, being equally disposedtowards every living being, has no enemies and no friends, but He hasspecial affection for a devotee who always thinks of Him in love.Therefore neutrality and partiality are both among the transcendentalqualities of the Lord, and they are properly adjusted by Hisinconceivable energy. The Lord is Parabrahman, or the source of theimpersonal Brahma, which is His all-pervading feature of neutrality. InHis personal feature, however, as the owner of all transcendentalopulences, the Lord displays His partiality by taking the side of Hisdevotees. Partiality, neutrality and all such qualities are present inGod, otherwise they could not be experienced in the creation. Since Heis the total existence, all things are properly adjusted in theAbsolute. In the relative world such qualities are displayed in aperverted manner, and therefore we experience nonduality as a pervertedreflection. Because there is no logic to explain how things happen inthe realm of spirit, the Lord is sometimes described as being beyond therange of experience. But if we simply accept the Lord'sinconceivability, we can then adjust all things in Him. Nondevoteescannot understand the Lord's inconceivable energy, and consequently forthem it is said that He is beyond the range of conceivable expression.The author of the Brahma-stras accepts this fact and says, srutes tusabda-mulatvat: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not conceivable byan ordinary man; He can be understood only through the evidence of Vedicinjunctions. The Skanda Purana confirms, acintyah khalu ye bhava na tamstarkena yojayet: "Matters inconceivable to a common man should not be asubject for argument." We find very wonderful qualities even in materialjewels and drugs. Indeed, their qualities often appear inconceivable.Therefore if we do not attribute inconceivable potencies to the SupremePersonality of Godhead, we cannot establish His supremacy. It is becauseof these inconceivable potencies that the glories of the Lord havealways been accepted as difficult to understand.     Ignorance and the jugglery of words are very common in humansociety, but they do not help one understand the inconceivable energiesof the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If we accept such ignorance andword jugglery, we cannot accept the Supreme Lord's perfection in sixopulences. For example, one of the opulences of the Supreme Lord iscomplete knowledge. Therefore, how could ignorance be conceivable inHim? Vedic instructions and sensible arguments establish that the Lord'smaintaining the cosmic manifestation and simultaneously beingindifferent to the activities of its maintenance cannot becontradictory, because of His inconceivable energies. To a person who isalways absorbed in the thought of snakes, a rope always appears as asnake, and similarly to a person bewildered by material qualities anddevoid of knowledge of the Absolute, the Supreme Personality of Godheadappears according to diverse bewildered conclusions.     Someone might argue that the Absolute would be affected by dualityif He were both all-cognizance (Brahman) and the Personality of Godheadwith six opulences in full ( B hagavan). To ref ute such an argu me nt,the ap horism svarupa-dvayam iksyate declares that in spite ofappearances, there is no chance of duality in the Absolute, for He isbut one in diverse manifestations. Understanding that the Absolute
displays varied pastimes by the influence of His energies at onceremoves the apparent incongruity of His inconceivably opposite energies.Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.4.16) gives the following description of theinconceivable potency of the Lord:.     karmany anihasya bhavo 'bhavasya te     durgasrayo 'thari-bhayat palayanam     kalatmano yat pramada-yutasrayah     svatman-rateh khidyati dhir vidam iha"Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead has nothing to do, Henevertheless acts;although He is always unborn, He nevertheless takesbirth;although He is time, fearful to everyone, He flees Mathura in fearof His enemy to take shelter in a fort; and although He is self-sufficient, He marries 16,000 women. These pastimes seem likebewildering contradictions, even to the most intelligent." Had theseactivities of the Lord not been a reality, sages would not have beenpuzzled by them. Therefore such activities should never be consideredimaginary. Whenever the Lord desires, His inconceivable energy(yogamaya) serves Him in creating and performing such pastimes.     The scriptures known as the Pancaratra--sastras are recognizedVedic scriptures that have been accepted by the great acaryas. Thesescriptures are not products of the modes of passion and ignorance.Learned scholars and brahmanas therefore always refer to them assatvata-samhitas. The original speaker of these scriptures is Narayana,the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is especially mentioned in theMoksa-dharma (349.68), wh ich is part of th e Santi-parva of theMahabharata. Liberated sages like Narada and Vyasa, who are free fromthe four defects of conditioned souls, are the propagators of thesescriptures. Sri Narada Muni is the original spea ker of the Pancaratra-sastra. Srimad-Bhagavatam is also co nsidered a satvata-samhita. Indeed, S r i Caitan ya Mahapra b h u deci ared, srimad-bhagavatampuranam amalam: "Srimad-Bhagavatam is a spotless Purana." M alic ious editors and scholars who attempt to misrepresent the Pancaratra-sastras torefute its regulations are most abominable. In the modern age, suchmalicious scholars have even commented m islead ingl y u po n Bhagavad-gita, wh ic h was spo ke n by Krsn a, to prove that there is no Krsna.How the Mayavadis have misrepresented the pancaratrika- vidhi will beshown below.      ( 1) I n co m menti ng o n th e fo rty-seco nd ve rseof th e Vedanta-sutra, Sripad Sankaracarya has claimed that Sankarsanais jiva, the ordinary living entity, but there is no evidence in anyVedic scripture that devotees of the Lord have ever said that Sankarsanais an ordinary living entity. He is an infallible plenary expansion ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead in the Visnu category, and He isbeyond the creation of material nature. He is the original source of theliving entities. The Upanisads declare, nityo nityanam cetanascetananam: "He is the su pre me living entity among all the livingentities." Therefore He is vibhu-caitanya, the greatest. He is directlythe cause of the cosmic manifestation and the infinitesimal livingbeings. He is the infinite living entity, and ordinary living entitiesare infinitesimal. Therefore He is never to be considered an ordinaryliving being, for that would be against the conclusion of the authorizedscriptures. The living entities are also beyond the limitations of birthand death. This is the version of the Vedas, and it is accepted by thosewho follow scriptural injunctions and who have actually descended in the
disciplic succession.     (2) In answer to Sankaracarya's commentary on the forty-thirdverse, it must be said that the original Visnu of all the Visnucategories, which are distributed in several ways, is Mula Sankarsana.Mula means "the original." San karsana is also Visnu, but from Him allother Visnus expand. This is confirmed in the Brahma- samhita, whereinit is said that just as a flame transferred fro m another flame actslike the original, so the Visnus who emanate from Mula Sankarsana are asgood as the original Visnu. One should worship that Supreme Personalityof Godhead, Govinda, who thus expands Himself.     (3) In reply to the commentary of Sankaracarya on the forty-fourthverse, it may be said that no pure devotees strictly following theprinciples of Pancaratra will ever accept the statement that all theexpansions of Visnu are different identities, for this idea iscompletely false. Even Sripad Sankaracarya, in his commentary on theforty-second verse, has accepted that the Personality of Godhead canautomatically expand Himself variously. Therefore his commentary on theforty-second verse and his commentary on the forty-fourth verse arecontradictory. It is a defect of Mayavada commentaries that they makeone statement in one place and a contradictory statement in anotherplace as a tactic to refute the Bhagavata school. Thus Mayavadicommentators do not even follow regulative principles. It should benoted that the Bhagavata school accepts the quadruple forms of Narayana,but that does not mean that it accepts many Gods. Devotees knowperfectly well that the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, is one without a second. They are never pantheists, worshipersof many Gods, for this is against the injunction of the Vedas. Devoteescompletely believe, with strong faith, that Narayana is transcendentaland has inconceivable proprietorship of various transcendentalpotencies. We therefore recom mend that scholars consult the Laghu-bhagavatamrta of Srila Rupa Gosvami, where these ideas are explicitlystated. Sripad Sankaracarya has tried to prove that Vasudeva,Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha expand through cause and effect. Hehas compared Them with earth and earthen pots. That is completelyignorant, however, for there is no such thing as cause and effect inTheir ex-pansions (nanyad yat sad-asat-param). The Kurma Purana also con firms,deha-dehi- vibhedo 'yam nesvare vidyate kvacit.- "There is no difference betwee n bod y and soul in the Supreme Personality ofGodhead." Cause and effect are material. For example, it is seen that afather's body is the cause of a son's body, but the soul is neithercause nor effect. On the spiritual platform there are none of thedifferences we find in cause and effect. Since all the forms of theSupreme Personality of Godhead are spiritually supreme, They are equallycontrollers of material nature. Standing on the fourth dimension, Theyare predominating figures on the transcendental platform. There is notrace of material contamination in Their expansions because materiallaws cannot influence Them. There is no such rule as cause and effectoutside of the material world. Therefore the understanding of cause andeffect cannot approach the full, transcendental, complete expansions ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Vedic literature proves this:     om purnam adah purnam idam     purnat purnam udacyate     purnasya purnam adaya
     purnam evavasisyate"The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete, and because He iscompletely perfect, all emanations from Him, such as this phenomenalworld, are perfectly equipped as complete wholes. Whatever is producedof the complete whole is also complete by itself. Because He is thecomplete whole, even though so many complete units emanate from Him, Heremains the complete balance." (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad, 5.1) It is mostapparent that nondevotees violate the rules and regulations ofdevotional service to equate the whole cosmic manifestation, which isthe external feature of Visnu, with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,who is the controller of maya, or with His quadruple expansions. Theequalization of maya and spirit, or maya and the Lord, is a sign ofatheism. The cosmic creation, which manifests life in forms from Brahmato the ant, is the external feature of the Supreme Lord. It comprisesone fourth of the Lord's energy, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (ekamsenasthito jagat). The cosmic manifestation of the illusory energy ismaterial nature, and everything within material nature is made ofmatter. Therefore, one should not try to compare the expansions ofmaterial nature to the catur-vyuha, the quadruple expansions of thePersonality of Godhead, but unfortunately the Mayavadi schoolunreasonably attempts to do this.     (4) To answer Sankaracarya's commentary on the forty-fifth verse,the substance of the transcendental qualities and their spiritual natureis described in the Laghu- bhagavatamrta, verses 97 th ro ugh 99, asfollows: "So me say that transcendence must be void of all qualitiesbecause qualities are manifested only in matter. According to them, allqualities are like temporary, flickering mirages. But this is notacceptable. Since the Supreme Personality of Godhead is absolute, Hisqualities are nondifferent from Him. His form, name, qualities andeverything else pertaining to Him are as spiritual as He is. Everyqualitative expansion of the absolute Personality of Godhead isidentical with Him. Since the Absolute Truth, the Personality ofGodhead, is the reservoir of all pleasure, all the transcendentalqualities that expand from Him are also reservoirs of pleasure. This isconfirmed in the scripture known as Brahma-tarka, which states that theSupreme Lord Hari is qualified by Himself, and therefore Visnu and Hispure devotees and their transcendental qualities cannot be differentfrom their persons. In the Visnu Purana Lord Visnu is worshiped in thefollowing words: `Let the Supreme Personality of Godhead be mercifultoward us. His existence is never infected by material qualities.' Inthe same Visnu Purana it is also said that all the qualities attributedto the Supreme Lord, such as knowledge, opulence, beauty, strength andinfluence, are known to be nondifferent from Him. This is also confirmedin the Padma Purana, which explains that whenever the Supreme Lord isdescribed as having no qualities, this should be understood to indicatethat He is devoid of material qualities. In the First Chapter of thesame Padma Purana it is said: `O Dharma, protector of religiousprinciples, all noble and sublime qualities are eternally manifested inthe person of Krsna, and devotees and transcendentalists who aspire tobecome faithful also desire to possess such transcendental qualities."'It is to be understood that Lord Sri Krsna, the transcendental form ofabsolute bliss, is the fountainhead of all pleasurable transcendentalqualities and inconceivable potencies. In this connection we mayrecommend references to Srimad-Bhagavatam, Third Canto, Chapter Twenty-
Six, verses 21, 25, 27 and 28.     Sripad Ramanujacarya has also refuted the arguments of San kara inhis own com mentary on the Vedanta-sutra, wh ich is known as the Sri-bhasya: "Sripad Sankaracarya has tried to equate the Pancaratras withthe philosophy of the atheist Kapila, and thus he has tried to provethat the Pancaratras contradict the Ved ic injunctions. The Pancaratrasstate that the personality ofjiva called San karsana has emerged fromVasudeva, the supreme cause of ali causes, that Pradyumna, the mind, hascome from Sankarsana, and that Aniruddha, the ego, has come fromPradyumna. But one cannot say that the living entity (jiva) takes birthor is created, for such a statement is against the injunction of theVedas. As stated in the Katha Upanisad (2.18), living entities, asindividual spiritual souls, can have neither birth nor death. All Vedicliterature declares that the living entities are eternal. Therefore whenit is said that Sankarsana isjiva, this indicates that He is thepredominating Deity of the living entities. Similarly, Pradyumna is thepredominating Deity of the mind, and Aniruddha is the predominatingDeity of the ego.     "It has been said that Pradyumna, the mind, was prod uced fromSankarsana. But if Sankarsana were a living entity, this could not beaccepted, because a living entity cannot be the cause of the mind. TheVedic injunctions state that everything --includ ing life, mind and thesenses--comes from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is impossiblefor the mind to be produced by a living entity, for the Vedas state thateverything comes from the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Lord.     "San karsana, Pradyu mna and Aniruddha have all the potent featuresof the absolute Personality of Godhead, according to the revealedscriptures, which contain undeniable facts that no one can refute.Therefore these quadruple forms are never to be considered ordinaryliving beings. Each of Them is a plenary expansionof the Absolute Godhead, and thus each is identical with the SupremeLord in knowledge, opulence, energy, influence, prowess and potencies.The evidence of Pancaratra cannot be neglected. Only untrained personswho have not genuinely stud ied the Pancaratras thin k that thePancaratras contradict the srutis regard ing the birth or beginning ofthe living entity. In this connection, we mustacceptthe verdict ofSrimad-Bhagavatam, which says: `The absolute Personality of Godhead, whois known as Vasudeva and who is very much affectionate toward Hissurrendered devotees, expands Himself in quadruple forms who aresubordinate to Him and at the same time identical with Him in allrespects.' The Pauskara-samhita states: `The scriptures that recommendthat brahmanas worship the q uad ruple forms of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead are called agamas [authorized Vedic literatures].' In allVaisnava literature it is said that worshiping these quadruple forms isas good as worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead Vasudeva, whoin His different expansions, complete in six opulences, can acceptofferings from His devotees of the results of their prescribed duties.Worshiping the expansions for pastimes, such as Nrsimha, Rama, Sesa andKurma, promotes one to the worship of the Sankarsana quadruple. Fromthat position one is raised to the platform of worshiping Vasudeva, theSupreme Brahman. In the Pauskara-samhita it is said: `If one fullyworships according to the regulative principles, one can attain theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva. It is to be accepted thatSankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are as good as Lord Vasudeva, for
They all have inconceivable power and can accept transcendental formslike Vasudeva. San karsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are never born, butThey can manifest Themselves in various incarnations before the eyes ofpure devotees. This is the conclusion of all Vedic literature. ThattheLord can manifest Himself before His devotees by His inconceivable poweris not against the teaching of the Pancaratra. Since Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are actually the predominating Deities of all livingentities, the total mind, and the total ego, the descriptions ofSankarsana, pradyumna and Aniruddha as jiva, mind and ego are nevercontradictory to the statements of the scriptures. These names identifythese Deities, just as the terms `sky' and `light' sometimes identifythe Absolute Brahman.     "The scriptures completely deny the birth or production of theliving entity. In the Parama-samhita it is described that materialnature, which is used for others' purposes, is factually inert andalways subject to transformation. The field of material nature is thearena of the activities of fruitive actors and since the material fieldis externally related with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, it isalso eternal. In every samhita, the jiva (living entity) has beenaccepted as eternal, and in the Pancaratra the birth of the jiva iscompletely denied. Anything that is produced must also be annihilated.Therefore if we accept the birth of the living entity, we also have toaccept his annihilation. But since the Vedic literatures say thattheliving entity is eternal, one should not think the living being to beproduced at a certain time. In the beginning of the Parama-samhita it isdefinitely stated that the face of material nature is constantlychangeable. Therefore beginning, annihilation and all such terms areapplicable only in the material nature.      ,,Considering all thesepoints, one should understand that Sankaracarya's statement thatSankarsana is born as ajiva is completely against the Vedic statements.His assertions are completely refuted by the above arguments. In thisconnection the commentary of Sridhara Svami on Srimad-Bhagavatam(3.1.34) is very helpful."     For a detailed refutation of Sankaracarya's arguments to proveSankarsana an ordinary living being, one may refer to SrimatSudarsanacarya's commentary on Sri-bhasya, wh ic h is known as theSruta-prakasika.     The original quadruple forms Krsna, Baladeva, Pradyumna andAniruddha expand into another quadruple, which is present in theVaikuntha planets of the spiritual sky. Therefore the quadruple forms inthe spiritual sky are the second manifestation of the original quadruplein Dvaraka. As explained above, Vasudeva, San karsana, Pradyumna andAniruddha are all changeless, transcendental plenary expansions of theSupreme Lord who have no relation to the material modes. The Sankarsanaform in the second quadruple is not only a representation of Balaramabut also the original cause of the Causal Ocean, where KaranodakasayiVisnu lies asleep, breathing out the seeds of innumerable universes.     In the spiritual sky there is a spiritual creative energytechnically called suddha- sattva, which is a pure spiritual energy thatsustains all the Vaikuntha planets with the full opulences of knowledge,wealth, prowess, etc. All these actions of suddha- sattva display thepotencies of Maha-Sankarsana, who is the ultimate reservoir of allindividual living entities who are suffering in the material world. Whenthe cosmic creation is annihilated, the living entities, who are
indestructible by nature, rest in the body of Maha-Sankarsana. Sankarsana is therefore sometimes called the total jiva. As spiritualsparks, the living entities have the tendency to be inactive in theassociation of material energy, just as sparks of a fire have thetendency to be extinguished as soon as they leave the fire. Thespiritual nature of the living being can be rekindled, however, inassociation with the Supreme Being. Because the living beingcan appeareither in matter or in spirit, the jiva is called the marginal potency.     Sankarsana is the origin of Karana Visnu, who isthe original formwho creates the universes, and that Sankarsana is but a plenaryexpansion of Sri Nityananda Rama.
                                   TEXT 42                    tanha ye ramera rupa--maha-sankarsana
                   cic-chakti-asraya tinho, karanera karana
                                 TRANSLATION     There the personal feature of Balarama called Maha-Sankarsana is
the shelter of the spiritual energy. He is the primary cause, the causeof all causes.
                                   TEXT 43
                 cic-chakti-yilasa eka--`suddha-sattva' nama
                  suddha-sattva-maya yata vaikunthadi-dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     One variety of the pastimes of the spiritual energy is described as
pure goodness [visuddha-sattva]. It comprises all the abodes ofVaikuntha.
                                   TEXT 44
                    sad- vidhaisvarya tanha sakala cinmaya
                   sankarsanera vibhti saba, janiha niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The six attributes are all spiritual. Know for certain that they
are all manifestations of the opulence of Sankarsana.
                                   TEXT 45
                   `jiva'-naina tatasthakhya eka sakti haya
                     maha-sankarsana--saba jivera asraya
                                 TRANSLATION     There is one marginal potency, known as the jiva. Maha-Sankarsana
is the shelter of all jivas.
                                   TEXT 46
                   yanha haite visvotpatti, yanhate pralaya
                      sei purusera sankarsana samasraya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sankarsana is the original shelter of the purusa, from whom this
world is created and in whom it is dissolved.
                                   TEXT 47
                   sarvasraya, sarvadbhuta, aisvarya apara
                     `anan ta' kahite nare mahima yanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     He [Sankarsana] is the shelter of everything. He is wonderful in
every respect, and His opulences are infinite. Even Ananta cannotdescribe His glory.
                                   TEXT 48
                  turiya, visuddha-sattva, `sankarsana, nama
                    tinh o yanra amsa, sei nityananda-rama
                                 TRANSLATION     That Sankarsana, who is transcendental pure goodness, is a partial
expansion of N ityananda Balarama.
                                   TEXT 49
                    astama slokera kaila sanksepe vivarana
                     navama slokera artha suna diya mana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have briefly explained the eighth verse. Now please listen with
attention as I explain the ninth verse.
                                   TEXT 50
                       maya-bhartaianda-sanghasrayangah
                       sete saksat karanambhodhi-madhye                      yasyaikamsah sri-puman adi-de vas
                      tam sri-nityananda-ramam prapadye                                TRANSLATION
     I offer my full obeisances unto the feet of Sri Nityananda Rama,
whose partial representation called Karanodakasayi Visnu, lying on theKarana Ocean, is the original purusa, the master of the illusory energy,and the shelter of all the universes.
                                   TEXT 51
                    vaikuntha-bahire yei jyotir-maya dhama
                       tahara bahire `karanarnava' nama
                                 TRANSLATION     Outside the Vaikuntha planets is the impersonal Brahman effulgence,
and beyond that effulgence is the Karana Ocean, or Causal Ocean.
                                   PURPORT     The impersonal glowing effulgence known as impersonal Brahman is
the outer space of the Vaikuntha planets in the spiritual sky. Beyondthat impersonal Brahman is the great Causal Ocean, which lies betweenthe material and spiritual skies. The material nature is a by-product ofthis Causal Ocean.     Karanodakasayi Visnu, who lies on the Causal Ocean, creates theuniverses merely by glancing upon material nature.Therefore Krsnapersonally has nothing to do withthe material creation. Bhagavad-gita confirms that the Lord glances overmaterial nature, and thus she produces the many material universes.Neither Krsna in Goloka nor Narayana in Vaikuntha comes directly incontact with the material creation. They are completely aloof from thematerial energy.     It is the function of Maha-Sankarsana in the form of KaranodakasayiVisnu to glance over the material creation, which is situated beyond thelimits of the Causal Ocean. Material nature is connected with thePersonality of Godhead by His glance over her and nothing more. It issaid that she is impregnated by the energy of His glance. The materialenergy, maya, never even touches the Causal Ocean, for the Lord's glancefocuses upon her from a great distance away.     The glancing power of the Lord agitates the entire cosmic energy,and thus its actions begin at once. This indicates that matter, howeverpowerful she may be, has no power by herself. Her activity begins by thegrace of the Lord, and then the entire cosmic creation is manifested ina systematic way. The example of a woman's conception can help usunderstand this subject to a certain extent. The mother is passive, butthe father puts his energy within the mother, and thus she conceives.She supplies the ingredients for the birth of the child in her womb.Similarly, the Lord activates material nature, which then supplies theingredients for cosmic development.     Material nature has two different phases. The aspect called
pradhana supplies the material ingredients for cosmic development, andthe aspect called maya causes the manifestation of her ingredients,which are temporary like foam in the ocean. In reality, the temporarymanifestations of material nature are originally caused by the spiritualglance of the Lord. The Personality of Godhead is the direct, or remote,cause of creation, and material nature is the indirect, or immediate,cause. Materialistic scientists, puffed-up by the magical changes theirso-called inventions have brought about, cannot see the real potency ofGodhead behind matter. Therefore the jugglery of science is graduallyleading people to a godless civilization at the cost of the goal ofhuman life. Having missed the goal of life, materialists run after self-sufficiency, not knowing that material nature is already self-sufficientby the grace of God. Thus creating a colossal hoax in the name ofcivilization, they create an imbalance in the natural self-sufficiencyof material nature.     To think of material nature as all in all, not knowing the originalcause, is ignorance. Lord Caitanya appeared to dissipate this darknessof ignorance by igniting the spark of spiritual life that can, by Hiscauseless mercy, enlighten the entire world.     To explain how maya acts by Krsna's power, the author of SriCaitanya-caritamrta gives the example that an iron rod in a fire,although it is not fire, becomes red-hot and acts like fire itself.Similarly, all the actions and reactions of material nature are notactually the work of material nature, but are actions and reactions ofthe energy of the Supreme Lord manifested through matter. The power ofelectricity is transmitted through the medium of copper, but this doesnot mean that the copper is electricity. The power is generated at apowerhouse under the control of an expert living being. Similarly,behind all the jugglery of the natural laws is a great living being, whois a person like the mechanical engineer in the powerhouse. It is by Hisintelligence that the entire cosmic creation moves in a systematic way.The modes of nature that directly cause material actions are alsooriginally activated by Narayana. A simple example will explain how thisis so. When a potter manufactures a pot from earth, the potter's wheel,his tools and the potter himself are the remote causes of the pot, butthe potter is the chief cause. Similarly, Narayana is the chief cause ofall material creations, and the material energy supplies the ingredientsof matter. Therefore without Narayana, all other causes are useless,just as the potter's wheel and tools are useless without the potterhimself. Since materialistic scientists ignore the Personality ofGodhead, it is as if they were concerned with the potter's wheel and itsrotation, the potter's tools and the ingredients for the pots, but hadno knowledge of the potter himself. Therefore modern science has createdan imperfect, godless civilization that is in gross ignorance of theultimate cause. Scientific advancement should have a great goal toattain, and that great goal should be the Personality of Godhead. InBhagavad-gita it is said that after conducting research for many, manybirths, great men of knowledge who stress the importance of experimentalthought can know the Personalityof Godhead, who is the cause of allcauses. When one knows Him perfectly, one surrenders unto Him and thenbecomes a mahatma.
                                   TEXT 52                     vaikuntha bediya eka ache jala-nidhi
                      ananta, apara--tara nahika avadhi
                                 TRANSLATION     Surrounding Vaikuntha is a mass of water that is endless,
unfathomed and unlimited.
                                   TEXT 53
                    vaikunthera prthivy-adi sakala cinmaya
                     mayika bhutera tathi janma nahi haya
                                 TRANSLATION     The earth, water, fire, air and ether of Vaikuntha are all
spiritual. Material elements are not found there.
                                   TEXT 54
                        cinmaya jala sei parama karana
                      yara eka kana ganga patita-pavana
                                 TRANSLATION     The water of the Karana Ocean, which is the original cause, is
therefore spiritual. The sacred Ganges, which is but a drop of it,purifies the fallen souls.
                                   TEXT 55
                      sei ta' karanarnave sei sankarsana
                        apanara eka amse karena sayana
                                 TRANSLATION     In that ocean lies one plenary portion of Lord Sankarsana.                                   TEXT 56                   mahat-srasta purusa, tinho jagat-karana
                       adya-avatara kare mayaya iksana
                                 TRANSLATION     He is known as the first purusa, the creator of the total material
energy. He, the cause of the universes, the first incarnation, casts Hisglance over ma-ya-.                                   TEXT 57
                     maya-sakti rahe karanabdhira bahire
                      karana-samudra maya parasite nare
                                 TRANSLATION     Maya-sakti resides outside the Ocean of Karana. Maya cannot touch
its waters.
                                   TEXT 58
                      sei ta' mayara dui-vidha avasthiti
                     jagatera upadana `pradhana', prakrti
                                 TRANSLATION     Maya has two varieties of existence. One is called pradhana or
prakrti. It supplies the ingredients of the material world.
                                   PURPORT     Maya, the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
divided into two parts. Maya is the cause and the ingredient of thecosmic manifestation. As the cause of the cosmic manifestation she isknown as maya, and as the agent supplying the ingredients of the cosmicmanifestation she is known as pradhana. An expiicit description of thesedivisions of external energy is given in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.24.1-4).Elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.63.26) the ingredients and cause ofthe material cosmic manifestation are described as follows:     kalo daivam karma jivah svabhavo     dravyam ksetram prana atma vikarah     tat-sanghato bija-roha-pravahas     tvan-mayaisa tan-nisedham prapadye"O my Lord! Time, activity, providence and nature are four parts of thecausal aspect [maya] of the external energy. The conditioned vitalforce, the subtle material ingredients called the dravya, and materialnature (which is the field of activity where the false ego acts as thesoul), as well as the eleven senses and five elements (earth, water,fire, air and ether), which are the sixteen ingredients of the body--these are the ingredient aspect of maya. The body is generated fromactivity, and activity is generated from the body, just as a tree isgenerated from a seed that is generated from a tree. This reciprocalcause and effect is called maya. My dear Lord, You can save me from thiscycle of cause and effect. I worship Your lotus feet."     Although the living entity is primarily related to the causalportion of maya, he is nevertheless conducted by the ingredients ofmaya. Three forces work in the causal portion of maya: knowledge, desireand activity. The material ingredients are a manifestation of maya aspradhana. In other words, when the three qualities of maya are in adormant stage, they ex ist as prakrti, avyakta or pradhana. The wordavyakta, referring to the nonmanifest, is another name of pradhana. Inthe avyakta stage, material nature is without varieties. Varieties aremanifested by the pradhana portion of maya. The word pradhana is
therefore more important than avyakta or prakrti.
                                   TEXT 59                     jagat-karana nahe prakrti jada-rupa
                     sakti sancariya tare krsna kare krpa
                                 TRANSLATION     Because prakrti is dull and inert, it cannot actually be the cause
of the material world. But Lord Krsna shows His mercy by infusing Hisenergy into the dull, inert material nature.
                                   TEXT 60
                    krsna-saktye prakrti haya gauna karana
                    agni-saktye iauha yaiche karaye jarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus prakrti, by the energy of Lord Krsna, becomes the secondary
cause, just as iron becomes red-hot by the energy of fire.
                                   TEXT 61
                       atae va krsna mula jagat-karana
                    prakrti--karana yaiche aja-gaia-stana
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore Lord Krsna is the original cause of the cosmic
manifestation. Prakrti is like the nipples on the neck of a goat, forthey cannot give any milk.
                                   PURPORT     The external energy, composed of pradhana or prakrti as the
ingredient-supplying portion and maya as the causal portion, is known asmaya-sakti. Inert material nature is not the actual cause of thematerial manifestation, for Karanarnavasayi, Maha-Visnu,the plenaryexpansion of Krsna, activates all the ingredients. It is in this waythat material nature has the power to supply the ingredients. Theexample given is that iron has no power to heat or burn, but aftercoming in contact with fire the iron becomes red-hot and can thendiffuse heat and burn other things. Material nature is like iron, for ithas no independence to act without the touch of Visnu, who is comparedto fire. Lord Visnu activates material nature by the power of Hisglance, and then the ironlike material nature becomes a material-supplying agent just as iron made red-hot becomes a burning agent.Material nature cannot independently become an agent for supplying thematerial ingredients. This is more clearly explained by Sri Kapiladeva,
an incarnation of Godhead, in Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.28.40):     yatholmukad visph uiingad     dh umad vapi s va-sambhavat     apy atmatvenabhimatad     yathagnih prthag ulmukat"Although smoke, flaming wood, and sparks are all considered together asingredients of a fire, the flaming wood is nevertheless different fromthe fire, and the smoke is different from the flaming wood." Thematerial elements (earth, water, fire, etc.) are like smoke, the livingentities are like sparks, and material nature as pradhana is like theflaming wood. But all of them together are recipients of power from theSupreme Personality of Godhead and are thus able to manifest theirindividual capacities. In other words, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is the origin of all manifestations. Material nature can supplyonly when it is activated by the glance of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.     Just as a woman can deliver a child after being impregnated by thesemina of a man, so material nature can supply the material elementsafter being glanced upon by Maha-Visnu. Therefore pradhana cannot beindependent of the superintendence of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.10). Mayadhyaksenaprakrtih suyate sa-caracaram.- prakrti, th e to tal m ate ri al e n ergy, works under the superintendence of the Lord. The original source ofthe material elements is Krsna. Therefore the attempt of the atheisticSankhya philosophers to consider material nature the source of theseelements, forgetting Krsna, is useless, like trying to get milk from thenipple-like bumps of skin hanging on the neck of a goat.
                                   TEXT 62                      maya-amse kahi tare nimitta-karana
                     seha nahe, yate karta-hetu--narayana
                                 TRANSLATION     The maya aspect of material nature is the immediate cause of the
cosmic manifestation. But it also cannot be the real cause, for theoriginal cause is Lord Narayana.
                                   TEXT 63
                   ghatera nimitta-he tu yaiche kumbhakara
                     taiche jagatera karta--purusavatara
                                 TRANSLATION     Just as the original cause of an earthen pot is the potter, so the
creator of the material world is the first purusa incarnation [Karanarnavasayi Visnu ].
                                   TEXT 64                    krsna--karta, maya tanra karena sahaya
                     ghatera karana--cakra-dandadi upaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna is the creator, and maya only helps Him as an
instrument, just like the potter's wheel and other instruments, whichare the instrumental causes of a pot.
                                   TEXT 65
                    dura haite purusa kare mayate avadhana
                      jiva-rupa virya tate karena adnana
                                 TRANSLATION     The first purusa casts His glance at maya from a distance, and thus
He impregnates her with the seed of life in the form of the livingentities.
                                   TEXT 66
                       eka angabhase kare mayate milana
                    maya haite janme tabe brahmandera gana
                                 TRANSLATION     The reflected rays of His body mix with maya, and thus maya gives
birth to myriads of universes.
                                   PURPORT     The Vedic conclusion is that the cosmic manifestation visible to
the eyes of the conditioned soul is caused by the Absolute Truth, thePersonality of Godhead, through the exertion of His specific energies,although in the conclusion of atheistic deliberations this manifestedcosmic exhibition is attributed to material nature. The energy of theAbsolute Truth is exhibited in three ways: spiritual, material andmarginal. The Absolute Truth is identical with His spiritual energy.Only when contacted by the spiritual energy can the material energy workand the temporary material manifestations thus appear active. In theconditioned state the living entities of the marginal energy are amixture of spiritual and material energies. The marginal energy isoriginally under the controi of the spiritual energy, but, under thecontrol of the material energy, the living entities have been wanderingin forgetfulness within the material world since time immemorial.     The conditioned state is caused by misuse of the individualindependence of the spiritual platform, for this separates the livingentity from the association of the spiritual energy. But when the livingentity is enlightened by the grace of the Supreme Lord or His puredevotee and becomes inclined to revive his original state of lovingservice, he is on the most auspicious platform of eternal bliss and
knowledge. The marginal jiva, or living entity, misuses his independenceand becomes averse to the eternal service attitude when he independentlythinks he is not energy but the energetic. This misconception of his ownexistence leads him to the attitude of lording it over material nature.     Material nature appears to be just the opposite of the spiritualenergy. The fact is that the material energy can work only when incontact with the spiritual energy. Originally the energy of Krsna isspiritual, but it works in diverse ways, like electrical energy, whichcan exhibit the functions of refrigerating or heating through itsmanifestations in different ways. The material energy is spiritualenergy covered by a cloud of illusion, or maya. Therefore, the materialenergy is not self-sufficient in working. Krsna invests His spiritualenergy into material energy, and then it can act, just as iron can actlike fire after being heated by fire. The material energy can act onlywhen empowered by the spiritual energy.     When covered by the cloud of material energy, the living entity,who is also a spiritual energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,forgets about the activities of the spiritual energy and considers allthat happens in the material manifestation to be wonderful. But a personwho is engaged in devotional service in full Krsna consciousness and whois therefore already situated in the spiritual energy can understandthat the material energy has no independent powers; whatever actions aregoing on are due to the help of the spiritual energy. The materialenergy, which is a perverted form of the spiritual energy, presentseverything pervertedly, thus causing misconceptions and duality.Material scientists and philosophers conditioned by the spell ofmaterial nature suppose that material energy acts automatically, andtherefore they are frustrated, like an illusioned person who tries toget milk from the nipple-like bunches of skin on the neck of a goat. Asthere is no possibility of getting milk from these bunches of skin,there is similarly no possibility that anyone will be successful inunderstanding the original cause of creation by forwarding theoriesproduced by the material energy. Such an attempt is a manifestation ofignorance.     The material energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is calledmaya, or illusion, because in two capacities (by supplying the materialelements and bycausing the material manifestation) it makes the conditioned soul unableto understand the real truth of creation. When a living entity isliberated, however, from the conditional life of matter, he canunderstand the two different activities of material nature, namelycovering and bewildering.     The origin of creation is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Asconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.10), the cosmic manifestation is workingunder the direction of the Supreme Lord, who invests the material energywith three material qualities. Agitated by these qualities, the elementssupplied by the material energy produce varieties of things, just as anartist produces varieties of pictures by mixing the three colors red,yellow and blue. Yellow represents the quality of goodness, redrepresents passion, and blue represents ignorance. Therefore thecolorful material creation is but an interaction of these threequalities, represented in eighty-one varieties of mixtures (3 x 3equalling 9, 9 x 9 thus equalling 81). Deluded by material energy, theconditioned soul, enamored by these eighty-one varieties of
manifestations, wants to iord it over material energy, just as a flywants to enjoy a fire. This illusion is the net result of theconditioned soul's forgetfulness of his eternal reiationship with theSupreme personality of Godhead. When conditioned, the soul is impelledby the material energy to engage in sense gratification, whereas oneenlightened by the spiritual energy engages himself in the service ofthe Supreme Lord in his eternal relationship.     Krsna is the original cause of the spiritual world, and He is thecovered cause of the material manifestation. He is also the originalcause of the marginal potency,the living entities. He is both the leaderand maintainer of the living entities, who are called marginal potencybecause they can act under the protection of the spiritual energy orunder the cover of the material energy. With the help of the spiritualenergy we can understand that independence is visible only in Krsna, whoby His inconceivable energy is able to act in any way He likes.     The Supreme Personality of Godhead isthe Absolute Whole, and theliving entities are parts of the Absolute Whole. This relationship ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead and the living entities is eternal.One should never mistakenly think that the spiritual whole can bedivided into small parts by the small material energy. Bhagavad-gitadoes not support this Mayavada theory. Rather, it clearly states thatthe living entities are eternally small fragments of the supremespiritual whole. As a part can never be equal with the whole, so aliving entity, as a minute fragment of the spiritual whole, cannot beequal at any time to the Supreme Whole, the absolute Personality ofGodhead. Although the Supreme Lord and the living entities arequantitatively related as the whole and the parts, the parts arenevertheless qualitatively one with the whole. Thus the living entities,although always qualitatively one with the Supreme Lord, are in arelative position. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the controllerof everything, and the living entities are always controlled either bythe spiritual energy or by the material energy. Therefore a livingentity can never become the controller of material or spiritualenergies. The natural position of the living being is always as asubordinate of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one agrees toact in such a position, he attains perfection in life, but if one rebelsagainst this principle, he is in the conditioned state.
                                   TEXT 67                      aganya, ananta yata anda-sannivesa
                     tata-rupe purusa kare sabate prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The purusa enters each and every one of the countless universes. He
manifests Himself in as many separate forms as there are universes.
                                   TEXT 68
                      purusa-nasate yabe bahiraya svasa
                    nisvasa sahite haya brahmanda-prakasa                                 TRANSLATION
     When the purusa exhales, the universes become manifest with each
outward breath.
                                   TEXT 69
                      punarapi svasa yabe pravese antare
                   svasa-saha brahmanda paise purusa-sarire
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter, when He inhales, all the universes again enter His
body.
                                   PURPORT     In His form as Karanodakasayi Visnu the Lord impregnates material
nature by His glance. The transcendental molecules of that glance areparticles of spirit, or spiritual atoms, which appear in differentspecies of life according to the seeds of their individual karma fromthe previous cosmic manifestation. And the Lord Himself, by His partialrepresentation, creates a body of innumerable universes and again enterseach of those universes as Garbodakasayi Visnu. His coming in contactwith maya is explained in Bhagavad-gita by a comparison between air andthe sky. The sky enters everything material, yet it is far away from us.
                                   TEXT 70                    gavaksera randhre yena trasarenu cale
                     purusera loma-kupe brahmandera jale
                                 TRANSLATION     Just as atomic particles of dust pass through the openings of a
window, so the networks of universes pass through the pores of the skinof the purusa.
                                   TEXT 71
                    yasyaika-nis vasita-kalam athavalambya
                    jivanti loma-vilaja jagad-anda-n athah                    visnur mahan sa iha yasya kala-viseso                    govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajaini
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Brahmas and other lords of the mundane worlds appear from the
pores of the Maha-Visnu and remain alive for the duration of His oneexhalation. I adore the primeval Lord, Govinda, for Maha-Visnu is aportion of His plenary portion."                                   PURPORT
     This description of the Lord's creative energy is from the Brahma-
samhita (5 48) which Lord Brahma compiled after his personalrealization. When Maha-Visnu exhales,the spiritual seeds of the universeemanate from Him in the form of molecular particles like those that arevisible, three times the size of an atom, when sunlight is diffusedthrough a small hole. In these days of atomic research it will be aworthwhile engagement for atomic scientists to learn from this statementhow the entire universe develops from the spiritual atoms emanating fromthe body of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 72                  kvham tamo-mahad-aham-kha-caragni- vr-bh-
                   sam vestitanda-ghata-sapta-vitasti-kayah                    k vedrg vidhaviganitanda-paranu-carya-                   vatadh va-roma-vivarasya ca te mahitvam
                                 TRANSLATION     "Where am l, a small creature of seven spans the measure of my own
hand? I am enclosed in the universe composed of material nature, thetotal material energy, false ego, ether, air, water and earth. And whatis Your glory? Unlimited universes pass through the pores of Your bodyjust like particles of dust passing through the opening of a window.
                                   PURPORT     When Lord Brahma, after having stolen all Krsna's cows and cowherd
boys, returned and saw that the cows and boys were still roaming withKrsna, he offered this prayer (SB. 10.14.11) in his defeat. Aconditioned soul, even one so great as Brahma, who manages the affairsof the entire universe, cannot compare to the Personality of Godhead,for He can produce numberless universes simply by the spiritual raysemanating from the pores of His body. Material scientists should takelessons from the utterances of Sri Brahma regarding our insignificancein comparison to God. In these prayers of Brahma there is much to learnfor those who are falsely puffed up by the accumulation of power.
                                   TEXT 73                      amsera amsa yei, `kala' tara nama
                      go vindera prati-mrti sri-balarama
                                 TRANSLATION     A part of a part of a whole is called a `kala.' Sri Balarama is the
counter-form of Lord Govinda.
                                   TEXT 74                    tanra eka svarupa--sri-maha-sankarsana
                    tanra amsa `purusa' haya kalate ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     Balarama's own expansion is called Maha-Sankarsana, and His
fragment, the purusa, is counted as a kala, or a part of a plenaryportion.
                                   TEXT 75
                   yanhake ta' kala kahi, tinho maha-visnu
                     maha-purusavatari tenho sarva-jisnu
                                 TRANSLATION     I say that this kala is Maha-Visnu. He is the Maha-purusa, who is
the source of the other purusas and who is all-pervading.
                                   TEXT 76
                  garbhoda-ksiro da-sayi donhe `purusa' nama
                  sei dui, yanra amsa,--visn u, vis va-dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     Garbhodasayi and Ksirodasayi are both called purusas. They are
plenary portions of Karanodasayi Visnu, the first purusa, who is theabode of all the universes.
                                   PURPORT     The sy mptoms of the purusa are descri bed in Laghu-bhagavatamrta.
While describing the incarnations of the Supreme personality of Godhead,the author has quoted from the Visnu Purana (6.8.59), where it is said:"Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Purusottama, Lord Krsna, whois always free from the contamination of the six material dualities;whose plenary expansion, Maha-Visnu, glances over matter to create thecosmic manifestation; who expands Himself in various transcendentalforms, all of which are one and the same; who is the master of allliving entities; who is always free and liberated from the contaminationof material energy; and who, when He appears in this materiai world,seems one of us, although He has an eternally spiritual, blissful,transcendental form." In summarizing this statement, Rupa Gosvami hasconcluded that the plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead who acts in cooperation with the material energy is called thepurusa.
                                   TEXT 77                            visnos tu trini rupani
                           purusakhyany atho viduh                            ekam tu mahatah srastr
                         dvitiyam tv anda-samsthitam                          trtiyam sarva-bhuta-stham                            tani jnatva vimucyate
                                 TRANSLATION     "Visnu has three forms called purusas. The first, Maha-Visnu, is
the creator of the total material energy [ mahat], the second isGarbhodasayi, who is situated within each universe, and the third isKsirodasayi, who lives in the heart of every living being. He who knowsthese three becomes liberated from the clutches of maya.
                                   PURPORT     This verse appears in the Laghu-bhagavatamrta (Purva-khanda, 33),
where it has been quoted from the Satvata Tantra.
                                   TEXT 78                   yadyapi kahiye tanre krsnera `kala' kari
                    matsya-krmady-avatarera tinho avatari
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Ksirodasayi Visnu is called a "kala" of Lord Krsna, He is
the source of Matsya, Kurma and the other incarnations.
                                   TEXT 79
                            ete camsa-kalah pumsah
                          krsnas tu bhagavan svayam                           indrari- vyakulam lo kam                             mrdayanti yuge yuge
                                 TRANSLATION     "All these incarnations of Godhead are either plenary portions or
parts of the plenary portions of the purusa-avataras. But Krsna is theSupreme Personality of Godhead Himself. In every age He protects theworld through His different features when the world is disturbed by theenemies of Indra."
                                   PURPORT     This quotation is from Srimad-Bhagavatam ( 1.3.28).                                   TEXT 80                   sei purusa srsti-sthiti-oralayera karta
                      nana avatara kare, jagatera bharta
                                 TRANSLATION     That purusa [ Ksirodakasayi Visnu] is the performer of creation,
maintenance and destruction. He manifests Himself in many incarnations,for He is the maintainer of the world.
                                   TEXT 81
                    srsty-adi-nimitte yei amsera avadhana
                      sei ta' amsere kahi `avatara' nama
                                 TRANSLATION     That fragment of the Maha-purusa who appears for the purpose of
creation, maintenance and annihilation is called an incarnation.
                                   TEXT 82
                      adyavatara, maha-purusa, bhagavan
                     sarva-avatara-bija, sarvasraya-dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     That Maha-purusa is identical with the Personality of Godhead. He
is the original incarnation, the seed of all others, and the shelter ofeverything.
                                   TEXT 83
                        adyo 'vatarah purusah parasya
                      kalah svabhavah sad-asan-manas ca                        dravyam vikaro guna indriyani                    virat svarat sthasnu carisn u bhumnah
                                 TRANSLATION     "The purusa is the primary incarnation of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Time, nature, prakrti (as cause and effect), the mind, thematerial elements, false ego, the modes of nature, the senses, theuniversal form, complete independence and the moving and nonmovingbeings appear subsequently as His opulences."
                                   PURPORT     Describing the incarnations and their symptoms, the Laghu-
bhagavatamrta has stated that when Lord Krsna descends to conduct thecreative affairs of the material manifestation, He is an avatara, orincarnation. The two categories of avataras are empowered devotees andtad-ekatma-rupa (the Lord H imself). An example of tad-ekatma-rupa isSesa, and an example of a devotee is Vasudeva, the father of Lord Krsna.Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana has commented that the material cosmicmanifestation is a partial kingdom of God where God must sometimes cometo execute a specific function. The plenary portion of the Lord through
whom Lord Krsna executes such actions is called Maha-Visnu, who is theprimal beginning of all incarnations. Inexperienced observers presumethat the material energy provides both the cause and elements of thecosmic manifestation and that the living entities are the enjoyers ofmaterial nature. But the devotees of the bhagavata school, which hasscrutinizingly examined the entire situation, can understand thatmaterial nature can independently be neither the supplier of thematerial elements nor the cause of the material manifestation. Materialnature gets the power to supply the material elements from the glance ofthe supreme purusa, Maha-Visnu, and when empowered by Him she is calledthe cause of the material manifestation. Both features of materiainature, as the cause of the material creation and as the source of itselements, exist due to the glance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.The various expansions of the Supreme Lord who act to empower thematerial energy are known as plenary expansions or incarnations. Asillustrated by the example of many flames lit from one flame, all theseplenary expansions and incarnations are as good as Visnu Himself;nevertheless, because of their activities in controlling maya, sometimesthey are known as mayika, or having a relationship with maya. This is averse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.6.42).
                                   TEXT 84                            jagrhe paurusam rupam
                           bhaga van mahad-adibhih                            sambhutam sodasa-kalam                             adau loka-sisrksaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the beginning of the creation, the Lord expanded Himself in the
form of the purusa incarnation, accompanied by all the ingredients ofmaterial creation. First He created the sixteen principal energiessuitable for creation. This was for the purpose of manifesting thematerial universes.,,
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.3.1). The commentary of
Madhva on Srimad-Bhagavatam mentions that the following sixteenspiritual energies are present in the spiritual world: (1) sri, (2) bhu,(3) Iiia, (4) kanti, (5) kirti, (6) tusti, (7) gih, (8) pusti, (9) satya(10) jnanainana, (11) jaya utkarsini, (12) vimala, (13) yogamaya, (14)prahvi (15) isana and (16) anugraha. I n his com mentary on the Laghu-bhagavatamrta,Sri Baladeva Vidyabhusana has said that the above energiesare also known by nine names: (1) vimala, (2) utkarsini (3) jnana, (4)kriva, (5) yoga, (6) prahvi (7) satya, (8) isana and (9) anugraha. I nthe Bhagavat-sandarbha of Srila J iva Gosvami (verse 117) they aredescribed as sri, pusti, gih, kanti, kirti, tusti, ila, jaya;vidyavidya, maya, sam vit, sandhini, hladini, bhakti, murti, vimala,yoga, prahvi, isana, anugraha, etc. All these energies act in differentspheres of the Lord's supremacy.                                   TEXT 85
                  yadyapi sarvasraya tinho, tanhate samsara
                      antaratma-rupe tinho jagat-adhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Although the Lord is the shelter of everything and although all the
universes rest in Him, He, as the Supersoul, is also the support ofeverything.
                                   TEXT 86
                    prakrti-sahite tanra ubhaya sambandha
                   tathapi prakrti-saha nahi sparsa-gandha
                                 TRANSLATION     Although He is thus connected with the material energy in two ways,
He does not have the slightest contact with it.
                                   PURPORT     In the Laghu-bhagavatamrta, Srila Rupa Gosvami, commenting upon the
Lord's transcendental position beyond the material qualities, says thatVisnu, as the controller and superintendent of material nature, has aconnection with the material qualities. That connection is called"yoga." However, the person who directs a prison is not also a prisoner.Similarly, although the Supreme Personality of Godhead Visnu directs orsupervises the qualitative nature, He has no connection with thematerial modes of nature. The expansions of Lord Visnu always retaintheir supremacy; they are never connected with the material qualities.One may argue that Maha-Visnu cannot have any connection with thematerial qualities, because if He were so connected, Srimad-Bhagavatamwould not state that material nature, ashamed of her thankless task ofacting to induce the living entities to become averse to the SupremeLord, remains behind the Lord in shyness. In answer to this argument, itmay be said that the word guna means "regulation." Lord Visnu, LordBrahma and Lord Siva are situated within this universe as the directorsof the three modes, and their connection with the modes is known asyoga. This does not indicate, however, that these personalities arebound by the qualities of nature. Lord Visnu specifically is always thecontroller of the three qualities. There is no question of His comingunder their control.     Although the causal and element-supplying features exist inmaterial nature by dint of the glance of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, the Lord is never affected by glancing over the materialqualities. By the will of the Supreme Lord the different qualitativechanges in the material world take place, but there is no possibility ofmaterial affection, change or contamination for Lord Visnu.
                                   TEXT 87                              etad isanam isasya
                         prakrti-stho 'pi tad-gunaih                          na yujyate sadatma-sthair                           yatha buddhis tad-asraya
                                 TRANSLATION     "This is the opulence of the Lord. Although situated within the
material nature, He is never affected by the modes of nature. Similarly,those who have surrendered to Him and have fixed their intelligence uponHim are not influenced by the modes of nature."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.11.38).                                   TEXT 88                      ei mata gitateha punah punah kaya
                  sarvada isvara-tattva acin tya-sakti haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Bhagavad-gita also states again and again that the Absolute
Truth always possesses inconceivable power.
                                   TEXT 89
                       ami ta'jagate vasi, jagat amate
                      na ami jagate vasi, na ama jagate
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am situated in the material world, and the world rests in Me.
But atthe same time I am not situated in the material world, nor does itrest on Me in truth.
                                   PURPORT     Nothing in existence is possible unless energized by the will of
the Lord. The entire manifested creation is therefore resting on theenergy of the Lord, but one should not therefore presume that thematerial manifestation is identical with the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. A cloud may rest in the sky, but that does not mean that thesky and the cloud are one and the same. Similarly, the qualitativematerial nature and its products are never identicai with the SupremeLord. The tendency to lord it over material nature, or maya, cannot be afeature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When He descends to thematerial world, He maintains His transcendental nature, unaffected bythe materiai qualities. In both the spiritual and material worlds, He isalways the controller of all energies. The uncontaminated spiritualnature always exists within Him. The Lord appears and disappears in thematerial world in different features for His pastimes, yet He is the
origin of all cosmic manifestations.     The material manifestation cannot exist separate from the SupremeLord, yet Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in spite ofHis connection with material nature, cannot be subordinate to nature'sinfiuence. His original form of eternal bliss and knowledge is neversubordinate to the three qualities of material nature. This is aspecific feature of the Supreme Lord's inconceivable potencies.
                                   TEXT 90                      acin tya aisvarya ei janiha amara
                      ei ta' gitara artha kaiia paracara
                                 TRANSLATION     ,,O Arjuna, you should know this as My inconceivable opulence."
This is the meaning propagated by Lord Krsna in Bhagavad-gita.
                                   TEXT 91
                   sei ta' purusa yanra `amsa' dhare naina
                     caitanyera sange sei nityananda-rama
                                 TRANSLATION     That Maha-purusa [ Karanodakasayi Visnu] is known as a plenary part
of Him who is Lord Nityananda Balarama, the favorite associate of LordCaitanya.
                                   TEXT 92
                    ei ta' na vama slokera artha-vivarana
                     dasama slokera artha suna oiya mana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have thus explained the ninth verse, and now I shall explain the
tenth. Please listen with rapt attention.
                                   TEXT 93
                       yasyamsamsah srila-garbhoda-sayi
                     yan-nabhy-abjam loka-sanghata-nalam                       loka-srastuh sutika-dhama dhatus                      tam sri-nityananda-ramam prapadye
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my full obeisances unto the feet of Sri Nityananda Rama, a
partial part of whom is Garbhodakasayi Visnu. From the navel ofGarbhodakasayi Visnu sprouts the lotus that is the birthplace of Brahma,
the engineer of the universe. The stem of that lotus is the restingplace of the multitude of planets.
                                   PURPORT     In the Mahabharata, Santi-parva, it is said that He who is
Pradyumna is also Aniruddha. He is also the father of Brahma. ThusGarbhodakasayi Visnu and Ksirodakasayi Visnu are identical plenaryexpansions of Pradyumna, the original Deity of Brahma, who is born fromthe lotus flower. It is Pradyumna who gives Brahma direction for cosmicmanagement. A full description of Brahma's birth is given in Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.8.15-16).     Describing the features of the three purusas, the Laghu-bhagavatamrta says that Garbhodakasayi Visnu has a four-handed form, andwhen He Himself enters the hollow of the universe and lies down in theocean of milk He is known as Ksirodakasayi Visnu, who is the Supersoulof all living entities, including the demigods. In the Satvata Tantra itis said that the third purusa incarnation, Ksirodakasayi Visnu, issituated as the Supersoul in everyone's heart. This Ksirodakasayi Visnuis an expansion of Garbhodakasayi Visnu for pastimes.
                                   TEXT 94                    sei ta' purusa ananta-brahmanda srjiya
                     saba ande pravesija bahu-murti hana
                                 TRANSLATION     After creating millions of universes, the first purusa entered into
each of them in a separate form, as Sri Garbhodakasayi.
                                   TEXT 95
                    bhitare pravesi' dekhe saba andhakara
                      rahite nahika sthana kariia vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     Entering the universe, He found only darkness, with no place in
which to reside. Thus He began to consider.
                                   TEXT 96
                      nijnnga--sveda jala karija srjana
                    sei jale kaila ardha-brahmanda bharana
                                 TRANSLATION     Then He created water from the perspiration of His own body and
with that water filled half the universe.                                   TEXT 97
                   brah manda-pramana pancasat-koji-yojana
                      ayama, vistara, dui haya eka sama
                                 TRANSLATION     The universe measures five hundred million yojanas. Its length and
breadth are one and the same.
                                   TEXT 98
                   jale bhari' ardha tanha kaila njja-vasa
                   ara ardhe kaila caudda-bhu vana prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     After filling half the universe with water, He made His own
residence therein and manifested the fourteen worlds in the other half.
                                   PURPORT     The fourteen worlds are enumerated in Srimad-Bhagavatam, Second
Canto, Fifth Chapter. The upper planetary systems are (1) Bhu, (2)Bhuvah, (3) Svah, (4) Mahah, (5) Jana, (6) Tapah and (7) Satya. Theseven lower planetary systems are (1) Tala, (2) Atala, (3) Vitala, (4)Nitala, (5) Talatala, (6) Mahatala and (7) Sutala. The lower planets, asa whole, are called Patala. Among the upper planetary systems, Bhu,Bhuvah and Svah constitute Svargaloka, and the rest are called Martya.The entire universe is thus known as Triloka.
                                   TEXT 99                  tanhai prakata kaila vaikuntha njja-dhama
                       sesa-sayana jale karija visrama
                                 TRANSLATION     There He manifested Vaikuntha as His own abode and rested in the
waters on the bed of Lord Sesa.
                                 TEXT 100-101
                     anan ta-sayyate tanh\ karija sayana
                     sahasra mastaka tanra sahasra vadana
                     sahasra-carana-hasta, sahasra-nayana
                       sarva-avatara-bija, jagat-karana
                                 TRANSLATION     He lay there with Ananta as His bed. Lord Ananta is a divine
serpent having thousands of heads, thousands of faces, thousands of eyesand thousands of hands and feet. He is the seed of all incarnations andis the cause of the material world.
                                   PURPORT     In the reservoir of water first created by the perspiration of
Garbhodakasayi Visnu,the Lord lies on the Sesa plenary expansion ofVisnu, who is described in the Srimad-Bhagavatam and in the four Vedasas follows:     sahasra-sirsa purusah sahasraksah sahasra-pat     sa bhumim visvato vrtvatyatisthad dasangulam"The Visnu form called Ananta-sayana has thousands of hands and legs andthousands of eyes, and He is the active generator of all theincarnations within the material world."
                                   TEXT 102                   tanra nabhi-oadma haite uthila eka padma
                     sei padme haila brahmara janma-sadma
                                 TRANSLATION     From His navel grew a lotus flower, which became the birthplace of
Lord Brahma.
                                   TEXT 103
                    sei padma-naje haila caudda-bh u vana
                    tenho brahma hana srsti karila srjana
                                 TRANSLATION     Within the stem of that lotus were the fourteen worlds. Thus the
Supreme Lord, as Brahma, created the entire creation.
                                   TEXT 104
                      visnu-rupa hana kare jagat palane
                     gunatita-visnu sparsa nahi maya-gune
                                 TRANSLATION     And as Lord Visnu He maintains the entire world. Lord Visnu, being
beyond all material attributes, has no touch with the materialqualities.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Baladeva Vidyabhusana says that although Visnu is the
predominating Deity of the quality of goodness in the material world, Heis never affected by the quality of goodness, for He directs that
quality simply by His supreme will. It is said that all living entitiescan derive all good fortune from the Lord simply by His will. In theVamana Purana it is said that the same Visnu expands Himself as Brahmaand Siva to direct the different qualities.     Because Lord Visnu expands the quality of goodness, He has the nameSattvatanu. The multifarious incarnations of Ksirodakasayi Visnu areknown as Sattvatanu. Therefore in all Vedic scriptures Visnu has beendescribed as being free from all material qualities. In the Tenth Cantoof Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said:     harir hi nirgunah saksat     purusah prakrteh parah     sa sarva-org upadrasta     tam bhajan nirguno bhavet"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is always uncontaminated bythe modes of material nature, for He is beyond the materialmanifestation. He is the source of the knowledge of all the demigods,headed by Lord Brahma,and He is the witness of everything. Therefore onewho worships the Supreme Lord Visnu also attains freedom from thecontamination of material nature." (SB. 10.88.5) One can attain freedomfrom the contamination of material nature by worshiping Visnu, andtherefore He is called Sattvatanu, as described above.
“Caitanya-caritamrita – Adi Lila ” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Summary: Caitanya-caritamrita is the biography of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
written by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami in the 16
th century, now published
with elaborate translations and commentaries in English by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami. The multi-volume Caitanya-caritamrita is dividedinto three sections, Adi Lila, Madhya Lila, and Antya Lila, representingthe beginning, middle, and concluding pastimes of Lord ChaitanyaMahaprabhu. This file comprises the text of the several volumes thatmake up the Adi Lila section.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluationcopy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyrightinformation intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Caitanya Caritamrita” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1974-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .
                                   TEXT 105
                     rudra-rupa dhari' kare jagat samhara
                    srsti-sthiti-pralaya--icchaya yanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Assuming the form of Rudra, He destroys the creation. Thus
creation, maintenance and dissolution are created by His will.
                                   PURPORT     Mahesvara, or Lord Siva, is not an ordinary living being, nor is he
equal to Lord Visnu. Effectively comparing Lord Visnu and Lord Siva, theBrahma-samhita says that Visnu is iike milk, whereas Siva is like curd.Curd is nothing like milk, but nevertheless it is milk also.
                                   TEXT 106                   hiranya-garbha, antaryami, jagat-karana
                     yanra amsa kari' kare virata-kalpana
                                 TRANSLATION     He is the Supersoul, Hiranyagarbha, the cause of the material
world. The universal form is conceived as His expansion.
                                   TEXT 107
                      hena narayana,--yanra amsera amsa
                    sei prabhu nityananda--sarva-avatamsa
                                 TRANSLATION     That Lord Narayana is a part of a plenary part of Lord Nityananda
Balarama, who is the source of all incarnations.
                                   TEXT 108
                     dasama slokera artha kaila vivarana
                     ekadasa slokera artha suna diya mana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have thus explained the tenth verse. Now please listen to the
meaning of the eleventh verse with all your mind.                                   TEXT 109
                      yasyamsamsamsah paratmakhilanain.
                      posta visnur bhati dugdhabdhi-sayi                    ksauni-bharta yat-kala so 'py anantas                      tam sri-nityananda-ramam prapadye
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances unto the feet of Sri Nityananda
Rama, whose secondary part is the Visnu lying in the ocean of milk. ThatKsirodakasayi Visnu is the Supersoul of all living entities and themaintainer of all the universes. Sesa Naga is His further sub-part.
                                   TEXT 110
                    narayanera nabhi-naia-madhyete dharani
                    dharanira madhye sapta samudra ye gani
                                 TRANSLATION     The material planets rest within the stem that grew from the lotus
navel of Lord Narayana. Among these planets are seven oceans.
                                   TEXT 111
                  tanha ksirodadhi-madhye `svetadvioa' nama
                    paiayita visnu,--tanra sei nija dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     There, in part of the ocean of milk, lies Svetadvipa, the abode of
the sustainer, Lord Visnu.
                                   PURPORT     In the Siddhnta-siromani, an astrological text, the different
oceans are described as follows: (1) the ocean of salt, (2) the ocean ofmilk, (3) the ocean of curd, (4) the ocean of clarified butter, (5) theocean of sugar cane juice, (6) the ocean of liquor and (7) the ocean ofsweet water. On the southern side of the ocean of salt is the ocean ofmilk, where Lord Ksirodakasayi Visnu resides. He is worshiped there bydemigods like Brahma.
                                   TEXT 112                      sakala jivera tinho haye antaryami
                      jagat-palaka tinho jagatera svami
                                 TRANSLATION     He is the Supersoul of all living entities. He maintains this
material world, and He is its Lord.
                                   PURPORT     The Laghu-bhagavatamrta gives the following descri ption of the
Visn uloka within this universe, quoted from the Visnu-dharmottara:"Above Rudraloka, the planet of Lord Siva, is the planet calledVisnuloka, 400,000 miles in circumference, which is inaccessible for anymortal living being. Above that Visnuloka and east of the Sumeru Hill isa golden island called Maha-Visnuloka in the ocean of salt. Lord Brahmaand other demigods sometimes go there to meet Lord Visnu. Lord Visnulies there with the goddess of fortune, and it is said that during thefour months of the rainy season He enjoys sleeping on that Sesa Nagabed. East of Sumeru is the ocean of milk, in which there is a white cityon a white island where the Lord can be seen sitting with His consort,Laksmiji, on a throne of Sesa. That feature of Visnu also enjoyssleeping during the four months of the rainy season. The Svetadvipa inthe milk ocean is situated just south of the ocean of salt. It iscalculated that the area of Svetadvipa is 200,000 square miles. Thistranscendentallybeautiful island is decorated with desire trees to please Lord Visnu andHis consort." Th e re are re fe re n ces to Svetad v i p a i n th eBrahmanda Purana, Visnu purana, Mahabharata and Padma Purana, and thereis the following reference in the Srimad- Bhagavatam (11.15.18).     sveta-dvioa-patau cittam     suddhe dharma-maye mayi     dharayan ch vetatam yati     sad-urmi-rahito narah"My dear Uddhava, you may know that My transcendental form of Visnu inSvetadvipa is identical with Me in divinity. Anyone who places this Lordof Svetadvipa within his heart can surpass the pangs of the six materialtribulations: hunger, thirst, birth, death, lamentation and illusion.Thus one can attain his original transcendental form."
                                   TEXT 113                    yuga-man van tare dhari' nana a vatara
                   dharma samsthapana kare, adharma samhara
                                 TRANSLATION     In the ages and millenniums of Manu, He appears as different
incarnations to establish the principles of real religion and vanquishthe principles of irreligion.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Visnu, who lies in the ocean of milk, incarnates Himself in
various forms to maintain the laws of the cosmos and annihilate thecauses of disturbance. Such incarnations are visible in every manvantara(i.e., in the course of the reign of each Manu, who lives for 71 x4,300,000 years). Fourteen such Manus take their birth and die, to yield
a place for the next, during one day of Brahma.
                                   TEXT 114                     de va-gane na paya yanhara darasana
                      ksirodaka-tire yai' karena stavana
                                 TRANSLATION     Unable to see Him, the demigods go to the bank of the ocean of milk
and offer prayers to Him.
                                   PURPORT     The denizens of heaven, who live in the pianetary systems beginning
from Svarloka, cannot even see Lord Visnu in Svetadvipa. Unable to reachthe island, they can simply approach the beach of the miik ocean tooffer transcendental prayers to the Lord, appealing to Him on specialoccasions to appear as an incarnation.
                                   TEXT 115                       tabe avatari' kare jagat palana
                     ananta vaibhava tanra nahika ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     He then descends to maintain the material world. His unlimited
opulences cannot be counted.
                                   TEXT 116
                     sei visnu haya yanra ams\msera amsa
                    sei prabhu nityananda--sarva-a vatamsa
                                 TRANSLATION     That Lord Visnu is but a part of a part of a plenary portion of
Lord Nityananda, who is the source of all incarnations.
                                   PURPORT     The Lord of Svetadvipa has immense potency for creation and
destruction. Sri Nityananda Prabhu, being Baladeva Himself, the originalform of Sankarsana, is the original form of the Lord of Svetadvipa.
                                   TEXT 117                    sei visnu `sesa'-rupe dharena dharani
                    kanha ache mahi, sire, hena nahi jani
                                 TRANSLATION     That same Lord Visnu, in the form of Lord Sesa, holds the planets
upon His heads, although He does not know where they are, for He cannotfeel their existence upon His heads.
                                   TEXT 118
                    sahasra vistirna yanra phanara mandala
                    surya jini' mani-gana kare jhala-mala
                                 TRANSLATION     His thousands of extended hoods are adorned with dazzling jewels
surpassing the sun.
                                   TEXT 119
                     pancasat-koji-yojana prthivi-vistara
                      yanra eka-phane rahe sarsapa-akara
                                 TRANSLATION     The universe, which measures five hundred million yojanas in
diameter, rests on one of His hoods like a mustard seed.
                                   PURPORT     The Lord of Svetadvipa expands Himself as Sesa Naga, who sustains
all the planets upon His innumerable hoods. These huge global spheresare compared to grains of mustard resting on the spiritual hoods of SesaNaga. The scientists' law of gravity is a partial explanation of LordSankarsana's energy. The name "Sankarsana" has an etymologicalrelationship to the idea of gravity. There is a reference to Sesa Nagain the Bhagavata Purana (5.17.21), where it is said:.     yam ahur asya sthiti janma-samyamam     tribhir vihinam yam anantam rsayah     na veda siddartham iva kvacit sthitam     bhu-mandalam murdha-sahasra-dhamasu"O my Lord, the hymns of the Vedas proclaim that You are the effectivecause for the creation, maintenance and destruction. But in fact You aretranscendental to all limitations and are therefore known as unlimited.On Your thousands of hoods rest the innumerable global spheres, likegrains of mustard so insignificant that You have no perception of theirweight." The Bhagavatam further says (5.25.2):     yasyedam ksiti-mandalam bhagavato     'nanta-murteh sahasra-sirasa ekasminn     eva sirsani dhriyamanam siddhartha iva laksyate"Lord Anantadeva has thousands of hoods. Each sustains a global spherethat appears like a grain of mustard."
                                   TEXT 120                   sei ta' `ananta' `sesa'--bhakta-avatara
                       isvarera se va vina nahijnne ara
                                 TRANSLATION     That Ananta-Sesa is the devotee incarnation of Godhead. He knows
nothing but service to Lord Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Srila J iva Gosvami, in his Krsna-sandarbha, has described Sesa
Naga as follows: "Sri Anantadeva has thousands of faces and is fullyindependent. Always ready to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead,He waits upon Him constantly. Sankarsana is the first expansion ofVasudeva, and because He appears by His own will, He is called svarat,fully independent. He is therefore infinite and transcendental to alllimits of time and space. He Himself appears as the thousand-headedSesa." In the Skanda Purana, in the Ayodhya-mahatmya Chapter, thedemigod Indra requested Lord Sesa, who was standing before him asLaksmana, "Please go to Your eternal abode, Visnuloka, where Yourexpansion Sesa, with His serpentine hoods, is also present." After thusdispatching Laksmana to the regions of Patala, Lord I ndra returned tohis abode. This quotation indicates that the Sankarsanaof the quadrupleform descends with Lord Rama as Laksmana. When Lord Rama disappears,Sesa again separates Himself from the personality of Laksmana. Sesa thenreturns to His own abode in the Patala regions, and Laksmana returns toHis abode in Vaikuntha.     The Laghu-bhagavatamrta gives the following description: "The Sankarsana of the second group of quadruple forms appears as Rama, takingwith Him Sesa, who bears the global spheres. There are two features ofSesa. One is the bearer of the globes, and the other is the bedsteadservitor. The Sesa who bears the globes is a potent incarnation ofSankarsana, and therefore He is sometimes also called Sankarsana. Thebedstead feature of Sesa always presents himself as an eternal servitorof the Lord."
                                   TEXT 121                     sahasra- vadane kare krsna-guna gana
                    niravadhi guna ga'na, anta nahi pa'na
                                 TRANSLATION     With His thousands of mouths He sings the glories of Lord Krsna,
but although He always sings in that way, He does not find an end to thequalities of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 122
                     sanakadi bhagavata sune yanra mukhe
                   bhagavanera guna kahe, bhase prema-sukhe
                                 TRANSLATION     The four Kumaras hear Srimad-Bhagavatam from His lips, and they in
turn repeat it in the transcendental bliss of love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 123
                   chatra, paduka, sayya, upadhana, vasana
                     arama, avsa, yajna-sutra, simhasana
                                 TRANSLATION     He serves Lord Krsna, assuming all the following forms: umbrella,
slippers, bedding, pillow, garments, resting chair, residence, sacredthread and throne.
                                   TEXT 124
                    eta murti-bheda kari' krsna-seva kare
                    krsnera sesata pana `sesa' nama dhare
                                 TRANSLATION     He is thus called Lord Sesa, for He has attained the ultimate end
of servitude to Krsna. He takes many forms for the service of Krsna, andthus He serves the Lord.
                                   TEXT 125
                     sei ta' ananta, yanra kahi eka kala
                 hena prabhu nityananda, ke jane tanra khela
                                 TRANSLATION     That person of whom Lord Ananta is a kala, or part of a plenary
part, is Lord Nityananda Prabhu. Who, therefore, can know the pastimesof Lord Nityananda?
                                   TEXT 126
                  e-saba pramane jani nityananda-tattva-sima
                    tanhake `ananta' kahi, ki tanra mahima
                                 TRANSLATION     From these conclusions we can know the limit of the truth of Lord
Nityananda. But what glory is there in calling Him Ananta?
                                   TEXT 127                    athava bhaktera vakya mani satya kari'
                     sakala sambhave tante, yate avatari
                                 TRANSLATION     But I accept it as the truth because it has been said by devotees.
Since He is the source of all incarnations, everything is possible inHim.
                                   TEXT 128
                       avatara-avatari--abheda, ye jane
                  purve yaiche klsnake keho kaho kari' mane
                                 TRANSLATION     They know that there is no difference between the incarnation and
the source of all incarnations. Previously Lord Krsna was regarded inthe light of different principles by different people.
                                   TEXT 129
                    keho kahe, krsna saksat nara-narayana
                     keho kahe, krsna haya saksat vamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Some said that Krsna was directly Lord Nara-Narayana, and some
called Him Lord Vamana-deva incarnate.
                                   TEXT 130
                    keho kahe, krsna ksiroda-sayi avatara
                     asambhava nahe, satya vacana sabara
                                 TRANSLATION     Some called Lord Krsna an incarnation of Lord Ksirodakasayi. All
these names are true; nothing is impossible.
                                   TEXT 131
                      krsna yabe avatare sarvamsa-asraya
                      sarvamsa asi' tabe krsnete milaya
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna appears, He is the
shelter of all plenary parts. Thus at that time all His plenary portionsjoin in Him.                                   TEXT 132
                       yei yei r\pe jane, sei taha kahe
                   sakala sambhave krsne, kichu mithyanahe
                                 TRANSLATION     In whatever form one knows the Lord, one speaks of Him in that way.
In this there is no falsity, since everything is possible in Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     In this connection we may mention an incident that took place
between two of our sannyasis while we were preaching the Hare Krsnamaha-mantra in Hyderabad. One of them stated that"Hare Rama" refers toSri Balarama, and the other protested that "Hare Rama" means Lord Rama.Ultimately the controversy came to me, and I gave the decision that ifsomeone says that "Rama" in "Hare Rama" is Lord Ramacand ra and someoneelse says that the "Rama" in "Hare Rama" is Sri Balarama, both arecorrect because there is no difference between Sri Balarama and LordRama. Here in Sri Caitanya-caritamrta we find that Krsnadasa KavirajaGosvami has stated the same conclusion:     yei yei rupe jane, sei taha kahe     sakala sambhave krsne, kichu mithya naheIf someone calls Lord Ramacandra by the vibration Hare Rama, or if heunderstands Ramacandra, he is quite right. Similarly, if one says thatHare Rama means Sri Balarama, he is also right. Those who are aware ofthe visnu-tattva do not fight over all these details.     I n the Laghu-bhagavatamrta Srila Rupa Gosvami has explainedKrsna's being both Ksirodakasayi Visnu and Narayana in the spiritual skyand expanding in quadruple forms like Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumnaand Aniruddha. He has refuted the idea that Krsna is an incarnation ofNarayana. Some devotees think that Narayana is the original Personalityof Godhead and that Krsna is an incarnation. Even Sankaracarya, in hiscommentary on Bhagavad-gita, has accepted Narayana as the transcendentalPersonality of Godhead who appeared as Krsna, the son of Devaki andVasudeva. Therefore this matter may be difficult to understand. But theGaudiya-Vaisnava-sampradaya, headed by Rupa Gosvami, has established theprinciple of Bhagavad-gita that everything emanates from Krsna, who saysin Bhagavad- gita, aham sarvasya prabhavah: "I am the original source ofeverything." "Everything" includes Narayana. Therefore Rupa Gosvami, inthe Laghu-bhagavatamrta, has established that Krsna, not Narayana, isthe original Personality of Godhead.     In this connection he has quoted a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam(3.2.15) that states:     sva-san ta-rupesv itaraih s va-rupair     abhyardyamanes v anukampitatma     paravareso mahad-amsa-yukto     hy ajo 'pijato bhagavan yathagnih"When pure devotees of the Lord like Vasudeva are greatly disturbed bydangerous demons like Kamsa, Lord Krsna joins with all His pastimeexpansions, such as the Lord of Vaikuntha, and, although unborn, becomesmanifest, just as fire becomes manifest by the friction of arani wood."
Arani wood is used to ignite a sacrificial fire without matches or anyother flame. Just as fire appears from arani wood, the Supreme Lordappears when there is friction between devotees and nondevotees. WhenKrsna appears, He appears in full, including within Himself all Hisexpansions like Narayana, Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Aniruddha and Pradyumna.Krsna is always integrated with His other incarnations, likeNrsimhadeva, Varaha, Vamana, NaraNarayana, Hayagriva and Ajita. InVrndavana sometimes Lord Krsna exhibits the functions of suchincarnations.     In the Brahmanda purana it is said: "The same Personaiity ofGodhead who is known in Vaikuntha as the four-handed Narayana, thefriend of all living entities, and in the milk ocean as the Lord ofSvetadvipa, and who is the best of all purusas, appeared as the son ofNanda. In a fire there are many sparks of different dimensions; some ofthem are very big,and some are small.The small sparks are compared tothe living entities, and the large sparks are compared to the Visnuexpansions of Lord Krsna. All the incarnations emanate from Krsna, andafter the end of their pastimes they again merge with Krsna."     Therefore in the various Puranas Krsna is described sometimes asNarayana, sometimes as Ksirodakasayi Visnu, sometimes as GarbhodakasayiVisnu and sometimes as Vaikunthanatha, the Lord of Vaikuntha. Because Krsna is alwaysfull, Mula Sankarsana is in Krsna, and since all incarnations aremanifested from Mula Sankarsana, it should be understood that He canmanifest different incarnations by His supreme will, even in thepresence of Krsna. Great sages have therefore glorified the Lord bydifferent names. Thus when the original person, the source of allincarnations, is sometimes described as an incarnation, there is nodiscrepancy.
                                   TEXT 133                      atae va sri-krsna-caitanya gosani
                   sarva a vatara-lila kari' sabare dekhai
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu has exhibited to everyone all
the pastimes of all the various incarnations.
                                   TEXT 134
                     ei-rupe nityananda `ananta'-prakasa
                     sei-bhave--kahe muni caitanyera dasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Lord Nityananda has unlimited incarnations. In transcendental
emotion He calls Himself a servant of Lord Caitanya.
                                   TEXT 135                  kabhu guru, kabhu sakha, kabhu bhrtya-lila
                   purve yena tina-bhave vraje kaila khela
                                 TRANSLATION     Sometimes He serves Lord Caitanya as His guru, sometimes as His
friend and sometimes as His servant, just as Lord Balarama played withLord Krsna in these three different modes in Vraja.
                                   TEXT 136
                    vrsa hana krsna-sane matha-mathi rana
                    kabhu krsna kare tanra pada-samvahana
                                 TRANSLATION     Playing like a bull, Lord Balarama fights with Krsna head to head.
And sometimes Lord Krsna massages the feet of Lord Balarama.
                                   TEXT 137
                    apanake bhrtya kari' krsne prabhu jane
                       krsnera kalara kala apanake mane
                                 TRANSLATION     He considers Himself a servant and knows Krsna to be His master.
Thus He regards Himself as a fragment of His plenary portion.
                                   TEXT 138
                            vrsayamanau nardantau
                             yuyudhate parasparam                           anukrtya rutair jantums                            ceratuh prlrtau yatha
                                 TRANSLATION     "Acting just like ordinary boys, They played like roaring bulls as
they fought each other, and they imitated the calls of variousanimals.,,
                                   PURPORT     This and the following quotations are from Bhagavatam (10. 1 1.40)
and (10.15.14).
                                   TEXT 139                          k vacit krida-parisrantam                             gopotsangopabarhanam
                          s vayam visramayaty aryam                            pada-sam vahanadibhih
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sometimes when Lord Krsna's elder brother, Lord Balarama, felt
tired after playing and lay His hand on the lap of a cowherd boy, LordKrsna Himself served Him by massaging His feet."
                                   TEXT 140
                             keyam va kuta ayata
                            daivi va nary utasuri                           prayo mayastu me bhartur                             nanya me'pi vimohini
                                 TRANSLATION     "Who is this mystic power, and where has she come from? Is she a
demigod or a demoness? She must be the illusory energy of My master,Lord Krsna, for who else can bewilder Me?"
                                   PURPORT     The playful pastimes of the Lord caused suspicion in the mind of
Lord Brahma, and therefore Lord Brahma, to test Krsna's Lordship, stoleall the Lord's cows and cowherd boys with his own mystic power. SriKrsna responded, however, by replacing all the cows and boys in thefield. Lord Balarama's thoughts of astonishment at such wonderfulretaliation are recorded in this verse (SB. 10.13.37).
                                   TEXT 141                  yasyanghri-pankaja-rajo 'khila-loka-palair
                 mauly-uttamair dhrtam upasita-tirtha-tirtham                  brahma bhavo 'ham api yasya kalah kalayah                   sris codvahema ciram asya nrpasanam k va
                                 TRANSLATION     "What is the value of a throne to Lord Krsna? The masters of the
various planetary systems accept the dust of His lotus feet on theircrowned heads. That dust makes the holy places sacred, and even LordBrahma, Lord Siva, Laksmi and I Myself, who are all portions of Hisplenary portion, eternally carry that dust on our heads."
                                   PURPORT     When the Kauravas, to flatter Baladeva so that He would become
their ally, spoke ill of Sri Krsna, Lord Baladeva was angry and spokethis verse (SB. 10.68.37).                                   TEXT 142
                     ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya
                   yare yaiche nacaya, se taiche kare nrtya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna alone is the supreme controller, and all others are His
servants. They dance as He makes them do so.
                                   TEXT 143
                     ei mata caitanya-gosani ekale isvara
                      ara saba parisada, keha va kinkara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Lord Caitanya is also the only controller. All others are His
associates or servants.
                                 TEXT 144-145
                   guru-varga,--nityananda, advaita acarya
                   srivasadi, ara yata--lagh u, sama, arya
                      sabe parisada, sabe lilara sahaya
                    saba lana nija-karya sadhe gaura-raya
                                 TRANSLATION     His elders such as Lord Nityananda, Advaita Acarya and Srivasa
Thakura, as well as His other devotees--whether His juniors, equals, orsuperiors--are all His associates who help Him in His pastimes. LordGauranga fulfills His aims with their help.
                                   TEXT 146
                    advaita acarya, nityananda,--dui anga
                   dui jana lana prabhura yata kichu ranga
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Acarya and Srila Nityananda Prabhu, who are plenary
parts of the Lord, are His principal associates. With these two the Lordperforms His pastimes in various ways.
                                   TEXT 147
                     advaita-acarya-gosani saksat isvara
                  prabhu guru kari' mane, tinho ta' kinkara                                 TRANSLATION
     Lord Advaita Acarya is directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Although Lord Caitanya accepts Him as His preceptor, Advaita Acarya is aservant of the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya always offered respects to Advaita Prabhu as He would
to His father because Advaita was even older than His father; yetAdvaita Prabhu always considered Himself a servant of Lord Caitanya. SriAdvaita Prabhu and Isvara Puri, Lord Caitanya's spiritual master, wereboth disciples of Madhavendra Puri, who was also the spiritual master ofNityananda Prabhu. Thus Advaita Prabhu, as Lord Caitanya's spiritualuncle, was always to be respected because one should respect one'sspiritual master's Godbrothers as one respects one's spiritual master.Because of all these considerations, Sri Advaita Prabhu was superior toLord Caitanya, yet Advaita Prabhu considered Himself Lord Caitanya'ssubordinate.
                                   TEXT 148                    acarya-gosanira tattva na yaya kathana
                      krsna avatari yenho tarila bhuvana
                                 TRANSLATION     I cannot describe the truth of Advaita Acarya. He has delivered the
entire world by making Lord Krsna descend.
                                   TEXT 149
                   nityananda-svarupa purve ha-iya laksmana
                    laghu-bhrata haiya kare ramera sevana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda Svarupa formerly appeared as Laksmana and served
Lord Ramacandra as His younger brother.
                                   PURPORT     Among the sannyasis of the Sankara-sampradaya there are different
names for brahmacaris. Each sannyasi has some assistants, known asbrahmacaris, who are called by different names according to the names ofthe sannyasi. Among such brahmacaris there are four names: Svarupa,Ananda, Prakasa and Caitanya. Nityananda Prabhu maintained himself as abrahmacari; He never took sannyasa. As a brahmacari His name wasNityananda Svarupa, and therefore the sannyasi under whom He was livingmust have been from the tirthas or asramas because the assistantbrahmacari of such a sannyasi is called Nityananda Svarupa.                                   TEXT 150
                    ramera caritra saba,--duhkhera karana
                   sva-tantra lilaya duhkha sahena laksmana
                                 TRANSLATION     The activities of Lord Rama were full of suffering, but Laksmana,
of His own accord, tolerated that suffering.
                                   TEXT 151
                     nisedha karite nare, yate chota bhai
                 mauna dhari' rahe laksmana mane duhkha pai'
                                 TRANSLATION     As a younger brother He could not stop Lord Rama from His
resolution, and so He remained silent, although unhappy in His mind.
                                   TEXT 152
                  krsna-avatare jyestha haila se vara karana
                     krsnake karaila nana sukha asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Lord Krsna appeared, He [ Balarama] became His elder brother
to serve Him to His heart's content and make Him enjoy all sorts ofhappiness.
                                   TEXT 153
                   rama-iaksmana--krsna-ramera amsa-visesa
                      avatara-kaie donhe donhte pravesa
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Rama and Sri Laksmana, who are plenary portions of Lord Krsna
and Lord Balarama, entered into Them at the time of Krsna's andBalarama's appearance.
                                   PURPORT     With reference to the Visnu-dharmottara, the Laghu-bhagavatamrta
explains that Rama is an incarnation of Vasudeva, Laksmana is anincarnation of Sankarsana, Bharata is an incarnation of Pradyumna, andSatrughna is an incarnation of Aniruddha. The Padma Purana describesthat Ramacandra is Narayana, and Laksmana, Bharata and Satrughna arerespectively Sesa, Cakra, and Sankha (the conchshell in the hand ofNarayana). In the Rama-gita of the Skanda purana, Laksmana, Bharata, and
Satrughna have been described as the triple attendants of Lord Rama.
                                   TEXT 154                   sei am. sa lana jyestha-kanisthabhimana
                     amsamsi-rupe sastre karaye vyakhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna and Balarama present Themselves as elder or younger brother,
but in the scriptures They are described as the original SupremePersonality of Godhead and His expansion.
                                   TEXT 155
                     ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan
                     nanavataram akarod bh u vanesu kintu                 krsnah s vayam samabha vat paramah puman yo                    go vindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
                                 TRANSLATION     "I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who by His various plenary
portions appeared in the world in different forms and incarnations su chas Lord Rama, but who personally appears in His supreme original form asLord Krsna."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Brahma-samhita (5.39).                                   TEXT 156                  sri-caitanya--sei krsna, nityananda--rama
                    nityananda purna kare caitanyera kama
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya is the same Lord Krsna, and Lord Nityananda is Lord
Balarama. Lord Nityananda fulfills all of Lord Caitanya's desires.
                                   TEXT 157
                   nityananda-mahima-sindhu anan ta, apara
                   eka kana sparsi matra,--se krpa tanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     The ocean of Lord Nityananda's glory is infinite and unfathomable.
Only by His mercy can I touch even a drop of it.                                   TEXT 158
                       ara eka suna tanra krpara mahima
                     adhama jivere cadhaila urdh va-sima
                                 TRANSLATION     Please listen to another glory of His mercy. He made a fallen
living entity climb to the highest limit.
                                   TEXT 159
                      veda-guhya katha ei ayogya kahite
                     tathapi kahiye tanra krpa prakasite
                                 TRANSLATION     To disclose it is not proper, for it should be kept as confidential
as the Vedas, yet I shall speak of it to make His mercy known to all.
                                   TEXT 160
                      uiiasa-upari iekhon tomara prasada
                   nityananda prabhu, m ora ksama aparadha
                                 TRANSLATION     O Lord Nityananda, I write of Your mercy out of great exultation.
Please forgive me for my offenses.
                                   TEXT 161
                   avadhuta gosanira eka bhrtya prema-dhama
                     minaketana ramadasa haya tanra nama
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda Prabhu had a servant named Sri Minaketana Ramadasa,
who was a reservoir of love.
                                   TEXT 162
                      amara alaye ah o-ratra-sankirtana
                      tahate aila tenho pana nimantrana
                                 TRANSLATION     At my house there was sankirtana day and night, and therefore he
visited there, having been invited.                                   TEXT 163
                     maha-prema-maya tinho vasija angane
                     sakala vaisnava tanra vandila carane
                                 TRANSLATION     Absorbed in emotional love, he sat in my courtyard, and all the
Vaisnavas bowed down at his feet.
                                   TEXT 164
                     namaskara karite, ka'ra uparete cade
                    preme ka're vamsi mare, kahake capade
                                 TRANSLATION     In a joyful mood of love of God he sometimes climbed upon the
shoulder of someone offering obeisances, and sometimes he struck otherswith his flute or mildly slapped them.
                                   TEXT 165
                    ye nayana dekhite asru haya mane yara
                     sei netre avicchinna vahe asru-dhara
                                 TRANSLATION     When someone saw the eyes of Minaketana Ramadasa, tears would
automatically flow from his own eyes, for a constant shower of tearsflowed from the eyes of Minaketana Ramadasa.
                                   TEXT 166
                     kabhu kona ange dekhi pulaka-kadamba
                     eka ange jadya tanra, ara ange kampa
                                 TRANSLATION     Sometimes there were eruptions of ecstasy like kadamba flowers on
some parts of his body, and sometimes one limb would be stunned whileanother would be trembling.
                                   TEXT 167
                     nityananda bali' yabe karena hunkara
                    taha dekhi' lokera haya maha-camatkara                                 TRANSLATION
     Whenever he shouted aloud the name Nityananda, the people around
him were filled with great wonder and astonishment.
                                   TEXT 168
                     gunarnava misra name eka vipra arya
                    sri-murti-nikate tenho kare seva-karya
                                 TRANSLATION     One respectable brahmana named Sri Gunarnava Misra was serving the
Deity.
                                   TEXT 169                     angane asiya tenho na kaila sambhasa
                    taha dekhi' kruddha hana bale ramadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     When Minaketana was seated in the yard, this brahmana did not offer
him respect. Seeing this, Sri Ramadasa became angry and spoke.
                                   TEXT 170
                      `ei ta' dvitiya suta romaharasana
                  baiade va dekhi' ye na kaiia pratyudgama'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Here I find the second Romaharsana-suta, who did not stand to show
honor when he saw Lord Balarama."
                                   TEXT 171
                     eta bali' nace gaya, karaye san tosa
                   krsna-karya kare vi,ora--na karila rosa
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, he danced and sang to his heart's content, but
the brahmana did not become angry, for he was then serving Lord Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Minaketana Ramadasa was a great devotee of Lord Nityananda. When he
entered the house of Krsnadasa Kaviraja, Gunarnava Misra, the priest whowas worshiping the Deity installed in the house, did not receive himvery well. A similar event occurred when Romaharsana-suta was speakingto the great assembly of sages at Naimisaranya. Lord Baladeva entered
that great assembly, but since Romaharsanasuta was on the vyasasana, hedid not get down to offer respect to Lord Baladeva. The behavior ofGunarnava Misra indicated that he had no great respect for LordNityananda, and this idea was not at ali palatable to MinaketanaRamadasa. For this reason the mentality of Minaketana Ramadasa is neverdeprecated by devotees.
                                   TEXT 172                     utsavante gela tinho kariya prasada
                   mora bhrata-sane tanra kichu haila vada
                                 TRANSLATION     At the end of the festival Minaketana Ramadasa went away, offering
his blessings to everyone. At that time he had some controversy with mybrother.
                                   TEXT 173
                   caitanya-prabhute tanra sudrdha visvasa
                    nityananda-prati tanra vis vasa-abhasa
                                 TRANSLATION     My brother had firm faith in Lord Caitanya but only a dim glimmer
of faith in Lord Nityananda.
                                   TEXT 174
                   iha jani' ramadasera duhkha ha-ila mane
                    tabe ta' bhratare ami karinu bhartsane
                                 TRANSLATION     Knowing this, Sri Ramadasa felt unhappy in his mind. I then rebuked
my brother.
                                   TEXT 175
                      dui bhai eka-tanu--samana-prakasa
                  nityananda na mana, tomara habe sarva-nasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "These two brothers," I told him, "are like one body; They are
identical manifestations. If you do not believe in Lord Nityananda, youwill fall down.                                   TEXT 176
                     ekete visvasa, anye na kara sammana
                     "ardha-kukkuti-nyaya" tomara pramana
                                 TRANSLATION     "If you have faith in one but disrespect the other, your logic is
like the logic of accepting half a hen.
                                   TEXT 177
                    kimva, donha na manina hao ta' pasanda
                    eke mani' are na mani,--ei-mata bhanda
                                 TRANSLATION     It would be better to be an atheist by slighting both brothers than
a hypocrite by believing in one and slighting the other."
                                   TEXT 178
                  kruddha haiya vamsi bhangi' cale ramadasa
                   tat-kale amara bhratara haila sarva-nasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Ramadasa broke his flute in anger and went away, and at
that time my brother fell down.
                                   TEXT 179
                     ei ta' kahila tanra se vaka-prabhava
                      ara eka kahi tanra dayara svabhava
                                 TRANSLATION     I have thus described the power of the servants of Lord Nityananda.
Now I shall describe another characteristic of His mercy.
                                   TEXT 180
                     bhaike bhartsinu muni, lana ei guna
                     sei ratre prabhu more dila darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     That night Lord Nityananda appeared to me in a dream because of my
good quality in chastising my brother.                                   TEXT 181
                   naihaji-nikate `jnamatapura' name grama
                   tanha svapne dekha dila nityananda-rama
                                 TRANSLATION     In the village of Jhamatapura, which is near Naihati, Lord
Nityananda appeared to me in a dream.
                                   PURPORT     There is now a railway line to Jhamatapura. If one wants to go
there, he can take a train on the Katwa railway line and go directly tothe station known as Salara. From that station one can go directly toJhamatapura.
                                   TEXT 182                       dandavat haiya ami padinu payete
                    nija-pada-padma prabhu dila mora mathe
                                 TRANSLATION     I fell at His feet, offering my obeisances, and He then placed His
own lotus feet upon my head.
                                   TEXT 183
                   `utha', `utha' bali' more bale bara bara
                   uthi' tanra rupa dekhi' hainu camatkara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Arise! Get up!" He told me again and again. Upon rising, I
wasgreatly astonished to see His beauty.
                                   TEXT 184
                     syama-cikkana kanti, prakanda sarira
                   saksat kandarpa, yaiche maha-malla-vira
                                 TRANSLATION     He had a glossy blackish complexion, and His tall, strong, heroic
stature made Him seem like Cupid himself.
                                   TEXT 185
                     su valita hasta, pada, kamala-nayana                  patta- vastra sire, patta-vastra paridhana
                                 TRANSLATION     He had beautifully formed hands, arms and legs, and eyes like lotus
flowers. He wore a silk cloth, with a silk turban on His head.
                                   TEXT 186
                   suvarna-kundala karne, svarnangada- vala
                    payete nupura baje, kanthe puspa-mala
                                 TRANSLATION     He wore golden earrings on His ears, and golden armlets and
bangles. He wore tinkling anklets on His feet and a garland of flowersaround His neck.
                                   TEXT 187
                     candana-lepita-anga, tilaka suthama
                    matta-gaja jini' mada-manthara payana
                                 TRANSLATION     His body was anointed with sandalwood pulp, and He was nicely
decorated with tilaka. His movements surpassed those of a maddenedelephant.
                                   TEXT 188
                   ko ti-candra jini' mukha ujjvala-varana
                   dadimba-biia-sama danta tambula-carvana
                                 TRANSLATION     His face was more beautiful than millions upon millions of moons,
and His teeth were like pomegranate seeds because of His chewing betel.
                                   TEXT 189
                      preme matta anga dahine-vame dole
                  `krsna' `krsna' baliya gambhira bola baie
                                 TRANSLATION     His body moved to and fro, right and left, for He was absorbed in
ecstasy. He chanted "Krsna, Krsna" in a deep voice.                                   TEXT 190
                   ranga-yasti haste dole yena matta simha
                     cari-pase vedi ache caranete bhrnga
                                 TRANSLATION     His red stick moving in His hand, He seemed like a maddened lion.
All around the four sides of His feet were bumblebees.
                                   TEXT 191
                     parisada-gane dekhi' saba gopa-vese
                   `krsna' `krsna' kahe sabe saprema avese
                                 TRANSLATION     His devotees, dressed like cowherd boys, surrounded His feet like
so many bees and also chanted "Krsna, Krsna," absorbed in ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 192
                   sing\ vamsi bajnya keha, keha nace gaya
                    se vaka yogaya tambula, camara dhulaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Some of them played horns and flutes, and others danced and sang.
Some of them offered betel nuts, and others waved camara fans about Him.
                                   TEXT 193
                    nityananda-svarupera dekhiya vaibhava
                     kiba rupa, guna, lila--alaukika saba
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I saw such opulence in Lord Nityananda Svarupa. His wonderful
form, qualities and pastimes are all transcendental.
                                   TEXT 194
                     anande vih vala ami, kichu nahijani
                     tabe hasi' prabhu more kahilena vani
                                 TRANSLATION     I was overwhelmed with transcendental ecstasy, not knowing anything
else. Then Lord Nityananda smiled and spoke to me as follows.                                   TEXT 195
                      are are krsnadasa, na karaha bhaya
                   vrndavane yaha,--tanha sarva labhya haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "O my dear Krsnadasa, do not be afraid. Go to Vrndavana, for there
you will attain all things."
                                   TEXT 196
                     eta bali' prerila more hatasani diya
                    antardhana kaila prabhu nija-gana lana
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, He directed me toward Vrndavana by waving His
hand. Then He disappeared with His associates.
                                   TEXT 197
                     murcchita ha-iya muni padinu bhumite
                 svapna-bhanga haila, dekhi, hanache prabhate
                                 TRANSLATION     I fainted and fell to the ground, my dream broke, and when I
regained consciousness I saw that morning had come.
                                   TEXT 198
                     ki dekhinu ki suninu, kariye vicara
                     prabhu-ajna haila vrndavana yaibara
                                 TRANSLATION     I thought about what I had seen and heard and concluded that the
Lord had ordered me to proceed to Vrndavana at once.
                                   TEXT 199
                      sei ksane vrndavane karinu gamana
                     prabhura krpate sukhe ainu vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     That very second I started for Vrndavana, and by His mercy I
reached there in great happiness.                                   TEXT 200
                    jaya jaya nityananda, nityananda-rama                     yanhara krpate painu vrndavana-dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     All glory, all glory to Lord Nityananda Balarama, by whose mercy I
have attained shelter in the transcendental abode of Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 201
                     jaya jaya nityananda, jaya krpa-maya
                     yanha haite painu rupa-sanatanasraya
                                 TRANSLATION     All glory, all glory to the merciful Lord Nityananda, by whose
mercy I have attained shelter at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and SriSanatana.
                                   TEXT 202
                    yanha haite painu raghunatha-mahasaya
                     yanha haite painu sri-svarupa-asraya
                                 TRANSLATION     By His mercy I have attained the shelter of the great personality
Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, and by His mercy I have found the refuge ofSri Svarupa Damodara.
                                   PURPORT     Anyone desiring to become expert in the service of Sri Sri Rad ha
and Krsna should always aspire to be under the guidance of SvarupaDamodara Gosvami, Rupa Gosvami, Sanatana Gosvami and Raghunatha dasaGosvami. To come under the protection of the Gosvamis, one must get themercy and grace of N ityananda Prabhu. The author has tried to explainthis fact in these two verses.
                                   TEXT 203                   sanatana-krpaya painu bhaktira siddhanta
                  sri-r\pa-krpaya painu bhakti-rasa-pran ta
                                 TRANSLATION     By the mercy of Sanatana Gosvami I have learned the final
conclusions of devotional service, and by the grace of Sri Rupa GosvamiI have tasted the highest nectar of devotional service.                                   PURPORT
     Sri Sanatana Gosvami Prabhu, the teacher of the science of
devotional service, wrote several books, of which the Brhad-bhagavatamrta is very famous; anyone who wants to know about the subjectmatter of devotees, devotional service and Krsna must read this book.Sanatana Gosvami also wrote a speciai commentary on the Tenth Canto ofSrimad-Bhagavatam known as the Dasama-tippani which is so excellent thatby reading it one can understand very deeply the pastimes of Krsna inHis exchanges of loving activities. Another famous book by SanatanaGosvami is the hari bhakti-vilasa, which states the rules andregulations for all d ivisions of Vaisnavas, namely, Vaisnavahouseholders, Vaisnava brahmacaris, Vaisnava vana- prasthas and Vaisnavasannyasis. This book was especially written, however, for Vaisnavahouseholders. Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami has described SanatanaGosvami in h is p raye r Vilapa-kusumanjali, ve rse six, whe re he h asex p ressed h is obligation to Sanatana Gosvami in the following words:     vairagya-yug-bhakti-rasam prayatnair     apayayan mam anabhiosum andham     krpambudhir yah para-duhkha-duhkhi     sanatanas tam parbhum asrayami"I was unwilling to drink the nectar of devotional service possessed ofrenunciation, but Sanatana Gosvami, out of his causeless mercy, made medrink it, even though I was otherwise unable to do so. Therefore he isan ocean of mercy. He is very much compassionate to fallen souls likeme, and thus it is my duty to offer my respectful obeisances unto hislotus feet." Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami also, in the last sectionof Caitanya.caritamrta, specifically mentions the names of Rupa Gosvami,Sanatana Gosvami and Srila Jiva Gosvami and offers his respectfulobeisances unto the lotus feet of these three spiritual masters, as wellas Raghunatha dasa. Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami also accepted SanatanaGosvami as the teacher of the science of devotional service. Srila RupaGosvami is described as the bhakti-rasacarya, or one who knows theessence of devotional service. His famous book Bhakti-rasamrta- sindhuis the science of devotional service, and by reading this book one canunderstand the meaning of devotional service. Another of his famousbooks is Ujj vala- nilamani. In this book he elaborately explains theloving affairs and transcendental activities of Lord Krsna andRadharani.
                                   TEXT 204                     jaya jaya nityananda-caranaravin da
                     yanha haite painu sri-radha-govinda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glory, all glory to the lotus feet of Lord Nityananda, by whose
mercy I have attained Sri Radha-Govinda.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Narottama dasa Thakura, who is famous for his poetic
composition known as prarthana, has lamented in one of his prayers,"When wili Lord Nityananda be merciful upon me so that I will forget allmaterial desires?" Srila Narottama dasa Thakura confirms that unless oneis freed from material desires to satisfy the needs of the body andsenses, one cannot understand the transcendental abode of Lord Krsna,Vrndavana. He also confirms that one cannot understand the lovingaffairs of Radha and Krsna without going through the direction of thesix Gosvamis. In another verse Narottama dasa Thakura has stated thatwithout the causeless mercy of Nityananda Prabhu, one cannot enter intothe affairs of Radha and Krsna.
                                   TEXT 205                     jagai madhai haite muni se papistha
                    purisera kita haite muni se laghistha
                                 TRANSLATION     I am more sinful than Jagai and Madhai and even lower than the
worms in the stool.
                                   TEXT 206
                     mora nama sune yei tara punya ksaya
                      mora nama laya yei tara papa haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Anyone who hears my name loses the results of his pious activities.
Anyone who utters my name becomes sinful.
                                   TEXT 207
                      emana nirghrna more keba krpa kare
                      eka nityananda vinu jagat bhitare
                                 TRANSLATION     Who in this world but Nityananda could show His mercy to such an
abominable person as me?
                                   TEXT 208
                     preme matta nityananda krpa-avatara
                     uttama, adhama, kichu na kare vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     Because He is intoxicated by ecstatic love and is an incarnation of
mercy, He does not distinguish between the good and the bad.                                   TEXT 209
                      ye age padaye, tare karaye nistara
                      ataeva nistarila mo-hena duracara
                                 TRANSLATION     He delivers all those who fall down before Him. Therefore He has
delivered such a sinful and fallen person as me.
                                   TEXT 210
                      mo-papisthe anilena sri-vrndavana
                     mo-hena adhame dija sri-rupa-carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Although I am sinful and I am the most fallen, He has conferred
upon me the lotus feet of Sri Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 211
                   sri-madana-gopala-sri-go vinda-darasana
                      kahibara yogya nahe e-saba kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     I am not fit to speak all these confidential words about my
visiting Lord Madanagopala and Lord Govinda.
                                   TEXT 212
                     vrndavana-purandara sri-madana-gopda
                     rasa-vilasi saksat vrajendra-kumara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Madanagopala, the chief Deity of Vrndavana, is the enjoyer of
the rasa dance and is directly the son of the King of Vraja.
                                   TEXT 213
                     sri-radha-lalita-sange rasa- vilasa
                    manmatha-manmatha-rupe yanhara prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     He enjoys the rasa dance with Srimati Radharani, Sri Lalita and
others. He manifests Himself as the Cupid of Cupids.
                                   TEXT 214
                           tasam avirabhuc chaurih
                            smayamana-mukhambujah                           pitainbara-dharah sragvi                          saksan manmatha-manmathah
                                 TRANSLATION     "Wearing yellow garments and decorated with a flower garland, Lord
Krsna, appearing among the gopis with His smiling lotus face, lookeddirectly like the charmer of the heart of Cupid."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.32.2).                                   TEXT 215                    sva-madhurye lokera mana kare akaisana
                     dui pase radha lalita karena se vana
                                 TRANSLATION     With Radha and Lalita serving Him on His two sides, He attracts the
hearts of all by His own sweetness.
                                   TEXT 216
                      nityananda-daya more tanre dekhaNa
                  sri-radha-madana-mohane prabhu kari' dila
                                 TRANSLATION     The mercy of Lord Nityananda showed me Sri Madanamohana and gave me
Sri Madanamohana as my Lord and master.
                                   TEXT 217
                     mo-adhame dila sri-govinda darasana
                     kahibara katha nahe akathya-kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     He granted to one as low as me the sight of Lord Govinda. Words
cannot describe this, nor is it fitto be disclosed.                                 TEXT 218-219
                     vrndavane yoga-pithe kalpa-taru-vane
                     ratna-mandapa, tahe ratna-simhasane
                  sri-go vinda vasiyachena vrajendra-nandana
                    madhurya prakasi' karen a jagat mohana
                                 TRANSLATION     On an altar made of gems in the principal temple of Vrndavana,
amidst a forest of desire trees, Lord Govinda, the son of the King ofVraja, sits upon a throne of gems and manifests His full glory andsweetness, thus enchanting the entire world.
                                   TEXT 220
                  vama-pais ve sri-radhika sakhi-gana-sange
                     rasadika-Iila prabhu kare kata range
                                 TRANSLATION     By His left side is Srimati Radharani and Her personal friends.
With them Lord Govinda enjoys the rasa-lila and many other pastimes.
                                   TEXT 221
                    yanra dhyana nija-loke kare padmasana
                      astadasaksara-man tre kare upasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Brahma, sitting on his lotus seat in his own abode, always
meditates on Him and worships Him with the mantra consisting of eighteensyllables.
                                   PURPORT     In his own planet, Lord Brahma, with the inhabitants of that
planet, worships the form of Lord Govinda, Krsna, by the mantra ofeighteen syllables, klim krsnaya govmdaya gopiiana-vallabhaya svaha.Those who are initiated by a bona fide spiritual master and who chantthe Gayatri mantra three times a day know this astdasaksara, eighteen-syllable mantra. The inhabitants of Brahmaloka and the planets belowBrahmaloka worship Lord Govinda by meditating with this mantra. There isno difference between meditating and chanting, but in the present agemeditation is not possible on this planet. Therefore loud chanting of amantra like the maha--mantra, Hare Krsna, with soft chanting of theastadasaksara, the mantra of eighteen syllables, is recommended.     Lord Brahma lives in the highest pianetary system, known asBrahmaloka or Satyaloka. In every planet there is a predominating deity.As the predominating deity in Satyaloka is Lord Brahma, so in theheavenly planets Indra is the predominating deity, and on the sun, the
sun-god, Vivasvan, is the predominating deity. Theinhabitants and predominating deities of every planet are allrecommended to worship Govinda either by meditation or by chanting.
                                   TEXT 222                    caudda-bhuvane yanra sabe kare dhyana
                    vaikun thaoi-pure yanra lila-guna gana
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone in the fourteen worlds meditates upon Him, and all the
denizens of Vaikuntha sing of His qualities and pastimes.
                                   TEXT 223
                     yanra madhurite kare laksmi akarsana
                   rupa-gosani kariyachena se-rupa varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     The goddess of fortune is attracted by His sweetness, which Srila
Rupa Gosvami has described in this way:
                                   PURPORT     Srila Rupa Gosvami, in his Laghu-bhagavatamrta, has quoted from the
Padma purana, where it is stated that Laksmidevi, the goddess offortune, after seeing the attractive features of Lord Krsna, wasattracted to Him, and to get the favor of Lord Krsna she engaged herselfin meditation. When asked by Krsna why she engaged in meditation withausterity, Laksmidevi answered, "I want to be one of Your associateslike the gopis in Vrndavana." Hearing this, Lord Sri Krsna replied thatit was quite impossible. Laksmidevi then said that she wanted to remainjust like a golden line on the chest of the Lord. The Lord granted therequest, and since then Laksmi has always been situated on the chest ofLord Krsna as a golden line. The austerity and meditation of Laksmideviare also mentioned in the Srimad- Bhagavatam (10.16.36), where theNagapatnis, the wives of the serpent Kaliya, in the course of theirprayers to Krsna, said that the goddess of fortune, Laksmi, also wantedHis association as agopiand desired the dust of His lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 224             smeram bhangi-traya-paricitam saci-vistirna-drstim-
               vamsi-nyastadhara-kisalayam ujj valam candrakena               govindakhyam hari-tanum itah kesi-tirthopakanthe           ma preksisthas tava yadi sakhe bandhu-sange 'sti rangah
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, if you are indeed attached to your worldly
friends, do not look at the smiling face of Lord Govinda as He stands onthe bank of the Yamuna at Kesighata. Casting sidelong glances, He placesHis flute to His lips, which seem like newly blossomed twigs. Histranscendental body, bending in three places, appears very bright in themoonlight."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse quoted from Bhakti rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.239) in
connection with practical devotional service. Generally people in theirconditioned life engage in thepleasure of society, friendship and love. This so-called love is lust,not love. But people are satisfied with such a false understanding oflove. Vidyapati, a great and learned poet of Mithila, has said that thepleasure derived from friendship, society and family life in thematerial world is like a drop of water, but our hearts desire pleasurelike an ocean. Thus the heart is compared to a desert of materialexistence that requires the water of an ocean of pleasure to satisfy itsdryness. If there is a drop of water in the desert, one may indeed saythat it is water, but such a minute quantity of water has no value.Similarly, in this material world no one is satisfied in the dealings ofsociety, friendship and love. Therefore if one wants to derive realpleasure within his heart, he must seek the lotus feet of Govinda. Inthis verse Rupa Gosvami indicates that if one wants to be satisfied inthe pleasure of society, friendship and love, he need not seek shelterat the lotus feet of Govinda, for if one takes shelter under His lotusfeet he will forget that minute quantity of socalled pleasure. One whois not satisfied with that so-called pleasure may seek the lotus feet ofGovinda, who stands on the shore of the Yamuna at Kesitirtha, orKesighata, in Vrndavana and attracts all the gopis to His transcendentalloving service.
                                   TEXT 225                     saksat vrajendra-suta ithe nahi ana
                    yeb\ ajne kare tanre pratim-hena jnna
                                 TRANSLATION     Withouta doubt He is directly the son of the King of Vraja. Only a
fool considers Him a statue.
                                   TEXT 226
                       sei aparadhe tara nahika nistara
                      gnora narakete pade, ki baliba ara
                                 TRANSLATION     For that offense, he cannot be liberated. Rather, he will fall into
a terrible hellish condition. What more should I say?                                   PURPORT
     I n the Bhakti-sandarbha Jiva Gosvami has stated that those who are
actu ally very serious about devotional service do not differentiatebetween the form of the Lord made of clay, metal, stone or wood and theoriginal form of the Lord. In the material world a person and hisphotograph, picture or statue are different. But the statue of LordKrsna and Krsna Himself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are notdifferent, because the Lord is absolute. What we call stone, wood andmetal are energies of the Supreme Lord, and energies are never separatefrom the energetic. As we have several times explained, no one canseparate the sunshine energy from the energetic sun. Therefore materialenergy may appear separate from the Lord, but transcendentally it isnondifferent from the Lord.     The Lord can appear anywhere and everywhere because His diverseenergies are distributed everywhere like sunshine. We should thereforeunderstand whatever we see to be the energy of the Supreme Lord andshould not differentiate between the Lord and His arca form made fromclay, metal, wood or paint. Even if one has not developed thisconsciousness, one should accept it theoretically from the instructionsof the spiritual master and should worship the arca-murti, or form ofthe Lord in the temple, as nondifferent from the Lord.     The padma purana specifically mentions that anyone who thinks theform of the Lord in the temple to be made of wood, stone or metal iscertainly in a heliish condition. Impersonalists are against the worshipof the Lord's form in the temple, and there is even a group of peoplewho pass as Hindus but condemn such worship. Their so-called acceptanceof the Vedas has no meaning, for all the acaryas, even the impersonalistSankaracarya, have recommended the worship of the transcendental form ofthe Lord. Impersonalists like Sankaracarya recommend the worship of fiveforms, known as pancopasana, which include Lord Visnu. Vaisnavas,however, worship the forms of Lord Visnu in His varied manifestations,such as RadhaKrsna, Laksmi-Narayana, Sita-Rama and Ru kmini-Krsna.Mayavadis admit that worship of the Lord's form is required in thebeginning, but they think that in the end everything is impersonal.Therefore, since they are ultimately against worship of the Lord's form,Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has described them as offenders.     Srimad-Bhagavatam has condemned those who thin k the body to be theself as bhauma ijya-dhih. Bhauma means earth, and jjya-dhih meansworshiper. There are two kinds of bhauma ijya-dhih: those who worshipthe land of their birth, such as nationalists, who make many sacrificesfor the motherland, and those who condemnthe worship of the form of the Lord. One should not worship the planetearth or land of his birth, nor should one condemn the form of the Lord,which is manifested in metal or wood for our facility. Material thingsare also the energy of the Supreme Lord.
                                   TEXT 227                  hena ye go vinda prabhu, painu yanha haite
                     tanhara carana-krpa ke pare varnite
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore who can describe the mercy of the lotus feet of Him [
Lord Nityananda] by whom I have attained the shelter of this LordGovinda?
                                   TEXT 228
                    vrndavane vaise yata vaisnava-mandala
                     krsna-nama-parayana, parama-mangala
                                 TRANSLATION     All the groups of Vaisnavas who live in Vrndavana are absorbed in
chanting the all-auspicious name of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 229
                  yanra prana-dhana--nityananda-sri-caitanya
                   radha-klsna-bhakti vine nani javne anya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityananda are their life and soul. They do
not know anything but devotional service to Sri Sri Radha-Krsna.
                                   TEXT 230
                  se vaisnavera pada-renu, tara pada-cha va
                     adhamere dija prabhu-nityananda-daya
                                 TRANSLATION     The dust and shade of the lotus feet of the Vaisnavas have been
granted to this fallen soul by the mercy of Lord Nityananda.
                                   TEXT 231
                  `tanha sarva labhya haya'--prabhura vacana
                      sei sutra--ei tara kaila vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda said, "In Vrndavana all things are possible." Here
I have explained His brief statement in detail.
                                   TEXT 232
                       se saba painu ami vrndavane aya
                      sei saba labhya ei prabhura krpaya                                 TRANSLATION
     I have attained all this by coming to Vrndavana, and this was made
possible by the mercy of Lord Nityananda.
                                   PURPORT     All the inhabitants of Vrndavana are Vaisnavas. They are all-
auspicious because somehow or other they always chant the holy name ofKrsna. Even though some of them do not strictly follow the rules andregulations of devotional service, on the whole they are devotees ofKrsna and chant His name directly or indirectly. Purposely or withoutpurpose, even when they pass on the street they are fortunate enough toexchange greetings by saying the name of Radha or Krsna. Thus directlyor indirectly they are auspicious.     The present city of Vrndavana has been established by the GaudiyaVaisnavas since the six Gosvamis went there and directed theconstruction of their different temples. Of all the temples inVrndavana, ninety percent belong to the Gaudiya Vaisnava sect, thefollowers of the teachings of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda,and seven temples are very famous. The inhabitants of Vrndavana do notknow anything but the worship of Radha and Krsna. In recent years someunscrupulous so-called priests known as caste gosvamis have introducedthe worship of demigods privately, but no genuine and rigid Vaisnavasparticipate in this. Those who are serious about the Vaisnava method ofdevotional activities do not take part in such worship of demigods.     The Gaudiya Vaisnavas never differentiate between Radha-Krsna andLord Caitanya. They say that since Lord Caitanya is the combined form ofRadha-Krsna, He is not different from Radha and Krsna. But some misledpeople try to prove that they are greatly elevated by saying that theylike to chant the hoiy name of Lord Gaura instead of the names Radha andKrsna. Thus they purposely differentiate between Lord Caitanya andRadha-Krsna. According to them, the system of naoiya-nagari, which theyhave recently invented in their fertile brains, is the worship of Gaura,Lord Caitanya, but they do not like to worship Radha and Krsna. They putforward the argument that since Lord Caitanya Himseif appeared as Radhaand Krsna combined, there is no necessity of worshiping Radha and Krsna.Such differentiation by so-called devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhuis considered disruptive by pure devotees. Anyone who differentiatesbetween Radha--Krsna and Gauranga is to be considered a plaything in thehands of maya.     There are others who are against the worship of CaitanyaMahaprabhu, thinking Him mundane. But any sect that differentiatesbetween Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Radha-Krsna, either by worshipingRadha-Krsna as distinct from Lord Caitanya or by worshiping LordCaitanya but not Radha-Krsna, is in the group of prakrta- sahajiyas.     Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, the author of Caitanya-caritainrta, pred icts in verses 225 and 226 that in the future thosewho manufacture imaginary methods of worship wiil gradually give up theworship of Radha-Krsna, and although they will call themselves devoteesof Lord Caitanya, they will aiso give up the worship of CaitanyaMahaprabhu and fall down into material activities. For the realworshipers of Lord Caitanya, the ultimate goal of life is to worship SriSri Radha and Krsna.                                   TEXT 233
                     apanara katha likhi nirlajja ha-iya
                    nityananda-gunelekhaya unmatta kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     I have described my own story without reservations. The attributes
of Lord Nityananda, making me like a madman, force me to write thesethings.
                                   TEXT 234
                    nityananda-prabhura guna-mahima apara
                    `sahasra-vadane' sesa nahi paya yanra
                                 TRANSLATION     The glories of Lord Nityananda's transcendental attributes are
unfathomable. Even Lord Sesa with His thousands of mouths cannot findtheir limit.
                                   TEXT 235
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Adi-lila, Fifth Chapter, describing the glories of Lord NityanandaBalarama.
                                 Chapter Six
     The truth of Advaita Acarya has been described in two different
verses. It is said that material nature has two features, namely thematerial cause and the efficient cause. The efficient causal activitiesare caused by Maha-Visnu, and the materiai causal activities are causedby another form of Maha-Visnu, known as Advaita. That Advaita, thesuperintendent of the cosmic manifestation, has descended in the form ofAdvaita to associate with Lord Caitanya. When He is addressed as theservitor of Lord Caitanya, His glories are magnified because unless oneis invigorated by this mentality of servitorship one cannot understandthe mellows derived from devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Krsna.                                    TEXT 1
               vande tam srimad-advaitacaryam adbhuta-cesjitam
                yasya prasadad ajno 'pi tat-svarupam nirupayet
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances to Sri Advaita Acarya, whose
activities are all wonderful. By His mercy, even a foolish person candescribe His characteristics.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. All glories to Lord
Nityananda. All glories to Advaita Acarya. And all glories to all thedevotees of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 3
                   panca sloke kahija sri-nityananda-tattva
                   sloka-dvaye kahi advaitacaryera mahattva
                                 TRANSLATION     In five verses I have described the principle of Lord Nityananda.
Then in the following two verses I describe the glories of Sri AdvaitaAcarya.
                                    TEXT 4
                           maha-visnur jagat-karta
                            mayaya yah srjaty adah                             tasyavatara e vayam                             advaitacarya isvarah
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Advaita Acarya is the incarnation of Maha-Visnu, whose main
function is to create the cosmic world through the actions of maya.
                                    TEXT 5
                            advaitam harinadvaitad
                           acaryam bhakti-samsanat                            bhaktavataram isam tam                             advaitacaryam asraye
                                 TRANSLATION     Because He is nondifferent from Hari, the Supreme Lord, He is
called Advaita, and because He propagates the cult of devotion, He iscalled Acarya. He is the Lord and the incarnation of the Lord's devotee.Therefore I take shelter of Him.
                                    TEXT 6
                     advaita-acarya gosani saksat is vara
                      yanhara mahima nahe jivera gocara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Acarya is indeed directly the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Himself. His glory is beyond the conception of ordinary livingbeings.
                                    TEXT 7
                    maha-visnu srsti karena jagad-di karya
                     tanra avatara saksat advaita acarya
                                 TRANSLATION     Maha-Visnu performs all the functions for the creation of the
universes. Sri Advaita Acarya is His direct incarnation.
                                    TEXT 8
                     ye purusa srsti-sthiti karena mayaya
                     ananta brahmanda srsti karena lilaya
                                 TRANSLATION     That purusa creates and maintains with His external energy. He
creates innumerable universes in His pastimes.
                                    TEXT 9
                     icchaya ananta murti karena prakasa
                    eka eka murte karena brahmande pravesa
                                 TRANSLATION     By His will He manifests Himself in unlimited forms, in which He
enters each and every universe.                                   TEXT 10
                 se purusera amsa--advaita, nahi kichu bheda
                     sarira-visesa tanra--nahika viccheda
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Acarya is a plenary part of that purusa and so is not
different from Him. Indeed, Sri Advaita Acarya is not separate but isanother form of that purusa.
                                   TEXT 11
                    sahaya karena tanra ia-iya `pradhana'
                    koti brahmanda karena icchaya nirmana
                                 TRANSLATION     He [Advaita Acarya] helps in the pastimes of the purusa, with whose
material energy and by whose will He creates innumerable universes.
                                   TEXT 12
                  jagat-mangala advaita, mangala-guna-dhama
                  mangala-caritra sada, `mangala' ynra nama
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Acarya is all-auspicious to the world, for He is a
reservoir of allauspicious attributes. His characteristics, activitiesand name are always auspicious.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Advaita Prabhu, who is an incarnation of Maha-Visnu, is an
acarya, or teacher. All His activities and ail the other activities ofVisnu are auspicious. Anyone who can view the all-auspiciousness in thepastimes of Lord Visnu also becomes auspi-     s simultaneously. Therefore, since Lord Visnu is the fountainheadof auspiciousness, anyone who is attracted by the devotional service ofLord Visnu can render the greatest service to human society. Rejectedpersons of the material world who refuse to understand pure devotionalservice as the eternal function of the living entities, and as actualliberation of the living being from conditional life, become bereft ofall devotional service because of their poor fund of knowledge.     In the teachings of Advaita Prabhu there is no question of fruitiveactivities or impersonal liberation. Bewildered by the spell of materiaienergy, however, persons who could not understand that Advaita Prabhu isnondifferent from Visnu wanted to follow Him with their impersonalconceptions. The attempt of Advaita prabhu to punish them is alsoauspicious. Lord Visnu and His activities can bestow all good fortune,directly and indirectly. In other words, being favored by Lord Visnu and
being punished by Lord Visnu are one and the same because all theactivities of Visnu are absolute. According to some, Mangala was anothername of Advaita Prabhu. As the causal incarnation, or Lord Visnu'sincarnation for a particular occasion, He is the supply agent oringredient in material nature. However, He is never to be consideredmaterial. All His activities are spiritual. Anyone who hears about andglorifies Him becomes glorified himself, for such activlties free onefromall kinds of misfortune. One should not invest any materialcontamination or impersonalism in the Visnu form. Everyone should try tounderstand the real identity of Lord Visnu, for by such knowledge onecan attain the highest stage of perfection.
                                   TEXT 13                     koti amsa, koti sakti, koti avatara
                     eta lana srje purusa sakala samsara
                                 TRANSLATION     Maha-Visnu creates the entire material world, with millions of His
parts, energies and incarnations.
                                  TEXT 14-15
                  maya yaiche dui amsa--`nimitta;, `upadana'
                  maya--`nimitta'-hetu, upadana--`pradhana'
                    purusa is vara aiche dvi-murti ha-i ya
                  visva-srsti kare `nimitta' `upadana' lana
                                 TRANSLATION     Just as the external energy consists of two parts--the efficient
cause [nimitta] and the material cause [upadana], maya being theefficient cause and pradhana the material cause--so Lord Visnu, theSupreme Personality of Godhead assumes two forms to create the materialworld with the efficient and material causes.
                                   PURPORT     There are two kinds of research to find the original cause of
creation. One conclusion is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, theail-blissful, eternal, allknowing form, is indirectly the cause of thiscosmic manifestation and directly the cause of the spiritual world,where there are innumerable spiritual planets known as Vaikunthas asweli as His personal abode, known as Goloka Vrndavana. In other words,there are two manifestations--the material cosmos and the spiritualworld. As in the material world there are innumerable planets anduniverses, so in the spiritual world there are also innumerablespiritual planets and universes, including the Vaikunthas and Goloka.The Supreme Lord is the cause of both the material and spiritual worlds.The other conclusion, of course, is that this cosmic manifestation is
caused by an inexplicable unmanifested void. This argument ismeaningless.     The first conclusion is accepted by the Vedanta philosophers, andthe second is supported by the atheistic phiiosophical system of theSankhya smrti, which directiy opposes the Vedantic philosophicalconclusion. Material scientists cannot see any cognizant spiritualsubstance that might be the cause of the creation. Such atheisticSankhya philosophers think that the symptoms of knowledge and livingforce visible in the innumerable living creatures are caused by thethree qualities of the cosmic manifestation. Therefore the Sankhyitesare against the conclusion of Vedanta regarding the originai cause ofcreation.     Factually, the supreme absolute spirit soul is the cause of everykind of manifestation, and He is always complete, both as the energy andas the energetic. The cosmic manifestation is caused by the energy ofthe Supreme Absolute Person, in whom all energies are conserved.Philosophers who are subjectively engaged in the cosmic manifestationcan appreciate only the wonderful energies of matter. Such philosophersaccept the conception of God only as a product of material energy.According to their conclusions, the source of the energy is also aproduct of the energy. Such philosophers wrongly observe that the livingcreatures within the cosmic manifestation are caused by the materialenergy, and they thin k that the supreme absolute conscious being mustsimilarly be a productof the material energy.     Since materialistic philosophers and scientists are too muchengaged with their imperfect senses, naturally they conclude that theliving force is a product of a material combination. But the actual factis just the opposite. Matter is a product of spirit. According toBhagavad-gita, the supreme spirit, the Personaiity of Godhead, is thesource of all energies. When one advances in research work by studying alimited substance within the limits of space and time, one is amazed bythe various wonderful cosmic manifestations, and naturally one goes onhypnotically accepting the path of research work or the inductivemethod. Through the deductive way ofunderstanding, however, one accepts the Supreme Absolute Person, thePersonality of Godhead, as the cause of all causes, who is full withdiverse energies and who is neither impersonal nor void. The impersonalmanifestation of the Supreme Person is another display of His energy.Therefore the conclusion that matter is the original cause of creationis completely different from the reai truth. The material manifestationis caused by the glance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who isinconceivably potent. Material nature is electrified by the supremeauthority, and the conditioned soul, within the limits of time andspace, is trapped by awe of the material manifestation. In other words,the Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually realized in the vision ofa material philosopher and scientist through the manifestations of Hismaterial energy. For one who does not understand the power of theSupreme Personality of Godhead or His diverse energies because of notknowing the relationship between the source of the energies and theenergies themselves, there is always a chance of error, which is knownas vivarta. As long as materialistic scientists and philosophers do notcome to the right conclusion, certainly they will hover above thematerial field, bereft of proper understanding of the Absolute Truth.     The great Vaisnava philosopher Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana has very
nicely explained the materialistic conclusion in his Govinda-bhasya onthe Vedanta-sutra. He writes as follows:     "The Sankhya philosopher Kapila has connected the differenteiementary truths according to his own opinion. Material nature,according to him, consists of the equilibrium of the three materialqualities, goodness, passion and ignorance. Material nature produced thematerial energy, known as mahat, and mahat produced the false ego. Theego produced the five objects of sense perception, which produced theten senses (five for acquiring knowledge and five for working), the mindand the five gross elements. Counting the purusa, or the enjoyer, withthese twenty-four elements, there are twenty-five different truths. Thenonmanifested stage of these twenty-five elementary truths is calledprakrti, or material nature. The qualities of material nature canassociate in three different stages, namely as the cause of happiness,the cause of distress and the cause of illusion. The quality of goodnessis the cause of material happiness, the quality of passion is the causeof material distress, and the quality of ignorance is the cause ofillusion. Our materiai experience lies within the boundaries of thesethree manifestations of happiness, distress and illusion. For example, abeautiful woman is certainly a cause of material happiness for one whopossesses her as a wife, but the same beautiful woman is a cause ofdistress to a man whom she rejects or who is the cause of her anger, andif she leaves a man she becomes the cause of illusion.     "The two kinds of senses are the ten external senses and the oneinternal sense, the mind. Thus there are eleven senses. According toKapila, material nature is eternal and all-powerful. Originally there isno spirit, and matter has no cause. Matter itself is the chief cause ofeverything. It is the all-pervading cause of all causes. The Sankhyaphilosophy regards the total energy (mahat-tattva), the false ego andthe five objects of sense perception as the seven diverse manifestationsof material nature, which has two features, known as the material causeand efficient cause. The purusa, the enjoyer, is without transformation,whereas material nature is always subject to transformation. Butalthough material nature is inert, it is the cause of enjoyment andsalvation for many living creatures. Its activities are beyond theconception of sense perception, but still one may guess at them bysuperior intelligence. Material nature is one, but because of theinteraction of the three qualities, it can produce the total energy andthe wonderful cosmic manifestation. Such transformations divide materialnature into two features, namely the efficient and material causes. Thepurusa, the enjoyer, is inactive and without material qualities,although at the same time He is the master, existing separately in eachand every body as the emblem of knowledge. By understanding the materialcause, one can guess that the purusa, the enjoyer, being withoutactivity, is aloof from all kinds of enjoyment or superintendence. Sankhya philosophy, after describing the nature of prakrti (materialnature) and purusa (the enjoyer), asserts that the creation is only aproduct of their unification or proximity to one another. With suchunification the living symptoms are visible in material nature, but onecan guess that in the person of the enjoyer, purusa, there are powers ofcontrol and enjoyment. When the purusa is illusioned for want ofsufficient knowledge, He feels Himself to be the enjoyer, and when He isin full knowiedge He is liberated. In the Sankhya philosophy the purusa
is described to be always indifferent to the activities of prakrti.     "The Sankhya philosopher accepts three kinds of evidences, nameiydirect perception, hypothesis and traditional authority. When suchevidence is complete, everything is perfect. The process of comparisonis within such perfection. Beyond such evidence there is no proof. Thereis not much controversy regarding direct perceptional evidence orauthorized traditional evidence. The Sankhya system of philosophyidentifies three kinds of procedures--namely,parimanat (transformation),samanvayat (adjustment) and saktitah (performance of energies)--as thecauses of the cosmic manifestation."     Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana, in his commentary on the Vedanta-sutra, has tried to nullify this conclusion because he thinks thatdiscrediting these so-called causes of the cosmic manifestation willnuilify the entire Sankhya philosophy. Materialistic philosophers acceptmatter to be the material and efficient cause of creation; for them,matter is the cause of every type of manifestation. Generally they givethe example of a water pot and clay. Clay is the cause of the water pot,but the clay can be found as both cause and effect. The water pot is theeffect and clay itself is the cause, but clay is visible everywhere. Atree is matter, but a tree produces fruit. Water is matter, but waterflows. In this way, say the Sankhyites, matter is the cause of movementsand production. As such, matter can be considered the material andefficient cause of everything in the cosmic manifestation. SrilaBaladeva Vidyabhusana has therefore enunciated the nature of pradhana asfollows:     "Material nature is inert, and as such it cannot be the cause ofmatter, neither as the material nor as the efficient cause. Seeing thewonderful arrangement and management of the cosmic manifestationgenerally suggests that a living brain is behind this arrangement, forwithout a living brain such an arrangement could not exist. One shouldnot imagine that such an arrangement can exist without consciousdirection. In our practical experience we never see that inert brickscan themselves construct a big building.     "The example of the water pot cannot be accepted because a waterpot has no perception of pleasure and distress. Such perception iswithin.Therefore the covering body, or the water pot, cannot besynchronized with it.     "Sometimes the material scientist suggests that trees grow from theearth automatically, without assistance from a gardener, because that isa tendency of matter. They also consider the intuition of livingcreatures from birth to be material. But such material tendencies asbodily intuition cannot be accepted as independent, for they suggest theexistence of a spirit soul within the body. Actually, the tree or thethe body of a living creature has no tendency or intuition;the tendencyand intuition exist because the soul is present within the body. In thisconnection, the example of a car and driver may be given veryprofitably. The car has a tendency to turn right and left, but onecannot say that the car itself, as matter,turns right and ieft withoutthe direction of a driver. A material car has neither tendencies norintuitions independent of the intentions of the driver within the car.The same principle applies for the automatic growth of trees in theforest. The growth takes place because of the soul's presence within thetree.     "Sometimes foolish people take for granted that because scorpions
are born from heaps of rice, the rice has produced the scorpions. Thereal fact, however, is that the mother scorpion lays eggs within therice, and by the proper fermentation of the rice the eggsgive birth toseveral baby scorpions, which in due course come out. This does not meanthat the rice gives birth to the scorpions. Similarly, sometimes bugsare seen to come from dirty beds. This does not mean, however, that thebeds give birth to the bugs. It is the living soul that comesforth,taking advantage of the dirty condition of the bed. There aredifferent kinds of living creatures. Some of them come from embryos,some from eggs and some from the fermentation of perspiration. Differentliving creatures have different sources of appearance, but one shouldnot conclude that matter produces such living creatures.     "The example cited by materialists that trees automatically comefrom the earth follows the same principle. Taking advantage of a certaincondition, a living entity comes from the earth. According to the Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad, every living being is forced by divinesuperintendence to take a certain type of body according to his pastdeeds. There are many varieties of bodies, and because of a divinearrangement a living entity takes bodies of different shapes.     "When a person thinks, `I am doing this,' the `I am' does not referto the body. It refers to something more than the body, or within thebody. As such, the body as it is has neither tendencies nor intuition;the tendencies and intuition belong to the soul within the body.Material scientists sometimes suggest that the tendencies of male andfemale bodies cause their union and that this is the cause of the birthof the child. But since the purusa, according to Sankhya philosophy, isalways unaffected, where does the tendency to give birth come from?     "Sometimes material scientists give the example that milk turnsinto curd automatically and that distilled water pouring from the cloudsfalls down to earth, produces different kinds of trees, and entersdifferent kinds of flowers and fruits with different flavors and tastes.Therefore, they say, matter produces varieties of material things on itsown. In repiy to this argument, the same proposition of the Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad--that different kinds of living creatures are put intodifferent kinds of bodies by the management of a superior power--isrepeated. Under superior superintendence, various souls, according totheir past activities, are given the chance to take a particular type ofbody, such as that of a tree, animal, bird or beast, and thus theirdifferent tendencies develop under these circumstances. Bhagavad-gitaalso further affirms:     purusah prakrti-stho hi     bhunkte prakrti jan gunan     karanam guna-sango 'sya     sad-asad- yonijanmasu`The living entity in material nature foliows the ways of life, enjoyingthe three modes of nature. This is due to his association with thatmaterial nature. Thus he meets with good and evil among variousspecies.' (Bg. 13.22) The soul is given different types of bodies. Forexample, were souls not given varieties of tree bodies, the differentvarieties of fruits and flowers could not be produced. Each class oftrees produce a particular kind of fruit and flower, it is not thatthere is no distinction between the different classes. An individualtree does not produce flowers of d ifferent colors, nor fruits ofdifferent tastes. There are demarcated classes, as we find them among
humans, animals, birds and other species. There are innumerable livingentities, and their activities, performed in the material worldaccording to the different qualities of the material modes of nature,give them the chance to have different kinds of life. Thus one shouldunderstand that pradhana, matter, cannot act unless impelled by a livingcreature. The materialistic theory that matter independently actscannot, therefore, be accepted. Matter is called prakrti, which refersto female energy. A woman is prakrti, a female. A female cannot producea child without the association of a purusa, a man. The purusa causesthe birth of a child because the man injects the soul, which issheltered in the semina, into the womb of the woman. The woman, as thematerial cause, suppiies the body of the soul, and as the efficientcause she gives birth to the child. But although the woman appears to bethe materiai and efficient cause of the birth of a chiid, originally thepurusa, the male, is the cause of the child. Similarly,this materialworld gives rise to varieties of manifestations due to the entrance ofGarbhodakasayi Visnu within the universe. He is present not only withinthe universe but within the bodies of all living creatures, as well aswithin the atom. We understand from the Branma- samhita that theSupersoul is present within the universe, within the atom and within theheart of every living creature. Therefore the theory that matter is thecause of the entire cosmic manifestation cannot be accepted by any manwith sufficient knowledge of matter and spirit.     "Materialists sometimes give the argument that as straw eaten by acow produces milk automatically, so material nature, under differentcircumstances, producesvarieties of manifestations. Thus originally matter is the cause. Inrefuting this argument, we may say that an animal of the same species asthe cow--namely,the bull--also eats straw like the cow but does notproduce milk. Under the circumstances,it cannot be said that straw inconnection with a particular species produces milk. The conclusionshould be that there is superior management, as confirmed in Bhaga vad-gita (9.10), wh e re th e Lo rd say s, mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram: `This material nature is working under My direction, O son ofKunti, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings.' The SupremeLord says, mayadhyaksena (`under My su perintendence'). When He desiresthat the cow produce milk by eating straw, there is milk, and when Hedoes not so desire it, the mixture of such straw cannot produce milk. Ifthe way of material nature had been that straw produced milk, a stack ofstraw could also produce milk. But that is not possible. And the samestraw given to a human female aiso cannot produce milk. That is themeaning of Bhagavad-gita's statement that only under superior ordersdoes anything take place. Matter itself has no power to produceindependently. The conclusion, therefore, is that matter, which has noself-knowledge, cannot be the cause of the material creation. Theultimate creator is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.     "If matter were accepted as the original cause of creation, all theauthorized scriptures in the world would be useless, for in everyscripture, especially the Vedic scriptures like the Manu-smrti, theSupreme Personality of Godhead is said to be the ultimate creator. TheManu-smrti is considered the highest Vedic direction to humanity. Manuis the giver of law to mankind, and in the Manu-smrti it is clearlystated that before the creation the entire universal space was darkness,without information and without variety, and was in a state of complete
suspension, like a dream. Everything was darkness. The SupremePersonality of Godhead then entered the universal space, and although Heis invisible, He created the visible cosmic manifestation. In thematerial world the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not manifested byHis personal presence, but the presence of the cosmic manifestation indifferent varieties is the proof that everything has been created underHis direction. He entered the universe with all creative potencies, andthus He removed the darkness of the unlimited space.     "The form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is described to betranscendental, very subtle, eternal, all-pervading, inconceivable andtherefore non manifested to the material senses of a conditioned livingcreature. He desired to expand Himself into many living entities, andwith such a desire He first created a vast expanse of water within theuniversai space and then impregnated that water with living entities. Bythat process of impregnation a massive body appeared, blazing like athousand suns, and in that body was the first creative principle,Brahma. The great Parasara Rsi has also confirmed this in the Visnupurana. He says that the cosmic manifestation visible to us is producedfrom Lord Visnu and sustained under His protection. He is the principalmaintainer and destroyer of the universal form.     "This cosmic manifestation is one of the diverse energies of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. As aspider secretes saliva and weaves aweb by its own movements but at the end winds the web within its body,so Lord Visnu produces this cosmic manifestation from His transcendentalbody and at the end winds it up within Himself. All the great sages ofthe Vedic understanding have accepted that the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is the original creator.     "It is sometimes claimed that the impersonal speculations of greatphilosophers are meant for the advancementof knowledge without religiousritualistic principles. But the reiigious rituaiistic principles areactually meant for the advancement of spiritual knowledge. Byperformance of religious rituais one ultimately reaches the supreme goalof knowledge by understanding that Vasudeva, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, is the cause of everything. It is clearly stated in Bhagavad-gita that even those who are advocates of knowledge only, without anyreligious ritualistic processes, advance in knowledge after many, manylifetimes of speculation and thus come to the conciusion that Vasudevais the supreme cause of everything that be. As a result of thisachievement of the goal of life, such an advanced learned scholar orphilosopher surrenders unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Religious ritualistic performances are actually meant to cleanse thecontaminated mind in the material world, and the special feature of thisage of Kali is that one can easily execute the process of cleansing themind of contamination by chanting the holy names of God--Hare Krsna,Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare.     "A Vedic injunction states, sarve veda yat padamananti: all Vedicknowledge is searching after the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Similarly, another Vedic inj u nction states, narayana-para vedah: theVed as are mean t for u n d e rsta nd i ng Narayana, the Supreme Lord.Similariy, Bhagavad-gita also confirms, vedais ca sarvair aham evavedyah.- by all the Vedas, Krsna is to be known. Therefore, the mainpurpose of understanding the Vedas, performing Vedic sacrifices andspecuiating on the Vedanta-sutras is to understand Krsna. Accepting theim personalist view of voidness or the nonexistence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead negates all study of the Vedas. Impersonalspeculation aims at disproving the conclusion of the Vedas. Thereforeany impersonal speculative presentation should be understood to beagainst the principles of the Vedas or standard scriptures. Since thespeculation of the impersonalists does not follow the principles of theVedas, their conclusion must be considered to be against the Vedicprinciples. Anything not supported by the Vedic principles must beconsidered imaginary and lacking in standard proof. Therefore noimpersonalist explanation of any Vedic literature can be accepted.     "If one tries to nullify the conclusions of the Vedas byacceptingan unauthorized scripture or so-called scripture, it will bevery hard for him to come to the right conclusion about the AbsoluteTruth. The system for adjusting two contradictory scriptures is to referto the Vedas, for references from the Vedas are accepted as finaljudgments. When we refer to a particular scripture, it must beauthorized, and for this authority it must strictly follow the Vedicinjunctions. If someone presents an alternative doctrine he himself hasmanufactured, that doctrine will prove itself useless, for any doctrinethat tries to prove that Vedic evidence is meaningless immediatelyproves itself meaningless. The followers of the Vedas unanimously acceptthe authority of Manu and Parasara in the disciplic succession. Theirstate-ments, however, do not support the atheistic Kapila because the Kapilamentioned in the Vedas is a different Kapila, the son of Kardama andDevahuti. The atheist Kapila is a descendant of the dynasty of Agni andis one of the conditioned souls. But the Kapila who is the son ofKardama Muni is accepted as an incarnation of Vasudeva. The Padma Puranagives evidence that the Supreme Personality of Godhead Vasudeva takesbirth in the incarnation of Kapila and, by His expansion of theisticSankhya philosophy, teaches all the demigods and a brahmana of the nameAsuri. In the doctrine of the atheist Kapila there are many statementsdirectly against the Vedic principles. The atheist Kapila does notaccept the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He saysthat the living entityis himself the Supreme Lord and that no one is greater than him. Hisconceptions of so-called conditional and liberated life arematerialistic, and he refuses to accept the importance of immortal time.All such statements are against the principles of the Vedanta-sutras."
                                   TEXT 16                    apane purusa--visvera `nimitta'-karana
                     advaita-rupe `upadana' hana narayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Visnu Himself is the efficient [nimitta] cause of the material
world, and Narayana in the form of Sri Advaita is the material cause[upadana].
                                   TEXT 17
                    `nimittamse' kare tenho mayate iksana                  `upadana' advaita karena brahmanda-srjana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Visnu, in His efficient aspect, glances over the material
energy, and Sri Advaita, as the material cause, creates the materialworld.
                                   TEXT 18
                   yadyapi sankhya mane, `pradhna'--karana
                     jada ha-ite kabh u nahe jagat-srjana
                                 TRANSLATION     Although the Sankhya philosophy accepts that the material
ingredients are the cause, the creation of the world never arises fromdead matter.
                                   TEXT 19
                  nija srsti-sakti prabh u sancare pradhane
                    isvarera saktye tabe haye ta' nirmane
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord infuses the material ingredients with His own creative
potency. Then, by the power of the Lord, creation takes place.
                                   TEXT 20
                      advaita-rupe kare sakti-sancarana
                     ataeva advaita hayena mukhya karana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the form of Advaita He infuses the material ingredients with
creative energy. Therefore, Advaita is the original cause of creation.
                                   TEXT 21
                    advaita-acarya ko ti-brahmandera karta
                    ara eka eka murtye brahmandera bharta
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Acarya is the creator of millions and millions of
universes, and by His expansions [as Garbhodakasayi Visnu] He maintainseach and every universe.                                   TEXT 22
                     sei narayanera mukhya anga,--advaita
                    `anga'-sabde amsa kari' kahe bhagavata
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita is the principal limb [anga] of Narayana. Srimad-
Bhagavatam speaks of "limb" [anga] as "a plenary portion" [arhsa] of theLord.
                                   TEXT 23
                      narayanas tvam na hi sarva-dehinam
                        atmasy adhisakhila-loka-saksi                      narayano 'ngam nara-bhu jalayanat                       tac capi satyam na tavaiva maya
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Lord of lords, You are the seer of all creation. You are indeed
everyone's dearest life. Are You not, therefore, my father, Narayana?`Narayana' refers to one whose abode is in the water born from Nara[Garbhodakasayi Visnu ], and that Narayana is Your plenary portion. AllYour plenary portions are transcendental. They are absolute and are notcreations of maya."
                                   PURPORT     This text is from the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.14).                                   TEXT 24                    isvarera `anga' amsa--cid-ananda-maya
                     mayara sambandha nahi' ei sloke kaya
                                 TRANSLATION     This verse describes that the limbs and plenary portions of the
Lord are all spiritual; they have no relationship with the materialenergy.
                                   TEXT 25
                   `amsa' na kahiya, kene kaha tanre `anga'
                   `amsa' haite `anga,' yate haya antaranga
                                 TRANSLATION     Why has Sri Advaita been called a limb and not a part? The reason
is that "limb" implies greater intimacy.                                   TEXT 26
                    maha-visnura amsa--advaita guna-dhama
                   isvare abneda, teni `advaita' purna nama
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita, who is a reservoir of virtues, is the main limb of
Maha-Visnu. His full name is Advaita, for He is identical in allrespects with that Lord.
                                   TEXT 27
                   purve yaiche kaila sarva-visvera srjana
                     avatari' kaija ebe bhakti-pravartana
                                 TRANSLATION     As He had formerly created all the universes, now He descended to
introduce the path of bhakti.
                                   TEXT 28
                    jiva nistarija krsna-bhakti kari' dana
                   gita-bhagavate kaija bhaktira vyakhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     He delivered all living beings by offering the gift of krsna-
bhakti. He explained Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam in the light ofdevotional service.
                                   PURPORT     Although Sri Advaita Prabhu is an incarnation of Visnu, for the
welfare of the conditioned souls He manifested Himself as a servitor ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, and throughout all His activities Heshowed Himself to be an eternal servitor. Lord Caitanya and LordNityananda also manifested the same principle, although They also belongto the category of Visnu. If Lord Caitanya, Lord Nityananda and AdvaitaPrabhu had exhibited Their all-powerful Visnu potencies within thismaterial world, peopie would have become greater impersonalists, monistsand self-worshipers than they had already become under the spell of thisage. Therefore the Personality of Godhead and His different incarnationsand forms played the parts of devotees to instruct the conditioned soulshow to approach the transcendentai stage of devotional service. AdvaitaAcarya especially intended to teach the conditioned souls aboutdevotional service. The word acarya means "teacher."The special functionof such a teacher is to make people Krsna conscious. A bona fide teacherfollowing in the footsteps of Advaita Acarya has no other business thanto spread the principles of Krsna consciousness all over the world. The
real qualification of an acarya is that he presents himself as a servantof the Supreme.Such a bona fide acarya can never support the demoniac activities ofatheistic men who present themselves as God. It is the main business ofan acarya to defy such imposters posing as God before the innocentpublic.
                                   TEXT 29                     bhakti-upadesa vinu tanra nahi karya
                      ataeva nama haija `advaita acarya'
                                 TRANSLATION     Since He has no other occupation than to teach devotional service,
His name is Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 30
                     vaisnavera guru tenho jagatera arya
                    dui-nama-milane haija `advaita-acarya'
                                 TRANSLATION     He is the spiritual master of all devotees and is the most revered
personality in the world. By a combination of these two names, His nameis Advaita Acarya.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Advaita Acarya is the prime spiritual master of the Vaisnavas,
and He is worshipable by all Vaisnavas. Devotees and Vaisnavas mustfollow in the footsteps of Advaita Acarya, for by so doing one canactually engage in the devotional service of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 31                  kamala-nayanera tenho, yate `anga', `amsa,
                     `kamalaksa' kari dhare nama avatamsa
                                 TRANSLATION     Since He is alimb or part of the lotus-eyed Supreme Lord, He also
bears the name Kamalaksa.
                                   TEXT 32
                      isvara-sarupya paya parisada-gana
                   catur-bh uja, pita-vasa, yaiche narayana
                                 TRANSLATION     His associates have the same bodily features as the Lord. They all
have four arms and are dressed in yellow garments like Narayana.
                                   TEXT 33
                     advaita-acarya--isvarera amsa-varya
                    tanra tattva-nama-guna, sakali ascarya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Acarya is the principal limb of the Supreme Lord. His
truths, names and attributes are all wonderful.
                                   TEXT 34
                     yanhara tulasijale, yanhara hunkare
                      sva-gana sahite caitanyera avatare
                                 TRANSLATION     He worshiped Krsna with tulasi leaves and water of the Ganges and
called for Him in a loud voice. Thus Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu appearedon earth, accompanied by His personal associates.
                                   TEXT 35
                   yanra dvara kaila prabhu kirtana pracara
                    yanra dvara kaija prabhu jagat nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     It is through Him [Advaita Acarya] that Lord Caitanya spread the
sankirtana movement and through Him that He delivered the world.
                                   TEXT 36
                      acarya gosanira guna-mahima apara
                     jiva-kita kothaya paibeka tara para
                                 TRANSLATION     The glory and attributes of Advaita Acarya are unlimited. How can
the insignificant living entities fathom them?
                                   TEXT 37
                     acarya gosani caitanyera mukhya anga
                     ara eka anga tanra prabhu nityananda                                 TRANSLATION
     Sri Advaita Acarya is a principal limb of Lord Caitanya. Another
limb of the Lord is Nityananda Prabhu.
                                   TEXT 38
                   prabhura upanga--srivasadi bhak ta-gana
                  hasta-mukha-netra-anga cakrady-astra-sama
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees headed by Srivasa are His smaller limbs. They are like
His hands, face, eyes and His disc and other weapons.
                                   TEXT 39
                    e-saba la-iya caitanya-prabhura vihra
                    e-saba la-iva karena vanchita pracara
                                 TRANSLATION     With all of them Lord Caitanya performed His pastimes, and with
them He spread His mission.
                                   TEXT 40
                   madhavendra-purira inho sisya, ei jnane
                    acarya-gosanire prabhu guru kari' mane
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking, "He [Sri Advaita Acarya] is a disciple of Sri Madhavendra
Puri," Lord Caitanya obeys Him, respecting Him as His spiritual master.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Madhavend ra Puri is one of the acaryas in the disciplic
succession from Madhvacarya. Madhavendra Puri had two principaldisciples, Isvara Puri and Sri Advaita Prabhu. Therefore the Gaudiya-Vaisnava-sampradaya is a disciplic succession from Madhvacarya. Thisfact has been accepted in the authorized books known as Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika an d prameya-ratnavali, as wel I as b y G o pa la G u ru Gosvami.The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika clearly states the disciplic succession ofthe Gaudiya Vaisnavas as follows: "Lord Brahma is the direct disciple ofVisnu, the Lord of the spiritual sky. His disciple is Narada, Narada'sdisciple is Vyasa, and Vyasa's disciples are Sukadeva Gosvami andMadhvacarya. Padmanabha Acarya is the disciple of Madhvacarya, andNarahari is the disciple of Padmanabha Acarya. Madhava is the discipleof Narahari, Aksobhya is the direct disciple of Madhava, and Jayatirthais the disciple of Aksobhya. Jayatirtha's disciple is Jnanasindhu, and
his disciple is Mahanidhi. Vidyanidhi is the disciple of Mahanidhi, andRajendra is the disciple of Vidyanidhi. Jayadharma is the disciple ofRajendra. Purusottama is the disciple of Jayadharma. Sriman Laksmipatiis the disciple of Vyasatirtha, who is the disciple of Purusottama. AndMadhavendra Puri is the disciple of Laksmipati."
                                   TEXT 41                    laukika-lilate dnarma-maryada-raksana
                  stuti-bnaktye karena tanra carana vandana
                                 TRANSLATION     To maintain the proper etiquette for the principles of religion,
Lord Caitanya bows down at the lotus feet of Sri Advaita Acarya withreverential prayers and devotion.
                                   TEXT 42
                 caitanya-gosanike acarya kare `prabhu'-jnana
                     apanake karena tanra `dasa'-abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Acarya, however, considers Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu His
master, and He thinks of Himself as a servant of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     The Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu of Rupa Gosvami explains the su
perexcellent quality of devotional service as follows:     brahmanando bhaved esa     cet parardha-gunikrtah     naiti bhak ti-sukhambh odheh     paramanu-tulam api"If multiplied billions of times, the transcendental pleasure derivedfrom impersonal Brahman realization still could not compare to even anatomic portion of the ocean of bhakti, or transcendental service."(B.r.s. 1.1.38) Similarly, the Bhavartha-dioika states:     tvat-katnamrta-patnodhau     viharan to mah a-mudah     kurvanti krtinah kecic     catur-vargam trnopamam"For those who take pleasure in the transcendental topics of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, the four progressive realizations ofreligiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation,all combined together, cannot compare, any more than a straw, to thehappiness derived from hearing about the transcendental activities ofthe Lord." Those who engage in the transcendental service of the lotusfeet of Krsna, being relieved of all material enjoyment, have noattraction to topics of impersonal monism. In the padma purana, inconnection with the glorification of the month of Karttika, it is stated
that devotees pray:.     varam deva moksam na moksavadhim va     na canyam vrne 'ham varesad apina      idam te vapur natna gopala-balam     sada me manasy avirastam kim anyaih     kuveratmajau baddha-murtyaiva yadvat     tvaya mocitau bhakti-bhajau krtau ca     tatha prema-bhak tim svakam me prayaccha     na mokse graho me 'sti damodareha"Dear Lord, always remembering Your childhood pastimes at Vrndavana isbetter for us than aspiring to merge into the impersonal Brahman. DuringYour childhood pastimes You liberated the two sons of Kuvera and madethem great devotees of Your Lordship. Similarly, I wish that instead ofgiving me liberation You may award me such devotion unto You." I n theHayasirsiya-sri-narnana-vyuha-stava, in the chapter called Narayana-stotra, it is stated:     na dharmam kamam artham va     moksam va varadesvara     prarthaye tava padabje     dasyam e vabhikamaye"My dear Lord, I do not wish to become a man of religion nor a master ofeconomic development or sense gratification, nor do I wish forliberation. Although I can have all these from You,the supremebenedictor, I do not pray for all these. I simply pray that I may alwaysbe engaged as a servant of Your lotus feet." Nrsimhadeva offeredPrahlada Maharaja all kinds of benedictions, but Prahlada Maharaja didnot accept any of them, for he simply wanted to engage in the service ofthe lotus feet of the Lord. Similarly, a pure devotee wishes to beblessed like Maharaja Prahlada by being thus endowed with devotionalservice. Devotees aiso offer their respects to Hanuman, who alwaysremained a servant of Lord Rama. The great devotee Hanuman prayed:     bnava-bandna-ccnide tasyai     sprhayami na muk taye     bhavan prabhur aham dasa     iti yatra vilupyate"I do not wish to take liberation or to merge in the Brahman effulgence,where the conception of being a servant of the Lord is completely lost."Similarly, in the Narada-pancaratra it is stated:     dharmartha-kama-moksesu     neccna mama kadacana     tvat-pada-pankajasyadho     jivitam diyatam mama"I do not want any one of the four desirable stations. I simply want toengage as a servant of the lotus feet of the Lord." King Kulasekhara, inhis very famous book Mukunda-mala-stotra, p rays:     naham vande pada-kamalayor dvandvam advan dva-ne toh     kumbhi-pakam gurum api nare narakam napanetum     ramya-rama-mrdu-tanu-lata-nandane nabhiran tum-     bhave bhave hrdaya-bhavane bhavayeyam bhavan tam"My Lord, I do not worship You to be liberated from this materialentanglement, nor do I wish to save myself from the hellish condition ofmaterial existence, nor do I ever pray for a beautiful wife to enjoy ina nice garden. I wish only that I may always be in full ecstasy with thepleasure of serving Your Lordship." (M.m.s. 6) In Srimad-Bhnavatam also
there are many instances in the Third and Fourth Cantos in whichdevotees pray to the Lord simply to be engaged in His service, andnothing else (SB. 3.4.15, 3.25.34, 3.25.36, 4.1.22, 4.9.10 and 4.20.24).
                                   TEXT 43                       sei abhimana-sukhe \oana pasare
                     `krsna-dasa' nao--jive upadesa kare
                                 TRANSLATION     He forgets Himself in the joy of that conception and teaches all
living entities, "You are servants of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu."
                                   PURPORT     The transcendental devotional service of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is so ecstatic that even the Lord Himself plays the part of adevotee. Forgetting Himself to be the Supreme, He personaliy teaches thewhole world how to render service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 44                     krsna-dasa-abhimane ye ananda-sindhu
                    koti-brahma-sukha nahe tara eka bindu
                                 TRANSLATION     The conception of servitude to Sri Krsna generates such an ocean of
joy in the soul that even the joy of oneness with the Absolute, ifmultiplied ten million times, could not compare to a drop of it.
                                   TEXT 45
                     muni ye caitanya-dasa ara nityananda
                     dasa-bnava-sama nahe anyatra ananda
                                 TRANSLATION     He says, "Nityananda and I are servants of Lord Caitanya." Nowhere
else is there such joy as that which is tasted in this emotion ofservitude.
                                   TEXT 46
                     parama-preyasi laksmi nrdaye vasati
                     tenho dasya-sukha mage kariya minati
                                 TRANSLATION     The most beloved goddess of fortune resides on the chest of Sri
Krsna, yet she too, earnestly praying, begs for the joy of service atHis feet.
                                   TEXT 47
                      dasya-bhave ananaita parisada-gana
                   vidhi, bhava, narada ara suka, sanatana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the associates of Lord Krsna, such as Brahma, Siva, Narada,
Suka and Sanatana, are very much pleased in the sentiment of servitude.
                                   TEXT 48
                       nityananda avadhuta sabate agala
                     caitanyera dasya-preme ha-ila pagala
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Nityananda, the wandering mendicant, is the foremost of all the
associates of Lord Caitanya. He became mad in the ecstasy of service toLord Caitanya.
                                  TEXT 49-50
                    srivasa, haridasa, ramadasa, gadadhara
                  murari, mukunda, candrasekhara, vakresvara
                     e-saba pandita-loka parama-mahattva
                    caitanyera dasye sabaya karaye unmatta
                                 TRANSLATION     Srivasa, Haridasa, Ramadasa, Gadadhara, M urari, Mu kunda,
Candrasekhara and Vakresvara are all glorious and are all learnedscholars, but the sentiment of servitude to Lord Caitanya makes them madin ecstasy.
                                   TEXT 51
                      ei mata gaya, nace, kare attahasa
                     loke upadese,--`hao caitanyera dasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus they dance, sing, and laugh like madmen, and they instruct
everyone, "Just be loving servants of Lord Caitanya."                                   TEXT 52
                     caitanya-gosani more kare guru jnana
                      tatnapiha mora haya dasa-abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Acarya thinks, "Lord Caitanya considers Me His
spiritual master, yet I feel Myself to be only His servant."
                                   TEXT 53
                     krsna-premera ei eka apurva prabhava
                     guru-sama-laghuke karaya dasya-bhava
                                 TRANSLATION     Love for Krsna has this one uniq ue effect: it imbues su periors,
eq uals and inferiors with the spirit of service to Lord Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     There are two kinds of devotional service: the way of pancaratrika
regulative principles and the way of bhagavata transcendental lovingservice. The love of Godhead of those engaged in pancaratrika regulativeprinciples depends more or less on the opulent and reverential platform,but the worship of Radha and Krsna is purely on the platform oftranscendental love. Even persons who play as the superiors of Krsnaalso take the chance to offer transcendental loving service to the Lord.The service attitude of the devotees who play the parts of superiors ofthe Lord is very difficult to understand, but can be very plainlyunderstood in connection with the superexcellence of their particularservice to Lord Krsna. A vivid example is the service of mother Yasodato Krsna, which is distinct. In the feature of Narayana, the Lord canaccept services only from His associates who play parts in which theyare equal to or less than Him, but in the feature of Lord Krsna Heaccepts service very plainly from His fathers, teachers and other elderswho are His superiors, as well as from His equals and His subordinates.This is very wonderful.
                                   TEXT 54                    ihara pramana suna--sastrera vyakhyana
                     mahad-anubhava yate sudrdha pramana
                                 TRANSLATION     For evidence, please listen to the examples described in the
revealed scriptures, which are also corroborated by the realization ofgreat souls.                                  TEXT 55-56
                    anyera ka katha, vraje nanda mahasaya
                    tara sama `guru' krsnera ara keha naya
                    suddha-vatsalye isvara-jnana nahi tara
                      tahakei preme karaya dasya-anukara
                                 TRANSLATION     Although no one is a more respected elder for Krsna than Nanda
Maharaja in VraJa, who in transcendental paternal love has no knowledgethat his son is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, still ecstatic lovemakes him, not to speak of others, feel himself to be a servant of LordKrsna.
                                   TEXT 57
                     tenno rati-mati mage krsnera carane
                    tanara sri-mukna-van i tahate pramane
                                 TRANSLATION     He too prays for attachment and devotion to the lotus feet of Lord
Krsna, as the words from his own mouth give evidence.
                                  TEXT 58-59
                   suna uddhava, satya, krsna--amara tanaya
                   tenho isvara--hena yadi tomara mane laya
                     tathapi tanhate rahu mora mano-vrtti
                     tomara isvara-krsne hauka mora mati
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Uddhava, please hear me. In truth Krsna is my son, but
even if you think that He is God, I would still bear toward Him my ownfeelings for my son. May my mind be attached to your Lord Krsna."
                                   TEXT 60
                           manaso vrttayo nah syun
                            krsna-padambujasrayah                          vaco 'bhidhayinir nainnam                           kayas tat-prah vanadisu
                                 TRANSLATION     "May our minds be attached to the lotus feet of your Lord Krsna,
may our tongues chant His holy names, and may our bodies lie prostratebefore Him.
                                   TEXT 61
                           karmabhir bhramyamananam
                           yatra k vapisvarecchaya                            mangalacaritair danai                            ratir nah krsna isvare
                                 TRANSLATION     "Wherever we wander in the material universe under the influence of
karma by the will of the Lord, may our auspicious activities cause ourattraction to Lord Krsna to increase."
                                   PURPORT     These verses from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.47.66-67) were spoken by
the denizens of Vrndavana, headed by Maharaja Nanda and his associates,to Uddhava, who had come from Mathura-.
                                   TEXT 62                     sridainadi vraje yata sakhara nicaya
                   aisvarya-jnana-hina, ke vala-sakhya-maya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna's friends in Vrndavana, headed by Sridama, have pure
fraternal affection for Lord Krsna and have no idea of His opulences.
                                   TEXT 63
                   krsna-sange yuddha kare, skandhe arohana
                     tara dasya-bhave kare carana-sevana
                                 TRANSLATION     Although they fight with Him and climb upon His shoulders, they
worship His lotus feet in a spirit of servitude.
                                   TEXT 64
                           pada-sam vahanam cakruh
                            kecit tasya mahatmanah                              apare hata-papmano                            vyajanaih samavijayan
                                 TRANSLATION     "Some of the friends of Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, massaged His feet, and others whose sinful reactions had beendestroyed fanned Him with hand-held fans."
                                   PURPORT     Th is verse, q u oted fro m Srimad-Bhagavatam ( 10.15.17), descri
bes h ow L o rd Krsna and Lord Balarama were playing with the cowherdboys after killing Dhenukasura in Talavana.
                                  TEXT 65-66                     krsnera preyasi vraje yata gopi-gana
                   yanra pada-dhuli kare uddhava prarthana
                   yan-sabara upare krsnera priya nahi ana
                      tanhara apanake kare dasi-abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     Even the beloved girl friends of Lord Krsna in Vrndavana, the
gopis, the dust of whose feet was desired by Sri Uddhava and beyond whomno one is more dear to Krsna, regard themselves as Krsna's maidservants.
                                   TEXT 67
                        vraja janarti-han vira yositam
                       nija jana-smaya-dh vamsana-smita                      bnaja sakhe bnavat-kinkarih sma no                         jala-ruhananam caru darsaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Lord, remover of the afflictions of the inhabitants of
Vrndavana! O hero of all women! O Lord who destroys the pride of Yourdevotees by Your sweet, gentle smile! O friend! We are Yourmaidservants. Please fulfill our desires and show us Your attractivelotus face."
                                   PURPORT     This verse in connection with the rasa dance of Krsna with the
gopis is quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.31.6). When Krsna disappearedfrom His companions in the course of dancing, the gopis sang like thisin separation from Krsna.
                                   TEXT 68                  api bata madhu-puryam arya-putro 'dhunaste
                smarati sa pitr-gehan saumya bandhums ca gopan                  kvacid api sa katham nah kinkarinam grnite               bhujam aguru-sugandham murdhny adhasyat kada nu                                 TRANSLATION
     "O Uddhava! It is indeed regrettable that Krsna resides in Mathura.
Does He remember His father's household affairs, His friends and thecowherd boys? O great soul! Does He ever talk about us, Hismaidservants? When will He lay on our heads His aguru-scented hand?"
                                   PURPORT     This verse appears in the Srimad-Bnagavatam (10.47.21) in the
section known as the Bhramara-gita. When Uddhava came to Vrndavana,Srimati Radharani, in complete separation from Krsna, sang like this.
                                  TEXT 69-70                    tan-sabara katna rahu,--srimatiradhika
                      saba haite sakalamse parama-adnika
                    tenho yanra dasi haina se vena carana
                    yanra prema-gune klsna baddha anuksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Not to speak of the other gopis, even Sri Radhika, who in every
respect is the most elevated of them all and who has bound Sri Krsnaforever by Her loving attributes, serves His feet as His maidservant.
                                   TEXT 71
                           ha natha ramana prestha
                           k vasi k vasi mana-bhuja                            dasyas te krpanaya me                           sakhe darsaya sannidhim
                                 TRANSLATION     "O My Lord, O My husband, O most dearly beloved! O mighty-armed
Lord! Where are You? Where are You? O my friend, reveal Yourself to Yourmaidservant, who is very much aggrieved by Your absence."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.30.39). When the
rasa dance was going on in full swing, Krsna left all the gopis and tookonly Srimati Radharani with Him. At that time all the gopislamented, andSrimati Radharani being proud of Her position, requested Krsna to carryHer wherever He liked. Then Krsna immediately disappeared from thescene, and Srimati Radharani began to lament.
                                   TEXT 72                     dvarakate rukminy-adi yateka mahisi                       tanharao apanake mane krsna-dasi
                                 TRANSLATION     In Dvaraka-dhama, all the queens, headed by Rukmini, also consider
themselves maidservants of Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 73
                     caidyaya marpayitum udyata-karmukesu
                   rajasv ajeya-bhata-sekharitanghri-renuh                     ninye mrgendra iva bhagam ajavi-ytht                   tac chri-niketa-carano 'stu mamarcanaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "When Jarasandha and other kings, bows and arrows upraised, stood
ready to deliver me in charity to Sisupala, He forcibly took me fromtheir midst, as a lion takes its share of goats and sheep. The dust ofHis lotus feet is therefore the crown of inconquerable soldiers. Maythose lotus feet, which are the shelter of the goddess of fortune, bethe object of my worship."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.83.8).                                   TEXT 74                            tapas caran ti majn\ya
                            s va-pada-sparsanasaya                           saknyope tyagrahit panim                            saham tad-grha-marjani
                                 TRANSLATION     "Knowing me to be performing austerities with the desire to touch
His feet, He came with His friend Arjuna and accepted my hand. Yet I ambut a maidservant engaged in sweeping the floor of the house of SriKrsna."
                                   PURPORT     This verse appears in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.83.11) in connection
with the meeting of the family ladies of the Kuru and Yadu dynasties atSamanta-pancaka. At the time of that meeting, the queen of Krsna namedKalindi spoke to Draupadi in this way.
                                   TEXT 75                             atmaramasya tasyema
                            vayam vai grha-dasikah                           sarva-sanga-nivrttyaddha                             tapasa ca babnuvima
                                 TRANSLATION     "Through austerity and through renunciation of all attachments, we
have become maidservants in the home of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, who is satisfied in Himself."
                                   PURPORT     During the same incident, this verse, quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam
(10.83.39), was spoken to Draupadi by another queen of Krsna's.
                                   TEXT 76                      anera ki katha, baladeva mahasaya
                  yanra bhava--suddha-sakhya-vatsalyadi-maya
                                 TRANSLATION     Not to speak of others, even Lord Baladeva, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, is full of emotions like pure friendship and paternal love.
                                   PURPORT     Although Lord Baladeva appeared before the birth of Lord Krsna and
is therefore Krsna's worshipable elder brother, He used to act asKrsna's eternal servitor. In the spiritual sky all the Vaikuntha planetsare predominated by the quadruple expansions of Krsna known as thecatur-vyuha. They are direct expansions from Baladeva. It is thesingularity of the Supreme Lord that everyone in the spiritual skythinks himself a servitor of the Lord. According to social conventionone may be superior to Krsna, but factually everyone engages in Hisservice. Therefore in the spiritual sky or the material sky, in all thedifferent planets, no one is able to supersede Lord Krsna or demandservice from Him. On the contrary, everyone engages in the service ofLord Krsna. As such, the more a person engages in the service of theLord, the more he is im portant; and, conversely, the more one is bereftof the transcendental service of Krsna, the more he invites the badfortune of material contamination. In the material world, althoughmaterialists want to become one with God or compete with God, everyonedirectly or indirectly engages in the service of the Lord. The more oneis forgetful of the service of Krsna, the more he is considered to bedying. Therefore, when one develops pure Krsna consciousness, heimmediately develops his eternal servitorship to Krsna.
                                   TEXT 77                      tenho apanake karena dasa-bhavana
                     krsna-dasa-bhava vinu ache kona jana
                                 TRANSLATION     He also considers Himself a servant of Lord Krsna. Indeed, who is
there who does not have this conception of being a servant of LordKrsna?
                                   TEXT 78
                    sahasra- vadane yenho sesa-sankarsana
                    dasa deha dhari' kare krsnera se vana
                                 TRANSLATION     He who is Sesa, Sankarsana, with His thousands of mouths, serves
Sri Krsna by assuming ten forms.
                                   TEXT 79
                   anan ta brahmande rudra--sadasivera amsa
                    gunavatara tenho, sarva-de va-avatamsa
                                 TRANSLATION     Rudra, who is an expansion of Sadasiva and who appears in unlimited
universes, is also a gunavatara [qualitative incarnation] and is theornament of all the demigods in the endless universes.
                                   PURPORT     There are eleven expansions of Rud ra, or Lord Siva. They are as
follows: Ajaikapat, Ahibradhna, Virupaksa, Raivata, Hara, Bah urupa,Devasrestha Tryam baka, Savitra, Jayanta, Pinaki and Aparajita. Besidesthese expansions there are eight forms of Rudra called earth, water,fire, air, sky, the sun, the moon and soma-yaji Generaily all theseRudras have five faces, three eyes and ten arms. Sometimes it is foundthat Rudra is compared to Brahma and considered a living entity. Butwhen Rudra is explained to be a partial expansion of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, he is compared to Sesa. Lord Siva is thereforesimultaneously an expansion of Lord Visnu and, in his capacity forannihilating the creation, one of the living entities. As an expansionof Lord Visnu he is called Hara, and he is transcendental to thematerial qualities, but when he is in touch with tamo-guna he appearscontaminatedby the material modes of nature. This is explained in the Srimad-Bhagavatam and the Brahma-samhita. I n the Srimad-Bhnavatam, TenthCanto, it is stated that Lord Rudra is always associated with thematerial nature when she is in the neutral, unmanifested stage, but whenthe modes of material nature are agitated he associates with materialnature from a distance. In the Brahma-samhita the relationship betweenVisnu and Lord Siva is compared to that of milk and yogurt. Milk isconverted into yogurt by certain additives, but although milk and yogurthave the same ingredients, they have different functions. Similarly,Lord Siva is an expansion of Lord Visnu, yet because of his taking partin the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation, he is considered to bechanged, like milk converted into yogurt. In the Puranas it is found
that Durga appears sometimes from the heads of Brahma and sometimes fromthe heads of Visnu. The annihilator, Rudra, is born from Sankarsana andthe ultimate fire to burn the whole creation. In the V\yu purana thereis a description of Sadasiva in one of the Vaikuntha planets. ThatSadasiva is a direct expansion of Lord Krsna's form for pastimes. It issaid that Sadasiva (Lord Sambhu) is an expansion from the Sadasiva inthe Vaikuntha planets (Lord Visnu) and that his consort, mahamaya, is anexpansion of Ramadevi, or Laksmi. Mahamaya is the origin or birthplaceof material nature.
                                   TEXT 80                     tenho karena krsnera dasya-pratyasa
                   niran tara kahe siva, `muni krsna-dasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     He also desires only to be a servant of Lord Krsna. Sri Sadasiva
always says, "I am a servant of Lord Krsna."
                                   TEXT 81
                   krsna-preme unmatta, vih vala digambara
                     krsna-guna-Iiia g\ya, nace nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     Intoxicated by ecstatic love for Lord Krsna, he becomes overwhelmed
and incessantly dances without clothing and sings about Lord Krsna'squalities and pastimes.
                                   TEXT 82
                     pita-mata-guru-sakha-bhava kene naya
                krsna-premera sva-bhave dasya-bnava se karaya
                                 TRANSLATION     All the emotions, whether those of father, mother, teacher or
friend, are full of sentiments of servitude. That is the nature of loveof Krsna.
                                   TEXT 83
                     eka krsna--sarva-sevya, jagat-isvara
                     ara yata saba,--tanra se vakanucara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna, the one master and the Lord of the universe, is worthy
of being served by everyone. Indeed, everyone is but a servant of Hisservants.
                                   TEXT 84
                     sei krsna avatirna--caitanya-isvara
                      ataeva ara saba,--tanhara kinkara
                                 TRANSLATION     That same Lord Krsna has descended as Lord Caitanya, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Everyone, therefore, is His servant.
                                   TEXT 85
                   keha mane, keha na mane, saba tanra dasa
                     ye na mane, tara haya sei p\oe nasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Some accept Him whereas others do not, yet everyone is His servant.
One who does not accept Him, however, will be ruined by his sinfulactivities.
                                   PURPORT     When a living entity forgets his constitutional position, he
prepares himself to be an enjoyer of the material resources. Sometimeshe is also misguided by the thought that service to the SupremePersonality of Godhead is not absolute engagement. In other words, hethinks that there are many other engagements for a living entity besidesthe service of the Lord. Such a foolish person does not know that in anyposition he either directly or indirectly engages in activities ofservice to the Supreme Lord. Actually, if a person does not engage inthe service of the Lord, all inauspicious activities encumber himbecause service to the Supreme Lord, Lord Caitanya, is theconstitutional position of the infinitesimal living entities. Becausethe living entity is infinitesimal, the allurement of material enjoymentattracts him, and he tries to enjoy matter, forgetting hisconstitutional position. But when his dormant Krsna consciousness isawakened, he no longer engages in the service of matter but engages inthe service of the Lord. In other words, when one is forgetful of hisconstitutional position, he appears in the position of the lord ofmateriai nature. Even at that time he remains a servant of the SupremeLord, but in an unqualified or contaminated state.
                                   TEXT 86                    caitanyera dasa muni, caitanyera dasa
                     caitanyera dsa muni, tnra dsera dsa                                 TRANSLATION
     "I am a servant of Lord Caitanya, a servant of Lord Caitanya. I am
a servant of Lord Caitanya, and a servant of His servants."
                                   TEXT 87
                    eta bali' nace, gaya, hunkara gambhira
                     ksaneke vasila acarya haina susthira
                                 TRANSLATION     Saying this, Advaita Prabhu dances and loudly sings. Then at the
next moment He quietly sits down.
                                   TEXT 88
                      bhakta-abhimana mula sri-balarame
                      sei bhave anugata tanra amsa-gane
                                 TRANSLATION     The source of the sentiment of servitude is indeed Lord Balarama.
The plenary expansions who follow Him are all influenced by thatecstasy.
                                   TEXT 89
                       tanra avatara eka sri-sankarsana
                    bhakta bali' abhimana kare sarva-ksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sankarsana, who is one of His incarnations, always considers
Himself a devotee.
                                   TEXT 90
                     tanra avatara ana sri- vuta laksmana
                    sri-ramera dasya tinho kaila anuksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Another of His incarnations, Laksmana, who is very beautiful and
opulent, always serves Lord Rama.
                                   TEXT 91
                      sankarsana-avatara karanabdhi-sayi                     tanhara hrdaye bhakta-bnava anuyayi
                                 TRANSLATION     The Visnu who lies on the Causal Ocean is an incarnation of Lord
Sankarsana, and, accordingly, the emotion of being a devotee is alwayspresent in His heart.
                                   TEXT 92
                    tanhara prakasa-bneda, advaita-acarya
                   kaya-mano- vakye tanra bhakti sada karya
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya is a separate expansion of Him. He always engages in
devotional service with His thoughts, words and actions.
                                   TEXT 93
                    vakye kahe, `muni caitanyera anucara'
                   muni tanra bhakta--mane bhave nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     By His words He declares, "I am a servant of Lord Caitanya." Thus
with His mind He always thinks, "I am His devotee."
                                   TEXT 94
                     jaia-tulasi diyakare kayate se vana
                     bnakti pracariya saba tarila bhuvana
                                 TRANSLATION     With His body He worshiped the Lord by offering Ganges water and
tulasileaves, and by preaching devotional service He delivered theentire universe.
                                   TEXT 95
                     prthivi dharena yei sesa-sankarsana
                    kaya-vyuha kari' karena krsnera sevana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sesa Sankarsana, who holds all the planets on His head, expands
Himself in different bodies to render service to Lord Krsna.                                   TEXT 96
                      ei saba haya Sri-krsnera a vatara
                    nirantara dekhi sabara bhaktira acara
                                 TRANSLATION     These are all incarnations of Lord Krsna, yet we always find that
they act as devotees.
                                   TEXT 97
                    e-sabake sastre kahe `bhakta-avatara'
                      `bhakta-a vatara'-pada upari sabra
                                 TRANSLATION     The scriptures call them incarnations as devotees [bhakta-avatara].
The position of being such an incarnation is above all others.
                                   PURPORT     The Supreme Personality of Godhead appears in different
incarnations, but His appearance in the role of a devotee is morebeneficial to the conditioned souls than the other incarnations, withall their opulences. Sometimes a conditioned soul is bewildered when hetries to understand the incarnation of Godhead with fullopulence. Lord Krsna appeared and performed many uncommon activities,and some materialists misunderstood Him, but in His appearance as LordCaitanya He did not show much of His opulences, and therefore fewerconditioned souls were bewildered. Misunderstanding the Lord, many foolsconsider themselves incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,but the result is that after leaving the material body they enter thespecies of jackals. Persons who cannot understand the real significanceof an incarnation must attain such lower species of life as punishment.Conditioned souls who are puffed up by false egoism and who try tobecome one with the Supreme Lord become Mayavadis.
                                   TEXT 98                   eka-matra `amsi'--krsna, `amsa'--avatara
                    amsi amse dekhi jyestha-kanistha-acara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna is the source of all incarnations, and all others are
His parts or partial incarnations. We find that the whole and the partbehave as superior and inferior.
                                   TEXT 99
                    jyestha-bhave amsite haya prabhu-jnana                    kanistha-bhave apanate bhakta-abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     The source of all incarnations has the emotions of a superior when
He considers Himself the master, and He has the emotions of an inferiorwhen He considers Himself a devotee.
                                   PURPORT     A fraction of a particular thing is called a part, and that from
which the fraction is distinguished is called the whole. Therefore thefraction, or part, is included within the whole. The Lord is the whole,and the devotee is the part or fractional part. That is the relationshipbetween the Lord and the devotee. There are also gradations of devotees,who are calculated as greater and lesser. When a devotee is great he iscalled prabhu, and when he is lesser he is called bhakta, or a devotee.The supreme whole is Krsna, and Baladeva and all Visnu incarnations areHis fractions. Lord Krsna is therefore conscious of His superiorposition, and all Visnu incarnations are conscious of Their positions asdevotees.
                                   TEXT 100                    krsnera samata haite bada bhakta-pada
                  atma haite krsnera bhakta haya premaspada
                                 TRANSLATION     The position of being a devotee is higher than that of equality
with Lord Krsna, for the devotees are dearer to Lord Krsna than His ownself.
                                   PURPORT     The conception of oneness with the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is inferior to that of eternal service to the Lord because Lord Krsna ismore affectionate to devotees than to His personal self. In Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.68) the Lord clearly says:     sadha vo hrdayam mahyam     sadhunam hrdayam tv aham     mad anyat te na jananti     naham tebhyo manag api"The devotees are My heart, and I am the heart of My devotees. Mydevotees do not know anyone but Me; similarly, I do not know anyone butMy devotees." This is the intimate relationship between the Lord and Hisdevotees.
                                   TEXT 101                   atma haite krsna bhakte bada kari' mane
                     ihate bahuta sastra- vacana pramane
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna considers His devotees greater than Himself. In this
connection the scriptures provide an abundance of evidence.
                                   TEXT 102
                            na tatha me priyatama
                            atma-yonir na sankarah                           na ca sankarsano na srir                           naivatma ca yatha bhavan
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Uddhava! Neither Brahma, nor Sankara, nor Sankarsana, nor
Laksmi, nor even My own self is as dear to Me as you."
                                   PURPORT     This text is from the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.14.15).                                   TEXT 103                   krsna-samye nahe tanra madhuryas vadana
                   bhakta-bhave kare tanra madhurya carvana
                                 TRANSLATION     The sweetness of Lord Krsna is not to be tasted by those who
consider themselves equal to Krsna. It is to be tasted only through thesentiment of servitude.
                                   TEXT 104
                  sastrera siddhanta ei,--vijnera an ubhava
                     mudha-loka nanijane bhavera vaibhava
                                 TRANSLATION     This conclusion of the revealed scriptures is also the realization
of experienced devotees. Fools and rascals, however, cannot understandthe opulences of devotional emotions.
                                   PURPORT     When a person is liberated in the sarupya form of liberation,
having a spiritual form exactly like Visnu, it is not possible for himto relish the relationship of Krsna's personal associates in theirmellow exchanges. The devotees of Krsna, however, in their lovingreiationships with Krsna, sometimes forget their own identities;sometimes they think themselves one with Krsna and yet relish stillgreater transcendental mellow in that way. People in general, because oftheirfoolishness only, try to become masters of everything, forgetting the
transcendental mellow of servitorship to the Lord. When a person isactually advanced in spiritual understanding, however, he can accept thetranscendental servitorship of the Lord without hesitation.
                                 TEXT 105-106                  bhakta-bhava angikari' balarama, laksmana
                    advaita, nityananda, sesa, sankarsana
                     krsnera madhurya-rasamrta kare pana
                     sei sukhe matta, kichu nahi jane ana
                                 TRANSLATION     Baladeva, Laksmana, Advaita Acarya, Lord Nityananda, Lord Sesa and
Lord Sankarsana taste the nectarean mellows of the transcendental blissof Lord Krsna by recognizing Themselves as being His devotees andservants. They are all mad with that happiness, and they know nothingelse.
                                   TEXT 107
                     anyera achuk karya, apane sri-krsna
                      apana-madnurya-pane na-ila satrsna
                                 TRANSLATION     Not to speak of others, even Lord Krsna Himself becomes thirsty to
taste His own sweetness.
                                   TEXT 108
                     sva-madhurya asvadite karena yatana
                     bhakta-bhava vinu nahe taha asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     He tries to taste His own sweetness, but He cannot do so without
accepting the emotions of a devotee.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Sri Krsna wanted to relish the transcendental mellow of a
devotee, and therefore He accepted the role of a devotee by appearing asSri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 109                    bhakta-bhava angikari' haila avatirna
                   sri-krsna-caitanya-rupe sarva-bhave prna                                 TRANSLATION
     Therefore Lord Krsna accepted the position of a devotee and
descended in the form of Lord Caitanya, who is complete in everyrespect.
                                   TEXT 110
                  nana-bhakta-bhave karena sva-madhurya pana
                    purve kariyachi ei siddhanta vyakhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     He tastes His own sweetness through the various emotions of a
devotee. I have formerly explained this conclusion.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya, who is known as Sri Gaurahari, is complete in
relishing all the different mellows, namely, neutrality, servitorship,fraternity, parental affection and conjugal love. By accepting theecstasy of different grades of devotees, He is complete in relishing allthe mellows of these relationships.
                                   TEXT 111                     avatara-ganera bhakta-bhave adhikara
                   bhakta-bhava haite adhika sukha nahi ara
                                 TRANSLATION     All the incarnations are entitled to the emotions of devotees.
There is no higher bliss than this.
                                   PURPORT     All the different incarnations of Lord Visnu have the right to play
the roles of servitors of Lord Krsna by descending as devotees. When anincarnation gives up the understanding of His Godhood and plays the partof a servitor, He enjoys a greater transcendental mellow taste than whenHe plays the part of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 112                      mula bhakta-avatara sri-sankarsana
                     bhakta-avatara tanhi advaite ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     The original bhakta-avatara is Sankarsana. Sri Advaita is counted
among such incarnations.
                                   PURPORT     Although Sri Advaita Prabhu belongs to the Visnu category, He
displays servitorship to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu as one of Hisassociates. When Lord Visnu appears as a servitor, He is called anincarnation of a devotee of Lord Krsna. Sri Sankarsana, who is anincarnation of Visnu in the spiritual sky known as the greaterVaikuntha, is the chief of the quadruple incarnations and is theoriginal incarnation of a devotee. Lord Maha-Visnu, who is lying on theCausal Ocean, is another manifestation of Sankarsana. He is the originalPersonality of Godhead who glances over the material and efficientcauses of the cosmic manifestation. Advaita Prabhu is accepted as anincarnation of Maha-Visnu. All the plenary manifestations of Sankarsanaare indirect expansions of Lord Krsna. That consideration also makesAdvaita Prabhu an eternal servitor of Gaura Krsna. Therefore He isaccepted as a devotee incarnation.
                                   TEXT 113                     advaita-acarya gosanira mahima apara
                     yanhara hunkare kaila caitanyavatara
                                 TRANSLATION     The glories of Sri Advaita Acarya are boundless, for His sincere
vibrations brought about Lord Caitanya's descent upon this earth.
                                   TEXT 114
                   san kirtana p racariya saba jagat tarila
                    advaita-prasade loka prema-dhana paila
                                 TRANSLATION     He liberated the universe by preaching sankirtana. Thus the people
of the world received the treasure of love of Godhead through the mercyof Sri Advaita.
                                   TEXT 115
                     advaita-mahima ananta ke pare kahite
                      sei likhi, yei suni mahajana haite
                                 TRANSLATION     Who can describe the unlimited glories of Advaita Acarya? I write
here as much as I have known from great authorities.
                                   TEXT 116
                      acarya-carane mora koji namaskara
                      ithe kichu aparadha na labe amara                                 TRANSLATION
     I offer my obeisances ten million times to the lotus feet of Sri
Advaita Acarya. Please do not take offense at this.
                                   TEXT 117
                      tomara mahima--koti-samudra agadha
                     tanara iyatta kahi,--e bada aparadha
                                 TRANSLATION     Your glories are as fathomless as millions of oceans and seas.
Speaking of its measure is a great offense indeed.
                                   TEXT 118
                      jaya jaya jaya sri-advaita acarya
                   jaya jaya sri-caitanya, nityananda arya
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories, all glories to Sri Advaita Acarya! All glories to Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and the superior Lord Nityananda!
                                   TEXT 119
                   dui sloke kahila advaita-tattva-nirupana
                panca-tattvera vicara kicnu suna, bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus in two verses I have described the truth concerning Advaita
Acarya. Now, O devotees, please hear about the five truths [ panca-tattva].
                                   TEXT 120
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kane krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Adi-lila, Sixth Chapter, describing the glories of Sri Advaita Acarya.                                Chapter Seven
                                    TEXT 1
                            agaty-eka-gatim natva                            hinarthadhika-sadhakam                         sri-caitanyam likhyate 'sya                            prema-bhakti-vadanyata
                                 TRANSLATION
     Let me first offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who is the ultimate goal of life for one bereft of allpossessions in this material world and is the only meaning for oneadvancing in spiritual life. Thus let me write about His magnanimouscontribution of devotional service in love of God.
                                   PURPORT     A person in the conditional stage of material existence is in an
atmosphere of helplessness, but the conditioned soul, under the illusionof maya, or the external energy, thinks that he is completely protectedby his country, society, friendship and love, not knowing that at thetime of death none of these can save him. The laws of material natureare so strong that none of our material possessions can save us from thecruel hands of death. In Bhagavad-gita (13.9) it is stated,janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-duhkha-dosanudarsanam.- o n e w h o is actu al I y ad van cing m u st al way s consider the four principles of miserable life,namely, birth, death, old age and disease. One cannot be saved from allthese miseries unless he takes shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is therefore the only shelter forall conditioned souls. An intelligent person, therefore, does not puthis faith in any material possessions, but completely takes shelter ofthe lotus feet of the Lord. Such a person is called akincana, or one whodoes not possess anything in this material world.The Supreme Personalityof Godhead is also known as Akincana-gocara, for He can be achieved by aperson who does not put his faith in material possessions. Therefore,for the fully surrendered soul who has no material possessions on whichto depend, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the only shelter. Everyonedepends upon dharma (religiosity),artha (economic development), kama(sense gratification) and ultimately moksa (salvation), but Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, due to His magnanimous character, can give more thansalvation. Therefore in this verse the words hinarthadhika-sadhakamindicate that although by material estimation salvation is of a qualitysuperior to the inferior interests of religiosity, economic developmentand sense gratification, above salvation there is the position ofdevotional service and transcendental love for the Supreme Personalityof Godhead. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the bestower of this greatbenediction. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, prema pumartho mahan: "Loveof Godhead is the ultimate benediction for all human beings." SrilaKrsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, the author of Caitanya-caritamrta, thereforefirst offers his respectful obeisances u nto Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
before describing His magnanimity in bestowing love of Godhead.
                                    TEXT 2                   jaya jaya mahaorabhu sri-krsna-caitanya
                     tanhara caranasrita, sei bada dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer glorification to the Supreme Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. One who has taken shelter of His lotus feet is the mostglorified person.
                                   PURPORT     Prabhu means master. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the supreme master
of all masters; therefore He is called Mahaprabhu. Any person who takesshelter of Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu is most glorified because bythe mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu he is able to get promotion to theplatform of loving service to the Lord, which is transcendental tosalvation.
                                    TEXT 3                 purve gurv-adi chaya tattve kaila namaskara
                  guru-tattva kahiyachi, ebe pancera vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     In the beginning I have discussed the truth about the spiritual
master. Now I shall try to explain the Panca-tattva.
                                   PURPORT     In the First Chapter of Caitanya-carltamrta, Adi-lila, the author,
Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, has described the initiator spiritualmaster and the instructor spiritual master in the verse beginning withthe words vande gurun isa-bhaktan isam isavatarakan. In that verse thereare six transcendental subject matters, of which the truth regarding thespiritual master has already been described. Now the author willdescribe the other five tattvas (truths), namely, isa-tattva (theSupreme Lord), His expansion tattva, His incarnation tattva, His energytattva and His devotee tattva.
                                    TEXT 4                   panca-tattva a vatirna caitanyera sange
                  panca-tattva lana karena sankirtana range
                                 TRANSLATION     These five tattvas incarnate with Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and
thus the Lord executes His sankirtana movement with great pleasure.                                   PURPORT
     I n the Srimad-Bhagavatam there is the following statement
regarding Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu:     krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam sa-ngopangastra-parsadam     yajnaih sankirtana-prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah"I n the age of Kali, people who are endowed with sufficientintelligence will worship the Lord, who is accompanied by Hisassociates, by performance of sankirtana yajna." (SB. 11.5.32) SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu is always accompanied by His plenary expansion SriNityananda Prabhu, His incarnation Sri Advaita Prabhu, His internalpotency Sri Gadadhara Prabhu and His marginal potency Srivasa Prabhu. Heis in the midstof them asthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. One shouldknow that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is always accompanied by these othertattvas. Therefore our obeisances to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arecomplete when we say, sri-krsna- caitanya prabhu nityananda sri-advaitagadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. As preachers of the Krsnaconsciousness movement, we first offer our obeisances to Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu by chanting this Panca-tattva mantra; then we say, HareKrsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare. There are ten offenses in the chanting of the HareKrsna maha-mantra, but these are not considered in the chanting of thePanca-tattva mantra, namely, sri- krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda sri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuis known as maha-vadanyavatara, the most magnanimous incarnation,for Hedoes not consider the offenses of the fallen souls. Thus to derive thefull benefit of the chanting of the maha-mantra (Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare), wemust first take shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, learn the Panca-tattva maha-mantra, and then chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. That willbe very effective.     Taking advantage of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, there are manyunscrupulous devotees who manufacture a maha-mantra of their own.Sometimes they sing, bhaja nitai gaura radhe syama hare krsna hare ramaor sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda hare krsna hare rama sri radhegovinda. Actually, however, one should chant the names of the fu I I Panca-tattva (sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda sri-advaita gadadharasrivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda) a n d the n th e si x tee n wo rd s H a reK rsn a, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare, but these unscrupulous, less intelligent men confusethe entire process. Of course, since they are also devotees they canexpress their feelings in that way, but the method prescribed by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu's pure devotees is to chant first the full Panca-tattva mantra and then chant the maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
                                    TEXT 5                  panca-tattva--eka-vastu, nahi kichu bheda
                      rasa asvadite tabu vivldha vibheda
                                 TRANSLATION     Spiritually there are no differences between these five tattvas,
for on the transcendental platform everything is absolute. Yet there arealso varieties in the spiritual world, and in order to taste thesespiritual varieties one should distinguish between them.
                                   PURPORT     In his Anubhasya commentary Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura
describes the Panca-tattva as follows. The supreme energetic, thePersonality of Godhead, manifesting in five kinds of pastimes, appearsas the Panca-tattva. Actually there is no difference between thembecause they are situated on the absolute platform, but they manifestdifferent spiritual varieties as a challenge to impersonalists to tastedifferent kinds of spiritual humors (rasas). In the Vedas it is said,parasya saktlr vividhaiva sruyate: "The varieties of energy of theSupreme Personality of Godhead are differently known." From thisstatement of the Vedas one can understand that there are eternalvarieties of humors or tastes in the spiritual world. Sri Gauranga, SriNityananda, Sri Advaita, Sri Gadadhara and Srivasa are all on the sameplatform, but in spiritually distinguishing between them one shouldunderstand that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the form of a devotee,Nityananda Prabhu appears in the form of a devotee's spiritual master,Advaita Prabhu is the form of a bhakta (devotee) incarnation, GadadharaPrabhu is the energy of a bhakta, and Srivasa is a pure devotee. Thusthere are spiritual distinctions between them. The bhakta-rupa (SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu), the bhakta-svarupa (Sri Nityananda Prabhu) and thebhakta- avatara (Sri Advaita Prabhu) are described as the SupremePersonality of Godhead Himself, His immediate manifestation and Hisplenary expansion, and They all belong to the Visnu category. Althoughthe spiritual and marginal energies of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead are nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead Visnu,they are predominated subjects, whereas Lord Visnu is the predominator.As such, although they are on the same platform, they have appeareddifferently in order to facilitate tasting of transcendental mellows.Actually, however, there is no possibility of one being different fromthe other, for the worshiper and the worshipable cannot be separated atany stage. On the absolute platform, one cannot be understood withoutthe other.
                                    TEXT 6                          panca-tattvatmakam krsnam
                            bhaktarupa-svarupakam                          bhaktavataram bhaktakhyam                            namami bhakta-saktlkam
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my obeisances unto Lord Sri Krsna, who has manifested
Himself in five as a devotee, expansion of a devotee, incarnation of adevotee, pure devotee and devotional energy.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Nityananda Prabhu is the immediate expansion of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu as His brother. He is the personified spiritual bliss of sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. His body is transcendental and full of ecstasy indevotional service. Sri Caitanya Mah-aprabhu is therefore called bhakta-rupa (the form of a devotee), and Sri Nityananda Prabhu is calledbhakta-svarupa (the expansion of a devotee). Sri Advaita Prabhu, theincarnation of a devotee, is Visnu-tattva and belongs to the samecategory.There are also different types of bhaktas or devotees on theplatforms of neutrality, servitude, friendship, paternity and conjugallove. Devotees like Sri Damodara, Sri Gadadhara and Sri Ramananda aredifferent energies. This confirms the Vedic sutra, parasya saktirvividhaiva sruyate. All these bhakta subjects taken together constituteSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is Krsna Himself.
                                    TEXT 7                      svayam bhagavan krsna ekale isvara
                     advitiya, nandatmaja, rasika-sekhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna, the reservoir of all Pleasure, is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Himself, the supreme controller. No one is greater than or equalto Sri Krsna, yet He appears as the son of Maharaja Nanda.
                                   PURPORT     In this verse Kaviraja Gosvami gives an accurate description of
Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by stating that althoughno one is equal to or greater than Him, and He is the reservoir of allspiritual pleasure, He nevertheless appears as the son of Maharaja Nandaand Yasodamayi.
                                    TEXT 8                      rasadi-vilasi, vrajalalana-nagara
                     ara yata saba dekha,--tanra parikara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the supreme
enjoyer in the rasa dance. He is the leader of the damsels of Vraja, andall others are simply His associates.
                                   PURPORT     The word rasadi-vilasi ("the enjoyer of the rasa dance") is very
important. The rasa dance can be enjoyed only by Sri Krsna because He isthe supreme leader and chief of the damsels of Vrndavana. All otherdevotees are His associates. Although no one can compare with Sri Krsna,the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there are many unscrupulous rascalswho imitate the rasa dance of Sri Krsna. They are Mayavadis, and peopleshould be wary of them. The rasa dance can be performed only by SriKrsna and no one else.                                    TEXT 9
                    sei krsna a vatirna sri-krsna-caitanya
                     sei parikara-gana sange saba dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     The selfsame Lord Krsna advented Himself as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
with all His eternal associates, who are also equally glorious.
                                   TEXT 10
                     ekale isvara-tattva caitanya-isvara
                   bhakta-bhavamaya tanra suddha kale vara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is the supreme controller, the one
Personality of Godhead, has ecstatically become a devotee, yet His bodyis transcendental and not materially tinged.
                                   PURPORT     There are different tattvas or truths, including isa-tattva, jiva-
tattva and sakti- tattva. Isa-tattva refers to the Supreme Personalityof Godhead Visnu, who is the su p re me I ivi ng fo rce. I n th e KathaUpanisad it is said, nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam: the SupremePersonality of Godhead is the supreme eternal and the supreme livingforce. The living entities are also eternal and are also living forces,but they are very minute in quantity, whereas the Supreme Lord is thesupreme living force and the supreme eternal. The supreme eternal neveraccepts a body of a temporary material nature, whereas the livingentities who are partand parcel of the supreme eternal are prone to doso. Thus according to the Vedic mantras the Supreme Lord is the suprememaster of innumerable living entities. The Mayavadi philosophers,however, try to equate the minute living entities with the supremeliving entity. Because they recognize no distinctions between them,theirphilosophy is called advaita-vada, or monism. Factually, however, thereis a distinction. This verse is especially meant to impart to theMayavadi philosopher the understandingthat the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the supreme controller. Thesupreme controller, the Personality of Godhead, is Krsna Himself, but asa transcendental pastime He has accepted the form of a devotee, LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu.     As stated in Bhagavad-gita, when the Su preme Personality ofGodhead Krsna comes to this planet exactly like a human being, somerascals consider Him to be one of the ordinary humans. One who thinks inthat mistaken way is described as mudha, or foolish. Therefore oneshould not foolishly consider Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be an ordinaryhuman being. He has accepted the ecstasy of a devotee, but He is theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Since Caitanya Mahaprabhu, there havebeen many imitation incarnations of Krsna who cannot understand thatCaitanya Mahaprabhu was Krsna Himself and not an ordinary human being.
Less intelligent men create their own Gods by advertising a human beingas God. This is their mistake. Therefore here the words tanra suddhakalevara warn that Caitanya Mahaprabhu's body is not material but purelyspiritual. One should not, therefore, accept Caitanya Mahaprabhu as anordinary devotee, although He has assumed the form of a devotee. Yet onemust certainly know that although Caitanya Mahaprabhu isthe SupremePersonality of Godhead, because He accepted the ecstasy of a devotee oneshould not misunderstand His pastimes and place Him in exactly the sameposition as Krsna. It is for this reason only that when Sri KrsnaCaitanya Mahaprabhu was addressed as Krsna or Visnu He blocked His ears,not wanting to hear Himself addressed as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. There is a class of devotees called Gauranganagari who stageplays of Krsna's pastimes using a vigraha or form of CaitanyaMahaprabhu. This is a mistake which is technically called rasabhasa.While Caitanya Mahaprabhu is trying to enjoy as a devotee, one shouldnot disturb Him by addressing Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 11                    krsna-madhuryera eka adbhuta svabhava
                    apana asvadite krsna kare bhakta-bhava
                                 TRANSLATION     The transcendental mellow of conjugal love of Krsna is so wonderful
that Krsna Himself accepts the form of a devotee to relish and taste itfully.
                                   PURPORT     Although Krsna is the reservoir of all pleasure, He has a special
intention to taste Himself by accepting the form of a devotee. It is tobe concluded that although Lord Caitanya is present in the form of adevotee, He is Krsna Himself. Therefore Vaisnavas sing, sri;krsna-caitanya radha-krsna nahe anya: Rad ha and Krsna combined together areSri Krsna Caitan ya Mahaprabhu. Caitanyakhyam prakatam adhuna tad-dvayamcaikyam aptam. Sri Svarupa-damodara Gosvami has said that Radha andKrsna assumed oneness in the form of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 12                   ithe bhakta-bhava dhare caitanya gosani
                    `bhakta-svarupa' tanra nityananda-bhai
                                 TRANSLATION     For this reason Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the supreme teacher,
accepts the form of a devotee and accepts Lord Nityananda as His elderbrother.
                                   TEXT 13                     `bhakta-avatara' tanra acarya-gosani
                     ei tina tattva sabe prabhu kari' gai
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Acarya is Lord Caitanya's incarnation as a devotee.
Therefore these three tattvas [Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhuand Advaita Gosani] are the predominators or masters.
                                   PURPORT     Gosani means gosvami. A person who has full control over the senses
and mind is called a gosvami or gosani. One who does not have suchcontrol is called godasa, ora servant of the senses, and cannot become a spiritual master. Aspiritual master who actually has control over the mind and senses iscalled gosvami. Although the gosvami title has become a hereditarydesignation for unscrupulous men, actually the title gosani or gosvamibegan from Sri Rupa Gosvami, who presented himself as an ordinarygrhastha and minister in government service but became gosvami when hewas actually elevated by the instruction of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Therefore gosvami is not a hereditary title but refers to one'squalifications. When one is highly elevated in spiritual advancement,regardless of wherefrom he comes, he may be called gosvami. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, Sri Nityananda Prabhu and Sri Advaita Gosani Prabhu arenatural gosvamis because They belong to the Visnu- tattva category. Assuch, all of Them are prabhus ("predominators" or "masters"), and Theyare sometimes called Caitanya Gosani, Nityananda Gosani and AdvaitaGosani. Unfortunately Their so-called descendants who do not have thequalifications ofgosvamis have accepted this title as a hereditarydesignation or a professional degree. That is not in accord with thesastric injunctions.
                                   TEXT 14                      eka mahaprabhu, ara prabhu duijana
                     dui prabhu sebe mahaprabhura carana
                                 TRANSLATION     One of Them is Mahaprabhu, and the other two are prabhus. These two
prabhus serve the lotus feet of Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sri Nityananda Prabhu and Sri
Advaita Prabhu all belong to the same Visnu category, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu is nevertheless accepted as the Supreme, and the other twoprabhus engage in His transcendental loving service to teach ordinaryliving entities that every one of us is subordinate to Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. In another place in Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi.5.142) it issaid, ekala isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya.- the only supreme master isKrsna, and all others, both Visnu-tattva andjiva-tattva, engage in theservice of the Lord. Both the Vlsnu-tattva (as Nityananda Prabhu andAdvaita) and the jiva-tattva (Srivasadi-gaura- bhakta-vrnda) engage in
the service of the Lord, but one must distinguish between the Visnu-tattva servitors and the jiva-tattva servitors. The jiva-tattvaservitor, the spiritual master, is actually the servitor God. Asexplained in previous verses, in the absolute world there are no suchdifferences, yet one must observe these differences in order todistinguish the Supreme from His subordinates.
                                   TEXT 15                   ei tina tattva,--`sarvaradhya' kari mani
                  caturtha ye bhakta-tattva,--`aradhaka'jani
                                 TRANSLATION     The three Predominators [Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu and
Advaita Prabhu] are worshipable by all living entities, and the fourthprinciple [Sri Gadadhara Prabhu] is to be understood as Their worshiper.
                                   PURPORT     In his Anubhasya, Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, describing
the truth about the Panca-tattva, explains that we can understand thatLord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the supreme predominator, and NityanandaPrabhu and Advaita Prabhu are His subordinates but are alsopredominators. Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the Supreme Lord, andNityananda Prabhu and Advaita Prabhu are manifestations of the SupremeLord. All of Them are Visnu-tattva, the Supreme, and are thereforeworshipable by the living entities. Although the other two tattvaswithin the category of Panca-tattva--namely, sakti-tattva and jiva-tattva, represented by Gadadhara and Srivasa--are worshipers of theSupreme Lord, they are in the same cate. gory because they eternallyengage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 16                     srivasadi yata koti koti bhakta-gana
               `suddha-bhakta'-tattva-madhye ta-n-sabara ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     There are innumerable pure devotees of the Lord, headed by Srivasa
Thakura, who are known as unalloyed devotees.
                                   TEXT 17
                gadadhara-panditadi prabhura `sakti'-avata--a
                   `antaranga-bhakta' kari' ganana yanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees headed by Gadadhara Pandita are to be considered
incarnations of the potency of the Lord. They are internal potentialdevotees engaged in the service of the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     In connection with verses sixteen and seventeen, Sri
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura explains in his Anubhasya: "There arespecific symptoms by which the internal devotees and the unalloyed orpure devotees are to be known. All unalloyed devotees are sakti-tattvas,or potencies of the Lord. Some of them are situated in conjugal love andothers in filial affection, fraternity and servitude. Certainly all ofthem are devotees, but by making a comparative study it is found thatthe devotees or potencies who are engaged in conjugal love are bettersituated than the others. Thus devotees who are in a relationship withthe Supreme Personality of Godhead in conjugal love are considered to bethe most confidential devotees of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thosewho engage in the service of Lord Nityananda Prabhu and Lord AdvaitaPrabhu generally have relationships of parental love, fraternity,servitude and neutrality. When such devotees develop great attachmentfor Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they too become situated within theintimate circle of devotees in conjugal love." This gradual developmentof devotional service is described by Sri Narottama dasa Thakura asfollows:     gauranga balite habe pulaka sarira     harl hari balite nayane ba'be nira     ara kabe nitaicanda karuna- karlbe     samsara-vasana mora kabe tuccha habe     visaya chadiya kabe suddha habe mana     kabe hama heraba sri-vrnoavana     rupa-raghunatha-pade ha-ibe akuti     kabe hama bujhaba sri-yugala-piriti"When will there be eruptions on my body as soon as I chant the name ofLord Caitanya, and when will there be incessant torrents of tears assoon as I chant the holy names Hare Krsna? When will Lord Nityananda bemerciful toward me and free me from all desires for material enjoyment?When will my mind be completely freed from all contamination of desiresfor material pleasure? Only at that time will it be possible for me tounderstand Vrndavana. Only if I become attached to the instructionsgiven by the six Gosvamis headed by Rupa Gosvami and Raghunatha dasaGosvami will it be possible for me to understand the conjugal love ofRadha and Krsna." By attachment to the devotional service of LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu one immediately comes to the ecstatic position. Whenhe develops his love for Nityananda Prabhu he is freed from allattachment to the material world, and at that time he becomes eligibleto understand the Lord's pastimes in Vrndavana. In that condition, whenone develops his love for the six Gosvamis, he can understand theconjugal love between Radha and Krsna. These are the different stages ofa pure devotee's promotion to conjugal love in the service of Radha andKrsna in an intimate relationship with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                  TEXT 18-19                     yan-saba lana prabhura nitya vihara                   yan-saba lana- prabhura kirtana-pracara
                     yan-saba lana- karena prema asvadana                     yan-saba lana dana kare prema-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     The internal devotees or potencies are all eternal associates in
the pastimes of the Lord. Only with them does the Lord advent topropound the sankirtana movement, only with them does the Lord taste themellow of conjugal love, and only with them does He distribute this loveof God to people in general.
                                   PURPORT     Distinguishing between pure devotees and internal or confidential
devotees, Sri Rupa Gosvami, in his book Upadesamrta, traces thefollowing gradual process of development. Out of many thousands ofkarmis, one is better when he is situated in perfect Vedic knowledge.Out of many such learned scholars and philosophers, one who is actuallyliberated from material bondage is better,and out of many such personswho are actually liberated, one who is a devotee of the SupremePersonality of Godhead is considered to be the best. Among the many suchtranscendental lovers of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the gopisare the best, and among the gopis Srimati Radhika is the best. SrimatiRadhika is very dear to Lord Krsna, and similarly Her ponds, namely,Syamakunda and Radhakunda, are also very much dear to the SupremePersonality of Godhead.     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments in his Anubhasyathat among the five tattvas, two are energies (saktl-tattva) and thethree others are energetic (saktiman tattva). Unalloyed and internaldevotees are both engaged in the favorable culture of Krsnaconsciousness untinged by philosophical speculation or fruitiveactivities. They are all understood to be pure devotees, and those amongthem who simply engage in conjugal love are called madhurya-bhaktas orinternal devotees. The potential loving services in parental love,fraternity and servitude are included in conjugal love of God. Inconclusion, therefore, every confidential devotee is a pure devotee ofthe Lord.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu enjoys His pastimes with His immediateexpansion Nityananda Prabhu. His pure devotees and His three purusaincarnations, namely, Karanodakasayi Visnu, Garbhodakasayi Visnu andKsirodakasayi Visnu, always accompany the Supreme Lord to propound thesankirtana movement.
                                  TEXT 20-21                    sei panca-tattva mili' prthi vi asiya
                    purva-premabha-ndarera mudra ughadiya                   pa--nce mili' lute prema, kare asvadana                     yata yata piye, trsna badhe anuksana
                                 TRANSLATION     The characteristics of Krsna are understood to be a storehouse of
transcendental love. Although that storehouse of love certainly camewith Krsna when He was present, it was sealed. But when Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu came with His other associates of the Panca-tattva, theybroke the seal and plundered the storehouse to taste transcendental loveof Krsna. The more they tasted it, the more their thirst for it grew.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is called maha-vadanyavatara because
although He is Sri Krsna Himself, He is even more favorably disposed tothe poor fallen souls than Lord Sri Krsna. When Lord Sri Krsna Himselfwas personally present He demanded that everyone surrender unto Him andpromised that He would then give one all protection, but when SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu came to this earth with His associates, He simplydistributed transcendental love of God without discrimination. Sri RupaGosvami, therefore, could understand that Lord Caitanya was none otherthan Sri Krsna Himself, for no one but the Supreme Personality ofGodhead can distribute confidential love of the Supreme Person.
                                   TEXT 22                      punah punah piyaiya haya mahamatta
                  nace, kande, hase, gaya, yaiche mada-matta
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Panca-tattva themselves danced again and again and thus made it
easier to drink nectarean love of Godhead. They danced, cried, laughedand chanted like madmen, and in this way they distributed love ofGodhead.
                                   PURPORT     People generally cannot understand the actual meaning of chanting
and dancing. Describing the Gosvamis, Sri Srinivasa Acarya stated,krsnotkirtana-gana-nartana- parau: not only did Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhuand His associates demonstrate this chanting and dancing, but the sixGosvamis also followed in the next generation. The present Krsnaconsciousness movement follows the same principle, and therefore simplyby chanting and dancing we have received good responses all over theworld. It is to be understood, however, that this chanting and dancingdo not belong to this material world. They are actually transcendentalactivities, for the more one engages in chanting and dancing, the morehe can taste the nectar of transcendental love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 23                  patrapatra-vicara nahi, nahi sthanasthana
                    yei yanha paya, tanha kare prema-dana
                                 TRANSLATION     In distributing love of Godhead, Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His
associates did not consider who was a fit candidate and who was not, norwhere such distribution should or should not take place. They made noconditions. Wherever they got the opportunity the members of the Panca-tattva distributed love of Godhead.
                                   PURPORT     There are some rascals who dare to speak against the mission of
Lord Caitanya by criticizing the Krsna consciousness movement foraccepting Europeans and Americans as brahmanas and offering themsannyasa. But here is an authoritative statement that in distributinglove of Godhead one should not consider whether the recipients areEuropeans, Americans, Hindus, Muslims, etc. The Krsna consciousnessmovement should be spread wherever possible, and one should accept thosewho thus become Vaisnavas as being greater than brahmanas, Hindus orIndians. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu desired that His name be spread in eachand every town and village on the surface of the globe. Therefore, whenthe cult of Caitanya Mahaprabhu is spread all over the world, shouldthose who embrace it not be accepted as Vaisnavas, brahmanas andsannyasis? These foolish arguments are sometimes raised by enviousrascals, but Krsna conscious devotees do not care about them. Westrictly follow the principles set down by the Panca-tattva.
                                   TEXT 24                     lutiya, khaiya, diya, bhandara ujade
                    ascarya bhandara, prema sata-guna bade
                                 TRANSLATION     Although the members of the Panca-tattva plundered the storehouse
of love of Godhead and ate and distributed its contents, there was noscarcity, for this wonderful storehouse is so complete that as the loveis distributed, the supply increases hundreds of times.
                                   PURPORT     A pseudo-incarnation of Krsna once told his disciple that he had
emptied himself by giving him all knowledge and was thus spirituallybankrupt. Such bluffers speak in this way to cheat the public, butactual spiritual consciousness is so perfect that the more it isdistributed, the more it increases. Bankruptcy is a term which appliesin the material world, but the storehouse of love of Godhead in thespiritual world can never be depleted. Krsna is providing for millionsand trillions of living entities by supplying all their necessities, andeven if all the innumerable living entities wanted to become Krsnaconscious, there would be no scarcity of love of Godhead, nor wouldthere be insufficiency in providing for their maintenance. Our Krsnaconsciousness movement was started single-handedly, and no one providedfor our livelihood, but at present we are spending hundreds andthousands of dollars all over the world, and the movement is increasingmore and more. Thus there is no question of scarcity. Although jealouspersons may be envious, if we stick to our principles and follow in the
footsteps of the Panca-tattva, this move-ment will go on unchecked by imitation svamis, sannyasis, religionists,philosophers or scientists, for it is transcendental to all materialconsiderations. Therefore those who propagate the Krsna consciousnessmovement should not be afraid of such rascals and fools.
                                   TEXT 25                     uchalila prema-vanya caudike vedaya
                  stri, vrddha, balaka, yuva, sabare du vaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The flood of love of Godhead swelled in all directions, and thus
young men, old men, women and children were all immersed in thatinundation.
                                   PURPORT     When the contents of the storehouse of love of Godhead is thus
distributed, there is a powerful inundation which covers the entireland. In Sridhama Mayapura there is sometimes a great flood after therainy season. This is an indication that from the birthplace of LordCaitanya the inundation of love of Godhead should be spread all over theworld, for this will help everyone, including old men, young men, womenand children. The Krsna consciousness movement of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu is so powerful that it can inundate the entire world andinterest all classes of men in the subject of love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 26                 saj jana, dur jana, pangu, jada, andha-gana
                     prema-vanyaya duvaila jagatera jana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Krsna consciousness movement will inundate the entire world and
drown everyone, whether one be a gentleman, a rogue or even lame,invalid or blind.
                                   PURPORT     Here again it may be emphasized that although jealous rascals
protest that Europeans and Americans cannot be given the sacred threador sannyasa, there is no need even to consider whether one is agentleman or a rogue because this is a spiritual movement which is notconcerned with the external body of skin and bones. Because it is beingproperly conducted under the guidance of the Pancatattva, strictlyfollowing the regulative principles, it has nothing to do with externalimpediments.
                                   TEXT 27                     jagat duvila, jivera haila bija nasa
                    taha dekhi' panca janera parama ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     When the five members of the Panca-tattva saw the entire world
drowned in love of Godhead and the seed of material enjoyment in theliving entities completely destroyed, they all became exceedingly happy.
                                   PURPORT     In this connection, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura writes
in his Anu- bhasya that since the living entities all belong to themarginal potency of the Lord, each and every living entity has a naturaltendency to become Krsna conscious, although at the same time the seedof material enjoyment is undoubtedly within him. The seed of materialenjoyment, watered by the course of material nature, fructifies tobecome a tree of material entanglement which endows the living entitywith all kinds of material enjoyment. To enjoy such material facilitiesis to be afflicted with the three material miseries. However, when bynature's law there is a flood, the seeds within the earth becomeinactive. Similarly, as the inundation of love of Godhead spreads allover the world, the seeds of material enjoyment become impotent. Thusthe more the Krsna consciousness movement spreads, the more thedesire for material enjoyment decreases. The seed of material enjoymentautomatically becomes impotent with the increase of the Krsnaconsciousness movement. Instead of being envious that Krsnaconsciousness is spreading all over the world by the grace of LordCaitanya, those who are jealous should be happy, as indicated here bythe words parama ullasa. But because they are kanistha-adhikaris orprakrta-bhaktas (materialistic devotees who are not advanced inspiritual knowledge), they are envious instead of happy, and they try tofind faults in Krsna consciousness. Yet Srimat Prabodhananda Sarasvatiwrites in his Caitanya-candramrta that when influenced by LordCaitanya's Krsna consciousness movement, materialists become averse totalking about their wives and children, supposedly learned scholars giveup their tedious studies of Vedic literature,yogis give up theirimpractical practices of mystic yoga, ascetics give up their austereactivities of penance and austerity, and sannyasis give up their studyof Sankhya philosophy. Thus they are all attracted by the bhaktl-yogapractices of Lord Caitanya and cannot relish a mellow taste superior tothat of Krsna consciousness.
                                   TEXT 28                    yata yata prema-vrsti kare panca jane
                   tata tata badhe jala, vyape tri-bhuvane
                                 TRANSLATION     The more the five members of the Panca-tattva cause the rains of
love of Godhead to fall, the more the inundation increases and sPreadsall over the world.                                   PURPORT
     The Krsna consciousness movement is not stereotyped or stagnant. It
will spread all over the world in spite of all objections by fools andrascals that European and American mlecchas cannot be accepted asbrahmanas or sannyasis. Here it is indicated that this process willspread and inundate the entire world with Krsna consciousness.
                                  TEXT 29-30                    maya vadi, karma-aistha kutarkika-gana
                      nindaka, pasand yata paduya adhama                       sei saba mahadaksa dhana palaila                      sei vanya ta-sabare chunite narila
                                 TRANSLATION     The impersonalists, fruitive workers, false logicians, blasphemers,
nondevotees and lowest among the student community are very expert inavoiding the Krsna consciousness movement, and therefore the inundationof Krsna consciousness cannot touch them.
                                   PURPORT     Like Mayavadi philosophers in the past such as Prakasananda
Sarasvati of Benares, modern impersonalists are not interested in LordCaitanya's Krsna consciousness movement. They do not know the value ofthis material world; they consider it false and cannot understand howthe Krsna consciousness movement can utilize it. They are so absorbed inimpersonal thought that they take it for granted that all spiritualvariety is material. Because they do not know anything beyond theirmisconception of the brahmajyoti, they cannot understand that Krsna, theSupreme Personality of Godhead, is spiritual and therefore beyond theconception of material illusion. Whenever Krsna incarnates personally oras a devotee, these Mayavadi philosophers accept Him as an ordinaryhuman being. This is condemned i n Bhagavad-gita:     avajananti mam mudha     manusim tanum asrltam     param bhavam ajananto     mama bhuta-mahesvaram"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know Mytranscendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be." (Bg.9.1 1)     There are also other unscrupulous persons who exploit the Lord'sappearance by posing as incarnations to cheat the innocent public. Anincarnation of God should pass the tests of the statements of thesastras and also perform uncommonactivities. One should not accept a rascal as an incarnation of God butshould test his ability to act as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.For example, Krsna taught Arj u na i n Bhagavad-gita, and Arj u na alsoaccepted Him as the Su pre me Personality of Godhead, but for ourunderstanding Arjuna requested the Lord to manifest His universal form,thus testing whether He was actually the Supreme Lord. Similarly, onemust test a so-called incarnation of Godhead according to the standardcriteria. To avoid being misled by an exhibition of mystic powers, it is
best to examine a so-called incarnation of God in the light of thestatements of sastras. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is described in the sastrasas an incarnation of Krsna; therefore if one wants to imitate LordCaitanya and claim to be an incarnation, he must show evidence from thesastras about his appearance to substantiate his claim.
                                  TEXT 31-32                    taha dekhi' mahaprabhu karena cintana
                       jagat duvaite ami karllun yatana                   keha keha edaila, pratijna ha-ila bhanga                      ta-saba duvaite patiba kichu ranga
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing that the Mayavadis and others were fleeing, Lord Caitanya
thought: I wanted everyone to be immersed in this inundation of love ofGodhead, but some of them have escaped. Therefore I shall devise a trickto drown them also.
                                   PURPORT     Here is an important point. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to
invent a way to capture the Mayavadis and others who did not takeinterest in the Krsna consciousness movement. This is the symptom of anacarya. An acarya who comes for the service of the Lord cannot beexpected to conform to a stereotype, for he must find the ways and meansby which Krsna consciousness may be spread. Sometimes jealous personscriticize the Krsna consciousness movement because it engages equallyboth boys and girls in distributing love of Godhead. Not knowing thatboys and girls in countries like Europe and America mix very freely,these fools and rascals criticize the boys and girls in Krsnaconsciousness for intermingling. But these rascals should consider thatone cannot suddenly change a community's social customs. However, sinceboth the boys and girls are being trained to become preachers, thosegirls are not ordinary girls but are as good as their brothers who arepreaching Krsna consciousness. Therefore, to engage both boys and girlsin fully transcendental activities is a policy intended to spread theKrsna consciousness movement. These jealous fools who criticize theintermingling of boys and girls will simply have to be satisfied withtheir own foolishness because they cannot think of how to spread Krsnaconsciousness by adopting ways and means which are favorable for thispurpose. Their stereotyped methods will never help spread Krsnaconsciousness. Therefore, what we are doing is perfect by the grace ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for it is He who proposed to invent a way tocapture those who strayed from Krsna consciousness.
                                   TEXT 33                     eta bali' mane kichu kari ya vicara
                    sannyasa-asrama prabhu kaila angikara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the Lord accepted the sannyasa order of life after full
consideration.
                                   PURPORT     There was no need for Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to accept
sannyasa, for He is God Himself and therefore has nothing to do with thematerial bodily concept of life. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did notidentify Himself with any of the eight varnas and asramas, n am e I y,brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, sudra, brahmacari, grhastha, vanaprastha andsannyasa. He identified Himself as the Supreme Spirit. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, or for that matter any pure devotee, never identifies withthese social and spiritual divisions of life, for a devotee is alwaystranscendental to these different gradations of society. Nevertheless,Lord Caitanya decided to accept sannyasa on the grounds that when Hebecame a sannyasi everyone would show Him respect andin that way be favored. Although there was actually no need for Him toaccept sannyasa, He did so for the benefit of those who might think Himan ordinary human being. The main purpose of His accepting sannyasa wasto deliver the Mayavadi sannyasis. This will be evident later in thischapter.     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura has explained the term"Mayavadi" as follows: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead istranscendental to the material conception of life. A Mayavadi is one whoconsiders the body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna to bemade of maya and who also considers the abode of the Lord and theprocess of approaching Him, devotional service, to be maya. The Mayavadiconsiders all the paraphernalia of devotional service to be maya." Mayarefers to material existence, which is characterized by the reactions offruitive activities. Mayavadis consider devotional service to be amongsuch fruitive activities. According to them, when bhagavatas or devoteesare purified by philosophical speculation, they will come to the realpoint of liberation. Those who speculate in this way regardingdevotional service are called kutarkikas (false logicians), and thosewho consider devotional service to be fruitive activity are also calledkarma-nisthas. Those who criticize devotional service are callednindakas (blasphemers). Similarly, nondevotees who consider devotionalactivities to be material are also called pasandis, and scholars with asimilar viewpoint are called adhama paduyas. The kutarkikas, nindakas,pasandis and adhama paduyas all avoided the benefit of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu's movement of developing love of Godhead. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu felt compassion for them, and it is for this reason that Hedecided to accept the sannyasa order, for by seeing Him as a sannyasithey would offer Him respects. The sannyasa order is still respected inIndia. Indeed, the very dress of a sannyasi still commands respect fromthe Indian public. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasato facilitate preaching His devotional cult, although otherwise He hadno need to accept the fourth order of spiritual life.
                                   TEXT 34                    cabbisa vatsara chila grhastha-asrame
                    panca-vlmsati varse kaila yati-dharme                                 TRANSLATION
     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained in householder life for twenty-
four years, and on the verge of His twenty-fifth year He accepted thesannyasa order.
                                   PURPORT     There are four orders of spiritual life, namely, brahmacarya,
grhastha, vanaprastha and sannyasa, and in each of these asramas thereare four divisions. The divisions of the brahmacaryasrama are savitrya,prajapatya, brahma and brhat, and the divisions of the grhasthasrama arevarta (professionals), sancaya (accumulators), salina (those who do notask anything from anyone) and silonchana (those who collect grains fromthe paddy fields). Similarly, the divisions of the vanaprasthasrama arevaikhanasa, balikhilya, audumbara and phenapa, and the d ivisions ofsannyasa are kuticaka, bahudaka, hamsa and niskriya. There are two kindsof sannyasis, who are called dhiras and narottamas, as stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.13.26-27). At the end of the month of January in the year1432sakabda, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu accepted the sannyasa order fromKesava Bharati, who belonged to the Sankara-sampradaya.
                                   TEXT 35                    sannyasa kariya prabhu kaila akarsana
                       yateka palanachila tarkikadigana
                                 TRANSLATION     After accepting the sannyasa order, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
attracted the attention of all those who had evaded Him, beginning withthe logicians.
                                   TEXT 36
                   paduya, pa--andi, karmi, nindakadi yata
                      tara asi' prabhu-paya haya avanata
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the students, infidels, fruitive workers and critics all came
to surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 37
                     aparadha ksamaila, dubila prema jale
                      keba edaibe prabhura prema-mahdale
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya excused them all, and they merged into the ocean of
devotional service, for no one can escape the unique loving network ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was an ideal acarya. An acarya is an ideal
teacher who knows the purpose of the revealed scriptures, behavesexactly according to their injunctions and teaches his students to adoptthese principles also. As an ideal acarya, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhudevised ways to capture all kinds of atheists and materialists. Everyacarya has a specific means of propagating his spiritual movement withthe aim of bringing men to Krsna consciousness. Therefore, the method ofone acarya may be different from that of another, but the ultimate goalis never neglected. Srila Rupa Gosvami recommends:     yena tena prakarena manah krsne nivesayet     sarve vldhi-nisedha syur etayor eva kinkarahAn acarya should devise a means by which people may somehow or othercome to Krsna consciousness. First they should become Krsna conscious,and all the prescribed rules and regulations may later gradually beintroduced. In our Krsna consciousness movement we follow this policy ofLord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. For example, since boys and girls in theWestern countries freely intermingle, special concessions regardingtheir customs and habits are necessary to bring them to Krsnaconsciousness. The acarya must devise a means to bring them todevotional service. Therefore, although I am a sannyasi I sometimes takepart in getting boys and girls married, although in the history ofsannyasa no sannyasi has personally taken part in marrying hisdisciples.
                                   TEXT 38                      saba nistarite prabhu krpa-avatara
                       saba nistarite kare caturi apra
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared to deliver all the fallen souls.
Therefore He devised many methods to liberate them from the clutches ofmaya.
                                   PURPORT     It is the concern of the acarya to show mercy to the fallen souls.
In this connection, desa-kala-patra (the place, the time and the object)should be taken into consideration. Since the European and American boysand girls in our Krsna consciousness movement preach together, lessintelligent men criticize that they are mingling without restriction. InEurope and America boys and girls mingle unrestrictedly and have equalrights; therefore it is not possible to completely separate the men fromthe women. However, we are thoroughly instructing both men and women howto preach, and actually they are preaching wonderfully. Of course, wevery strictly prohibit illicit sex. Boys and girls who are not marriedare not allowed to sleep together or live together, and there areseparate arrangements for boys and girls in every temple. Grhasthas live
outside the temple, for in the temple we do not allow even husband andwife to live together. The results of this are wonderful. Both men andwomen are preaching the gospel of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and LordKrsna with redoubled strength. I n this verse the words saba nistaritekare caturi apara indicate that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted todeliver one and all. Therefore it is a principle that a preacher muststrictly follow the rules and regulations laid down in the sastras yetat the same time devise a means by which the preaching work to reclaimthe fallen may go on with full force.
                                   TEXT 39                   tabe nija bhakta kaila yata mleccha adi
                      sabe edaila matra kasira mayavadi
                                 TRANSLATION     All were converted into devotees of Lord Caitanya, even the
mlecchas and yavanas. Only the impersonalist followers of Sankaracaryaevaded Him.
                                   PURPORT     In this verse it is clearly indicated that although Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu converted Mohammedans and other mlecchas into devotees, theimpersonalist followers of Sankaracarya could not be converted. Afteraccepting the renounced order of life, Caitanya Mahaprabhu convertedmany karma-nisthas who were addicted to fruitive activities, many greatlogicians like Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, nindakas (blasphemers) li kePrakasananda Sarasvati, pasandis ( nondevotees) like J agai an d Madhai,and adhama paduyas (degraded students) like Mukunda and his friends. Allof them gradually became devotees of the Lord, even the Pathans orMuslims, but the worst offenders, the impersonalists, were extremelydifficult to convert, for they very tactfully escaped the devices ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.     In describing the Kasira Mayavadis, Srila BhaktisiddhantaSarasvatiThakura has explained that persons who are bewildered byempiric knowledge or direct sensual perception, and who thus considerthat even this limited material world can be gauged by their materialestimations, conclude that anything that one can discern by direct senseperception is butmay\ or illusion. They maintain that although theAbsolute Truth is beyond the range of sense perception, it includes nospiritual     , variety or enjoyment. According to the Kasira Mayavadis, thespiritual world is simply void. They do not believe in the Personalityof the Absolute Truth nor in His varieties of activities in thespiritual world. Although they have their own arguments which are notvery strong, they have no conception of the variegated activities of theAbsolute Truth. These impersonalists, who are followers of Sankaracarya,are generally known as Kasira Mayavadis.     Near Varanasi there is another group of impersonalists, who areknown as Saranatha Mayavadis. Outside the city of Varanasi is a placeknown as Saranatha where there is a big Buddhist stupa. Many followersof Buddhist philosophy live there, and they are known as Saranatha
Mayavadis. The impersonalists of Saranatha differ from those ofVaranasi, for the Varanasi impersonalists propagate the idea that theimpersonal Brahman is truth whereas material varieties are false, butthe Saranatha impersonalists do not even believe that the Absolute Truthor Brahman can be understood as the opposite of maya or illusion.According to their vision, materialism is the only manifestation of theAbsolute Truth.      Factually both the Kasira and Saranatha Mayavadis,as well as any other philosophers who have no knowledge of the spiritsoul, are advocates of utter materialism. None of them have clearknowledge regarding the Absolute or the spiritual world. Philosopherslike the Saranatha Mayavadis who do not believe in the spiritualexistence of the Absolute Truth but consider material varieties to beeverything do not believe that there are two kinds of nature, inferior(material) and superior (spiritual), as described in Bhagavad-gita.Actually, neither the Varanasi nor Saranatha Mayavadis accept theprinciples of Bhagavad-gita, due to a poor fund of knowledge.     Since these impersonalists who do not have perfect spiritualknowledge cannot understand the principles of bhaktl-yoga, they must beclassified among the nondevotees who are against the Krsna consciousnessmovement. We sometimes feel inconvenienced by the hindrances offered bythese impersonalists, but we do not care about their so-calledphilosophy, for we are propagating our own philosophy as presented inBhagavad-gita As It Is and getting successful results. Theorizing as ifdevotional service were subject to their mental speculation, both kindsof Mayavadi impersonalists conclude that the subject matter of bhakti-yoga is a creation of maya and that Krsna, devotional service and thedevotee are also maya. Therefore, as stated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,mayavadi krsne aparadhi.- "All the Mayavadis are offenders to LordKrsna." (Cc. Madhya 17.129) It is not possible for them to understandthe Krsna consciousness movement; therefore we do not value theirphilosophical conclusions. However expert such quarrelsomeimpersonalists are in putting forward their so-called logic, we defeatthem in every respect and go forward with our Krsna consciousnessmovement. Their imaginative mental speculation cannot deter the progressof the Krsna consciousness movement, which is completely spiritual andis never under the control of such Mayavadis.
                                   TEXT 40                     vrndavana yaite prabhu rahila kasite
                      mayavadi-gana tanre Iagija nindite
                                 TRANSLATION     While Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was passing through Varanasi on His
way to Vrndavana, the Mayavadi sannyasi philosophers blasphemed againstHim in many ways.
                                   PURPORT     While preaching Krsna consciousness with full vigor, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu faced many Mayavadi philosophers. Similarly, we are alsofacing opposing svamis, yogis, impersonalists, scientists, philosophersand other mental speculators, and by the grace of Lord Krsna we
successfully defeat all of them without difficulty.
                                   TEXT 41                     sannyasi ha-iya kare gayana, nacana
                    na kare veoanta-patha, kare sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although a sannyasi, He does not take interest in the study of
Vedanta but instead always engages in chanting and dancing insankirtana.
                                   PURPORT     Fortunately or unfortunately, we also meet such Mayavadis who
criticize our method of chanting and accuse us of not being interestedin study. They do not know that we have translated volumes and volumesof books into English and that the students in our temples regularlystudy them in the morning, afternoon and evening. We are writing andprinting books, and our students study them and distribute them all overthe world. No Mayavadi school can present as many books as we have;nevertheless, they accuse us of not being fond of study. Suchaccusations are completely false. But although we study, we do not studythe nonsense of the Mayavadis.     Mayavadi sannyasis neither chant nor dance. Their technicalobjection is that this method of chanting and dancing is calledtauryatrika, which indicates that a sannyasi should completely avoidsuch activities and engage his time in the study of Vedanta. Actually,such men do not understand what is meant by Vedanta. In Bhagavad-gita itis said: vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo vedanta-krd veda-vid evacaham. "By all the Vedas I am to be known; indeed I am the compiler ofVedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas." (Bg. 15.15) Lord Krsna isthe actual compiler of Vedanta, and whatever He speaks is Vedantaphilosophy. Although they are lacking the knowledge of Vedanta presentedby the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the transcendental form ofSrimad-Bhagavatam, the Mayavadis are very proud of their study.Foreseeing the bad effects of their presenting Vedanta philosophy in aperverted way, Srila Vyasadeva com piled Srimad-Bhagavatam as a com m entary on Vedanta-sutra. Srimad-Bhagavatam is bhasyam brahma-sutranam; inothe r words, all the Vedanta philosophy in the codes of the Brahma-sutras is thoroughly described in the pages of Sriinad-Bhagavatam. Thusthe factual propounder of Vedanta philosophy is a Krsna conscious personwho always engages in reading and understanding Bhagavad-gita andSrimad-Bhagavatam and teaching the purport of these books to the entireworld. The Mayavadis are very proud of having monopolized the Vedantaphilosophy, but devotees have their own commentaries on Vedanta such asSrimad- Bhagavatam and others written by the acaryas. The commentary ofthe Gaudiya Vaisnavas is the Govlnda-bhasya.     The Mayavadis' accusation that devotees do not study Vedanta isfalse. They do not know that chanting, dancing and preaching theprinciples of Srimad-Bhagavatam, called Bhagavata-dharma, are the sameas studying Vedanta. Since they think that reading Vedanta philosophy isthe only function of a sannyasi and they did not find Caitanya
Mahaprabhu engaged in such direct study, they criticized the Lord.Sripada Sankaracarya has given special stress to the study of Vedantaphilosophy. Vedanta- vakyesu sada ramantah kaupinavantah khalubhagyavantah. "A sannyasi, acce pting the renounced order very strictlyand wearing nothing more than a loincloth,should always enjoy thephilosophical statements in the Vedanta-sutra. Such a person in therenounced order is to be considered very fortunate." The Mayavadis inVaranasi blasphemed Lord Caitanya because His behavior did not followthese principles. Lord Caitanya, however, bestowed His mercy upon theseMayavadi sannyasis and delivered them by means of His Vedanta discourseswith Prakasananda Sarasvati and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.
                                   TEXT 42                    murkha sannyasi nija-dharma nahi jane
                     bhavuka ha-i ya phere bhavukera sane
                                 TRANSLATION     "This Caitanya Mahaprabhu is an illiterate sannyasi and therefore
does not know His real function. Guided only by His sentiments, Hewanders about in the company of other sentimentalists."
                                   PURPORT     Foolish Mayavadis, not knowing that the Krsna consciousness
movement is based on a solid philosophy of transcendental science,supeficially conclude that those who dance and chant do not havephilosophical knowledge. Those who are Krsna conscious actually havefull knowledge of the essence of Vedanta philosophy, for they study thereal commentary on the Vedanta philosophy, Srimad-Bhagavatam, and followthe actual words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as found inBhagavad-gita As It Is. After understanding the Bhagavata philosophy orBhagavata- dharma, they become fully spiritually conscious or Krsnaconscious, and therefore their chanting and dancing is not material butis on the spiritual platform. Although everyone admires the ecstaticchanting and dancing of the devotees, who are therefore popularly knownas the "Hare Krsna people," Mayavadis cannot appreciate these activitiesbecause of their poor fund of knowledge.
                                   TEXT 43                      e saba suniya prabhu hse mane mane
                    upeksa kariya karo na kaila sambhasane
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing all this blasphemy, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu merely smiled
to Himself, rejected all these accusations and did not talk with theMayavadis.
                                   PURPORT     As Krsna conscious devotees, we do not like to converse with
Mayavadi philosophers simply to waste valuable time, but whenever thereis an opportunity we impress our philosophy upon them with great vigorand success.
                                   TEXT 44                      upeksa kariya kaila mathura gamana
                     mathura dekhiy\ punah kaila agamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus neglecting the blasphemy of the Varanasi Mayavadis, Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu proceeded to Mathura, and after visiting Mathura Hereturned to meet the situation.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not talk with the Mayavaci
philosophers when He first visited Varanasi, but He returned there fromMathura to convince them of the real purpose of Vedanta.
                                   TEXT 45                    kasite lekhaka sudra-sricandrasekhara
                  tanra ghare rahila prabhu svatantra isvara
                                 TRANSLATION     This time Lord Caitanya stayed at the house of Candrasekhara,
although he was regarded as a sudra or kayastha, for the Lord, as theSupreme Personality of Godhead, is completely independent.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya stayed at the house of Candrasekhara, a clerk,
although a sannyasi is not supposed to reside in a sudra's house. Fivehundred years ago, especially in Bengal, it was the system that personswho were born in the families of brahmanas were accepted as brahmanas,and all those who took birth in other families--even the higher castes,namely, the ksatriyas and vaisyas--were considered sudra non-brahmanas.Therefore although Sri Candrasekhara was a clerk from a kayastha familyin upper India, he was considered a sudra. Similarly, vaisyas,especially those of the suvarna-vanlk community, were accepted as sudrasin Bengal, and even the valdyas, who were generally physicians, werealso considered sudras. Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu, however, did not accept this artificial principle, which wasintroduced in society by self-interested men, and later the kayasthas,vaidyas and vaniks all began to accept the sacred thread, despiteobjections from the so-called brahmanas.     Before the time of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the suvarna-vanik class wascondemned by Ballal Sen, who was then the King of Bengal, due to apersonal grudge. In Bengal the suvarna-vanik class are always very rich,for they are bankers and dealers in gold and silver. Therefore, BallalSen used to borrow money from a suvarna-vanik banker. Ballal Sen's
bankruptcy later obliged the suvarna-vanik banker to stop advancingmoney to him, and thus he became angry and condemned the entire suvarna-vanik society as belonging to the sudra community. Ballal Sen tried toinduce the brahmanas not to accept the suvarna-vaniks as followers ofthe instructions of the Vedas under the brahminical directions, butalthough some brhmanas approved of Ballal Sen's actions, others did not.Thus the brahmanas also became divided amongst themselves, and those whosupported the suvarna-vanlk class were rejected from the brahmanacommunity. At the present day the same biases are still being followed.     There are many Vaisnava families in Bengal whose members, althoughnot actually born brahmanas, act as acaryas by initiating disciples andoffering the sacred thread as enjoined in the Vaisnava tantras. Forexample, in the families of Thakura Raghunanda, Acarya ThakuraKrsnadasa, Navani Hoda and Rasikananda-deva (a disciple of SyamanandaPrabhu), the sacred thread ceremony is performed, as it is for the casteGosvamis, and this system has continued for the past three to fourhundred years. Accepting disciples born in brahmana families, they arebona fide spiritual masters who have the facility to worship theSalagrama-sila which is worshiped with the Deity. As of this writing,Salagrama-sila worship has not yet been introduced in our Krsnaconsciousness movement, but soon it will be introduced in all ourtemples as an essential function of arcana-marga (Deity worship).
                                   TEXT 46                    tapana-misrera ghare bhiksa-nirvahana
                     sannysira sange nahi mane nimantrana
                                 TRANSLATION     As a matter of principle, Lord Caitanya regularly accepted His food
at the bouse of Tapana Misra. He never mixed with other sannyasis, nordid He accept invitations from them.
                                   PURPORT     This exemplary behavior of Lord Caitanya definitely proves that a
Vaisnava sannyasi can not acce pt i nvitatio ns from M ayavad isannyasis nor in tim ately m ix with them.
                                   TEXT 47                      sanatana gosani asi' tanhai milila
                   tanra siksa Iagi' prabhu du-masa rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sanatana Gosvami came from Bengal, he met Lord Caitanya at the
house of Tapana Misra, where Lord Caitanya remained continuously for twomonths to teach him devotional service.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya taught Sanatana Gosvami in the line of disciplic
succession. Sanatana Gosvami was a very learned scholar in Sanskrit andother languages, but until instructed by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu he didnot write anything about Vaisnava behavior. His very famous book Hari-bhakti-vilasa, which gives directions for Vaisnava candidates, waswritten completely in compliance with the instructions of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. In this Hari-bhakti-vilasa Sri Sanatana Gosvami givesdefinite instructions that by proper initiation by a bona fide spiritualmaster one can immediately become a brahmana. In this connection hesays:     yatha kancanatam yati kamsyam rasa-vidhanatah     tatha aiksa-vidhanena dvijatvam jayate nrnam"As bell metal is turned to gold when mixed with mercury in analchemical process, so one who is properly trained and initiated by abona fide spiritual master immediately becomes a brahmana." Sometimesthose born in brahmana families protest this, but they have no strongarguments against this principle. By the grace of Krsna and His devotee,one's life can change. This is confirmed in the Srimad-Bhagavatam by thewords jahati bandham and suddhanti. Jahati bandham indicates that aliving entity is conditioned by a particular type of body. The body iscertainly an impediment, but one who associates with a pure devotee andfollows his instructions can avoid this impediment and become a regularbrhmana by initiation under his strictguidance. Srila Jiva Gosvami states how a non-brahmana can be turnedinto a brahmana by the association of a pure devotee. Prabha visnavenamah.- Lord Visnu is so powerful that He can do anything He likes.Therefore it is not difficult for Visnu to change the body of a devoteewho is under the guidance of a pure devotee of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 48                    tanre sikhaila saba vaisnavera dharma
                    bhaga vatadi sastrera yata gudha marma
                                 TRANSLATION     On the basis of scriptures like Srimad-Bhagavatam which reveal
these confidential directions, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructedSanatana Gosvami regarding all the regular activities of a devotee.
                                   PURPORT     In the parampara system, the instructions taken from the bona fide
spiritual master must also be based on revealed Vedic scriptures. Onewho is in the line of disciplic succession cannot manufacture his ownway of behavior. There are many so-called followers of the Vaisnava cultin the line of Caitanya Mahaprabhu who do not scrupulously follow theconclusions of the sastras, and therefore they are considered to be apa-sampradaya, which means "outside of the sampradaya." Some of these groups are known as aula, baula, karttabhaja, neda, daravesa, sani sahajiya,sakhibheki smarta, jata-gosni, ativadi, cudadhari and gauranga-aagari. In o rde r to follow strictly the disciplic succession of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu, one should not associate with these apa-sampradaya com m u nities.     One who is not taught by a bona fide spiritual master cannot
understand the Vedic literature. To emphasize this point, Lord Krsna,while instructing Arjuna, clearly said that it was because Arjuna wasHis devotee and confidential friend that he could understand the mysteryof Bhagavad-gita. It is to be concluded, therefore, that one who wantsto understand the mystery of revealed scriptures must approach a bonafide spiritual master, hear from him very submissively and renderservice to him. Then the import of the scriptures will be revealed. Itis stated in the Vedas..     yasya deve para bhaktlr yatha deve tatha gurau     tasyaite kathita hy arthah prakasante mahatmanah"The real import of the scriptures is revealed to one who hasunflinching faith in both the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thespiritual master." Srila Narottama dasa Thak u ra advises, sadhu-sastra-guru-vakya, hrdaye kariya aikya. The meaning of this instruction is thatone must consider the instructions of the sadhu, the revealed scripturesand the spiritual master in order to understand the real purpose ofspiritual life. Neither a sadhu (saintly person or Vaisnava) nor a bonafide spiritual master says anything that is beyond the scope of thesanction of the revealed scriptures. Thus the statements of the revealedscriptures correspond to those of the bona fide spiritual master andsaintly persons. One must therefore act with reference to these threeimportant sources of understanding.
                                   TEXT 49                    itimadhye candrasekhara, misra-tapana
                    duhkhThana- prabhu-paya kaila nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     While Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was instructing Sanatana Gosvami,
both Candrasekhara and Tapana Misra became very unhappy. Therefore theysubmitted an appeal unto the lotus feet of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 50
                     kateka suniba prabhu tomara nindana
                      na parl sahite, ebe chadiba jivana
                                 TRANSLATION     "How long can we tolerate the blasphemy of Your critics against
Your conduct? We should give up our lives rather than hear suchblasphemy.
                                   PURPORT     One of the most important instructions by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
regarding regular Vaisnava behavior is that a Vaisnava should betolerant like a tree and submissive li ke grass.     trnad api sunicena     taror api sahisnuna     amanina manadena
     kirtaniyah sada harih "One should chant the holy name of the Lordin a humble state of mind, thinking oneself lower than the straw in thestreet; one should be more tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense offalse prestige and should be ready to offer all respect to others. Insuch a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the Lordconstantly." Nevertheless, the author of these instructions, LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu, did not tolerate the misbehavior of Jagai andMadhai. When they harmed Lord Nityananda Prabhu, He immediately becameangry and wanted to kill them, and it was only by the mercy of LordNityananda Prabhu that they were saved. One should be very meek andhumble in his personal transactions, and if insulted a Vaisnava shouldbe tolerant and not angry. But if there is blasphemy against one's guruor another Vaisnava, one should be as angry as fire. This was exhibitedby Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. One should not tolerate blasphemy against aVaisnava but should immediately take one of three actions. If someoneblasphemes a Vaisnava, one should stop him with arguments and higherreason. If one is not expert enough to do this he should give up hislife on the spot, and if he cannot do this, he must go away. WhileCaitanya Mahaprabhu was in Benares or Kasi, the Mayavadi sannyasisblasphemed Him in many ways because although He was a sannyasi He wasindulging in chanting and dancing. Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara heardthis criticism, and it was intolerable for them because they were greatdevotees of Lord Caitanya. They could not stop it, however, andtherefore they appealed to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu because thisblasphemy was so intolerable that they had decided to give up theirlives.
                                   TEXT 51                     tomare nindaye yata sannyasira gana
                     sunite na pari, phate hrdaya-sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Mayavadi sannyasis are all criticizing Your Holiness. We
cannot tolerate hearing such criticism, for this blasphemy breaks ourhearts."
                                   PURPORT     This is a manifestation of real love for Krsna and Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. There are th ree catego ries of Vaisn avas: kanistha-adhikris, madhyama-adhikaris an d uttama-adhikris. The kanistha-adhikri,or the devotee i n the lowest stage of Vaisnava life, has firm faith butis not familiar with the conclusions of the sastras. The devotee in thesecond stage, the madhyama-adhikari, is completely aware of the sastricconclusion and has firm faith in his guru and the Lord. He, therefore,avoiding non-devotees, preaches to the innocent. However, the maha-bhagavata or uttama- adhikari the devotee in the highest stage ofdevotional life, does not see anyone as being against the Vaisnavaprinciples, for he regards everyone as a Vaisnava but himself. This isthe essence of Caitanya Mahaprabhu's instruction that one be moretolerantthan a tree and thin k oneself lower than the straw in thestreet(trnadapisunicena taror api sahisnuna). However, even if a devotee
is in the uttama-bhagavata status he must come down to the second statusof life, madhyama-adhikri, to be a preacher,     , for a preacher should not tolerate blasphemy against anotherVaisnava. Although a kanistha-adhikari also cannot tolerate suchblasphemy, he is not competent to stop it by citing sastric evidences.Therefore Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara are understood to be kanistha-adhikaris because they could not refute the arguments of the sannyasisin Benares. They appealed to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to take action,for they felt that they could not tolerate such criticism although theyalso could not stop it.
                                   TEXT 52                       iha suni rahe prabhu isat hasiya
                        sei kle eka vipra milila asiya
                                 TRANSLATION     While Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara were thus talking with Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He only smiled slightly and remained silent. Atthat time a brahmana came there to meet the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     Because the blasphemy was cast against Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Himself, He did not feel sorry, and therefore He was smiling. This isideal Vaisnava behavior. One should not become angry upon hearingcriticism of himself, but if other Vaisnavas are criticized one must beprepared to act as previously suggested. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wasvery compassionate for His pure devotees Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara;therefore by His grace this brahmana immediately came to Him. By Hisomnipotency the Lord created this situation for the happiness of Hisdevotees.
                                   TEXT 53                      asi' ni vedana kare carane dhariya
                    eka vastu magon, deha prasanna ha-iya
                                 TRANSLATION     The brahmana immediately fell at the lotus feet of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and requested Him to accept his proposal in a joyful mood.
                                   PURPORT     The Ved ic i nj u nctions state, tad viddhi pranioatena
pariprasnena sevaya: one m ust approach a superior authority inhumbleness (Bg. 4.34). One cannot challenge a superior authority, butwith great submission one can submit his proposal for acceptance by thespiritual master or spiritual authorities. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is anideal teacher by His personal behavior, and so also are all Hisdisciples. Thus this brahmana, being purified in association withCaitanya Mahaprabhu, followed these principles in submitting his request
to the higher authority. He fell down at the lotus feet of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu and then spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 54                    sakala sannyasi muni kainu nimantrana
                     tumi yadi alsa, purna haya mora mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, I have invited all the sannyasis of Benares to my
home. My desires will be fulfilled if You also accept my invitation.
                                   PURPORT     This brahmana knew that Caitanya Mahaprabhu was the only Vaisnava
sannyasi in Benares at that time and all the others were Mayavadis. Itis the duty of a grhastha to sometimes invite sannyasis to take food athis home. This grhastha-brahmana wanted to invite all the sannyasis tohis house, but he also knew that it would be very difficult to induceLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to accept such an invitation because theMayavadi sannysis would be present. Therefore he fell down at His feetand fervently appealed to the Lord to be compassionate and grant hisrequest. Thus he humbly submitted his desire.
                                   TEXT 55                    na yaha sannyasi-gosthi, iha ami jnni
                     more anugraha kara nimantrana mani,
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, I know that You never mix with other sannyasis, but
please be merciful unto me and accept my invitation."
                                   PURPORT     An acarya or great personality of the Vaisnava school is very
strict in his principles, but although he is as hard as a thunderbolt,sometimes he is as soft as a rose. Thus actually he is independent. Hefollows all the rules and regulations strictly, but sometimes heslackens this policy. It was known that Lord Caitanya never mixed withthe Mayavadi sannyasis, yet He conceded to the request of the brahmana,as stated in the next verse.
                                   TEXT 56                    prabhu hasi' nimantrana kaila angikara
                    sannyasire krpa Iagi' e bhangi tanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya smiled and accepted the invitation of the brahmana.
He made this gesture to show His mercy to the Mayavadi sannyasis.
                                   PURPORT     Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara appealed to the lotus feet of the
Lord regarding their grief at the criticism of Him by the sannyasis inBenares. Caitanya Mahaprabhu merely smiled, yet He wanted to fulfill thedesires of His devotees, and the opportunity came when the brahmana cameto request Him to accept his invitation to be present in the midst ofthe other sannyasis. This coincidence was made possible by theomnipotency of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 57                 se vipra janena prabhu na ya'na ka'ra ghare
                    tanhara preranaya tanre atyagraha kare
                                 TRANSLATION     The brahmana knew that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu never went to
anyone else's house, yet due to inspiration from the Lord he earnestlyrequested Him to accept this invitation.
                                   TEXT 58
                    ara dine gela prabhu se vipra-bhavane
                    dekhilena, vasiyachena sannyasira gane
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, when Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the house
of that brahmana, he saw all the sannyasis of Benares sitting there.
                                   TEXT 59
                     sabanamaskari' gela pada-praksalane
                   pa-da praksalana karl vasila sei sthane
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw the sannyasis He immediately
offered obeisances, and then He went to wash His feet. After washing Hisfeet, He sat down by the place where He had done so.
                                   PURPORT     By offering His obeisances to the Mayavadi sannyasis Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu very clearly exhibited His humbleness to everyone. Vaisnavasmust not be disrespectful to anyone, to say nothing of a sannyasi. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu teaches, amanina manadena: one should always berespectful to others but should not demand respect for himself. Asannyasi should always walk barefoot, and therefore when he enters a
temple or a society of devotees he should first wash his feet and thensit down in a proper place. In India it is still the prevalent customthat one put his shoes in a specified place and then enter the templebarefoot after washing his feet. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is an idealacarya, and those who follow in His footsteps should practice themethods of devotional life that He teaches us.
                                   TEXT 60                    vasi ya karila kichu aisvarya prakasa
                      mahatejomaya vapu koti-suryabhasa
                                 TRANSLATION     After sitting on the ground, Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His
mystic power by manifesting an effulgence as brilliant as theillumination of millions of suns.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Krsna, is full of all potencies. Therefore it is not remarkable for Himto manifest the illumination of millions of suns. Lord Sri Krsna isknown as Yogesvara, the master of all mystic powers. Sri Krsna CaitanyaMahaprabhu is Lord Krsna Himself; therefore He can exhibit any mysticpower.
                                   TEXT 61                    prabhave akarsila saba sannyasira mana
                      uthila sannyasi saba chadiya asana
                                 TRANSLATION     When the sannyasis saw the brilliant illumination of the body of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, their minds were attracted, and they allimmediately gave up their sitting places and stood in respect.
                                   PURPORT     To draw the attention of common men, sometimes saintly
persons,acaryas and teachers exhibit extraordinary opulences. This isnecessary to attract the attention of fools, but a saintly person shouldnot misuse such power for personal sense gratification like false saintswho declare themselves to be God. Even a magician can exhibitextraordinary feats which are not understandable to common men, but thisdoes not mean that the magician is God. It is a most sinful activity toattract attention by exhibiting mystic powers and utilizing thisopportunity to declare oneself to be God. A real saintly person neverdeclares himself to be God but always places himself in the position ofa servant of God. For a servant of God there is no need to exhibitmystic powers, and he does not like to do so, but on behalf of theSupreme Personality of Godhead a humble servant of God performs hisactivities in such a wonderful way that no common man can dare try to
act like him. Yet a saintly person never takes credit for such actionsbecause he knows very well that when wonderful things are done on hisbehalf by the grace of the Supreme Lord, all credit goes to the masterand not to the servant.
                                   TEXT 62                  prakasananda-name sarva sannyasi-pradhana
                     prabhuke kahila kichu kariya sammana
                                 TRANSLATION     The leader of all the Mayavadi sannyasis present was named
Prakasananda Sarasvati, and after standing up he addressed Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu as follows with great respect.
                                   PURPORT     As Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu showed respect to all the Mayavadi
sannyasis, si m i larly th e lead er of the Mayavadi sannyasis, Prakasanan da, also showed hi s respects to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 63                     ihan aisa, ihan aisa, sunaha sripada
                     apavitra sthane vaisa, kiba avasada
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please come here. Please come here, Your Holiness. Why do You sit
in that unclean place? What has caused Your lamentation?"
                                   PURPORT     Here is the distinction between Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
Prakasananda Sarasvati. In the material world everyone wants tointroduce himself as very important and great, but Caitanya Mahaprabhuintroduced Himself very humbly and meekly.The Mayavadis were sitting inan exalted position, and Caitanya Mahaprabhu sat in a place which wasnot even clean. Therefore the Mayavadi sannyasis thought that He musthave been aggrieved for some reason, and Prakasananda Sarasvati inquiredabout the cause for His lamentation.
                                   TEXT 64                    prabhu kahe,--ami ha-i hina-sampradaya
                     toma-sabara sabhaya vasite na yuyaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord replied: "I belong to a lower order of sannyasis.
Therefore I do not deserve to sit with you."                                   PURPORT
     Mayavad i sannyasis are al ways very p uffed u p beca use of thei r
k no wledge of Sanskrit and because they belong to the Sankara-sampradaya. They are always under the impression that unless one is abrahmana and a very good Sanskrit scholar, especially in grammar, onecannot accept the renounced order of life nor become a preacher. Mayavadi sannyasis always m isinterpret all the sastras with their wordjugglery and grammatical compositions, yet Sripada Sankaracarya himselfcondemned such jugglery of words in the verse, pr\ote sannihite khalumarane nahi nahi raksati dukrn-karane. Dukrn refers to suffixes andprefixes in Sanskrit grammar. Sankaracarya warned his disciples that ifthey concerned themselves only with the principles of grammar, notworshiping Govinda, they were fools who would never be saved. Yet inspite of Sripada Sankaracarya's instructions, foolish Mayavadi sannyasisare always busy juggling words on the basis of strict Sanskrit grammar.     Mayavadi sannyasis are very puffed up if they hold the elevatedsannyasa titles tirtha, asrama, and sarasvati. Even among Mayavadis,those who belong to other sampraoayas and hold other titles such asVana, Aranya, Bharati, etc., are considered to be lower-grade sannyasis.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa from the Bharati-sampradaya,and thus He considered Himself a lower sannyasi than PrakasanandaSarasvati. To remain distinct from Vaisnava sannyasis, the sannyasis ofthe Mayavadi-sampradaya always think themselves to be situated in a veryelevated spiritual order, but Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in order toteach them how to become humble and meek, accepted Himself as belongingto a lower sampradaya of sannyasis. Th us He wanted to poi nt outclearly that a sannyasi is one who is advanced in spiritual knowledge.One who is advanced in spiritual knowledge should be accepted asoccupying a better position than those who lack such knowledge.     The Mayavadi-sampradaya sannyasis are generally known as Vedantis,as if Vedanta were their monopoly. Actually, however, Vedanti refers toa person who perfectly k nows Krsna. As confi rmed i n Bhagavad-gita,vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah: "By all the Vedas it is Krsna who isto be known." (Bg. 15.15) The so-called Mayavadi Vedantis do not knowwho Krsna is; therefore their title of Vedanti, or knower of Vedantaphilosophy, is simply a pretension. Mayavadi sannyasis always think ofthemselves as real sannyasis and consider sannyasis of the Vaisnavaorder to be brahmacaris. A brahmacari is supposed to engage in theservice of a sannyasi and accept him as his guru. Mayavadi sannyasistherefore declare themselves to be not only gurus but jagad-gurus, orthe spiritual masters of the entire world, although, of course, theycannot see the entire world. Sometimes they dress gorgeously and travelon the backs of elephants in processions, and thus they are alwayspuffed up, accepting themselves as jagad-gurus. Srila Rupa Gosvami,however, has explained that jagad-guru properly refers to one who is thecontroller of his tongue, mind, words, belly, genitals and anger.Prthivim sa sisyat: such a jagad-guru is completely fit to makedisciples all over the world. Due to false prestige, Mayavad i sannyasiswho do not have these q ualifications sometimes harass and blaspheme aVaisnava sannyasi who humbly engages in the service of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 65                      apane prakasananda hatete dhariya
                     vasaila sabha-madhye sammana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Prakasananda Sarasvati, however, caught Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
personally by the hand and seated Him with great respect in the midst ofthe assembly.
                                   PURPORT     The respectful behavior of Prakasananda Sarasvati toward Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu is very much to be appreciated. Such behavior iscalculated to be ajnata- sukrti, or pious activities that one executeswithout his knowledge.Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu very tactfully gavePrakasananda Sarasvati an opportunity to advance in ajnta-sukrti so that in the future he might actually become aVaisnava sannyasi.
                                   TEXT 66                   puchila, tomra nma `sri-krsna-caitanya'
                    kesava-bhratira sisya, tte tumi dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     Prakasananda Sarasvati then said: "I understand that Your name is
Sri Krsna Caitanya. You are a disciple of Sri Kesava Bharati, andtherefore You are glorious.
                                   TEXT 67
                   samprad\yika sannysi tumi, raha ei grme
                      ki krane m-sabara na kara darsane
                                 TRANSLATION     "You belong to our Sankara-sampradaya and live in our village,
Varanasi. Why then do You not associate with us? Why is it that Youavoid even seeing us?
                                   PURPORT     A Vaisnava sannysi or a Vaisnava in the second stage of advancement
in spiritual knowledge can understand four principles--namely, theSupreme Personality of Godhead, the devotees, the innocent and thejealous--and he behaves differently with each. He tries to increase hislove for Godhead, make friendship with devoteesand preach Krsna consciousness among the innocent, but he avoids thejealous who are envious of the Krsna consciousness movement. LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu Himself exemplified such behavior, and this is whyPrakasananda Sarasvati inquired why He did not associate or even talkwith them. Caitanya Mahaprabhu confirmed by example that a preacher ofthe Krsna consciousness movement generally should not waste his time
talking with Mayavadi sannysis, but when there are arguments on thebasis of sstra, a Vaisnava must come forward to talk and defeat them inphilosophy.     According to Mayavadi sannysis, only one who takes sannysa in thedisciplic succession from Sankaracarya is a Vedic sannysi. Sometimes itis challenged that the sannysis who are preaching in the Krsnaconsciousness movement are not genuine because they do not belong tobrhmana families, for Mayavadis do not offer sannyasa to one who doesnot belong to a brhmana family by birth. Unfortunately, however, they donot know that at present everyone is born a sudra (kalau sudrasambhava). It is to be understood that there are no brhmanas in this agebecause those who claim to be brhmanas simply on the basis of birthrightdo not have the brahminical qualifications. However, even if one is bornin a nonbrahmana family, if he has the brahminical qualifications heshould be accepted as a brhmana, as confirmed by Srila Narada Muni andthe great saint Sridhara Svami. This is also stated in Srimad-Bhnavatam.Both Narada and Sridhara Svami completely agree that one cannot be abrhmana by birthright but must possess the qualities of a brahmana. Thusin our Krsna consciousness movement we never offer the sannyasa order toa person whom we do not find to be qualified in terms of the prescribedbrahminical principles. Although it is a fact that unless one is abrhmana he cannot become a sannyasi, it is not a valid principle that anunqualified man who is born in a brhmana family is a brhmana whereas abrahminically qualified person born in a non-brhmana family cannot beaccepted. The Krsna consciousness movement strictly follows the injunctions of Srimad-Bhnavatam, avoiding misleading heresy and manufacturedconclusions.
                                   TEXT 68                     sannysi ha-ijya kara nartana-gayana
                   bhavuka saba sange lana kara sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are a sannyasi. Why then do You indulge in chanting and
dancing, engaging in Your sankirtana movement in the company offanatics?
                                   PURPORT     This is a challenge by Prakasananda Sarasvati to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura writes in hisAnubh\sya that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is the object of Vedantaphilosophical research, has very kindly determined who is an appropriatecandidate for study of Vedanta philosophy. The first qualification ofsuch a candidate is expressed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in HisSlksastaka:     trnd api sunicena taror api sahisnun\     amnin\ mnadena kirtaniyah sada harihThis statement indicates that one can hear or speak about Vedantaphilosophy through the disciplic succession. One must be very humble andmeek, more tolerant than a tree and more humble than the grass. Oneshould not claim respect for himself but should be prepared to give all
respect to others. One must have these qualifications to be eligible tounderstand Vedic knowledge.
                                   TEXT 69                  vedanta-pathana, dhyna,--sannyasira dharma
                     th\ ch\di ' kara kene bhnukera karma
                                 TRANSLATION     "Meditation and the study of Vedanta are the sole duties of a
sannyasi. Why do You abandon these to dance with fanatics?
                                   PURPORT     As explained in regard to verse 41, Mayavadi sannysis do not
approve of chanting and dancing. Prakasananda Sarasvati, likeSarvabhauma Bhattacarya, misunderstood Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be amisled young sannysi, and therefore heasked Him why He indulged in the association of fanatics instead ofexecuting the duty of a sannyasi.
                                   TEXT 70                     prabhne dekhiye tom\ slst nra--vana
                      hin\cara kara kene, ithe ki krana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You look as brilliant as if You were Narayana Himself. Will You
kindly explain the reason that You have adopted the behavior of lower-class people?"
                                   PURPORT     Due to renunciation, Vedanta study, meditation and the strict
regulative principles of their daily routine, Mayavadi sannyasis arecertainly in a position to execute pious activities. Thus PrakasanandaSarasvati, on account of his piety, could understand that CaitanyaMahaprabhu was not an ordinary person but the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Sakst nr\yana: he considered Him to be Narayana Himself.Mayavadi sannysis address each other as Narayana because they think thatthey are all going to be Narayana or merge with Narayana in the nextlife. Prakasananda Sarasvati appreciated that Caitanya Mahaprabhu hadalready directly become Narayana and did not need to wait until His nextlife. One difference between the Vaisnava and Mayavadi philosophies isthat Mayavadi philosophers think that after giving up their bodies theyare going to become Narayana by merging with His body, whereas Vaisnavaphilosophers understand that after the body dies they are going to havea transcendental, spiritual body in which to associate with Narayana.
                                   TEXT 71                    prabhu kahe--suna, sripda, ihra krana
                     guru more murkha dekhi' kariia ssana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied to Prakasananda Sarasvati: "My dear
sir, kindly hear the reason. My spiritual master considered Me a fool,and therefore he chastised Me.
                                   PURPORT     When Prakasananda Sarasvati inquired from Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
why He neither studied Vedanta nor performed meditation, Lord Caitanyapresented Himself as a number one fool in order to indicate that thepresent age, Kali-yuga, is an age of fools and rascals in which it isnot possible to obtain perfection simply by reading Vedanta philosophyand meditating. The sastras strongly recommend:.     harer nma harer nma harer nmaiva ke valam     kalau nsty eva nsty eva nsty eva gatir anyatha"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance isthe chanting of the holy names of the Lord. There is no other way. Thereis no other way. There is no other way." People in general in Kali-yugaare so fallen that it is not possible for them to obtain perfectionsimply by studying Vednta-sutra. One should therefore seriously take tothe constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 72                    murkha tumi, tomra nhika vedantadhikra
                   'krsna-mantra' japa sada,--ei mantra-sra
                                 TRANSLATION     " `You are a fool,' he said. `You are not qualified to study
Vedanta philosophy, and therefore You must always chant the holy name ofKrsna. This is the essence of all mantras or Vedic hymns.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja comments in this
connection, "One can become perfectly successful in the mission of hislife if he acts exactly according to the words he hears from the mouthof his spiritual master." This acceptance of the words of the spiritualmaster is called srauta-vlya, which indicates that the disciple mustcarry out the spiritual master's instructions without deviation. SrilaVisvanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks in this connection that a disciplemust accept the words of his spiritual master as his life and soul. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu here confirms this by sayingthat since His spiritualmaster ordered Him only to chant the holy name of Krsna, He alwayschanted the Hare Krsna maha-mantra according to this direction (`krsna-mantra'japa sada,--ei mantra-sara).     Krsna is the origin of everything. Therefore when a person is fullyKrsna conscious it is to be understood that his relationship with Krsnahas been fully confirmed. Lacking Krsna consciousness, one is onlypartially related with Krsna and is therefore not in his constitutional
position. Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead Krsna, the spiritual master of the entire universe, Heneverthelesstook the position of a disciple in order to teach by examplehow a devotee should strictly follow the orders of a spiritual master inexecuting the duty of always chanting the Hare Krsna mah-mantra. One whois very much attracted to the study of Vedanta philosophy must takelessons from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. I n this age, no one is actuallycompetent to study Vedanta, and therefore it is better that one chantthe holy name of the Lord, which is the essence of all Vedic knowledge,as Krsna Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gita:     vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo     veonta-krd veda-vid eva cham"By all the Vedas am I to be known; indeed I am the compiler of Vedanta,and I am the knower of the Vedas." (Bg. 15.15)     Only fools give up the service of the spiritual master and thinkthemselves advanced in spiritual knowledge. In order to check suchfools, Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself presented the perfect example of howto be a disciple. A spiritual master knows very well how to engage eachdisciple in a particular duty, but if a disciple, thinking himself moreadvanced than his spiritual master, gives up his orders and actsindependently, he checks his own spiritual progress. Every disciple mustconsider himself completely unaware of the science of Krsna and mustalways be ready to carry out the orders of the spiritual master tobecome competent in Krsna consciousness. A disciple should always remaina fool before his spiritual master. Therefore sometimes pseudo-spiritualists accept a spiritual master who is not even fit to become adisciple because they want to keep him under their control.This isuseless for spiritual realization.     One who imperfectly knows Krsna consciousness cannot know Vedantaphilosophy. A showy display of Vedanta study without Krsna consciousnessis a feature of the external energy, maya, and as long as one isattracted by the inebrieties of this ever changing material energy, hedeviates from devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. An actualfollower of Vedanta philosophy is a devotee of Lord Visnu, who is thegreatestof the greatand the maintainer of the entire universe. Unlessone surpasses the field of activities in service to the limited, onecannot reach the unlimited. Knowledge of the unlimited is actualbrahmajnana, or knowledge of the Supreme.Those who are addicted tofruitive activities and speculative knowledge cannot understand thevalue of the holy name of the Lord, Krsna, who is always completelypure, eternally liberated and full of spiritual bliss. One who has takenshelter of the holy name of the Lord, which is identical with the Lord,does not have to study Vedanta philosophy, for he has already completedall such study.     One who is unfit to chant the holy name of Krsna but thinks thatthe holy name is different from Krsna and thus takes shelter of Vedantastudy in order to understand Him must be considered a number one fool,as confirmed by Caitanya Mahaprabhu by His personal behavior, andphilosophical speculators who want to make Vedanta philosophy anacademic career are also considered to be within the material energy. Aperson who always chants the holy name of the Lord, however, is alreadybeyond the ocean of nescience, and thus even a person born in a lowfamily who engages in chanting the holy name of the Lord is consideredto be beyond the study of Vedanta philosophy. I n this connection the
Srimad-Bhnavatam states:     aho bata svapaco'to gariyn     yajjih vnre vartate nma tubhyam     tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya     brahman ucur nama grnanti ye te"If a person born in a family of dog-eaters takes to the chanting of theholy name of Krsna, it is to be understood that in his previous life hemust have executed all kinds of austerities and penances and performedall the Vedic yajnas." (SB. 3.33.7) Another quotation states:     rg-vedo 'tha yajur-vedah sma-vedo 'py atharvanah     adhitas tena yenoktam harir ity aksara-dvayam"A person who chants the two syllables Ha-ri has already studied thefour Vedas--Sama, Rk, Yajuh and Atharva."     Taking advantage of these verses, there are some sahajiys who,taking everything very cheaply, consider themselves elevated Vaisnavasbut do not care even to touch the Vednta-sutras or Vedanta philosophy. Areal Vaisnava should, however, study Vedanta philosophy, but if afterstudying Vedanta one does not adopt the chanting of the holy name of theLord, he is no better than a Mayavadi. Therefore, one should not be aMayavadi, yet one should not be unaware of the subject matter of Vedantaphilosophy. Indeed, Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His knowledge ofVedanta in His discourses with Prakasananda Sarasvati. Thus it is to beunderstood that a Vaisnava should be completely conversant with Vedantaphilosophy, yet he should not think that studying Vedanta is all in alland therefore be unattached to the chanting of the holy name. A devoteemust know the importance of simultaneously understanding Vedantaphilosophy and chanting the holy names. If by studying Vedanta onebecomes an impersonalist, he has not been able to understand Vedanta.This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 15.15). Vedanta means "the endof knowledge." The ultimate end of knowledge is knowledge of Krsna, whois identical with His holy name. Cheap Vaisnavas (sahajiyas) do not careto study the Vedanta philosophy as commented upon by the four acaryas.In the Gaudiya-sampradaya there is a Vedanta commentary called theGovinda-bhasya, but the sahajiyas consider such commentaries to beuntouchable philosophical speculation, and they consider the acaryas tobe mixed devotees. Thus they clear their way to hell.
                                   TEXT 73                    krsna-mantra haite habe samsara-mocana
                     krsna-nama haite pabe krsnera carana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Simply by chanting the holy name of Krsna one can obtain freedom
from material existence. Indeed, simply by chanting the Hare Krsnamantra one will be able to see the lotus feet of the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     In the Anubhasya, Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami says that
the actual effect that will be visible as soon as one achievestranscendental knowledge is that he will immediately become free fromthe clutches of maya and fully engage in the service of the Lord. Unless
one serves the Supreme Personality of Godhead Mukunda one cannot becomefree from fruitive activities under the external energy. However, whenone chants the holy name of the Lord offenselessly, he can realize atranscendental position which is completely aloof from the materialconception of life. Rendering service to the Lord, a devotee relates tothe Supreme Personality of Godhead in one of five relationships--namely,santa, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya and madhurya--and thus he relishestranscendental bliss in that relationship. Such a relationship certainlytranscends the body and mind. When one realizes that the holy name ofthe Lord is identical with the Supreme Person, he becomes completelyeligible to chant the holy name of the Lord. Such an ecstatic chanterand dancer must be considered to have a direct relationship with theLord.     According to the Vedic principles, there are three stages ofspiritual advancement, namely, sambandhajnna, abhidheya and prayojana.Sambandhajnna refers to establishing one's original relationship withthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, abhidheya refers to acting accordingto that constitutional relationship, and prayojana is the ultimate goalof life, which is to develop love of Godhead (prema pumartho mahan). Ifone adheres to the regulative principles under the order of thespiritual master, he very easily achieves the ultimate goal of his life.A person who is addicted to the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra veryeasily gets the opportunity to serve the Supreme Personality of Godheaddirectly. There is no need for such a person to understand thegrammatical jugglery in which Mayavadi sannysis generally indulge. SriSankaracarya also stressed this point. Nahi nahi raksati dukrn-karane:"Simply by juggling grammatical suffixes and prefixes one cannot savehimself from the clutches of death." The grammatical word jugglerscannot bewilder a devotee who engages in chanting the Hare Krsna mah-mantra. Simply addressing the energy of the Supreme Lord as Hare and theLord Himself as Krsna very soon situates the Lord within the heart ofthe devotee. By thus addressing Radha and Krsna one directly engages inHis Lordship's service. The essence of all revealed scriptures and allknowledge is present when one addresses the Lord and His energy by theHare Krsna mantra, for this transcendental vibration can completelyliberate a conditioned soul and directly engage him in the service ofthe Lord.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu presented Himself as a grand fool, yet Hemaintained that all the words that He had heard from His spiritualmaster strictly followed the principles stated by Vyasadeva in Srimad-Bhagavatam.     anarthopasamam saksad     bhakti-yogam adhoksaje     lokasy\jnato vidv\ms     cakre stvata-samhitm"The material miseries of a living entity, which are superfluous to him,can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service.But the mass of people do not know this, and therefore the learnedVyasadeva compiled this Vedic literature, which is in relation to theSupreme Truth." (SB. 1.7.6) One can overcome all misconceptions andentanglement in the material world by practicing bhakti-yoga, andtherefore Vyasadeva, acting on the instruction of Sri Narada, has verykindly introduced Srimad-Bhagavatam to relieve the conditioned soulsfrom the clutches of m\ya. Lord Caitanya's spiritual master instructed
Him, therefore, that one must read Srimad-Bhnavatam regularly and withscrutiny to gradually become attached to the chanting of the Hare Krsnamaha-mantra.     The holy name and the Lord are identical. One who is completelyfree from the clutches of maya can understand this fact. This knowledge,which is achieved by the mercy of the spiritual master, places one onthe supreme transcendental platform. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu presentedHimself as a fool because prior to accepting the shelter of a spiritualmaster He could not understand that simply by chanting one can berelieved from all material conditions. But as soon as He became afaithful servant of His spiritual master and followed his instructions,He very easily saw the path of liberation. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'schanting of the Hare Krsna mantra must be understood to be devoid of alloffenses. The ten offenses against the holy name are as follows: (1) toblaspheme a devotee of the Lord, (2) to consider the Lord and thedemigods to be on the same level or to think that there are many gods,(3) to neglect the orders of the spiritual master, (4) to minimize . theauthority of scriptures (Vedas), (5) to interpret the holy name of God,(6) to commit sins on the strength of chanting, (7) to instruct theglories of the Lord's name to the unfaithful, (8) to compare thechanting of the holy name with material piety, (9) to be inattentivewhile chanting the holy name, and (10) to be attached to material thingsin spite of chanting the holy name.
                                   TEXT 74                      nma vinu kali-kale nahi ra dharma
                     sarva-mantra-sra nma, ei sstra-marma
                                 TRANSLATION     " `In this age of Kali there is no other religious principle than
the chanting of the holy name, which is the essence of all Vedic hymns.This is the purport of all scriptures.'
                                   PURPORT     The principles of the parampar\ system were strictly honored in the
ages Satya-yuga, Treta-yuga and Dvapara-yuga, but in the present age,Kali-yuga, people neglect the importance of this system of srauta-parampara, or receiving knowledge by disciplic succession. In this age,people are prepared to argue that they can understand that which isbeyond their limited knowledge and perception through so-calledscientific observations and experiments, not knowing that actual truthcomes down to man from authorities. This argumentative attitude isagainst the Vedic principles, and it is very difficult for one whoadopts it to understand that the holy name of Krsna is as good as KrsnaHimself. Since Krsna and His holy name are identical, the holy name iseternally pure and beyond material contamination. It is the SupremePersonality of Godhead as a transcendental vibration. The holy name iscompletely different from material sound, as confirmed by Narottama dasaThakura. Golokera prema-dhana, hari-nama-sankirtana: th e tran sce n d en tal v i b ratio n of hari-nma- sankirtana is imported from thespiritual world. Thus although materialists who are addicted to
experimental knowledge and the so-called "scientific method" cannotplace their faith in the chanting of the Hare Krsna mah-mantra, it is afact that simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra offenselessly one canbe freed from all subtle and gross material conditions. The spiritualworld is called Vaikuntha, which means "without anxiety." In thematerial world everything is full of anxiety (kuntha), whereas in thespiritual world (Vaikuntha) everything is free from anxiety. Thereforethose who are afflicted by a combination of anxieties cannot understandthe Hare Krsna mantra, which is free from all anxiety. I n the presentage the vibration of the Hare Krsna mah- mantra is the only processwhich is in a transcendental position beyond material contamination.Since the holy name can deliver a conditioned soul, it is explained hereto be sarva-mantra-sara, the essence of all Vedic hymns.     A name which represents an object of this material world may besubjected to arguments and experimental knowledge, but in the absoluteworld a name and its owner, fame and the famous, are identical, andsimilarly the qualities, pastimes and everything else pertaining to theAbsolute are also absolute. Although Mayavadis profess monism, theydifferentiate between the holy name of the Supreme Lord and the LordHimself. For this offense of namaparadha they grad ually glide down fromtheir exalted position of brahma- jnana, as confirmed in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (SB. 10.2.32):     ruhya krcchrena param padam tatah     patanty adho 'ndrta-yusmad-anghrayahAlthough by severe austerities they rise to the exalted position ofbrahma- jnana, they nevertheless fall down due to imperfect knowledge ofthe Absolute Truth. Although they profess to understand the Vedicmantra, sarvam khaiv idam brahma ("everyth ing is brahman"), they are unable to understand that the holy name is also brahman. I f theyregularly chant the mah-mantra, however, they can be relieved from thismisconception. Unless one properly takes shelter of the holy name, hecannot be relieved from the offensive stage in chanting the holy name.
                                   TEXT 75                       eta bali' eka sloka sikhila more
                      kanthe kari' ei sloka kariha vicre
                                 TRANSLATION     "After describing the potency of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, My
spiritual master taught Me another verse,advising Me to always keep thename within My throat.
                                   TEXT 76
                             harer nma harer nma
                            harer nmaiva ke valam                           kalau nasty eva nsty eva                           nsty e va gatir anyath\
                                 TRANSLATION     " `In this age of Kali there is no alternative, there is no
alternative, there is no alternative for spiritual progress than theholy name, the holy name, the holy name of the Lord.'
                                   PURPORT     For progress in spiritual life, the sstras recommend meditation in
Satya-yuga, sacrifice for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu in Treta-yugaand gorgeous worship of the Lord in the temple in Dvapara-yuga, but inthe age of Kali one can achieve spiritual progress only by chanting theholy name of the Lord. This is confirmed in various scriptures. In theSrimad-Bhnavatam there are many references to this fact. In the TwelfthCanto it is said, kirtand eva krsnasya mukta-sangah param vrajet: In theage of Kali there are many faults, for people are subjected to manymiserable conditions, yet in this age there is one great benediction--simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra one can be freed from allmaterial contamination and thus be elevated to the spiritual world. TheNarada-pancartra also praises the Hare Krsna mah-mantra as follows:     trayo vedah sad-angani     chandamsi vivldh\h surah     sarvam astlsarntahstham     yac cnyad api van-mayam     sarva-vednta-srrthah     samsrrna va-tranah"The essence of all Vedic knowledge--comprehending the three kinds ofVedic acti vity [ karma-k\nda, jnana-kanda and upasana-kanda ], th echandah o r Ved i c hymns, and the processes for satisfying thedemigods--is included in the eight syllables Hare Kisna, Hare Krsna.This is the reality of all Vedanta. The chanting of the holy name is theonly means to cross the ocean of nescience." Similarly, theKalisantarana Upanisad states, "Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--these sixteennames composed of thirty-two syllables are the only means to counteractthe evil effects of Kali-yuga. In all the Vedas it is seen that to crossthe ocean of nescience there is no alternative to the chanting of theholy name." Similarly, Sri Madhvacarya, while commenting upon theMundaka Upanisad, has said:     dvapariyair janair visnuh     pancartrais ca ke valam     kalau tu nma-mtrena     pujyate bhagavn harih"In the Dvapara-yuga one could satisfy Krsna or Visnu only by worshipingHim gorgeously according to the Pancaratriki system, but in the age ofKali one can satisfy and worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead Harisimply by chanting the holy name." In his Bhaktl-sandarbha (verse 284),Srila Jiva Gosvami strongly emphasizes the chanting of the holy name ofthe Lord as follows:     nanu bhagavan-namatmaka e va mantrah; tatm visesena namah-sabdady-aiankrtah sri- bhaga vata srimad-tsibhis cahita-sakti-visesah, sri-bhagavata samam atma-sambandha-visesapratioadakas ca tatra ke valanisri-bhagavan-namany api nirapeksa-ny eva parama-purusarthaphaia-paryanta-dana-samarthani tato mantresu namato'py adhika-samarthye labdhekatham aiksady-apeksa? ucyate--yady api svarupato nasti, tathapi prayahsvabhavato deh\oisambandhena kadarya-silanam viksipta-cittanam jananam
tat-sankocikaranaya srimad-rsiprabhrtibhir atrarcana-marge kvacit kvacitkacit kacin maryada sthapitastiSrila Jiva Gosvami states that the substance of all the Vedic mantras isthe chanting of the holy name of the Lord. Every mantra begins with theprefix nama om andeventually addresses by name the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By thesupreme will of the Lord there is a specific potency in each and everymantra chanted by great sages like Narada Muni and other rsis. Chantingthe holy name of the Lord immediately renovates the transcendentalrelationship of the living being with the Supreme Lord.     To chant the holy name of the Lord, one need not depend upon otherparaphernalia, for one can immediately get all the desired results ofconnecting or linking with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It maytherefore be questioned why there is a necessity for initiation orfurther spiritual activities in devotional service for one who engagesin the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. The answer is thatalthough it is correct that one who fully engages in chanting the holyname need not depend upon the process of initiation, generally a devoteeis addicted to many abominable material habits due to materialcontamination from his previous life. In order to get quick relief fromall these contaminations, it is required that one engage in the worshipof the Lord in the temple. The worship of the Deity in the temple isessential to reduce one's restlessness due to the contaminations ofconditional life. Thus Narada, in his pncartriki-vidhi, and other greatsages have sometimes stressed that since every conditioned soul has abodily concept of life aimed at sense enjoyment, to restrict this senseenjoyment the rules and regulations for worshiping the Deity in thetemple are essential. Srila Rupa Gosvami has described that the holyname of the Lord can be chanted by liberated souls, but almost all thesouls we have to initiate are conditioned. It is advised that one chantthe holy name of the Lord without offenses and according to theregulative principles, yet due to their past bad habits they violatethese rules and regulations. Thus the regulative principles for worshipof the Deity are also simultaneously essential.
                                   TEXT 77                        ei \jn\ pn\ nama la-i anuksana
                   nama laite laite mora bhrnta haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Since I received this order from My spiritual master, I always
chant the holy name, but I think that by chanting and chanting the holyname I have been bewildered.
                                   TEXT 78
                     dhairya dharite nari, hailma unmatta
                    hsi, kandi, naci, gi, yaiche madamatta
                                 TRANSLATION     "While chanting the holy name of the Lord in pure ecstasy, I lose
myself, and thus I laugh, cry, dance and sing just like a madman.
                                   TEXT 79
                    tave dhairya dhari' mane karilun vicra
                      krsna-nme jnn\cchana ha-ila ainara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Collecting My patience, therefore, I began to consider that
chanting the holy name of Krsna had covered all My spiritual knowledge.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu hints in this verse that to chant the holy
name of Krsna one does not need to speculate on the philosophicalaspects of the science of God, for one automatically becomes ecstaticand without consideration immediately chants, dances, laughs, cries andsings just like a madman.
                                   TEXT 80                      pnala ha-ilan mi, dhairya nhi mane
                      eta cinti' nivedilun gurura carane
                                 TRANSLATION     "I saw that I had become mad by chanting the holy name, and I
immediately submitted this at the lotus feet of my spiritual master.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as an ideal teacher, shows us how a
disciple should deal with his spiritual master. Whenever there is doubtregarding any point, he should refer the matter to his spiritual masterfor clarification. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said that while chanting anddancing He had developed the kind of mad ecstasy that is possible onlyfor a liberated soul. Yet even in His liberated position, He referredeverything to His spiritual master whenever there were doubts. Thus inany condition, even when liberated, we should never think ourselvesindependent of the spiritual master, but must refer to him as soon asthere is some doubt regarding our progressive spiritual life.
                                   TEXT 81                   kiba mantra dila, gosani, kiba tara bala
                      japite japite mantra karila pagala
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear lord, what kind of mantra have you given Me? I have
become mad simply by chanting this maha-mantra!
                                   PURPORTSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu prays in His Siksastaka:
     yuga--vitam nimesena     caksus\ prnrs\yitam      su-nya--vitam jagat sarvam     govinda vlrahena me"O Govinda! Feeling Your separation, I am considering a moment to belike twelve years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like torrentsof rain,and I am feeling all vacant in the world in Your absence." It isthe aspiration of a devotee that while he chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra his eyes will fill with tears, his voice falter and his heartthrob. These are good signs in chanting the holy name of the Lord. Inecstasy, one should feel the entire world to be vacant without thepresence of Govinda. This is a sign of separation from Govinda. Inmaterial life we are all separated from Govinda and are absorbed inmaterial sense gratification. Therefore, when one comes to his senses onthe spiritual platform he becomes so eager to meet Govinda that withoutGovinda the entire world becomes a vacant place.
                                   TEXT 82                     hs\ya, nac\ya, more kar\ya krandana
                       eta suni' guru hsi balil\ vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Chanting the holy name in ecstasy causes one to dance, laugh and
cry.' When My spiritual master heard all this, he smiled and then beganto speak.
                                   PURPORT     When a disciple very perfectly makes progress in spiritual life,
this gladdens the spiritual master, who then also smiles in ecstasy,thinking, "How successful my disciple has become!" He feels so glad thathe smiles as he enjoys the progress of the disciple, just as a smilingparent enjoys the activities of a child who istryingto stand up or crawlperfectly.
                                   TEXT 83                   krsna-nma-mah-mantrera ei ta' svabh\ va
                      yei jape, tara krsne upajaye bhna
                                 TRANSLATION     t is the nature of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra that anyone who
chants it immediately develops his loving ecstasy for Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     I n Bhagavad-git\ it is said:
     aham sarvasya prabhavo     mattah sarvam pravartate     iti matva bhajante mam     budh\ bhava-saman vit\h"I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everythingemanates from Me. The wise who know this perfectly engage in Mydevotional service and worship Me with all their hearts." (Bg. 10.8) Inthis verse it is explained that one who chants the Hare Krsna mantradevelops bhna, ecstasy, which is the point at which revelation begins.It is the preliminary stage in developing one's original love for God. Aneophyte disciple begins by hearing and chanting, associating withdevotees and practicing the regulative principles, and thus hevanquishes all of his unwanted bad habits. In this way he developsattachment for Krsna and cannot forget Krsna even for a moment. Bhava isalmost the successful stage of spiritual life. A sincere student aurallyreceives the holy name from the spiritual master, and after beinginitiated he follows the regulative principles given by the spiritualmaster. When the holy name is properly served in this way, automaticallythe spiritual nature of the holy name spreads; in other words, thedevotee becomes qualified in offenselessly chanting the holy name. Whenone is completely fit to chant the holy name in this way, he is eligibleto make disciples all over the world, and he actually becomesjagadguru.Then the entire world, under his influence, begins to chant the holynames of the Hare Krsna mah-mantra. Thus all the disciples of such aspiritual master increase in attachment for Krsna, and therefore hesometimes crics, sometimes laughs, sometimes dances and sometimeschants. These symptoms are very prominently manifest in the body of apure devotee. Sometimes when our students of the Krsna consciousnessmovement chant and dance, even in India people are astonished to see howthese foreigners have learned to chant and dance in this ecstaticfashion. As explained by Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, actually this isnot due to practice, for without extra endeavor these symptoms becomemanifest in anyone who sincerely chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.     Many fools, not knowing the transcendental nature of the Hare Krsnamaha- mantra, sometimes impede our loudly chanting this mantra, yet onewho is actually advanced in the fulfillment of chanting the Hare Krsnamaha-mantra induces others to chan t also. Krsnadasa Kavi raja Gosvamiex plai ns, krsna-akti vina nahe tra pravartana.- unless one receivesspecial power of attorney from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, hecannot preach the glories of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. As devoteespropagate the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, the general population of theentire world gets the opportunity to understand the glories of the holyname. While chanting and dancing or hearing the holy name of the Lord,one automatically remembers the Supreme Personality of Godhead, andbecause there is no difference between the holy name and Krsna, thechanter is immediately linked with Krsna. Thus connected, a devoteedevelops his original attitude of service to the Lord. In this attitudeof constantly serving Krsna, which is called bhava, ne always thinks ofKrsna in many different ways. One who has attained this bhna stage is nolonger under the clutches of the illusory energy. When other spiritualingredients, such as trembling, perspiration, tears, etc., are added tothis bhava stage, the devotee gradually attains love of Krsna.     The holy name of Krsna is called the maha-mantra. Other mantras
mentioned in the Narada-pancaratra are known simply as mantras, but thechanting of the holy name of the Lord is called the maha-mantra.
                                   TEXT 84                   krsna-visayaka prema--parama purusartha
                     yara age trna-tulya cari purusartha
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and
liberation are known as the four goals of life, but before love ofGodhead, the fifth and highest goal, these appear as insignificant asstraw in the street.
                                   PURPORT     While chanting the holy name of the Lord, one should not desire the
material advancements represented by economic development, religiosity,sense gratificationand ultimately liberation from the material world. As stated byCaitanyaMahaprabhu, the highest perfection in life is to develop one's love forKrsna (prema pumartho mahan sri;caitanya-maha--prabhor matam idam). Whenwe com pare love of God head with religiosity, economic development,sense gratification and liberation, we can understand that theseachievements may be desirable objectives for bubhuksus, or those whodesire to enjoy this material world, and mumuksus, or those who desireliberation from it, but they are very insignificant in the eyes of apure devotee who has developed bhava, the preliminary stage of love ofGodhead.     Dharma (religiosity), artha (economic development), kama (sensegratification) and moksa (liberation) are the four principles ofreligion which pertain to the material world. Therefore in the beginningof Srimad-Bhnavatam it is declared, dharmah projjhita-kaitavo'tra:cheating religious syste ms in terms of these four material principlesare completely discarded from Srimad-Bhnavatam, for Srimad- Bhagavatamteaches only how to develop one's dormant love of God. Bhagavad-gita isthe preliminary study of Srimad-Bhagavatam, and therefore it ends withthe words, sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja: "Abandon allvarieties of religion and just surrender unto Me." (Bg. 18.66) To adoptthis means, one should reject all ideas of religiosity, economicdevelopment, sense gratification and liberation and fully engage in theservice of the Lord, which is transcendental to these four principles.Love of Godhead is the original function of the spirit soul, and it isas eternal asthe soul and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thiseternity is called sanatana. When one revives his loving service to theSupreme Personality of Godhead, it should be understood that he has beensuccessful in achieving the desired goal of his life. At that timeeverything is automatically done by the mercy of the holy name, and thedevotee automatically advances in his spiritual progress.
                                   TEXT 85                  pancama purusartha--premananoamrta-sindhu
                      moksadi ananda yara nahe eka bindu
                                 TRANSLATION     " `For a devotee who has actually developed bhava, the pleasure
derived from dharma, artha, kama and moksa appears like a drop in thepresence of the sea.
                                   TEXT 86
                krsna-namera phala--`prema', sarva-astre kaya
                     bhagye sei prema tomaya karila udaya
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The conclusion of all revealed scriptures is that one should
awaken his dormant love of Godhead. You are greatly fortunate to havealready done so.
                                   TEXT 87
                   premara sva-bhave kare citta-tanu ksobha
                     krsnera carana-praptye upajnya lobha
                                 TRANSLATION     " `It is a characteristic of love of Godhead that by nature it
induces transcendental symptoms in one's body and makes one more andmore greedy to achieve the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 88
                  premara sva-bhave bhakta hase, kande, gaya
                      unmatta ha-iya nace, iti-uti dhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     " `When one actually develops love of Godhead, he naturally
sometimes cries, sometimes laughs, sometimes chants and sometimes runshere and there just like a madman.
                                   PURPORT     I n this connection Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami says that
sometimes persons who have no love of Godhead at all display ecstaticbodily symptoms. Artificially they sometimes laugh, cry and dance justlike madmen, but this cannot help one progress in Krsna consciousness.Rather, such artificial agitation of the body is to be given up when onenaturally develops the necessary bodily symptoms. Actual blissful life,manifested in genuine spiritual laughing, crying and dancing, is thesymptom of real advancement in Krsna consciousness, which can be
achieved by a person who always voluntarily engages in thetranscendental loving service of the Lord. If one who is notyetdeveloped imitates such symptoms artificially, he creates chaos inthe spiritual life of human society.
                                  TEXT 89-90                 sveda, kampa, romancasru, gadgada, vaivarnya
                unmada, visada, dhairya, garva, harsa, dainya
                     eta bhave prema bhaktaganere nacaya
                     krsnera anandamrta-sagare bhasa--ila
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Perspiration, trembling, standing of one's bodily hairs, tears,
faltering, fading, madness, melancholy, patience, pride, joy andhumility--these are various natural symptoms of ecstatic love ofGodhead, which causes a devotee to dance and float in an ocean oftranscendental bliss while chanting the Hare Krsna mantra.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Jiva Gosvami, in his priti-sandarbha (verse 66), explains
this stage of love of God head: bhagavat-priti-rupa vrttir ma--vadimayina bhavati; kintu svarupa- saktyananda-rupa, yadananda-paradhinah sri-bhaga van apiti. S i m i I a rl y, i n th e 69th verse he offers furtherexplanation: tad evam priter laksanam citta-dravas tasya caromaharsadikam. kathancij jate'pi citta-drave romaharsadike va na cedasayasuddhis tadapi na bhakteh samyag-avirbhava itljnapitam. asaya-suddhir nama canyatatparya-parityagah priti-tatparyam ca. atae vanimittasvabhaviki ceti tad visesanam. Transcendental love of Godhead is notunder the jurisdiction of the material energy, for it is thetranscendental bliss and pleasure potency of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Since the Supreme Lord is also under the influence oftranscendental bliss, when one comes in touch with such bliss in love ofGodhead, one's heart melts, and the symptoms of this are standing of thehairs on end, etc. Sometimes a person thus melts and manifests thesetranscendental symptoms yet at the same time is not well behaved in hispersonal transactions.This indicates that he has not yet reachedcomplete perfection in devotional life. In other words, a devotee whodances in ecstasy but after dancing and crying appears to be attractedto material affairs has not yet reached the perfection of devotionalservice, which is called asaya-suddhi, or the perfection of existence.One who attains the perfection of existence is completely averse tomaterial enjoyment and engrossed in transcendental love of Godhead. Itis therefore to be concluded that the ecstatic symptoms of asaya-suddhiare visible when a devotee's service has no material cause and is purelyspiritual in nature. These are characteristics of transcendental love ofGodhead, as stated in Srimad- Bhaga vatam:     sa vai pumsam paro dharmo     yato bhaktir adhoksaje     ahaituky apratihata     yayatma suprasidatl
"That religion is best which causes its followers to become ecstatic inlove of God which is unmotivated and free from material impediments, forthis only can completely satisfy the self." (SB. 1.2.6)
                                   TEXT 91                  bhala haila, paile tumi parama-purusartha
                      tomara premete ami hailan krtartha
                                 TRANSLATION     " `It is very good, my dear child, that You have attained the
supreme goal of life by developing love of Godhead. Thus You havepleased me very much, and I am very much obliged to You.
                                   PURPORT     According to revealed scriptures, if a spiritual master can convert
even one soul into a perfectly pure devotee, his mission in life isfulfilled. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura always used to say,"Even at the expense of all the properties, temples and mathas that Ihave, if I could convert even one person into a pure devotee, my missionwould be fulfilled." It is very difficult, however, to understand thescience of Krsna, not to speak of developing love of Godhead. Thereforeif by the grace of Lord Caitanya and the spiritual master a discipleattainsthe standard of pure devotional service, the spiritual master isvery happy. The spiritual master is not actually happy if the disciplebrings him money, but when he sees that a disciple is following theregulative principles and advancing in spiritual life, he is very gladand feels obliged to such an advanced disciple.
                                   TEXT 92                   naca, gao, bhakta-sange kara sankirtana
                     krsna-nama upadesi' tara' sarva jana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear child, continue dancing, chanting and performing
sankirtana in association with devotees. Furthermore, go out and preachthe value of
chanting Krsna-nama, for by this process You will be able to deliver all
fallen
                                   PURPORT     It is another ambition of the spiritual master to see his disciples
not only chant, dance and follow the regulative principles but alsopreach the sankirtana movement to others in order to deliver them, forthe Krsna consciousness movement is based on the principle that oneshould become as perfect as possible in devotional service oneself andalso preach the cult for others'benefit.There are two classes ofunalloyed d evotees--n am e I y, gosthy-anandis a n d bhajananandis.
Bhajananandi refe rs to o n e who is satisfied to cultivate devotionalservice for himself, and gosthy-ananoi is one who is not satisfiedsimply to become perfect himself but wants to see others also takeadvantage of the holy name of the Lord and advance in spiritual life.The outstanding example is Prahlada Maharaja. When he was offered abenediction by Lord Nrsimhadeva, Prahlada Maharaja said:     naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaranyas     tvad-virya-ga--vana-mahamrta-magna-cittah     soce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyartha-     maya-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimu-dhan"My dear Lord, I have no problems and want no benediction from Youbecause I am quite satisfied to chant Your holy name. This is sufficientfor me because whenever I chant I immediately merge in an ocean oftranscendental bliss. I only lament to see others bereft of Your love.They are rotting in material activities for transient material pleasureand spoiling their lives toiling all day and night simply for sensegratification, with no attachment for love of Godhead. I am simplylamenting for them and devising various plans to deliver them from theclutches of maya." (SB. 7.9.43)     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura explains in his Anubhasya,"A person who has attracted the attention of the spiritual master by hissincere service likes to dance and chant with similarly developed Krsnaconscious devotees. The spiritual master authorizes such a devotee todeliver fallen souls in all parts of the world. Those who are notadvanced prefer to chant the Hare Krsna mantra in a solitary place."Such activities constitute, in the language of Srila BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Thakura, a type of cheating process in the sense that theyimitate the activities of exalted personalities like Haridasa Thakura.One should not attempt to imitate such exalted devotees. Rather,everyone should endeavor to preach the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuin all parts of the world and thus become successful in spiritual life.One who is not very expert in preaching may chant in a secluded place,avoiding bad association, but for one who is actually advanced,preaching and meeting people who are not engaged in devotional serviceare not disadvantages. A devotee gives the nondevotees his associationbut is not affected by their misbehavior. Thus by the activities of apure devotee even those who are bereft of love of Godhead get a chanceto become devotees of the Lord one day. In this connectionSrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura advises that one discuss theverse in Srimad- Bhaga vatam, naitat samacarejjatu manasapi hy anisvarah(10.33.31), a n d th e fo I I o wi ng ve rse i n Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu:     anasaktasya visayan yatharham upayunjatah     nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe yuktam vairagyam ucyate     (B.r.s.1.2.255)One should not imitate the activities of great personalities. One shouldbe detached from material enjoyment and should accept everything inconnection with Krsna's service.
                                   TEXT 93                      eta bali' eka sloka sikhaila more
                     bhagavatera sara ei--baie vare vare                                 TRANSLATION
     "Saying this, My spiritual master taught Me one verse from Srimad-
Bhagavatam. It is the essence of all the Bhagavatam's instructions;therefore he instructed Me this verse again and again.
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.40) was spoken by Sri
Narada Muni to Vasudeva to teach him about Bhagavata-dharma. Vasudevahad already achieved the result of Bhagavata-dharma because Lord Krsnaappeared in his house as his son, yet in order to teach others, hedesired to hear from Sri Narada Muni to be enlightened in the process ofBhagavata-dharma. This is the humbleness of a great devotee.
                                   TEXT 94                      e vamvratah sva-priya-nama-kirtya
                        jntanurago druta-citta uccaih                       hasaty atho roditi rautl gayaty                        unmadavan nrtyati ioka-bahyah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `When a person is actually advanced and takes pleasure in
chanting the holy name of the Lord, who is very dear to him, he isagitated and loudly chants the holy name. He also laughs, cries, becomesagitated and chants just like a madman, not caring for outsiders.'
                                  TEXT 95-96
                   ei tanra vakye ami drdha visvasa dhari'
                     nirantara krsna-nama sankirtana kari
                   sei krsna-nama kabhu gaoya--va, naca--va
                      gahi, naci nahi ami apana-icchaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "I firmly believe in these words of My spiritual master, and
therefore I always chant the holy name of the Lord, alone and in theassociation of devotees. That holy name of Lord Krsna sometimes causesMe to chant and dance, and therefore I chant and dance. Please do notthink that I intentionally do it. I do it automatically. chant anddance. Please do not think that I intentionally do it. I do itautomatically.
                                   PURPORT     A person who cannot keep his faith in the words of his spiritual
master but acts independently never receives the authority to chant theholy name of the Lord. It is said in the Vedas:     yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve tatha gurau     tasyaite kathita hy arthah prakasante mahatmanah
"Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lordand the spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledgeautomatically revealed." This Vedic injunction is very important, andSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu supported it by His personal behavior. Believingin the words of His spiritual master, He introduced the sankirtanamovement, just as the present Krsna consciousness movement was startedwith belief in the words of our spiritual master. He wanted to preach,we believed in his words and tried somehow or other to fulfill them, andnow this movement has become successful all over the world. Thereforefaith in the words of the spiritual master and in the SupremePersonality of Godhead is the secret of success. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhunever disobeyed the orders of His spiritual master and stoppedpropagating the sankirtana movement. Sri Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiGosvami, at the time of his passing away, ordered all his disciples towork conjointly to preach the mission of Caitanya Mahaprabhu all overthe world. Later, however, some self-interested, foolish disciplesdisobeyed his orders. Each one of them wanted to become head of themission,and they fought in the courts, neglecting the order of thespiritual master,and the entire mission was defeated.We are not proud ofthis; however, the truth must be explained. We believed in the words ofour spiritual master and started in a humble way--in a helpless way--butdue to the spiritual force of the order of the supreme authority, thismovement has become successful.     It is to be understood that when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu chantedand danced, He did so by the influence of the pleasure potency of thespiritual world. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu never considered the holy nameof the Lord to be a material vibration, nor does any pure devoteemistake the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra to be a material musicalmanifestation. Lord Caitanya never tried to be the master of the holyname; rather He taught us how to be servants of the holy name. If onechants the holy name of the Lord just to make a show, not knowing thesecret of success, he may increase his bile secretion, but he will neverattain perfection in chanting the holy name. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhupresented himself in this way: "I am a great fool and do not haveknowledge of right and wrong. In order to understand the real meaning ofVedanta-sutra, I never followed the explanation of the Sankara-sampradaya or Mayavadi sannyasis. I'm very much afraid of the illogicalarguments of the Mayavadi philosophers. Therefore I think I have noauthority regarding their explanations of Vedanta-sutra. I firmlybelieve that simply chanting the holy name of the Lord can remove allmisconceptions of the material world. I believe that simply by chantingthe holy name of the Lord one can attain the shelter of the lotus feetof the Lord. I n this age of quarrel and disagreement, the chanting ofthe holy names is the only way to liberation from the material clutches.     "By chanting the holy name," Lord Caitanya continued, "I becamealmost mad. However, after inquiring from My spiritual master I havecome to the conclusion that instead of striving for achievement in thefour principles of religiosity (dharma), economic development(artha),sense gratification (kama) and liberation (moksa), it is better ifsomehow or other one develops transcendental love of Godhead. That isthe greatest success in life. One who has attained love of Godheadchants and dances by his nature, not caring for the public." This stageof life is known as bhagavata- jivana, or the life of a devotee.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, "I never chanted and danced to
make an artificial show. I dance and chant because I firmly believe inthe words of My spiritual master. Although the Mayavadi philosophers donot like this chanting and dancing, I nevertheless perform it on thestrength of his words. Therefore it is to be concluded that I deservevery little credit for these activities of chanting and dancing for theyare being done automatically by the grace of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead."
                                   TEXT 97                     krsna-name ye ananda-smdhu-asvadana
                     brahmananda tara age khatodaka-sama
                                 TRANSLATION     "Compared to the ocean of transcendental bliss which is tasted by
chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, the pleasure derived from impersonalBrahman realization [brahmananda] is like the shallow water in a canal.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu it is stated:
     brahmanando bhaved esa     cet pararddha-gunikrtah     naiti bhakti-sukhambhodheh     paramanu-tulam api"If brahmananda, the transcendental bliss derived from understandingimpersonal Brahman, were multiplied a million times, such a quantity ofbrahmananda could not compare with even an atomic portion of thepleasure relished in pure devotional service." (B.r.s. 1.1.38)
                                   TEXT 98                           tvat-saksatkaranahlada-
                          visuddhabdhi-sthitasya me                             sukhani gospadayante                           brahmany api jagad-guro
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear Lord, O master of the universe, since I have directly
seen You, my transcendental bliss has taken the shape of a great ocean.Being situated in that ocean, I now realize all other so-calledhappiness to be like the water contained in the hoofprint of a calf."'
                                   PURPORT     The transcendental bliss enjoyed in pure devotional service is like
an ocean, whereas material happiness and even the happiness to bederived from the realization of impersonal Brahman are just like thewater in the hoofprint of a calf. This is a verse from the Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya (14.36).                                   TEXT 99
                  prabhura mista-vakya suni' sannyasira gana
                    citta phiri' gela, kahe madhura vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all the Mayavadi
sannyasis were moved. Their minds changed, and thus they spoke withpleasing words.
                                   PURPORT     The Mayavadi sannyasis met Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Varanasi to
criticize the Lord regarding His participation in the sankirtanamovement, which they did not like. This demonic nature of opposition tothe sankirtana movement perpetually exists. As it existed in the time ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,similarly it existed long before that, even inthe time of Prahlada Maharaja. He used to chant in sankirtana althoughhis father did not like it, and that was the reason for misunderstandingbetween the father and son. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says:     na mam duskrtmo mudhah     prapadyante naradhamah     mayayapahrta-jnana     asuram bhavam asritah"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whoseknowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic natureof demons, do not surrender unto Me." (Bg. 7.15) The Mayavadi sannyasisare asuram bhavam asritah, which means that they have taken the path ofthe asuras (demons) who do not believe in the existence of the form ofthe Lord. The Mayavadis say that the ultimate source of everything isimpersonal, and in this way they deny the existence of God. Saying thatthere is no God is direct denial of God, and saying that God exists buthas no head, legs and hands and cannot speak, hear or eat is a negativeway of denying His existence. A person who cannot see is called blind,one who cannot walk can be called lame, one who has no hands can becalled helpless, one who cannot speak can be called dumb, and one whocannot hear can be called deaf. The Mayavadis' proposition that God hasno legs, no eyes, no ears and no hands is an indirect way of insultingHim by defining Him as blind, deaf, dumb, lame, helpless, etc. Thereforealthough they present themselves as great Vedantists, they are factuallyma--vayapahrta-jnana; in other words, they seem to be very learnedscholars, but the essence of their knowledge has been taken away.     Impersonalist Mayavadis always try to defy Vaisnavas becauseVaisnavas accept the Supreme Personality as the supreme cause and wantto serve Him,talk with Him and see Him, just as the Lord is also eagerto see His devotees and talk, eat and dance with them. These personalexchanges of love do not appeal to the Mayavadi sannyasis. Therefore theoriginal purpose of the Mayavadi sannyasis of Benares in meetingCaitanya Mahaprabhu was to defeat His personal conception of God. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, however, as a preacher, turned the minds of theMayavadi sannyasis. They were melted by the sweet words of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu and thus became friendly and spoke to Him also in sweetwords. Similarly, all preachers will have to meet opponents, but theyshould not make them more inimical. They are already enemies,and if we
talk with them harshly or impolitely their enmity will merely increase.We should therefore follow in the footsteps of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu as far as possible and try to convince the opposition byquoting from the sastras and presenting the conclusion of the acaryas.It is in this way that we should try to defeat all the enemies of theLord.
                                   TEXT 100                    ye kichu kahile tumi, saba satya haya
                    krsna-prema sei paya, yara bhagyodaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Dear Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, what You have said is all true. Only
one who is favored by fortune attains love of Godhead.
                                   PURPORT     One who is actually very fortunate can begin Krsna consciousness,
as stated by Caitanya Mahaprabhu to Srila Rupa Gosvami:     bmhmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva     guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija     (Cc. Madhya 19.151)There are millions of living entities who have become conditioned by thelaws of material nature, and they are wandering throughout the planetarysystems of this universe in different bodily forms. Among them, one whois fortunate meets a bona fide spiritual master by the grace of Krsnaand comes to understand the meaning of devotional service. Bydischarging devotional service under the direction of the bona fidespiritual master or acarya, he develops love of Godhead. One whose loveof Godhead (Krsna-prema) is awakened and who thus becomes a devotee ofthe inconceivable Supreme Personality of Godhead is to be consideredextremely fortunate. The Mayavadi sannyasis admitted this fact to SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. It is not easy for one to become a Krsna consciousperson, but by the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu it can be possible,as will be proven in the course of this narration.
                                   TEXT 101                   krsne bhakti kara--ihaya sabara santosa
                     vedanta na suna kene, tara kiba dosa
                                 TRANSLATION     "Dear sir, there is no objection to Your being a great devotee of
Lord Krsna. Everyone is satisfied with this. But why do You avoiddiscussion on the Vedantasutra? What is the fault in it?"
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments in this
connection,"Mayavadi sannyasis accept that the com mentary by Sri Sankaracarya known as Sariraka- bhasya gives the real mean ing of Vedanta-
sutra. I n other words, Mayavadi sannyasis accept the meanings expressedin the explanations of Vedanta-sutra by Sankaracarya, which are based onmonism. Thus they explain Vedanta- sutra, the Upanisads and all suchVedic literatures in their own impersonal way.,, The great Mayavadisannyasi Sadananda Yogind ra has written a book known as Vedanta-sara inwhich he writes:     vedanto nama upanisat-pramanam     tad-upakarini sariraka-sutradini caAccording to Sadananda Yogindra, the Veoanta and Upanisads, as presentedby Sri Sankaracarya in his Sariraka-bhasya commentary, are the onlysources of Vedic evidence. Actually, however, Vedanta refers to theessence of Vedic knowledge, and it is not a fact that there is nothingmore than Sankaracarya's Sariraka-bhasya. There are other Vedantacommentaries written by Vaisnava acaryas, none of whom follow SriSankaracarya or accept the imaginative commentary of his school. Theircommentaries are based on the philosophy of duality. Monist philosopherslike Sankaracarya and his followers want to establish that God and theliving entity are one, and instead of worshiping the Supreme Personalityof Godhead they present themselves as God. They want to be worshiped asGod by others. Such persons do not accept the philosophies of theVaisnava acaryas, which are known as suddhadvaita     rified mon ism), suddha-dvaita ( purified dualism), visistadvaita(specific mon ism), dvaitadvaita (monism and dualism) and acintya-bhedabheda (inconceivable oneness and difference). Mayavadis do notdiscuss these philosophies, for they are firmly convinced of their ownphilosophy of kevaladvaita, exclusive monism. Accepting this system ofphilosophy as the pure understanding of Vedanta-sutra, they believe thatKrsna has a body made of material elements and that the activities ofloving service to Krsna are sentimentality.They are known as Mayavadisbecause according to their opinion Krsna has a body which is made ofmaya, and the loving service of theLord executed by devotees is also ma--va. They consider such devotionalservice to be an aspect of fruitive activities (karma-ka-nda). Accordingto their view, bhakti consists of mental speculation or sometimesmeditation. This is the difference between the Mayavadi and Vaisnavaphilosophies.
                                   TEXT 102                     eta suni' hasi' prabhu balila vacana
                     duhkha na manaha yadi, kari nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing the Mayavadi sannyasis speak in that way, Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu smiled slightly and said, "My dear sirs, if youdon't mind I can say something to you regarding Vedanta Philosophy."
                                   PURPORT     The Mayavadi sannyasis, appreciating Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
inquired from Him why He did not discuss Vedanta philosophy. Actually,however, the entire system of Vaisnava activities is based on Vedantaphilosophy. Vaisnavas do not neglect Vedanta, but they do not care to
understand Vedanta on the basis of the Sariraka-bhasya commentary.Therefore, to clarify the situation, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, withthe permission of the Mayavad i sannyasis, wanted to speak regardingVedanta philosophy. The Vaisnavas are by far the greatest philosophersin the world, and the greatest among them was Srila Jiva Gosvami Prabhu,whose philosophy was again presented less than four hundred years laterby Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura Maharaja. Therefore one mustknow very well that Vaisnava philosophers are not sentimentalists orcheap devotees like the sahajiyas. All the Vaisnava acaryas were vastlylearned scholars who understood Vedanta philosophy fully, for unless oneknows Vedanta philosophy he cannot be an acarya. To be accepted as anacarya among Indian transcendentalists who follow the Vedic principles,one must become a vastly learned scholar in Vedanta philosophy, eitherby studying it or hearing it.     Bhakti develops in pursuance of Vedanta philosophy. This is statedin Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.12):     tac chraddadhana munayo     jnana-vairagya-yuktaya     pasyanty atmani catmanam     bhaktya sruta-grhitayaThe words bhaktyasruta-grhitaya in this verse are very important, forthey indicate that bhakti must be based upon the philosophy of theUpanisads and Vedanta-sutra. Srila Rupa Gosvami said:     sruti-smrti-puranadi-     pancaratra-vidhim vina     aikantikiharer bhaktir     utpatayaiva kalpate" Devotional service performed without reference to the Vedas, puranas,pancaratras, etc., must be considered sentimentalism, and it causesnothing but disturbance to society." There are different grades ofVaisnavas (kanistha-adhikari madhyama- adhikari uttama-adhikari), but tobe a madhyama-adhikari preacher one m ust be a learned scholar inVedanta-sutra and other Vedic literature because when bhakti- yogadevelops on the basis of Vedanta philosophy it is factual and steady. Inthis connection we may quote the translation and purport of the versementioned above (SB. 1.2.12):TRANSLATION     That Absolute Truth is realized by the seriously inquisitivestudent or sage who is well equipped with knowledge and who has becomedetached by rendering devotional service and hearing the Vedanta-sruti.PURPORT     The Absolute Truth is realized in full by the process of devotionalservice to the Lord Vasudeva or the Personality of Godhead who is thefull-fledged Absolute Truth. Brahman is His transcendental bodilyeffulgence, and Paramatma is His partial representation. As such,Brahman or Paramatma realization of the Absolute Truth is but a partialrealization. There are four different types of living beings, thekarmis, the jnanis, the yogis and the devotees. The karmis arematerialistic, whereas the other three are transcendental. The first-class transcendentalists are the devotees who have realized the SupremePerson. The second-class transcendentalists are those who have partiallyrealized the plenary portion of the absolute person. And the third-classtranscendentalists are those who have barely realized the spiritualfocus of the absolute person. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita and other
Vedic literatures, the Supreme Person is realized by devotional service,which is backed by full knowledge and detachment from the materialassociation. We have already discussed the point that devotional serviceis followed by knowledge and detachment from material association. AsBrahman and Paramatma realization are imperfect realizations of theAbsolute Truth, so the means of realizing Brahman and Paramatma, i.e.,the paths of jnana and yoga, are also imperfect means of realizing theAbsolute Truth. Devotional service, which is based on the foreground offull knowledge combined with detachment from material association fixedup on the aural reception of the Veaanta-sruti, is the only perfectmethod of realizing the Absolute Truth by the seriously inquisitivestudent. Devotional service is not, therefore, meant for the lessintelligent class of transcendentalist.There are three classes of devotees, namely first, second and thirdclass. The third-class devotees, or the neophytes, who have no knowledgenor are detached from the material association, but who are simplyattracted by the preliminary processes of worshiping the Deity in thetemple, are called material devotees. Material devotees are moreattached to material benefit than transcendental profit. Therefore, onehas to make definite progress from the position of material devotionalservice to the second-class devotional position. In the second-classposition, the devotee can see four principles in the devotional line,namely the Personality of Godhead, His devotees, the ignorant and theenvious. 0ne has to raise himself at least to the stage of a second-class devotee and thus become eligible to know the Absolute Truth.     A third-class devotee, therefore, has to receive the instructionsof devotional service from the authoritative sources of Bhagavatam. Thenumber one Bhagavatam is the established personality of devotee, and theother Bhagavatam is the message of Godhead.The third-class devotee has,therefore, to go to the personality of devotee in order to learn theinstructions of devotional service. Such a personality of devotee is nota professional man who earns his livelihood by the business ofBhagavatam. Such a devotee must be a representative of Sukadeva Gosvami,like Suta Gosvami, and must preach the cult of devotional service forthe all-around benefit of all people. A neophyte devotee has very littletaste for hearing from the authorities. Such a neophyte devotee makes ashow of hearing from the professional man to satisfy his senses. Thissort of hearing and chanting has spoiled the whole thing, so one shouldbe very careful about the faulty process. The holy messages of Godhead,as inculcated in the Bhagavad-gita or in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, areundoubtedly transcendental subjects, but even though they are so, suchtranscendental matters are not to be received from the professional manwho spoils them like the serpent spoils the milk simply by the touch ofhis tongue.     A sincere devotee must, therefore, be prepared to hear the Vedicliterature like the Upanisads, Vedanta and other literatures left by theprevious authorities or Gosvamis, for the benefit of his progress.Without hearing such literatures, one cannot make actual progress. Andwithout hearing and following the instructions, the show of devotionalservice becomes worthless and therefore a sort of disturbance in thepath of devotional service. Unless, therefore, devotional service isestablished on the principles of sruti, smrti, purana or pancaratraauthorities, the make-show of devotional service should at once berejected. An unauthorized devotee should never be recognized as a pure
devotee. By assimilation of such messages from the Vedic literatures,one can see the all-pervading localized aspect of the Personality ofGodhead within his own self constantly. This is called samadhi.
                                   TEXT 103                     iha suni' bale sarva sannyasira gana
                   tomake dekhiye yaiche saksat nara--vana
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, the Mayavadi sannyasis became somewhat humble and
addressed Caitanya Mahaprabhu as Narayana Himself, who they all agreedHe was.
                                   PURPORT     Mayavadi sannyasis address each other as Narayana. Whenever they
see another sannyasi, they offer him respect by calling,namo nara--vana("I offer my respect unto you, Narayana"), although they know perfectlywell what kind of Narayana he is. Narayana has four hands, but althoughthey are puffed-up with the idea of being Narayana, they cannot exhibitmore than two. Since their philosophy declares that Narayana and anordinary human being are both on the same level, they sometimes use theterm daridra-narayana ("poor Narayana"), which was invented by a so-called svami who did not know anything about Vedanta philosophy.Therefore although all these Mayavadi sannyasis who called themselvesNarayana were actually unaware of the position of Narayana, due to theirausterities Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu enabled them to understand Him tobe Narayana Himself. Lord Caitanya is certainly the Supreme Personalityof Godhead Narayana appearing as a devotee of Narayana, and thus theMayavadi sannyasis, understanding that He was directly Narayana Himselfwhereas they were false puffed-up Narayanas, spoke to Him as follows.
                                   TEXT 104                      tomara vacana suni' judaya sravana
                     tomara madhuri dekhi' judaya nayana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Dear Caitanya Mahaprabhu," they said, "to tell You the truth, we
are greatly pleased to hear Your words, and furthermore Your bodilyfeatures are so pleasing that we feel extraordinary satisfaction inseeing You.
                                   PURPORT     In the sastras it is said:.
     atah sri-krsna-namadi na bhaved grahyam indriyaih     sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svayam e va sphuraty adah,,One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His name,form, qualities or paraphernalia, but if one renders service unto Himthe Lord reveals Himself." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.234) Here one can
see the effect of the Mayavadi sannyasis' service toward Narayana.Because they offered a little respect to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu andbecause they were pious and actually followed the austere rules andregulations of sannyasa, they had some understanding of Vedantaphilosophy, and by the grace of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu they couldappreciate that He was none other than the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, who is endowed with all six opulences. One of these opulencesis His beauty. By His extraordinarily beautiful bodily featu res theMayavadisannyasis recognized Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as NarayanaHimself. He was not a farcical Naray an a like the daridra-nara--vanasinvented by so-called sannyasis.
                                   TEXT 105                     tomara prabhave sabara anandita mana
                      kabhu asangata nahe tomara vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Dear sir, by Your influence our minds are greatly satisfied, and
we believe that Your words will never be unreasonable. Therefore You canspeak on Vedanta-sutra."
                                   PURPORT     In this verse the words tomara prabhave ("Your influence") are very
important. Unless one is spiritually advanced he cannot influence anaudience. Bhaktivinoda Thakura has sung, suddha-bhakata-carana-renu,bhajana-anukula. "Unless one associates with a pure devotee he cannot beinfluenced to understand devotional service." These Mayavadi sannyasiswere fortunate enough to meet the Supreme Personality of Godhead in theform of a devotee, and certainly they were greatly influenced by theLord.They knew that since a perfectly advanced spiritualist never saysanything false, all his words are reasonable and agree with the Vedicversion. A highly realized person never says anything that has nomeaning. Mayavadi philosophers claim to be the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, and this has no meaning, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu neveruttered such nonsense. The Mayavadi sannyasis were convinced about Hispersonality, and therefore they wanted to hear from Him the purport ofVedanta philosophy.
                                   TEXT 106                   prabhu kahe, vedanta-sutra isvara-vacana
                     vyasa-rupe kaila yaha sri-nara--vana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord said: "Vedanta philosophy consists of words spoken by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Narayana in the form of Vyasadeva.
                                   PURPORT     Vedanta-sutra, which consists of codes revealing the method of
understanding Vedic knowledge, is the concise form of all Vedicknowledge. It begins with the wordsathato brahmajijnasa ("now is thetime to inquire about the Absolute Truth"). The human form of life isespecially meant for this purpose, and therefore the Vedanta-sutra veryconcisely explains the human mission. This is confirmed by the words ofthe Vayu and Skanda Puranas, which define a sutra as follows:     alpaksaram asanoigdham sara vat visvatomukham     astobhamana vadyam ca sutram sutra-vido viduh"Asutra is a code thatexpresses the essence of all knowledge in aminimum of words It must be universally applicable and faultless in itslinguistic presentation." Anyone familiar with such sutras must be awareof the Vedanta-sutra, which is well known among scholars by thefollowing different names: (1) Brahma-sutra, (2) Sariraka, (3) Vyasa-sutra, (4) Badarayana-sutra, (5) Uttara-mimamsa a n d (6) Vedanta-darsana.     There are four chapters (adhyayas) in the Vedanta-sutra, and thereare four divisions (padas) in each chapter. Therefore the Vedanta-sutramay be referred to as sodasa-pada, or sixteen divisions of codes. Thetheme of each and every division is fully described in terms of fivedifferent subject matters (adhikaranas), which are technically calledpratijna, hetu, udaharana, upanaya and nigamana. Every theme mustnecessarily be explained with reference to pratijna, or a solemndeclaration of the purpose of the treatise. The solemn declaration givenin the beginning of the Vedanta-sutra is athato brahma-jijnasa, whichindicates that this book was written with the solemn declaration toinquire about the Absolute Truth. Similarly, reasonsmust be expressed (hetu), examples must be given in terms of variousfacts (udaharana), the theme must gradually be brought nearer forunderstanding (upanaya), and finally it must be supported byauthoritative quotations from the Ved ic sastras (nigamana).     According to the great dictionary compiler Hemacandra, also knownas Kosakara, Vedanta refers to the purport of the Upanisads and theBrahmana portion of the Vedas. Professor Apte, in his dictionary,describes the Brahmana portion of the Vedas as that portion which statesthe rules for employment of hymns at various sacrifices and givesdetailed explanations of their origin, sometimes with lengthyillustrations in the form of legends and stories. It is distinct fromthe mantra portion of the Vedas. Hemacandra said that the supplement ofthe Vedas is called the Vedanta-sutra. Veda means knowledge, and antameans the end. In other words, proper understanding of the ultimatepurpose of the Vedas is called Vedanta knowledge. Such knowledge, asgiven in the codes of the Vedanta-sutra, must be supported by theUpanisads.     According to learned scholars, there are three different sources ofknowledge, which are called prasthana-traya. According to thesescholars, Vedanta is one of such sources, for it presents Vedicknowledge on the basis of logic and sound arguments. I n Bhagavad-gita(13.5) th e L o rd said, brahma-sutra-padais caiva he tumadbhirviniscitaih.- "Understanding of the ultimate goal of life is ascertainedin the Brahma- sutra by legitimate logic and argument concerning causeand effect." Therefore the Vedanta-sutra is known as nyaya-prasthana,the Upanisads are known as sruti- prasthana, and the Gita, Mahabharataand puranas are known as smrti-prasthana. All scientific knowledge oftranscendence must be supported by sruti, smrti and a sound logical
basis.     It is said that both the Vedic knowledge and the supplement of theVedas called the Satvata-pancaratra emanated from the breathing ofNarayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Vedanta-sutra codeswere compiled by Srila Vyasadeva, the powerful incarnation of SriNarayana, although it is sometimes said that they were compiled by agreat sage named Apantaratama. Both the pancaratra and Vedanta-sutra,however, express the same opinions. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thereforeconfirms that there is no difference in opinion between the two, and Hedeclares that because Vedanta-sutra was compiled by Srila Vyasadeva, itmay be understood to have emanated from the breathing of Sri Narayana.Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that while Vyasadevawas compiling the Veoanta-sutra, seven of his great saintlycontemporaries were also engaged in similar work. These saints wereAtreya Rsi, Asmarathya, Audulomi, Karsnajini, Kasakrtsna, Jaimini andBadari. In addition, it is stated that Parasari and Karmandibhiksu alsodiscussed the Vedanta-sutra codes before Vyasadeva.     The Vedanta-sutra consists of four chapters. The first two chaptersdiscuss the relationship of the living entity with the SupremePersonality of Godhead. This is known as sambandha jnana, or knowledgeof the relationship. The third chapter describes how one can act in hisrelationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is calledabhidheyajnana. The relationship of the living entity with the SupremeLord is described by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. jivera svarupa hayakrsnera 'nityac--asa'.: the living entity is an eternal servant of theSupreme God. (Cc. Madhya the prescribed duties of service to the SupremePersonality of Godhead. This is called abhidheyaj-nana. The fourthchapter describes the result of such devotional service(prayojanajnana). This ultimate goal of life is to go back home, back toGodhead. The words anavrttih sabdat in the Veoanta-sutra indicate thisultimate goal.     Srila Vyasadeva, the powerful incarnation of Narayana, compiledVedanta-sutra, and in order to protect it from unauthorizedcommentaries, he personally composed Srimad-Bhagavatam on theinstruction of his spiritual master, Narada Muni, as the originalcommentary on Vedanta-sutra. Besides Srimad-Bhagavatam, there arecommentaries on the Vedanta-sutra composed by all the major Vaisnavaacaryas, and in each of them devotional service to the Lord is describedvery explicitly. Only those who follow Sankara's commentary havedescribed Vedanta-sutra in an impersonal way, without reference toVisnu-bhakti, or devotional service to the Lord, Visnu. Generally peoplevery much appreciate this Sariraka-bhasya or impersonal description ofthe Vedanta-sutra, but all commentaries which are devoid of devotionalservice to Lord Visnu must be considered to differ in purpose from theoriginal Vedanta-sutra. In other words, Lord Caitanya definitelyconfirmed that the commentaries or bhasyas written by the Vaisnavaacaryas on the basis of devotional service to Lord Visnu, and not theSariraka-bhasya of Sankaracarya, give the actual explanation of Vedanta-sutra.
                                   TEXT 107                  bhrama, pramada, viprali,osa, karanapatava                       isvarera vakye nahi dosa ei saba
                                 TRANSLATION     "The material defects of mistakes, illusions, cheating and sensory
inefficiency do not exist in the words of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
                                   PURPORT     A mistake is the acceptance of an object to be different than what
it is or the acceptance of false knowledge. For example, one may see arope in the dark and think it to be a serpent, or one may see aglittering oyster shell and think itto be gold. These are mistakes.Similarly, an illusion is a misunderstanding which arisesfrom inattention while hearing, and cheating is the transmission of suchdefective knowledge to others. Materialistic scientists and philosophersgenerally use such words as "maybe" and "perhaps" because they do nothave actual knowledge of complete facts. Therefore their instructingothers is an example of cheating. The final defect of the materialisticperson is his inefficient senses. Although our eyes, for example, havethe power to see, they cannot see that which is situated at a distance,nor can they see the eyelid, which is the object nearest to the eye. Toour untrained eyes the sun appears to be just like a plate, and to theeyes of one who is suffering from jaundice everything appears to beyellow. Therefore we cannot rely on the knowledge acquired through suchimperfect eyes. The ears are equally imperfect. We cannot hear a soundvibrated a long distance away unless we put a telephone to our ear.Similarly, if we analyze all our senses in this way, we will find themall to be imperfect. Therefore it is useless to acquire knowledgethrough the senses. The Vedic process is to hear from authority. InBhagavad-gita the Lord says, evam parampara-praptam imam rajarsayoviduh.- "The su preme science was th us received through the chain ofdisciplic succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way."(Bg. 4.2) We have to hear not from a telephone but from an authorizedperson, for it is he who has real knowledge.
                                   TEXT 108                    upanisat-sahita sutra kahe yei tattva
                   mukhya-vrttye sei artha parama mahattva
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Absolute Truth is described by the Upanisads and Brahma-sutra,
but one must understand the verses as they are. That is the supremeglory in understanding.
                                   PURPORT     It has become fashionable since the time of Sankaracarya to explain
everything regarding the sastras in an indirect way. Scholars take pridein explaining everything in their own way, and they declare that one canunderstand the Vedic scriptures in any way he likes. This "any way youlike" method is foolishness, and it has created havoc in the Vedic
culture. One cannot accept scientific knowledge in his own whimsicalway. In the science of mathematics, for example, two plus two equalsfour, and one cannot make it equal three or five. Yet although it is notpossible to alter real knowledge, people have taken to the fashion ofunderstanding Vedic knowledge in any way they like. It is for thisreason that we have presented Bhagavad-gita As It Is. We do not createmeanings by concoction. Sometimes commentators say that the wordkuruksetra in the first verse of Bhagavad-gita refers to one's body, butwe do not accept this. We understand that Kuruksetra is a place whichstill exists, and according to the Vedic version it is a dharmaksetra,or place of pilgrimage. People still go there to perform Vedicsacrifices. Foolish commentators, however, say that Kuruksetra means thebody and that panca pandavas refers to the five senses. In this way theydistort the meaning, and people are misled. Here Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuconfirms that all Vedic literatures, including the Upanisads, Brahma-sutras and others, whether sruti, smrti or nyaya, m ust be u nde rstoodaccording to their original statements. To describe the direct meaningof the Vedic literatures is glorious, but to describe them in one's ownway, using imperfect senses and imperfect knowledge, is a disastrousblunder. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fully deprecated the attempt todescribe the Vedas in this way.     Regarding the Upanisads, the following eleven Upanisads areconsidered to be th e top m ost: Isa, Kena, Katha, prasna, Mundaka,Mandukya, Taittiriya, Aitareya, Chandogya, Brhao ranyaka an dSvetasvatara. However, in the Muktikopanisad, verses 30-39, there is adescription of 108 Upanisads. They are as follows: ( 1) isopanisad, (2)Kenopanisad, (3) Kathopanisad, (4) prasnopanisad, (5) Mundako- panisad,(6) Mandu-kyopanisad, (7) Taittiriyopanisad, (8) Aitareyopanisad, (9)Chandogyopanisad, (10) Brhadranyakopanisad, (11) Brahmopanisad, ( 1 2)Kaiva- lyopanisad, ( 1 3) Jabalopanisad, ( 1 4) Svetasvataropanisad,(15) Hamsopanisad, ( 1 6) Aruneyopanisad, ( 1 7) Garbhopanisad, ( 1 8)Narayanopanisad, ( 1 9) parama- hamsopanisad, (20) Amrta-bindupanisad, (2 1) Nada-bind upanisad, (22) Sira-upanisad, (23) Atharva-sikhopanisad,(24) Maitrayany-upanisad, (25) Kausitaky-upanisad, (26) Brhajjabaiopanisad, (27) Nrsimha-tapanivopanisad, (28) Kalagni-rudropanisad,(29) Maitreyy-upanisad, (30) Subalopanisad, (3 1) Ksurikopanisad, (32)Mantriko- panisad, (33) Sarva-saropanisad, (34) Niralambopanisad, (35)Suka-rahasyopanisad, (36) Vajra-sucikopanisad, (37) Tejo-bindupanisad,(38) Nada-bindupanisad, (39) Dhyana-bindupanisad, (40) Brahma-vidyopanisad, (41) Yoga-tattvopanisad, (42)     Atma-bodhopanisad, (43) Narada-parivrajakopanisad, (44) Trisikhy-upanisad, (45) Sitopanisad, (46) Yoga-cudamany-upanisad, (47)Nirvanopanisad, (48) Mandala- brahmanopanisad, (49) Daksina-murty-upanisad, (50) Sarabhopanisad, (5 1) Skando- panisad, (52)Mahanarayanopanisad, (53) Advaya-tarakopanisad, (54) Rama-rahasyopanisad, (55) Rama-tapany-upanisad, (56) Vasude vopanisad, (57)Mudgalo- panisad, (58) Sandilyopanisad, (59) paingalopanisad, (60)Bhiksupanisad, (61) Mahadupanisad, (62) Sarirakopanisad, (63) Yoga-sikhopanisad, (64) Turiyatito- panisad, (65) Sannyasopanisad, (66)paramahamsa-parivrajakopanisad, (67) Maliko- panisad, (68)Avyaktopanisad, (69) Ekaksaropanisad, (70) purnopanisad, (7 1) Suryo-panisad, (72) Aksy-upanisad, (73) Adhyatmopanisad, (74) Kundikopanisad,(75) Savltry-upanisad, (76) Atmopanisad, (77) pasupatopanisad, (78)param Brahmo- panisad, (79) Avadhutopanisad, (80) Tripuratapanopanisad,
(8 1) Devy-upanisad, (82) Tripuropanisad, (83) Katha-rudropanisad, (84)Bhavanopanisad, (85) Hrdayo-panisad, (86) Yoga-kundaliny-upanisad, (87) Bhasmopanisad, (88)Rudraksopanisad, (89) Ganopanisad, (90) Darsanopanisad, (91)iarasaropanisad, (92) Maha vakyopani- sad, (93) panca-brahmopanisad,(94) pranagni-hotropanisad, (95) Gopala-tapano- panisad, (96)Krsnopanisad, (97) Yajna-vaikyopanisad, (98) Varahopanisad, (99)Satyayany-upanisad, ( 1 00) Hayagrivopanisad, ( 1 01) Dattatreyopanisad,( 1 02) Garudopanisad, ( 1 03) Kaly-upanisad, ( 104) Jabaly-upanisad, (1 05) Saubhagyopani- sad, (106) Saras vati-rahasyopanisad, ( 1 07) Bahvrcopanisad a n d ( 1 08) Muktikopani- sad. Thus there are 108 generallyaccepted Upanisads, of which eleven are the most important, aspreviously stated.
                                   TEXT 109                    gauna-vrttye yeba bhasya karila acarya
                     tahara sravane nasa haya sarva karya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sripada Sankaracarya has described all the Vedic literatures in
terms of indirect meanings. One who hears such explanations is ruined.
                                   TEXT 110
                     tanhara nahika dosa, isvara\jna pana
                   gaunartha karila mukhya artha acchadiya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sankaracarya is not at fault, for he has thus covered the real
purpose of the Vedas under the order of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
                                   PURPORT     The Vedic literature is to be considered a source of real
knowledge, but if one does not take it as it is, one will be misled. Forexample, Bhagavad-gita is an important Vedic literature which has beentaught for many years, but because it was commented upon by unscrupulousrascals, people derived no benefit from it, and no one came to theconclusion of Krsna consciousness. Since the purpose of Bhagavad-gita isnow being presented as it is, however, within four or five short yearsthousands of people all over the world have become Krsna conscious. Thatis the difference between direct and indirect explanations of Vedicliterature. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, mukhya-vrttye seiartha parama mahattva.- to instruct Vedic literature according to itsdirect meaning, without false commentary, is glorious. Unfortunately,Sri Sankaracarya, by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,compromised between atheism and theism in order to cheat the atheistsand bring them to theism, and to do so he gave up the direct method ofVedic knowledge and tried to present a meaning which is indirect. It is
with this purpose that he wrote his Sariraka-bhasya commentary on theVedanta-sutra. One should not, therefore, attribute very much importanceto the Sariraka-bhasya. In order to understand Vedanta philosophy, onemust study the Srimad-Bhagavatam, which begins with the words, om namobhagavate vasudevaya, janmady asya yato 'nvayad itaratas carthesvabhijnah sva-rat: "I offer my obeisances unto Lord Sri Krsna, son ofVasudeva, who is the Supreme All-pervading Personality of Godhead. Imeditate upon Him, the transcendent reality, who is the primeval causeof all causes, from whom all manifested universes arise, in whom theydwell and by whom they are destroyed. I meditate upon that eternallyeffulgent Lord who is directly and indirectly conscious of allmanifestations and yet is fully independent." (SB. 1.1.1) Srimad-Bhagavatam is the real com mentary on the Vedanta-sutra. Unfortu nately,if one is attracted to Sri San karacarya's com mentary, Sariraka-bhasya,his spiritual life is doomed.     One may argue that since Sankaracarya is an incarnation of LordSiva, how is it that he cheated people in this way? The answer is thathe did so on the order of his master, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. This is confirmed in the padma purana in the words of Lord Sivahimself.:     mayavadam asac-chastram     pracchannam bauddham ucyate     mayai va kaipitam devi     kaiau brahmana-rupina     brahmanas caparam rupam     nirgunam vaksyate maya     sarvasvam jagato'py asya     mohanartham kalau yuge     vedante tu maha-sastre     mayavadam avaidikam     mayaiva vaksyate devi     jagatam nasa-karanat"The Mayavada philosophy," Lord Siva informed his wife Parvati, "isimpious [asacchastra]. It is covered Buddhism. My dear Parvati, in theform of a brahmana in Kali-yuga I teach this imagined Mayavadaphilosophy. In order to cheat the atheists, I describe the SupremePersonality of Godhead to be without form and without qualities.Similarly, in explaining Vedanta I describe the same Mayavada philosophyin order to mislead the entire population toward atheism by denying thepersonal form of the Lord." In the Siva purana the Supreme Personalityof Godhead told Lord Siva:     dvaparadau yuge bhutva     kalaya manusadisu     svagamaih kalpitais tvam ca     janan mad-vimukhan kuru"In Kali-yuga, mislead the people in general by propounding imaginarymeanings for the Vedas to bewilder them." These are the descriptions ofthe puranas.     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that mukhya-vrtti("the direct meaning") is abhidha-vrtti, or the meaning which one canunderstand immediately from the statements of dictionaries, whereasgauna-vrtti ("the indirect meaning") is a meaning that one imagineswithout consulting the dictionary. For example, one politician has saidthat Kuruksetra refers to the body, but in the dictionary there is no
such definition. Therefore this imaginary meaning is gauna-vrtti,whereas the direct meaning found in the dictionary is mukhya-vrtti orabhidha-vrtti. This is the distinction between the two. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu recommends that one understand the Vedic literature in termsof abhidha-vrtti, and the gauna-vrtti He rejects. Sometimes, however, asa matter of necessity, Vedic literature is described in terms of thelaksana-vrtti or gauna-vrtti, but one should not accept suchexplanations as permanent truths.     The purpose of the discussions in the Upanisads and Vedanta-sutrais to philosophically establish the personal feature of the AbsoluteTruth. The impersonalists, however, in order to establish theirphilosophy, accept these discussions in terms of laksana-vrtti, orindirect meanings. Thus instead of being tattva-vada, or in search ofthe Absolute Truth, they become Mayavada, or illusioned by the materialenergy. When Sri Visnusvami, one of the four acaryas of the Vaisnavacult, presented his thesis on the subject matter of suddhadvaita-vada,immediately the Mayavadis took advantage of this philosophy and tried toestablish their advaita-vada or kevaladvaita- vada. To defeat thiskevaladvaita-vada, Sri Raman ujacarya presented h is p hilosophy asvisistadvaita-vada, and Sri Madhvacarya presented his philosophy oftattva-vada, both of which are stumbling blocks to the Mayavadis becausethey defeat their philosophy in scrupulous detail. Students of Vedicphilosophy know very well how strongly Sri Ramanujacarya'svisistadvaita-vada and Sri Madhvacarya's tattva- vada contest theimpersonal Mayavada philosophy. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, accepted the direct meaning of the Vedanta philosophy and thusdefeated the Mayavada philosophy immediately. He opined in thisconnection that anyone who follows the principles of the Sariraka-bhasyais doomed. This is confirmed in the padma purana where Lord Siva tellsParvati:     srnu de vi pravaksyami     tamasani yathakramam     yesam sravana-matrena     patityam jnaninam api     apartham sruti-vakyanam     darsayal loka-garhitam     karma-svarupa-tyajyatvam     atra ca pratioadyate     sarva-karma-parlbhramsan     naiskarmyam tatra cocyate     paratma-jivayor aikyam     mayatra pratioadyate"My dear wife, hear my explanations of how I have spread ignorancethrough Mayavada philosophy. Simply by hearing it, even an advancedscholar will fall down. In this philosophy, which is certainly veryinauspicious for people in general, I have misrepresented the realmeaning of the Vedas and recommended that one give up all activities inorder to achieve freedom from karma. In this Mayavada philosophy I havedescribed the jivatma and Paramatma to be one and the same." How theMayavada philosophy was condemned by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Hisfollowers through 99, where Svarupa-damodara Gosvami says that anyonewho is eager to understand the Mayavada philosophy must be consideredinsane. This especially applies to a Vaisnava who reads the Sariraka-bhasya and considers himself to be one with God. The Mayavadi
philosophers have presented their arguments in such attractive flowerylanguage that hearing Mayavada philosophy may sometimes change the mindof even a maha-bhagavata, or very advanced devotee. An actual Vaisnavacannot tolerate any philosophy that claims God and the living being tobe one and the same.
                                   TEXT 111                 `brahma'sabde mukhya arthe kahe--`bhagavan'
                   cid-aisvarya-paripurna, anurdh va-samana
                                 TRANSLATION     "According to direct understanding, the Absolute Truth is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has all spiritual opulences. No onecan be equal to or greater than Him.
                                   PURPORT     This statement by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is confirmed in the
Srimad- Bhagavatam:     vadanti tat tattva-vidas     tattvam yaj jna-nam advayam     brahmeti paramatmeti     bhagavan itl sabdyate"Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call thisnondual substance Brahman, Paramatma or Bhagavan." (SB. 1.2.11) TheAbsolute Truth is ultimately understood as Bhagavan, partiallyunderstood as Paramatma and vaguely understood as the impersonalBrahman. Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is opulent inall excellence; no one can be equal to or greater than Hi m. This isalso confi rmed i n Bhagavad-gita, where the Lord says, mattah parataramnanyat kincid asti dhananjaya.: "O conqueror of wealth [ Arju na], thereis no truth superior to Me." (Bg. 7.7) There are many other verses whichprove that the Absolute Truth in the ultimate sense is understood to bethe Supreme Person ality of Godhead, Krsna.
                                   TEXT 112                     tanhara vibhuti, deha,--saba cidlara
                  cid-vibhuti acchadi' tanre kahe `nirakara'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Everything about the Supreme Personality of Godhead is spiritual,
including His body, opulence and paraphernalia. Mayavada philosophy,however, covering His spiritual opulence, advocates the theory ofimpersonalism.
                                   PURPORT     I t is stated i n th e Brahma-samhita, isvarah paramah krsnah sac-
cidnanda- vigrahah: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, has aspiritual body which is full of knowledge, eternity and bliss." In this
material world everyone's body is just the opposite--temporary, full ofignorance and full of misery. Therefore when the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is sometimes described as nirakara, this is to indicate that Hedoes not have a material body like us.     Mayavadi philosophers do not know how it is that the SupremePersonality of Godhead is formless. The Supreme Lord does not have aform like ours but has a spiritual form. Not knowing this, Mayavadiphilosophers simply advocate the onesided view that the Supreme Godhead,or Brahman, is formless (nirakara). In this connection SrilaBhaktivinoda Thakura offers many quotes from the Vedic literature. Ifone accepts the real or direct meaning of these Vedic statements, onecan understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead has a spiritualbody (sac-cid- ananda-vigrahah).     I n the Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad it is said, purnam adah purnam idampurnat purnam udacyate. This indicates that the body of the SupremePersonality of Godhead is spiritual, for even though He expands in manyways, He remains the same. I n Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, ahamsarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate: "I am the origin of all.Everything emanates from Me." (Bg. 10.8) Mayavadi philosophersmaterialistically think that if the Supreme Truth expands Himself ineverything, He must lose His original form. Thus they think that therecannot be any form other than the expansive gigantic body of the Lord.But the mantra of the Brhad- aranyaka Upanisad co nfi rm s, purnam idampu--nat purnam udacyate. "Although He expands in many ways, He keeps Hisoriginal personality. His original spiritual body remains as it is."Similarly, in the Svetasvatara Upanisad it is stated, vicitra-saktlhpurusah puranah.- "The Su preme Personality of God head, the originalperson [purusa], has multifarious energies." Sa vrksa-kalakrtibhih paro'nyo yasmat prapancah parivartate 'yam dharmavaham papanudam bhagesam:"He is the origi n of material creation, and it is due to Him only thateverything changes. He is the protector of religion and annihilator ofall sinful activities. He is the master of all opule nces." (6.6)Vedaham etam purusam mahantam aditya-varnam tamasah parastat: "Now Iunderstand the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be the greatest of thegreat. He is effulgent like the sun and is beyond this material world."(3.8) patim- patinam paramam parastat: "He is the master of all masters,the superior of all superiors." (6.7) Mahan prabhur vai purusah.: "He isthe supreme master and supreme person." (3.12) parasya saktir vividhajvasrayate.: "We can understand His opulences in different ways." (6.8)These are statements of the SvetasvataraUpanisad. Similarly, in the Rg-veda it is stated, tad visnoh paramampadam sada pasyanti surayah: "Visnu is the Supreme, and those who areactually learned think only of His lotus feet." I n the Prasna Upanisadit is said, sa iksa-ncakre: "He glanced over the material creation."(6.3) In the Aitareya Upanisad it is said, sa aiksata--"He glanced overthe material creation"--and sa imaliokan asrjata--"He created thisentire material world." (1.1.1-2)     Thus many verses can be quoted from the Upanisads and Vedas whichprove that the Supreme Godhead is not impersonal. In the Katha Upanisad(2.2.13) it is also said, nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam eko bahunamyo vidadhati kaman: "He is the supreme eternally conscious person whomaintains all other living entities." From all these Vedic referencesone can understand that the Absolute Truth is a person, although no onecan equal or excel Him. Although there are many foolish Mayavadi
philosophers who think that they are even greater than Krsna, Krsna isasamaurdhva; no one is equal to or above Him.     As stated i n the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3. 1 9), apni-pado javanograhita. T h is verse describes the Absolute Truth as having no legs orhands. Although this is an impersonal description, however, it does notmean that the Absolute Personality of Godhead has no form. He has aspiritual form which is distinct from the forms of matter. In this verseCaitanya Mahaprabhu clarifies this distinction.
                                   TEXT 113                  cid-ananda--tenho, tanra sthana, parivara
                     tanre kahe--prakrta-sattvera vikara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Supreme Personality of Godhead is full of spiritual potencies.
Therefore His body, name, fame and entourage are all spiritual. TheMayavadi philosopher, due to ignorance, says that these are all merelytransformations of the material mode of goodness.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita the Supreme Personality of
Godhead has classified His energies in two distinct divisions--namely,prakrta and aprakrta, or para-prakrti and apara-prakrti. In the Visnupurana the same distinction is made. The Mayavadi philosophers cannotunderstand these two prakrtis or natures--material and spiritual--but one who is actually intelligent can understandthem. Considering the many varieties and activities in material nature,why should the Mayavadi philosophers deny the spiritual varieties of thespiritual world? The Bhagavatam says:     ye'nye'ravinoaksa vimukta-maninas     tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah     (SB. 10.2.32)The intelligence of those who think themselves liberated but have noinformation of the spiritual world is not yet clear. In this verse theterm avisuddha-buddhayah refers to unclean intelligence. Due to uncleanintelligence or a poor fund of knowledge, the Mayavadi philosopherscannot understand the distinction between material and spiritualvarieties; therefore they cannot even think of spiritual varietiesbecause they take it for granted that all variety is material.     SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, therefore, explains in this verse thatKrsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the Absolute Truth, has aspiritual body which is distinct from material bodies, and thus Hisname, abode, entourage and qualities are all spiritual. The materialmode of goodness has nothing to do with spiritual varieties. Mayavadiphilosophers, however, cannot clearly understand spiritual varieties;therefore they imagine a negation of the material world to be thespiritual world. The material qualities of goodness, passion andignorance cannot act in the spiritual world, wh ich is therefore cal lednirguna, as clearly i nd icated in Bhagavad-gita (traigunya-visaya vedanistraigunyo bhavarjuna). The material world is a manifestation of thethree modes of material nature, but one has to become free from these
modes to come to the spiritual world where their influence is completelyabsent. Now Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu will disassociate Lord Sivafrom Mayavada philosophy in the following verse.
                                   TEXT 114                     tanra dosa nahi, tenho ajna-karidasa
                      ara yei sune tara haya sarva-aasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sankaracarya, who is an incarnation of Lord Siva, is faultless
because he is a servant carrying out the orders of the Lord. But thosewho follow his Mayavadi philosophy are doomed. They will lose all theiradvancement in spiritual knowledge.
                                   PURPORT     Mayavadi philosophers are very proud of exhibiting their Vedanta
knowledge through grammatical jugglery, but Lord Sri Krsna in Bhagavad-gita certifies that they are mayayapahrta jnanah, bereft of realknowledge d ue to maya. Maya has two potencies with which to execute hertwo functions--praksepatmika-sakti, the power to throw the living entityin the ocean of material existence, and avaranatmika-sakti, the power tocover the knowledge of the living entity. The function of theavaranatmika-sakti is explained i n Bhagavad-gita by the wordmayayapahrta-jnana.     Why the daivi-maya or illusory energy of Krsna takes away theknowledge of the Mayavadi philosophers is also explained in Bhagavad-gita by the use of the words asuram bhavam asritah, which refer to aperson who does not agree to the existence of the Lord.The Mayavadis whoare not in agreement with the existence of the Lord can be classified intwo groups, exemplified by the impersonalist Sankarites of Varanasi andthe Buddhists of Saranatha. Both of them are Mayavadis, and Krsna takesaway their knowledge due to their atheistic philosophies. Neither ofthem agree to accept the existence of a personal God. The Buddhistphilosophers clearly deny both the soul and God, and although theSankarites do not openly deny God, they say that the Absolute isnirakara, or formless. Thus both of them are avisuddha- buddhayah, orimperfect and unclean in their knowledge and intelligence.     The most prominent Mayavadi scholar, Sadananda Yogindra, haswritten a book called Vedanta-sara in which he expounds the philosophyof Sankaracarya, and all the followers of Sankara's philosophy attributegreat importance to his statements. In this Vedanta-sara SadanandaYogindra defines Brahman as sac-cidnanda combined with knowledge andwithout duality, and he defines ignorance (jada) as knowledge distinctfrom that of sat and asat. This is almost inconceivable, but it is aproduct of the three material qualities. Thus he considers anythingother than pure knowledge to be material.The center of ignorance isconsidered to be sometimes allpervading and sometimes individual. Thusaccording to his opinion both the allpervading Visnu and the individualliving entities are products of ignorance.     In simple language, it is the opinion of Sadananda Yogindra that
since everything is nirakara (formless), the conception of Visnu and theconception of the individual soul are both products of ignorance. Healso explains that the visuddha-sattva conception of the Vaisnavas isnothing butpradhana, or the chief principle of creation. He maintainsthat when all-pervading knowledge is contaminated by the visuddha-sattva, which consists of a transformation of the quality of goodness,there arises the conception of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who isthe omnipotent, omniscient supreme ruler, the Supersoul, the cause ofall causes, the supreme isvara, etc. According to Sadananda Yogindra,because isvara, the Supreme Lord, is the reservoir of all ignorance, Hemay be called sarva-jna or omniscient, but one who denies the existenceof the omnipotent Supreme Personality of Godhead is more than isvara, orthe Lord. His conclusion, therefore, is that the Supreme Personality ofGodhead (isvara) is a transformation of material ignorance and that theliving entity (jiva) is covered by ignorance. Thus he describes bothcollective and individual existence in darkness. According to Mayavadiphilosophers, the Vaisnava conception of the Lord asthe SupremePersonality of Godhead and of thejiva or individual soul as His eternalservant is a manifestation of ignorance. If we accept the judgment ofLord Krsna in Bhagavad-gita, however, the Mayavadis are to be consideredmayaya- pahrtajnana, or bereft of all knowledge, because they do notrecognize the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or theyclaim that His existence isa product of the material conception (maya).These are characteristics of asuras or demons.     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in His discourses with SarvabhaumaBhattacarya, said:     jivera nistara lagl' sutra kaila vyasa     mayavadi-bhasya sunile haya sarva-nasa     (Cc. Madhya 6. 1 69)Vyasadeva composed the Vedanta-sutra to deliver the conditioned soulsfrom this material world, but Sankaracarya, by presenting the Vedanta-sutra in his own way, has clearly done a great disservice to humansociety, for one who follows his Mayavada philosophy is doomed. In theVedanta-sutra, devotional service is clearly indicated, but the Mayavadiphilosophers refuse to accept the spiritual body of the Supreme AbsolutePerson and refuse to accept that the living entity has an individualexistence separate from that of the Supreme Lord. Thus they have createdatheistic havoc all over the world, for such a conclusion is against thevery nature of the transcendental process of pure devotional service.The Mayavadi philosophers' unrealizable ambition to become one with theSupreme through denying the existence of the Personality of Godheadresults in a most calamitous misrepresentation of spiritual knowledge,and one who follows this philosophy is doomed to remain perpetually inthis material world. Therefore they are called avlsuddha-buddhayah, orunclean in knowledge. Because they are unclean in knowledge, all theirausterities and penances end in frustration. Thus although they may behonored at first as very learned scholars, ultimately they descend tophysical activities of politics, social work, etc. Instead of becomingone with the Supreme Lord, they again become one with these materialactivities. This is explained by Srimad-Bhagavatam:     aruhya krcchrena param padam tatah     patanty adho 'nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah     (SB. 10.2.32)In actuality the Mayavadi philosophers very strictly follow the
austerities and penances of spiritual life and in this way are elevatedto the impersonal Brahman platform, but due to their negligence of thelotus feet of the Lord they again fall down to material existence.
                                   TEXT 115                     prakrta kariya mane visnu-kale vara
                       visnu-ninda ara nahi ihara upara
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who considers the transcendental body of Lord Visnu to be made
of material nature is the greatest offender at the lotus feet of theLord. There is no greater blasphemy against the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami explains that the variegated
personal feature of the Absolute Truth is the Visnu-tattva, and thematerial energy which creates this cosmic manifestation is the energy ofLord Visnu. The creative force is merely the energy of the Lord, but thefoolish conclude that the Lord has no separate existence because He hasdistributed Himself in an impersonal form. The impersonal Brahman,however, cannot possess energies, nor do the Vedic literatures statethat maya (the illusory energy) is covered by another maya. There arehundreds and thousands of references, however, to Visnu-maya (parasyasaktih), or the energy of Lord Visnu. In Bhagavad-gita (7.14) Krsnarefers to mama maya ("My energy"). Maya is controlled by the SupremePersonality of Godhead; it is not that He is covered by maya. ThereforeLord Visnu cannot be a product of the material energy. In the beginningof the Vedanta-sutra it is said,janmady asya yatah, indicating that thematerial energy is also an emanation of the Supreme Brahman. How thencould He be covered by the material energy? If that were possible,material energy would be greater than the Supreme Brahman. Even thesesimple arguments, however, cannot be understood by the Mayavadiphilosophers, and therefore the term mayayapahrtajnana which is appliedto them in Bhagavad-gita is extremely appropriate. Anyone who thinksthat Lord Visnu is a product of the material energy, as explained bySadananda Yogindra, should immediately be understood to be insane, forhis knowledge has been stolen by the illusory energy.     Lord Visnu cannot be placed within the category of the demigods.Those who are actually bewildered by the Mayavada philosophy and arestill in the darkness of ignorance consider Lord Visnu to be a demigod,in defiance of the Rg-vedic mantra, om tad visnah paramam padam ("Visnuis always in a superior position"). This mantra is also confirmed inBhagavad-gita. Mattah parataram nanyat.: there is no truth superior toLord Krsna or Visnu. Thus only those whose knowledge has been bewilderedconsider Lord Visnu to be a demigod and therefore suggest that one mayeither worship Lord Visnu, the goddess Kali or Durga or whomever helikes and achieve the same result. This is an ignorant conclusion thatis not accepted in Bhagavad-gita, wh ich d isti nctly says, yanti deva-vrata devan. ..yanti mad-yaji no'pi mam.- "The worshipers of thedemigods will be promoted to the respective planets of the demigods, but
devotees of the Supreme Lord will go back home, back to Godhead." (Bg.9.25) Lord Krsna explains very clearly in Bhagavad-gita that Hismaterial energy is very difficult to overcome (daivihy esa gunamayimamamaya duratyaya). Maya's influence is so strong that even learnedscholars and spiritualists are also covered by maya and think themselvesto be as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Actually, however,to free oneself from the influence of maya one must surrender to theSupreme Personality of Godhead, as Krsna also states i n Bhagavad-gita(mam eva ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te). It is to be concluded,therefore, that Lord Visnu does not belong to this material creation butto the spiritual world. To misconceive Lord Visnu to have a materialbody or to equate Him with the demigods is the most offensive blasphemyagainst Lord Visnu, and offenders against the lotus feet of Lord Visnucannot advance in spiritual knowledge. They are called mayayapahrta-jnana, or those whose knowledge has been stolen by the influence ofillusion.     One who thinks that there is a difference between Lord Visnu's bodyand His soul dwells in the darkest region of ignorance. There is nodifference between Lord Visnu's body and Visnu's soul, for they areadvayajnana, one knowledge. In this world there is a difference betweenthe material body and spiritual soul, but in the spiritual worldeverything is spiritual, and there are no such differences. The greatestoffense of the Mayavadi philosophers is to consider Lord Visnu and theliving entities to be one and the same. In this connection the padmapurana states:     arcye visnau siladhir- gurusu     nara-matir vaisnave jati-buddhih"One who considers the arca-murti or worshipable Deity of Lord Visnu tobe stone, the spiritual master to be an ordinary human being, and aVaisnava to belong to a particular caste or creed, is possessed ofhellish intelligence." One who follows such conclusions is doomed.
                                   TEXT 116                    isvarera tattva--yena jvalita jvalana
                   jivera svarupa--yaiche sphulingera kana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Lord is like a great blazing fire, and the living entities are
like small sparks of that fire.
                                   PURPORT     Although sparks and a big fire are both fire and both have the
power to burn; the burning power of the fire and that of the spark arenot the same. Why should one artificially try to become like a big firealthough by constitution he is like a small spark? It is due toignorance. One should therefore understand that neither the SupremePersonality of Godhead nor the small sparklike living entities haveanything to do with matter, but when the spiritual spark comes incontact with the material world his fiery quality is extinguished. Thatis the position of the conditioned souls. Because they are in touch withthe material world, their spiritual quality is almost dead, but because
these spiritual sparks are all Krsna's parts and parcels, as the Lordstates in Bhagavad-gita (mamaivamsah), they can revive their originalposition by getting free from material contact. This is purephilosophical understanding. I n Bhagavad-gita the spiritual sparks aredeclared to be sanatana (eternal); therefore the material energy, maya,cannot affect their constitutional position.     Someone may argue, "Why is there a need to create the spiritualsparks?" The answer can be given in this way. Since the AbsolutePersonality of Godhead is omnipotent, He has both unlimited and limitedpotencies. This is the meaning of omnipotent. To be omnipotent, He musthave not only unlimited potencies but limited potencies also. Thus toexhibit His omnipotency He displays both. The living entities areendowed with limited potency although they are part of the Lord. TheLord displays the spiritual world by His unlimited potencies, whereas byHis limited potencies the material world is displayed. In Bhagavad-gitathe Lord says:     apareyam itas tv anyam     prakrtim viddhi me param     jiva-bhutam maha-baho     yayedam dharyate jagat"Besides the inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superiorenergy of Mine, which is all living entities who are struggling withmaterial nature and are sustaining the universe." (Bg. 7.5) Thejiva-bhuta, living entities, control this material world with their limitedpotencies. Generally, people are bewildered by the activities ofscientists and technologists. Due to maya they think that there is noneed of God and that they can do everything and anything, but actuallythey cannot. Since this cosmic manifestation is limited, their existenceis also limited. Everything in this material world is limited, and forthis reason there is creation, sustenance and dissolution. However, inthe world of unlimited energy, the spiritual world, there is neithercreation nor destruction.     If the Personality of Godhead did not possess both limited andunlimited energies, He could not be called omnipotent. Mahato mahivananuto'niyan.- He is greater than the greatest and smaller than thesmallest. He is smaller than the smallest in the form of the livingentities and greater than the greatest in His form of Krsna. If therewere no one to control, there would be no meaning to the conception ofthe supreme controller (isvara), just as there is no meaningto a kingwithout his subjects. If all the subjects became king, there would be nodistinction between the king and an ordinary citizen. Thus for the Lordto be the supreme controller there must be a creation to control. Thebasic principle for the existence of the living entities is called cid-vilasa, or spiritual pleasure. The omnipotent Lord displays His pleasurepotency as the living entities. The Lord is described in Vedanta-sutraas anandamayo 'bhyasat. He is by nature the reservoir of all pleasures,and because He wants to enjoy pleasure, there must be energies to giveHim pleasure or supply Him the impetus for pleasure. This is the perfectphilosophical understanding of the Absolute Truth.
                                   TEXT 117                  jiva-tattva--sakti, krsna-tattva--saktiman                      gita-vlsnupuranadi tahate pramana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The living entities are energies, not the energetic. The energetic
is Krsna. This is very vividly described in Bhagavad-gita, the VisnuPurana and other Vedic literatures.
                                   PURPORT     As already explained, there are three prasthanas on the path of
advancement in spiritual knowledge--namely, nyaya-prasthana(Vedantaphilosophy), sruti-prasthana (the Upanisads and Ved ic mantras)and smrti-prasthana (the Bhagavad-gita, Mahabharata, Puranas, etc.).Unfortunately, Mayavadi philosophers do not accept the smrti-prasthana.Smrti refers to the conclusions d rawn from the Ved ic evidence.Sometimes Mayavadi philosophers do not accept the authority of Bhagavad-gita and the Puranas, and this is called ardha-kukkuti.nyaya. If onebelieves in the Vedic literatures, one must accept all the Vedicliteratures recognized by the great acaryas, but these Mayavadiphilosophers accept only the nyaya-prasthana and sruti- prasthana,rejecting the smrti-prasthana. Here, however, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhucites evidence from the Gita Visnu purana, etc., which are smrti-prasthana. No one can avoid the Personality of Godhead in the statementsof Bhagavad-gita and other Vedic literatures such as the Mahabharata andthe Puranas. Lord Caitanya therefore quotes a passage from Bhagavad-gita(Bg. 7.5).
                                   TEXT 118                            apareyam itas tv anyam
                           prakrtim vlddhi me param                            jiva-bhutam maha-baho                            yayedam dharyate jagat
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Besides the inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a
superior energy of Mine, which is all living entities who are strugglingwith material nature and are sustaining the universe.'
                                   PURPORT     In Bhagavad-gita it is explained that the five elements earth,
water, fire, air and ether constitute the gross energy of the AbsoluteTruth and that there are also three subtle energies, namely, the mind,intelligence and false ego, or identification with the phenomenal world.Thus the entire cosmic manifestation is divided into eight energies, allof which are inferior. As explained in Bhagavad-gita (mama mayaduratyaya), the inferior energy known as maya is so strong that althoughthe living entity does not belong to this energy, due to the superiorstrength of the inferior energy the living entity (jiva-bhuta) forgetshis real position and identifies with it. Krsna says distinctly thatbeyond the material energy there is a superior energy which is knownasthejiva-bhuta orliving entities. When in contact with the material
energy, this superior energy conducts all the activities of the entirematerial phenomenal world.     The supreme cause is Krsna (janmady asya yatah), who is the originof all energies, which work variously. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead has both inferior and superior energies, and the differencebetween them is that the superior energy is factual whereas the inferiorenergy is a reflection of the superior. A reflection of the sun in amirror or on water appears to be the sun but is not. Similarly, thematerial world is but a reflection of the spiritual world. Although itappears to be factual, it is not; it is only a temporary reflection,whereas the spiritual world is a factual reality. The material world,with its gross and subtle forms, is merely a reflection of the spiritualworld.     The living entity is not a product of the material energy; he isspiritual energy but in contact with matter he forgets his identity.Thus the living entity identifies himself with matter andenthusiastically engages in material activities in the guises of atechnologist, scientist, philosopher, etc. He does not know that he isnot at all a material product but is spiritual. His real identity thusbeing lost, he struggles very hard in the material world, and the HareKrsna movement or Krsna consciousness movement tries to revive hisoriginal consciousness. His activities in manufacturing big skyscrapersare evidence of intelligence, but this kind of intelligence is not atall advanced. One should know that his only real concern is how to getfree from material contact, for by absorbing his mind in materialactivities he takes material bodies again and again, and although hefalsely claims to be very intelligent, in material consciousness he isnot at all intelligent. When we speak about the Krsna consciousnessmovement, which is meant to make people intelligent, the conditionedliving entity therefore misunderstands it. He is so engrossed in thematerial concept of life that he does not think that there can be anyactivities which are actually based on intelligence beyond theconstruction of skyscrapers and big roads and the manufacturing of cars.This is proof of mayayapahrta-jnana, or loss of all intelligence due tothe influence of maya. When a living entity is freed from suchmisconceptions, he is called liberated. When one is actually liberatedhe no longer identifies with the material world. The symptom of mukti(liberation) is that one engages in spiritual activities instead offalsely engaging in material activities.     Transcendental loving devotional service is the spiritual activityof the spirit soul. Mayavadi philosophers confuse such spiritualactivity with material activity, but Bhagavad-gita confirm s:     mam ca yo'vyabhicarena bhakti-yogena se vate     sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhu vaya kalpate     (Bg. 14.26)One who engages in the spiritual activities of unalloyed devotionalservice (avyabhicarini-bhakti) is immediately elevated to thetranscendental platform, and he is to be considered brahma-bhuta, whichindicates that he is no longer in the material world but in thespiritual world. Devotional service is enlightenment or awakening. Whenthe living entity perfectly performs spiritual activities under thedirection of the spiritual master, he becomes perfect in knowledge andunderstands that he is not God but a servant of God. As explained byCaitanya Mahaprabhu, jivera `svarupa' haya--krsnera `nitya-dasa': the
real identity of the living entity is that he is an eternal servant ofthe Supreme (Cc. Madhya 20.108). As long as one does not come to thisconclusion, he must be in ignorance. This is also confirmed by the Lordin Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.19). Bahunam janmanam ante jnanavan mamprapadyate: "After many births of struggling for existence andcultivating knowl-edge, when one comes to the point of real knowledge he surrenders untoMe."Such an advanced mahatma or great soul is very rarely to be seen.Thus although the Mayavadi philosophers appear to be very advanced inknowledge, they are not yet perfect. To come to the point of perfectionthey must voluntarily surrender to Krsna.
                                   TEXT 119                           visnu-saktih paraprokta
                           ksetrajnakhya tatha para                            avidya-karma-samjnanya                             trtiya saktlr isyate
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The potency of Lord Visnu is summarized in three categories--
namely, the spiritual potency, the living entities and ignorance. Thespiritual potency is full of knowledge; the living entities, althoughbelonging to the spiritual potency, are subject to bewilderment; and thethird energy, which is full of ignorance, is always visible in fruitiveactivities.'
                                   PURPORT     I n the previous verse, quoted from Bhagavad-gita, it has been
established that the living entities are to be categorized among theLord's potencies. The Lord is potent, and there are varieties ofpotencies (parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate). Now, in this quotationfrom the Visnu purana, this is further confirmed. There are varieties ofpotencies, and they have been divided into three categories--namely,spiritual, marginal and external.     The spiritual potency is manifested in the spiritual world. Krsna'sform, qualities, activities and entourage are all spiritual. This isalso confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:     ajo 'pi sann avyayatma     bhutanam isvaro 'pi san     prakrtim svam adhisthaya     sambhavamy atma-mayaya "Although I am unborn and My transcendentalbody never deteriorates, and although I am the Lord of all sentientbeings, I still appear in every millennium in My original transcendentalform." (Bg. 4.6) Atma-maya refers to the spiritual potency. When Krsnacomes to this or any other universe, He does so with His spiritualpotency. We take birth by the force of the material potency, but asstated here with reference to the Visnu purana, the ksetrajna, or livingentity, belongs to the spiritual potency; thus when we free ourselvesfrom the clutches of the material potency we can also enter thespiritual world.     The material potency is the energy of darkness, or complete
ignorance of spiritual activities. I n the material potency, the livingentity engages himself in fruitive activities, thinking that he can behappy through expansion in terms of material energy. This fact isprominently manifest in this age of Kali because human society, notunderstanding the spiritual nature, is busily expanding in materialactivities. The men of the present day are almost unaware of theirspiritual identity. They think that they are products of the elements ofthe material world and that everything will end with the annihilation ofthe body. Therefore they conclude that as long as one has a materialbody consisting of material senses, one should enjoy the senses as muchas possible. Since they are atheists,they do not care whether there is anext life. Such activities are described in this verse as avidya-karma-samjnanya.     The material energy is separated from the spiritual energy of theSupreme Personi ality of Godhead. Thus although it is originally createdby the Supreme Lord, He is not actually present within it. The Lord alsoconfirms in Bhagavad-gita, mat-sthani sarva-bhutani: "Everything isresting on Me." (Bg. 9.4) This indicates that everything is resting onHis own energy. For example,the planets are resting within outer space,which is the separated energy of Krsna. The Lord explains in Bhagavad-gita:     bhumir apo'nalo vayuh     kham mano buddhir eva ca     ahankara itiyam me     bhinna prakrtlr astadha"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego--alltogether these eight comprise My separated energies." (Bg. 7.4) Theseparated energy acts as if it were independent, but here it is saidthat although such energies are certainly factual, they are notindependent but merely separated.     The separated energy can be understood from a practical example. Icompose books by speaking into a dictaphone, and when the dictaphone isreplayed, it appears that I am speaking personally, but actually I amnot. I spoke personally, but then the dictaphone tape, which is separatefrom me, acts exactly like me. Similarly, the material energy originallyemanates from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but it actsseparately, although the energy is supplied by the Lord. Th is is alsoex plai ned in Bhagavad-gita. Mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram.. "This material nature is working under My direction, O sonof Kunti, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings." (Bg.9.10) Under the guidance or superintendence of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, the material energy works as if independent, although it isnot actually independent.     In this verse from the Visnu purana the total energy of the SupremePersonality of Godhead is classified in three divisions--namely, thespiritual or internal potency of the Lord, the marginal potency orksetrajna (the living entity), and the material potency, which isseparated from the Supreme Personality of Godhead and appears to actindependently. When Srila Vyasadeva, by meditation and self-realization,saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he also saw the separated energyof the Lord sta n d i ng beh ind H i m (apasyatpurusam purnam mayam catad-apasrayam). Vyasadeva also realized that it is this separated energyof the Lord, the material energy, that covers the knowledge of theliving entities (yaya sammohito jiva atmanam tri- gunatmakam). The
separated, material energy bewilders the living entities Vivas), andthus they work very hard under its influence, not knowing that they arenot fulfilling their mission in life. Unfortunately, most of them thinkthatthey are the body and should therefore enjoy the material sensesirresponsibly, since when death comes everything will be finished. Thisatheistic philosophy also flourished in India, where it was sometimespropagated by Carvaka Muni, who said:     rnam krtva ghrtam pibet     yavaj jivet sukham jivet     bhasmi-bhutasya dehasya kutah     punar agamano bhavetHis theory was that as long as one lives one should eat as much ghee aspossible. In India, ghee (clarified butter) is a basic ingredient inpreparing many varieties of foodstuffs. Since everyone wants to enjoynice food, Carvaka Muni advised that one eat as much ghee as possible.One may say, "I have no money. How shall I purchase ghee?" Carvaka Muni,however, says, "If you have no money, then beg borrow or steal, but insome way secure ghee and enjoy life." For one who further objects thathe will be held accountable for such unauthorized activities as beggingborrowing and stealing, Carvaka Muni replies, "You will not be heldresponsible. As soon as your body is burned to ashes after death,everything is finished." This is called ignorance. From Bhagavad-gita itis understood that one does not die with the annihilation of his body(na hanyate hanyamane sarire). The annihilation of one body involveschanging to another (tatha dehantara-praptlh). Therefore, to performirresponsible activities in the material world is very dangerous.Without knowledge of the spirit soul and its transmigration, people areallured by the material energy to engage in many such activities, as ifone could become happy simply by dint of material knowledge, withoutreference to spiritual existence. Therefore the entire material worldand its activities are referred to as avidya-karma-samjnanya.     In order to dissipate the ignorance of the human beings who workunder the material energy, which is separated from the SupremePersonality of Godhead, the Lord comes down to revive their originalnature of spiritual activities (yadayadahi dharmasya glanir bhavatibharata). As soon as they deviate from their original nature, the Lordcomes to teach them, sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranam. vraja:"My dear living entities, give up all material activities and simplysurrender unto Me for protection." (Bg. 18.66)      It is the statementof Carvaka Muni that one should beg, borrow or steal money to purchaseghee and enjoy life (rnam krtva ghrtam pibet). Thus even the greatestatheist of India recommends that one eat ghee, not meat. No one couldconceive of human beings' eating meat like tigers and dogs, but men havebecome so degraded that they are just like animals and can no longerclaim to have a human civilization.
                                   TEXT 120                   hena jiva-tattva iana likhi' para-tattva
                   acchanna karlla srestha is vara-mahattva
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Mayavada Philosophy is so degraded that it has taken the
insignificant living entities to be the Lord, the Supreme Truth, thuscovering the glory and supremacy of the Absolute Truth with monism.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura comments in this connection that in all
Vedic scriptures the jiva-tattva, the truth of the living entities, ismentioned to be one of the energies of the Lord. If one does not acceptthe living entity to be a minute, infinitesimal spark of the Supreme butequates thejiva-tattva with the Supreme Brahman or Supreme Personalityof Godhead, it must be understood that his entire philosophy is based ona misunderstanding. Unfortunately, Sripada Sankaracarya purposelyclaimed the jiva-tattva, or living entities, to be equal to the SupremeGod. Therefore his entire philosophy is based on a misunderstanding, andit misguides people to become atheists whose mission in life isunfulfilled. The mission of human life, as described in Bhagavad-gita,is to surrender unto the Supreme Lord and become His devotee, but theMayavada philosophy misleads one to defy the existence of the SupremePersonality of Godhead and pose oneself as the Supreme Lord. Thus it hasmisguided hundreds and thousands of innocent men.     In the Vedanta-sutra, Vyasadeva has described that the SupremePersonality of Godhead is potent and that everything, material orspiritual, is but an emanation of His energy. The Lord, the SupremeBrahman, is the origin or source of everything (janmady asya yatah), andall other manifestations are emanations of different energies of theLord. This is also confirmed in the Visnu-purana.-     ekadesa-sthitasyagner     jyotsna vistarini yatha     parasya brahmanah saktis     tathedam akhilam jagat"Whatever we see in this world is simply an expansion of differentenergies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is exactly like afire which spreads illumination for a long distance although it issituated in one place." This is a very vivid example. Similarly, it isstated that just as everything in the material world exists in thesunshine, which is the energy of the sun, so everything exists on thebasis of the spiritual and material energies of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead. Thus although Krsna is situated in His own abode (goloka evanivasaty akhilatma-bhuto) where He enjoys His transcendental pastimeswith the cowherd boys and gopis, He is nevertheless present everywhere,even within the atoms of this universe (andantarastha-paramanu-cayantarastham). T h is is th e ve rd ict of the Ved ic lite rature.     Unfortunately, the Mayavada philosophy, misguiding people byclaiming the living entity to be the Lord, has created havoc throughoutthe entire world and led almost everyone to godlessness. By thuscovering the glories of the Supreme Lord, the Mayavadi philosophers havedone the greatest disservice to human society. It is to cou nteractthese most abominable activities of the Mayavadi philosophers that LordCaitanya has introduced the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.     harer nama harer nama harer namai va ke valam     kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance ischanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is noother way. There is no other way." People should simply engage in the
chanting of the Hare Krsna maha- mantra, for thus they will graduallycome to understand that they are not the Supreme Personality of Godhead,as they have been taught by the Mayavadi philosophers, but are eternalservants of the Lord. As soon as one engages himself in thetranscendental service of the Lord, he becomes free.     mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena     bhakti-yogena se vate     sa gunan samatityaitan     brahma-bhuyaya kalpate"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down inany circumstances, at once transcends the modes of material nature andthus comes to the level of Brahman." (Bg. 14.26) Therefore the HareKrsna movement or Krsna consciousness movement is the only light for thefoolish living entities who think either that there is no God or that ifGod exists He is formless and they themselves are also God. Thesemisconceptions are very dangerous, and the only way to counteract themis to spread the Hare Krsna movement.
                                   TEXT 121                     vyasera sutrete kahe `parinama'-vada
                  `vyasa bhranta'--bali' tara uthaila vivada
                                 TRANSLATION     "In his Vedanta-sutra Srila Vyasadeva has described that everything
is but a transformation of the energy of the Lord. Sankaracarya,however, has misled the world by commenting that Vyasadeva was mistaken.Thus he has raised great opposition to theism throughout the entireworld.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura explains, "In the Vedanta-sutra of Srila
Vyasadeva it is definitely stated that all cosmic manifestations resultfrom transformations of various energies of the Lord. Sankaracarya,however, not accepting the energy of the Lord, thinks that it is theLord who is transformed. He has taken many clear statements from theVedic literature and twisted them to try to prove that if the Lord, orthe Absolute Truth, were transformed, His oneness would be disturbed.Thus he has accused Srila Vyasadeva of being mistaken. In developing hisphilosophy of monism, therefore, he has established vivarta-vada, or theMayavada theory of illusion."     I n the Brahma-sutra, Second Chapter, the first quote is asfollows: tadananyatvam arambhana-sabdadlbhyah. Com m e n ti ng o n th issutra i n h is Sariraka-bhasya, San karacarya has introd uced thestatement vacarambhanam vikaro namadheyam from the Chandogya Upanisad totry to prove that acceptance of the transformation of the energy of theSupreme Lord is faulty. He has tried to defy this transformation ofenergy in a misguided way, which will be explained later. Since hisconception of God is impersonal, he does not believe that the entirecosmic manifestation is a transformation of the energies of the Lord,for as soon as one accepts the various energies of the Absolute Truth,one must immediately accept the Absolute Truth to be personal, not
impersonal. A person can create many things by the transformation of hisenergy. For example, a businessman transforms his energy by establishingmany big factories or business organizations, yet he remains a personalthough his energy has been transformed into these many factories orbusiness concerns. The Mayavadi philosophers do not understand thissimple fact. Their tiny brains andpoor fund of knowledge cannot afford them sufficient enlightenment torealize that when a man's energy is transformed, the man himself is nottransformed but remains the same person.     Not believing in the fact that the energy of the Absolute Truth istransformed, Sankaracarya has propounded his theory of illusion. Thistheory states that although the Absolute Truth is never transformed, wethink that it is transformed, which is an illusion. Sankaracarya doesnot believe in the transformation of the energy of the Absolute Truth,for he claims that everything is one and that the living entity istherefore also one with the Supreme. This is the Mayavada theory.     Srila Vyasadeva has explained that the Absolute Truth is a personwho has different potencies. Merely by His desire that there be creationand by His glance (sa alksata), He created this material world (saasrjata). After creation, He remains the same person; He is nottransformed into everything. One should accept that the Lord hasinconceivable energies and that it is by His order and will thatvarieties of manifestation have come into existence. I n the Vedanta-sutra it is said, sa-tattvato 'nyatha-buddhir vikara ity udahrtah. Thismantra ind icates that from one fact another fact is generated. Forexample, a father is one fact, and a son generated from the father is asecond fact. Thus both of them are truths, although one is generatedfrom the other. This generation of a second, independent truth from afirst truth is called vikara, or transformation resulting in a by-product. The Supreme Brahman is the Absolute Truth, and the otherenergies that have emanated from Him and are existing separately,such asthe living entities and the cosmic manifestation, are also truths. Thisis an example of transformation, which is called vikara or parinama. Togive another example of vikara, milk is a truth, but the same milk maybe transformed into yogurt. Thus yogurt is a transformation of milk,although the ingredients of yogurt and milk are the same.     In the Chandogya Upanisad there is the following mantra: aitadatmyam idam sarvam. This mantra indicates without a doubt that theentire world is Brahman. The Absolute Truth has inconceivable energies,as confirmed in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (parasya saktlr vlvidhaivasruyate), and the entire cosmic manifestation is evidence of thesedifferent energies of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is a fact, andtherefore whatever is created by the Supreme Lord is also factual.Everything is true and complete(parnam), but the original purnam, thecomplete Absolute Truth, always remains the same. purnat purnam udacyatepurnasya purnam adaya. The Absolute Truth is so perfect that althoughinnumerable energies emanate from Him and manifest creations whichappear to be different from Him, He nevertheless maintains Hispersonality. He never deteriorates under any circumstances.     It is to be concluded that the entire cosmic manifestation is atransformation of the energy of the Supreme Lord, not of the SupremeLord or Absolute Truth Himself, who always remains the same. Thematerial world and the living entities are transformations of the energyof the Lord, the Absolute Truth or Brahman, who is the original source.
In other words, the Absolute Truth, Brahman, is the original ingredient,and the other manifestations are transformations of this ingredient.This is also confirmed in the Taittiriya Upanisad. Yato va imani bhutanijayante.: "This entire cosm ic manifestation is made possible by theAbsolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead." In this verse it isindicated that Brahman, the Absolute Truth, is the original cause, andthe living entities (jivas) and cosmic manifestation are effects of thiscause. The cause being a fact, the effects are also factual. They arenot illusion. Sankaracarya has inconsistently tried to prove thatacceptance of the material world and thejivas to be by-products of theSupreme Lord is an illusion because in this conception the existence ofthe material world and the jivas is different and separate from that ofthe Absolute Truth. With this jugglery of understanding, Mayavadiphilosophers have propagated the slogan brahma satyam jagan-mithya,which declares that the Absolute Truth is fact but the cosmicmanifestation and the living entities are simply illusions, or that allof them are in fact the Absolute Truth and that the material world andliving entities do not separately exist.     It is therefore to be concluded that Sankaracarya, in order topresent the Supreme Lord, the living entities and the material nature asindivisible and ignorant, tries to cover the glories of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. He maintains that the material cosmicmanifestation is mithya, or false, but this is a great blunder. If theSupreme Personality of Godhead is a fact, how can His creation be false?Even in ordinary dealings, one cannot think the material cosmicmanifestation to be false. Therefore Vaisnava philosophers say that thecosmic creation is not false but temporary. It is separated from theSupreme Personality of Godhead, but since it is wonderfully created bythe energy of the Lord,to say that it is false is blasphemous.     Nondevotees factually appreciate the wonderful creation of materialnature, but they cannot appreciate the intelligence and energy of theSupreme Personality of Godhead who is behind this material creation.Sripada Ramanujacarya, however, refers to a Vedic sutra, atma va idamagra asit, which points out that the supreme atma, the Absolute Truth,existed before the creation. One may argue, "If the Supreme Personalityof Godhead is completely spiritual, how is it possible for Him to be theorigin of creation and have within Himself both material and spiritualenergies?" To answer this challenge, Sripada Ramanujacarya quotes amantra from the Taittiriya Upanisad which states:     yato va imani bhutani jayante     yena jatani jivantl     yat prayanty abhisamvisanti.This mantra confirms that the entire cosmic manifestation emanates fromthe Absolute Truth, rests upon the Absolute Truth and after annihilationagain reenters the body of the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personalityof Godhead. The living entity is originally spiritual, and when heenters the spiritual world or the body of the Supreme Lord, he stillretains his identity as an individual soul. In this connection SripadaRamanujacarya gives the example that when a green bird enters a greentree it does not become one with the tree; it retains its identity as abird, although it appears to merge in the greenness of the tree. To giveanother example, an animal that enters a forest keeps its individuality,although apparently the beast merges in the forest. Similarly, in
material existence, both the material energy and the livingentities of the marginal potency maintain their individuality. Thusalthough the energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead interactwithin the cosmic manifestation, each keeps its separate individualexistence. Merging in the material or spiritual energies, therefore,does not involve loss of individuality. According to Sri Ramanujapada'stheory of visistadvaita, although all the energies of the Lord are one,each keeps its individuality (vaisistya).     Sripada San karacarya has tried to mislead the readers of Vedanta-sutra by misinterpreting the words anandamayo' bhyasat, and he has eventried to find fault with Vyasadeva. All the codes of the Vedanta-sutraneed not be examined here, however, since we intend to present theVedanta-sutra in a separate volume.
                                   TEXT 122                      parinama-vade isvara hayena vlkari
                  eta kahi' `vlvarta'-vada sthapana ye kari
                                 TRANSLATION     "According to Sankaracarya, by accepting the theory of the
transformation of the energy of the Lord, one creates an illusion byindirectly accepting that the Absolute Truth is transformed.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura comments that if one does not clearly
understand the meaning of parinama-vada, or transformation of energy,one is su re to misunderstand the truth regarding this material cosmicmanifestation and the living e ntities. In the Chandogya Upanisad it issaid, san-mujah saumyemah prajah sadayatanah sat-pratlsthah (Cha. U.6.8.4).The material world and the living entities are separate beings,and they are eternally true, not false. Sankaracarya, however,unnecessarily fearing that by parinama-vada (transformation of energy)Brahman would be transformed (vikari), has imagined both the materialworld and the living entities to be false and to have no individuality.By word jugglery he has tried to prove that the individual identities ofthe living entities and the material world are illusory, and he hascited the examples of mistaking a rope for a snake or an oyster shellfor gold. Thus he has most abominably cheated people in general.     The example of misunderstanding a rope to be a snake is mentionedin the Mandukya Upanisad, but it is meant to explain the error ofidentifying the body with the soul. Since the soul is actually aspiritual particle, as confirmed in Bhagavad- gita (mamaivamsojiva-loke), it is due to illusion (vivarta-vada) that a human being, like ananimal, identifies the body with the self. This is a proper example ofvlvarta, or illusion. The verse atattvato'nyatha-buddhir vivarta ityudahrtah describes such an illusion. To not know actual facts and thusto mistake one thing for another (as, for example, to accept the body asoneself) is called vivarta-vada. Every conditioned living entity whoconsiders the body to be the soul is deluded by this vivarta-vada. Onecan be attacked by this vivarta-vada philosophy when he forgets the
inconceivable power of the omnipotent Personality of Godhead.     How the Supreme Personality of Godhead remains as He is, neverchanging, is explained in the Isopanisad.: purnasya purnam adaya purnamevavasisyate. God is complete. Even if a complete manifestation is takenaway from Him, He continues to be complete. The material creation ismanifested by the energy of the Lord, but He is still the same person.His form, entourage, qualities and so on never deteriorate. Srila J ivaGosvami, in h is paramatma-sandarbha, com me n ts regard i ng th e vivarta-vada as follows: "Under the spell of vjvarta-vada one imagines theseparate entities, namely, the cosmic manifestation and the livingentities, to be one with Brahman. This is due to complete ignoranceregarding the actual fact.The Absolute Truth, or Parabrahman, is alwaysone and always the same. He is completely free from all otherconceptions of existence. He is completely free from false ego, for Heis the full spiritual identity. It is absolutely impossible for Him tobe subjected to ignorance and fall under the spell of a misconception(vivarta-vada). The Absolute Truth is beyond our conception. One mustadmit that He has unblemished qualities that He does not share withevery living entity. He is never tainted in the slightest degree by theflaws of ordinary living beings. Everyone mu st therefore u nderstandthe Absolute Truth to possess inconceivable potencies."
                                   TEXT 123                    vastutah parinama-vada--sei se pramana
                    dehe atma-buddhi--ei vlvartera sthana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Transformation of energy is a proven fact. It is the false bodily
conception of the self that is an illusion.
                                   PURPORT     The jiva, or living entity, is a spiritual spark who is part of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unfortunately, he thinks the body to bethe self, and that misunderstanding is called vlvarta, or acceptance ofuntruth to be truth. The body is not the self, but animals and foolishpeople think that it is. Vivarta (illusion) does not, however, denote achange in the identity of the spirit soul; it is the misconception thatthe body is the self that is an illusion. Similarly, the SupremePersonality of Godhead does not change when His external energy,consisting of the eight gross and subtle material elements listed inBhagavad-gita (bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh, etc.), acts and reacts indifferent phases.
                                   TEXT 124                     avicintya-sakti-yukta sri-bhaga van
                       icchaya jagad-rupe paya parinama
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Supreme Personality of Godhead is opulent in all respects.
Therefore by His inconceivable energies He has transformed the materialcosmic manifestation.
                                   TEXT 125
                     tathapi acintya-saktye haya avikari
                   prakrta cintamani tahe drstanta ye dharl
                                 TRANSLATION     "Using the example of a touchstone, which by its energy turns iron
to gold and yet remains the same, we can understand that although theSupreme Personality of Godhead transforms His innumerable energies, Heremains unchanged.
                                   TEXT 126
                     nana ratna-rasi haya cintamani haite
                     tathapiha mani rahe svarupe avikrte
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although touchstone produces many varieties of valuable jewels, it
nevertheless remains the same. It does not change its original form.
                                   TEXT 127
                   prakrta-vastute yaol acintya-sakti haya
                   isvarera acintya-sakti,--ithe ki vismaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "If there is such inconceivable potency in material objects, why
should we not believe in the inconceivable potency of the SupremePersonality of Godhead?
                                   PURPORT     The argument of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu described in this verse can
be very easily understood even by a common man if he simply thinks ofthe activities ofthe sun, which has been giving off unlimited amounts of heat and lightsince time immemorial and yet has not even slightly decreased in power.Modern science believes that it is by sunshine that the entire cosmicmanifestation is maintained, and actually one can see how the actionsand reactions of sunshine maintain order throughout the universe. Thegrowth of vegetables and even the rotation of the planets take place dueto the heat and light of the sun. Sometimes, therefore, modernscientists consider the sun to be the original cause of creation, notknowing that the sun is only a medium, for it is also created by thesupreme energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Aside from the sun
and touchstone, there are many other material things which transformtheir energy in different ways and yet remain as they are. It is notnecessary, therefore, for the original cause, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, to change due to the changes or transformations of Hisdifferent energies.     The falsity of Sripada Sankaracarya's explanation of vivarta-vadaand parinama- vada has been detected by the Vaisnava acaryas, especiallyJiva Gosvami, whose opinion is that actually Sankara did not understandthe Vedanta-sutra. In Sankara's explanation of one sutra, anandamayo'bhyasat, he has interpreted the affix mayat with such word jugglerythat this very explanation proves that he had little knowledge of theVedanta-sutra but simply wanted to support his impersonalism through thecodes of the Vedanta philosophy. Actually, however, he failed to do sobecause he could not put forward strong arguments. In this connection,Srila Jiva Gosvami cites the code brahma-puccham pratistha, which givesVedic evidence that Brahman is the origin of everything. In explainingthis verse, Sripada Sankaracarya interpreted various Sanskrit words insuch a way that he implied, according to Jiva Gosvami, that Vyasadevahad very little knowledge of higher logic. Such unscrupulous deviationfrom the real meaning of the Vedanta-sutra has created a class of menwho by word jugglery try to derive various indirect meanings from theVedic literatures, especially Bhagavad-gita. One of them has evenexplained that the word kuruksetra refers to the body. Suchinterpretations imply, however, that neither Lord Krsna nor Vyasadevahad a proper sense of word usage or etymological adjustment. They leadone to assume that since Lord Krsna could not personally sense themeaning of what He was speaking and Vyasadeva did not know the meaningof what he was writing, Lord Krsna left His book to be explained laterby the Mayavadis. Such interpretations merely prove, however, that theirproponents have very little philosophical sense.     I nstead of wasting one's time falsely deriving such indirectmeanings from Vedanta-sutra and other Vedic literatures, one shouldaccept the words of these books as they are. In presenting Bhagavad-gitaAs It Is, therefore, we have not changed the meaning of the originalwords. Similarly, if one studies Vedanta-sutra as it is, withoutwhimsical and capricious adulteration, one can understand the Vedanta-sutra very easi ly. Srila Vyasadeva the refore explai ns Vedanta-sutra,begin n i ng from the fi rst sutra, janmady asya yatah, i n his Srimad-Bhagavatam:     janmady asya yato 'nvayad itaratas carthesv abhijnah sva-rat"I meditate upon Him [Lord Sri Krsna], the transcendent reality, who isthe primeval cause of all causes, from whom all manifested universesarise, in whom they dwell and by whom they are destroyed. I meditateupon that eternally effulgent Lord who is directly and indirectlyconscious of all manifestations and yet is fully independent." TheSupreme Personality of Godhead knows very well how to do everythingperfectly. He is abhijnah, always fully conscious. The Lord thereforesays in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.26) that He knows everything, past, presentand future, but no one but a devotee knows Him as He is. Therefore, theAbsolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, is at least partiallyunderstood by devotees of the Lord, but the Mayavadi philosophers whounnecessarily speculate to understand the Absolute Truth simply wastetheir time.                                   TEXT 128
                    `pranava' se maha vakya--vedera nidana
                  isvara-svarupa prana va sarva-visva-dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Vedic sound vibration omkara, the principle word in the Vedic
literatures, is the basis of all Vedic vibrations. Therefore one shouldaccept omkara as the sound representation of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead and the reservoir of the cosmic manifestation.
                                   PURPORT     I n Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 8.13) the glories of omkara are described as
follows:     om ity ekaksaram brahma     vyaharan mam anusmaran     yah prayati tyajan deham     sa yati paramam gatimThis verse indicates that omkara, or pranava, is a direct representationof the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Therefore if at the time of deathone simply remembers omkara, he remembers the Supreme Personality ofGodhead and is therefore immediately transferred to the spiritual world.Omkara is the basic principle of allVedic mantras, for it is a representation of Lord Krsna, understandingof whom is the ultimate goal of the Vedas, as stated in Bhagavad-gita(vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah). Mayavadi philosophers cannotunderstand these simple facts explained in Bhagavad-gita, and yet theyare very proud of being Vedantis. Sometimes, therefore, we refer to theVedanti philosophers as having no teeth (danta means "teeth," and vemeans "without"). The statements of the Sankara philosophy, which arethe teeth of the Mayavadi philosopher, are always broken by the strongarguments of Vaisnava philosophers such as the great acaryas, especiallyRamanujacarya. Sripada Ramanujacarya and Madhvacarya break the teeth ofthe Mayavaci philosophers, who can therefore be called Vedantis in thesense of "toothless."     The transcendental vibration omkara is explained in Bhagavad-gita,Chapter Eight, verse thirteen:     om ity ekaksaram brahma     vyaharan mam anusmaran     yah prayati tyajan deham     sa yati paramam gatim"After being situated in the yoga practice and vibrating the sacredsyllable om, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of theSupreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will certainlyreach the spiritual planets."lf one actually understands that omkara isthe sound representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whetherhe chants omkara or the Hare Krsna mantra, the result is certainly thesame.     The transcendental vibration of omkara is further explained inBhagavad-gita, Chapter Nine, verse seventeen:     pitaham asya jagato     mata dhata pitamahah
     vedyam pavitram omkara     rk sama yajur eva ca"I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support, and thegrandsire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllableom. I am also the Rg-veda, Sama-veda and Yaiur-veda."     Similarly, the transcendental sound om is further explained inBhagavad-gita, Chapter Seventeen, verse twenty-three:     om-tat-sad iti nlrdeso     brahmanas tri-vldhah smrtah     brahmanas tena vedas ca     yajnas ca vihitah pura"From the beginning of creation, the three syllables om tat sat havebeen used to indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth [Brahman].They wereuttered by brahmanas while chanting Vedic hymns and during sacrificesfor the satisfaction of the Supreme."      Throughout all the Vedicliteratures the glories of omkara are specifically mentioned. Srila JivaGosvami, in his thesis Bhagavat-sandarbha, says that in the Vedicliterature omkara is considered to be the sound vibration of the holyname of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Only this vibration oftranscendental sound can deliver a conditioned soul from the clutches ofmaya. Sometimes omkara is also called the deliverer (tara). Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the omkara vibration: om namo bhagavatevasudevaya. Therefore omkara has been described by the great commentatorSridhara Svami as tarankura, the seed of deliverance from the materialworld. Since the Supreme Godhead is absolute, His holy name and Hissound vibration omkara are as good as He Himself. Caitanya Mahaprabhusays that the holy name, or omkara, the transcendental representation ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, has all the potencies of thePersonality of Godhead.     namnam akari bahudha nija-sarva-saktis     tatrarpita niyamitah smarane na kaiahAll potencies are invested in the holy vibration of the holy name of theLord. There is no doubt that the holy name of the Lord, or omkara, isthe Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. In other words, anyone whochants omkara and the holy name of the Lord, Hare Krsna, immediatelymeets the Supreme Lord directly in His sound form. In the Narada-pancaratra it is clearly said that the Supreme Personality of GodheadNarayana personally appears before the chanter who engages in chantingthe astaksara, or eight-syllable mantra, om namo narayanaya. A similarstatement in the Mandukya Upanisad declares that whatever one sees inthe spiritual world is all an expansion of the spiritual potency ofomkara.     On the basis of all the Upanisads, Srila Jiva Gosvami says thatomkara is the Supreme Absolute Truth and is accepted as such by all theacaryas and authorities. Omkara is beginningless, changeless, supremeand free from deterioration and external contamination. Omkara is theorigin, middle and end of everything, and any living entity who thusunderstands omkara attains the perfection of spiritual identity inomkara. Omkara, being situated in everyone's heart, is isvara, theSupreme Person al ity of G od head, as confirm ed i n Bhagavad-gita(isvarah sarva-bhutanam hrd- dese 'rjuna tlsthati). Omkara is as good asVisnu because omkara is as all-pervasive as Visnu. One who knows omkaraand Lord Visnu to be identical no longer has to lament or hanker. Onewho chants omkara no longer remains a su-dra, but immediately comes to
the position of a brahmana. Simply by chanting omkara one can understandthe whole creation to be one unit, or an expansion of the energy of theSupreme Lord. Idam hi visvam bhagaan ivetaro, yato jagat-sthana-nirodha-sambhavah: "The Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead is Himself thiscosmos, and still He is aloof from it. From Him only this cosmicmanifestation has emanated, in Him it rests, and unto Him it entersafter annihilation." (SB. 1.5.20) Although one who does not understandconcludes otherwise, Srimad-Bhagavatam states that the entire cosmicmanifestation is but an expansion of the energy of the Supreme Lord.Realization of this is possible simply by chanting the holy name of theLord, omkara.     One should not, however, foolishly conclude that because theSupreme Personality of Godhead is omnipotent, we have manufactured acombination of letters--a, u and m--to represent Him. Factually thetranscendental sound omkara, although a combination of the three lettersa, u and m, has transcendental potency, and one who chants omkara willvery soon realize omkara and Lord Visnu to be nondifferent. Krsnadeclares,pranavah sarva-vedesu.- "I am the syllable om in the Vedicmantras." (Bg. 7.8) One should therefore conclude that among the manyincarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, omkara is the soundincarnation. All the Vedas accept this thesis.One should always rememberthat the holy name of the Lord and the Lord Himself are always identical(abhinnatvan nama-naminoh). Since omkara is the basic principle of allVedic knowledge, it is uttered before one begins to chant any Vedichymn. Without omkara, no Vedic mantra is successful. The Gosvamistherefore declare that pranava (omkara) is the complete representationof the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they have analyzed omkara interms of its alphabetical constituents as follows:     a-karenocyate krsnah     sarva-lokaika-na--vakah     u-karenocyate radha     ma-karo jiva-vacakahOmkara is a combination of the letters a, u and m. A-karenocyatekrsnah.- the letter a (a-kara) refers to Krsna, who is sarva-lokaika-nayakah, the master of all living entities and planets, material andspiritual. Nayaka means "leader." He is the supreme leader (nityonityanam cetanas cetananam). The letter u (u-kara) indicates SrimatiRadharani, the pleasure potency of Krsna, and m (ma-kara) indicates theliving entities (jivas). Thus om is the complete combination of Krsna,His potency and His eternal servitors. I n other words, omkararepresents Krsna, His name, fame, pastimes, entourage, expansions,devotees, potencies and everything else pertaining to Him. Sarva-visva-dhama.- omkara is the resting place of everything, just as Krsna is theresti ng p lace of eve ryth i ng (brahmano hi pratisthaham).     The Mayavadi philosophers consider many Vedic mantras to be themaha-vakya, or principal Vedic mantra, such as tattvamasi (ChandogyaUpanisad, 6.8.7), idam sarvam yad ayam atma and brahmedam sarvam(Brhadranyaka Upanisad, 2.5.1), atmaivedam sarvam (Chandogya Upanisad,7.25.2) and neha nanasti kincana ( Katha Upanisad, 2.1.11). That is agreat mistake. Only omkara is the maha-vakya. All these other mantraswhich the Mayavadis accept as the maha-vakya are only incidental. I heycannot be taken as the maha-vakya, or maha-mantra. The mantra tattvamasiindicates only a partial u nderstanding of the Vedas, unlike omkara,which represents the full understanding of the Vedas. Therefore the
transcendental sound which includes all Vedic knowledge is omkara(pranava).     Aside from omkara, none of the words uttered by the followers ofSankaracarya can be considered the maha-vakya. They are merely passingremarks. Sankaracarya, however, has never stressed chanting of the maha-vakya omkara; he has accepted only tattvamasi as the maha-vakya.Imagining the living entity to be God, he has misrepresented all themantras of the Vedanta-sutra with the motive of proving that there is noseparate existence of the living entities and the Supreme Absolute Iruth. This is similar to the politician's attempt to prove nonviolencefrom Bhagavad-gita. Krsna is violent to demons, and to attempt to provethat Krsna is not violent is ultimately to deny Krsna. As suchexplanations of Bhagavad-gita are absurd, so also is Sankaracarya'sexplanation of Veoanta-sutra, and no sane and reasonable man will acceptit. At present, however, Vedanta-sutra is misrepresented not only by theso-called Vedantis but also by other unscrupulous persons who are sodegraded that they even recommend that sannyasis eat meat, fish andeggs. In this way, the socalled followers of Sankara, the impersonalistMayavadis, are sinking lower and lower. How can these degraded menexplain Vedanta-sutra, which is the essence of all Vedic literature?     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has declared, mayavadi-bhasya sunilehaya sarva- nasa.- anyone who hears commentary on the Vedanta-sutra fromthe Mayavada school is completely doomed. As explained in Bhagavad-gita,vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah: all Vedic literature aims tounderstand Krsna (Bg. 15.15). Mayavada philosophy, however, has deviatedeveryone from Krsna. Therefore there is a great need for the Krsnaconsciousness movement all over the world to save the world fromdegradation. Every intelligent and sane man must abandon thephilosophical explanation of the Mayavadis and accept the explanation ofVaisnava acaryas. One should read Bhagavad-gita As It Is to try tounderstand the real purpose of the Vedas
                                   TEXT 129                      sarvasraya isvarera pranava uddesa
                   `tattvamasi'--vakya haya vedera ekadesa
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is the purpose of the Supreme Personality of Godhead to present
pranava [omkara] as the reservoir of all Vedic knowledge. The words tattvam asi are only a partial explanation of the Vedic knowledge.
                                   PURPORT     Tat tvam asi means "you are the same spiritual identity."                                   TEXT 130                  `pranava, maha-vakya--taha kari' acchadana
                    mahavakye kari `tattvamasi'ra sthapana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Pranava [omkara] is the maha-vakya [maha-mantra] in the Vedas.
Sankaracarya's followers cover this to stress without authority themantra tat tvam asi.
                                   PURPORT     The Mayavadi philosophers stress the statements tat tvam asi,
so'ham, etc., but they do not stress the real maha-mantra, pranava(omkara). Therefore, because they misrepresent Vedic knowledge, they arethe greatest offenders to the lotus feet of the Lord. Caitanya Mahaprabhu says clearly, mayavadi krsne aparadhi Mayavadi philosophers are thegreatest offenders to Lord Krsna. Lord Krsna declares:     tan aham dvisatah kruran     samsaresu naradhaman     ksipamy ajasram asubhan     asurisv e va yonisu"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest amongmankind, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, intovarious demoniac species of life," (Bg. 16.19) Life in demoniac speciesawaits the Mayavadi philosophers after death because they are envious ofKrsna. When Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (9.34), man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yajimam namaskuru (" E ngage you r m i nd al ways in thinkingof Me, offer obeisances and worship Me"), one demoniac scholar says thatit is not Krsna to whom one must surrender. This scholar is alreadysuffering in this life, and he will have to suffer again in the next ifin this life he does not complete his prescribed suffering. One shouldbe very careful not to be envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.In the next verse, therefore, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu clearly states thepurpose of the Vedas.
                                   TEXT 131                   sarva-veda-sutre kare krsnera abhidhana
                 mukhya-vrtti chadi' kaila laksana-vyakhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     "In all the Vedic sutras and literatures, it is Lord Krsna who is
to be understood, but the followers of Sankaracarya have covered thereal meaning of the Vedas with indirect explanations.
                                   PURPORT     Itissaid:
     vede ramayane caiva purane bharate tatha     adav ante ca madhye ca harih sarvatra giyateIn the Vedic literature, including the Ramayana, Puranas andMahabharata, from the very beginning (adau) to the end (ante ca), aswell as within the middle (madhye ca), only Hari, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, is explained.
                                   TEXT 132                    s vatah-pramana veda--pramana-siromani
                    laksana karile s vatah-pramanata-hani
                                 TRANSLATION     "The self-evident Vedic literatures are the highest evidence of
all, but if these literatures are interpreted, their self-evident natureis lost.
                                   PURPORT     We quote Vedic evidence to support our statements, but if we
interpret it according to our own judgment, the authority of the Vedicliterature is rendered imper-fect or useless. In other words, by interpreting the Vedic version oneminimizes the value of Vedic evidence. When one quotes from Vedicliterature, it is understood that the quotations are authoritative. Howcan one bring the authority under his own control? That is a case ofprincipiis obsta.
                                   TEXT 133                    ei mata pratisutre sahajartha chadiya
                    gaunartha vyakhya kare kalpana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Mayavada school, giving up the real, easily understood meaning
of Vedic literature, has introduced indirect meanings, based on theirimaginative powers, to prove their philosophy."
                                   PURPORT     Unfortunately, the Sankarite interpretation has covered almost the
entire world. Therefore there is a great need to present the original,easily understood natural import of the Vedic literature. We havetherefore begun by presenting Bhagavad- gita As It Is, and we propose topresent all the Vedic literature in terms of the direct meaning of itswords.
                                   TEXT 134                       ei mate pratisutre karena dusana
                    suni' camatkara haila sannyasira gana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus showed for each and every sutra
the defects in Sankaracarya's explanations, all the assembled Mayavadisannyasis were struck with wonder.
                                   TEXT 135                    sakala sannyasi kahe,--`sunaha srioada
                    tumi ye khandile artha, e nahe vivada
                                 TRANSLATION     All the Mayavadi sannyasis said: "Your Holiness, kindly know from
us that we actually have no quarrel with Your refutation of thesemeanings, for You have given a clear understanding of the sutras.
                                   TEXT 136
                    acarya-kalpita artha,--iha sabhe jani
                     samprada--va-anurodhe tabu taha mani
                                 TRANSLATION     "We know that all this word jugglery springs from the imagination
of Sankaracarya, and yet because we belong to his sect, we accept italthough it does not satisfy us.
                                   TEXT 137
                 mukhyartha vyakhya kara, dekhi tomara bala,
                    mukhyarthe Iagala prabhu sutra-sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     "Now let us see," the Mayavadi sannyasis continued, "how well You
can describe the sutras in terms of their direct meaning." Hearing this,Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu began His direct explanation of the Vedanta-sutra.
                                   TEXT 138
                  brhad-vastu `brahma' kahi--`sri-bhagavan'
                  sad-vidhais varya-purna, para-tattva-dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     "Brahman, who is greater than the greatest, is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He is full of six opulences, and therefore He isthe reservoir of ultimate truth and absolute knowledge.
                                   PURPORT     In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said that the Absolute Truth is
understood in three phases of realization: the impersonal Brahman, thelocalized Paramatma and ultimately the Supreme Personality of Godhead.The impersonal Brahman and localized Paramatma are expansions of thepotency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is complete in sixopulences, namely, wealth, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge andrenunciation. Since He possesses His six opulences, the Personality of
Godhead is the ultimate truth in absolute knowledge.
                                   TEXT 139                   svarupa-aisvarye tanra nahi maya-gandha
                  sakala vedera haya bhagavan se `sambandha'
                                 TRANSLATION     "In His original form the Supreme Personality of Godhead is full of
transcendental opulences which are free from the contamination of thematerial world. It is to be understood that in all Vedic literature theSupreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate goal.
                                   TEXT 140
                  tanre `nirvisesa' kahi, cic-chakti na mani
                  ardha-svarupa na manile purnata haya hani
                                 TRANSLATION     "When we speak of the Supreme as impersonal, we deny His spiritual
potencies. Logically, if you accept half of the truth, you cannotunderstand the whole.
                                   PURPORT     In the Upanisads it is said:
     om purnam adah purnam idam     purnat purnam udacyate     purnasya purnam adaya     purnam e vavasisyateT h is verse, wh ic h is me ntioned i n the Isopanisad, BrhadranyakaUpanisad an d many other Upanisads, indicates that the SupremePersonality of Godhead is full in six opulences. His position is unique,for He possesses all riches, strength, influence,beauty, knowledge and renunciation. Brahman means the greatest, but theSupreme Personality of Godhead is greater than the greatest, just as thesun globe is greater than the sunshine which is all-pervading in theuniverse. Although the sunshine that spreads all over the universesappears very great to the less knowledgeable, greater than the sunshineis the sun itself, and greater than the sun is the sun-god. Similarly,impersonal Brahman is not the greatest, although it appears to be so.Impersonal Brahman is only the bodily effulgence of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, but the transcendental form of the Lord isgreater than both the impersonal Brahman and localized Paramatma.Therefore whenever the word Brahman is used in Vedic literature, it isunderstood to refer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.     I n Bhagavad-gita th e L ord is also ad d ressed as Parab rah m an.Mayavadis and others sometimes misunderstand Brahman because everyliving entity is also Brahman. Therefore Krsna is referred to asParabrahman (the Supreme Brahman). I n the Vedic literature, wheneverthe words Brahman or Parabrahman are used, they are to be understood to
refer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. This is their realmeaning. Since the entire Vedic literature deals with the subject ofBrahman, Krsna is therefore the ultimate goal of Vedic understanding.The impersonal brahmajyoti rests on the personal form of the Lord.Therefore although the impersonal effulgence, the brahmajyoti, is thefirst realization, one must enter into it, as mentioned in theIsopanisad, to find the Supreme Person, and then one's knowledge isperfect. Bhagavad-gita (7.19) also confirms this. Bahunam janmanamantejnanavan mamprapadyate: one's search for the Absolute Truth by dintof speculative knowledge is complete when one comes to the point ofunderstanding Krsna and surrenders unto Him. That is the real point ofperfectional knowledge.     Partial realization of the Absolute Truth as impersonal Brahmandenies the complete opulences of the Lord. This is a hazardousunderstanding of the Absolute Truth. Unless one accepts all the featuresof the Absolute Truth--namely, impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatmaand ultimately the Supreme Personality of Godhead--his knowledge isimperfect. Sripada Ramanujacarya, in his Vedartha-sangraha, says:     jnanena dharmena svarupam api nirupitam,     na tu jnana-matram brahmeti katham idam     avagamyate iti cet?He thus indicates that the real absolute identity must be understood interms of both His knowledge and characteristics. Simply to understandthe Absolute Truth to be full of knowledge is not sufficient. In theVedic literature we find the statement yah sarva-jnah sarva-vit, whichmeans that the Absolute Truth knows everything perfectly, but we alsolearn from the Vedic description parasya saktir vivi- dhaiva sruyatethat not only does He know everything, but He also acts accordingly byutilizing His different energies. Thus to understand that Brahman, theSupreme, is conscious is not sufficient. One must know how Heconsciously acts through His different energies. Mayavada philosophysimply informs us of the consciousness of the Absolute Truth but doesnot give us information of how He acts with His consciousness. That isthe defect of that philosophy.
                                   TEXT 141                      bhagavan-praptihetu ye kari upaya
                   sra vanadi bhakti--krsna-praptira sahaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is only by devotional service, beginning with hearing, that one
can approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the only meansto approach Him.
                                   PURPORT     Mayavadi philosophers are satisfied simply to understand Brahman to
be the sum total of knowledge, but Vaisnava philosophers not only knowin detail about the Supreme Personality of Godhead but also know how toapproach Him directly. The method for this is described by Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu as nine kinds of devotional service, beginning with hearing.     sra vanam kirtanam visnoh smaranam pada-se vanam
     arcanam vandanam dasyam sakhyam atma-nivedanam     (SB. 7.5.23)One can directly approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead simply byexecuting the nine kinds of devotional service, of which hearing aboutthe Lord is the most important (sravanadi). Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu hasvery favorably stressed the importance of this process of hearing.According to His method, if people are simply given a chance to hearabout Krsna, certainly they will gradually develop their dormantawareness or love of Godhead. Sravanadi-suddha-citte karaye udaya (Cc.Madhya 22.107). Love of God is dormant in everyone, but if one is givena chance to hear about the Lord, certainly that love develops. Our Krsnaconsciousness movement acts on this principle. We simply give people thechance to hear about the Supreme Personality of Godhead and give themprasada to eat, and the actual result is that all over the world peopleare responding to this process and becoming pure devotees of Lord Krsna.We open hundreds of centers all over the world just to give people ingeneral a chance to hear about Krsna and accept Krsna's prasada. Thesetwo processes can be accepted by anyone, even a child. It doesn't matterwhether one is poor or rich, learned or foolish, black or white, oldor still a child--anyone who simply hears about the Supreme Personalityof Godhead and takes prasada is certainly elevated to the transcendentalposition of devotional service.
                                   TEXT 142                      sei sarva-vedera `abhidheya' nama
                   sadhana-bhakti haite haya premera udgama
                                 TRANSLATION     "By practicing this regulated devotional service under the
direction of the spiritual master, certainly one awakens his dormantlove of Godhead. This process is called abhidheya.
                                   PURPORT     By the practice of devotional service, beginning with hearing and
chanting, the impure heart of a conditioned soul is purified, and thushe can understand his eternal relationship with the Supreme personalityof Godhead. That eternal relationship is described by Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. jivera `svarupa' haya krsnera nitya- dasa: the living entityis an eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When oneis convinced about this relationship, which is called sambandha, he thenacts accordingly. That is called abhidheya. The next step is prayojana-siddhi, or fulfillment of the ultimate goal of one's life. If one canunderstand his relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead andact accordingly, automatically his mission in life is fulfilled. TheMayavadi philosophers miss even the first stage in self-realizationbecause they have no conception of God's being personal. He is themaster of all, and He is the only person who can accept the service ofall living entities, but since this knowledge is lacking in Mayavadaphilosophy, Mayavadis do not have knowledge even of their relationshipwith God. They wrongly think that everyone is God or that everyone isequal to God. Therefore, since the real position of the living entity is
not clear to them, how can they advance further? Although they are verypuffed-up at being liberated, Mayavadi philosophers very shortly falldown again to material activities due to their neglecting the lotus feetof the Lord. That is called patanty adhah.      aruhya krcchrena parampadam tatah     patanty adho 'nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah     (SB. 10.2.32)It is the statement of Prahlada Maharaja that persons who thinkthemselves liberated but do not execute devotional service, not knowingtheir relationship with the Lord, are certainly misled. One must knowhis relationship with the Lord and act accordingly. Then the fulfillmentof his life's mission will be possible.
                                   TEXT 143                       krsnera carane haya yadi anuraga
                    krsna binu anyatra tara nahi rahe raga
                                 TRANSLATION     "If one develops his love of Godhead and becomes attached to the
lotus feet of Krsna, gradually he loses his attachment to everythingelse.
                                   PURPORT     This is a test of advancement in devotional service. Bhaktir
parasyanubhavo viraktir anyatra syat: in bhakti, a devotee's onlyattachment is Krsna; he no longer wants to maintain his attachments tomany other things. Although Mayavadi philosophers are supposed to bevery advanced on the path of liberation, we see that after some timethey descend to politics and philanthropic activities. Many bigsannyasis who were supposedly liberated and very advanced have come downagain to materialistic activities, although they left this world asmithya (false). When a devotee develops in devotional service, however,he no longer has attachments to such philanthropic activities. He issimply inspired to serve the Lord,and he engages his entire life in suchservice. This is the difference between Vaisnava and Mayavadiphilosophers. Devotional service, therefore, is practical, whereasMayavada philosophy is merely mental speculation.
                                   TEXT 144                   pan cama purusartha sei prema-mahadhana
                    krsnera madhurya-rasa kar\ya asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Love of Godhead is so exalted that it is considered to be the
fifth goal of human life. By awakening one's love of Godhead, one canattain the platform of conjugal love, tasting it even during the presentspan of life.                                   PURPORT
     The Mayavadi philosophers consider the highest goal of perfection
to be liberation (mukti), which is the fourth perfectional platform.Generally people are aware of four principal goals of life--religiosity(dharma), economic development (artha), sense gratification (kama) andultimately liberation (moksa)--but devotional service is situated on theplatform above liberation. In other words, when one is actuallyliberated (mukta) he can understand the meaning of love of Godhead(krsna-prema). While teaching Rupa Gosvami, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhustated, kotimukta-madhye `durlabha' eka krsna-bhakta: "Ou t of m illions of li be rated pe rso n s, o n e may become a devotee of LordKrsna."     The most elevated Mayavadi philosopher can rise to the platform ofliberation, but Krsna-bhakti, devotional service to Krsna, istranscendental to such liberation. Srila Vyasadeva explains this fact inSrimad-Bhagavatam (SB. 1.1.2):     dharmah projjhita-kaitavo 'tra paramo nirmatsaranam satam     vedyam vastavam atra vastu sivadam tapa-trayonmulanam"Completely rejecting all religions which are materially motivated, theBhagavata Purana propounds the highest truth, which is understandable bythose devotees who are pure in heart. The highest truth is reality,distinguished from illusion for the welfare of all. Such truth uprootsthe threefold miseries." Srimad-Bhagavatam, the explanation of Vedanta-sutra, is meant for paramo nirmatsaranam, those who are completely alooffrom jealousy. Mayavadi philosophers are jealous of the existence of thePersonality of Godhead. Therefore Vedanta-sutra is not actually meantfor them. They unnecessarily poke their noses in the Vedanta-sutra, butthey have no ability to understand it because the author of Vedanta-sutra writes in his commentary, Srimad-Bhagavatam, that it is meant forthose who are pure in heart (paramo nirmatsaranam). If one is envious ofKrsna, how can he understand Vedanta-sutra or Srimad-Bhagavatam? TheMayavadis' pri mary occu pation is to offend the Supreme Personality ofGodhead Krsna. For example, although Krsna demands our surrender inBhagavad-gita, the greatest scholar and so-called philosopher in Indiahas protested that it is "not to Krsna" that we have to surrender.Therefore, he is envious. Since Mayavadis of all different descriptionsare envious of Krsna, they have no scope to understand the meaning ofVedanta-sutra. Even if they were on the liberated platform as theyfalsely claim, here Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami repeats the statement ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that love of Krsna is beyond the state ofliberation.
                                   TEXT 145                   prema haite krsna haya nija bhakta-vasa
                  prema haite p\ya krsnera se va-sukha-rasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Supreme Lord, who is greater than the greatest, becomes
submissive to even a very insignificant devotee because of hisdevotional service. It is the beautiful and exalted nature of devotionalservice that the infinite Lord becomes submissive to the infinitesimalliving entity because of it. In reciprocal devotional activities with
the Lord, the devotee actually enjoys the transcendental mellow qualityof devotional service.
                                   PURPORT     Becoming one with the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not very
important for a devotee. Muktih svayam mukulitanjali sevate 'sman (Krsna-karnamrta 1 07). Speaking from his actual experience, SrilaBilvamangala Thakura says that if one develops love of Godhead, mukti(liberation) becomes subservient and unimportant to him. Mukti standsbefore the devotee and is prepared to render all kinds of services. TheMayavadi philosophers' standard of mukti is very insignificant for adevotee, for by devotional service even the Supreme Personality ofGodhead becomes subordinate to him. An actual example is that theSupreme Lord Kisna became the chariot driver of Arjuna, and when Arjunaasked Him to draw his chariot between the two armies (senayor ubhayormadhye ratham sthapaya me'cyuta), Krsna executed his order. Such is therelationship between-the Supreme Lord and a devotee that although theLord is greater than the greatest, He is prepared to render service tothe insignificant devotee by dint of his sincere and unalloyeddevotional service.
                                   TEXT 146                     sambandha, abhidheya, pmyojana nama
                    ei tina artha sarva-sutre paryavasana
                                 TRANSLATION     "One's relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
activities in terms of that relationship, and the ultimate goal of life[to develop love of God]--these three subjects are explained in everycode of the Vedanta-sutra, for they form the culmination of the entireVedanta philosophy."
                                   PURPORT     I n the Srimad-Bhagavatam(5.5.5) it is said:
     parabha vas tavad abodha jato     yavan na jijnasata atma-tattvamA human being is defeated in all his activities as long as he does notknow the goal of life, which can be understood when one is inquisitiveabout Brahman. It is such inquiry that begins Vedanta-sutra: athatobrahma-jijnasa. A human being should be inquisitive to know who he is,what the universe is, what God is and what the relationship is betweenhimself, God and the material world. Such questions cannot be asked bycats and dogs, but they must arise in the heart of a real human being.Knowledge of these four items--namely, oneself, the universe, God, andtheir internal relationship--is called sambandhajnana, or the knowledgeof one's relation ship. When one's relationship with the Supreme Lord isestablished, the next program is to actin that relationship. This iscalled abhidheya, or activity in relationship with the Lord. Afterexecuting such prescribed duties, when one attains the highest goal oflife, love of Godhead, he achieves prayojana-siddhi, or the fulfillment
of his human mission. In the Brahma-sutra, or Vedanta-sutra, thesesubjects are very carefully explained. Therefore one who does notunderstand the Vedanta-sutra in terms of these principles is simplywasting his time. This is the version of Srimad- Bhagavatam ( 1.2.8):dharmah s vanusthitah pumsam     visvaksena-kathasu yah     notpadayed yadi ratim     srama eva hi kevalamOne may be a very learned scholar and execute his prescribed duty verynicely, but if he does not ultimately become inquisitive about theSupreme Personality of Godhead and is indifferent to sravanam kirtanam(hearing and chanting), all that he has done is but a waste of time.Mayavadi philosophers who do not understand the relationship betweenthemselves, the cosmic manifestation and the Supreme Personality ofGodhead are simply wasting their time, and their philosophicalspeculation has no value.
                                   TEXT 147                    eimata sarva-sutrera vyakhyana suniya
                      sakala sannyasi kahe vinaya kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     When all the Mayavadi sannyasis thus heard the explanation of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu on the basis of sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana,they spoke very     , humbly.
                                   PURPORT     Everyone who actually desires to understand Vedanta philosophy must
certainly accept the explanation of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu or theVaisnava acaryas who have also commented on the Vedanta-sutra accordingto the principles of bhakti- yoga. After hearing the explanation ofVedanta-sutra from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all the sannyasis, headed byPrakasananda Sarasvati, became very humble and obedient to the Lord, andthey spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 148                    vedamaya-murti tumi,--saksat narayana
                   ksama aparadha,--purve ye kailun nindana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Dear sir, You are Vedic knowledge personified and are directly
Narayana Himself. Kindly excuse us for the offenses we previouslycommitted by criticizing You."
                                   PURPORT     The complete path of bhakti-yoga is based upon the process of
becoming humble and submissive. By the grace of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu, all the Mayavadi sannyasis were very humble and submissiveafter hearing His explanation of Vedanta-sutra, and they begged to bepardoned for the offenses that they had committed by criticizingthe Lordfor simply chanting and dancing, not taking part in the study ofVedanta-sutra. We are propagating the Krsna consciousness movementsimply by following in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. We maynot be very well versed in the Vedanta-sutra codes and may notunderstand their meaning, but we follow in the footsteps of the acaryas,and because of our strictly and obediently following in the footsteps ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, it is to be understood that we know everythingregarding Vedanta-sutra.
                                   TEXT 149                     sei haite sannyasira phiri gela mana
                   `krsna' `krsna' nama sada karaye grahana
                                 TRANSLATION     From that moment when the Mayavadi sannyasis heard the explanation
of Vedanta-sutra from the Lord, their minds changed, and on theinstruction of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they too chanted, "Krsna! Krsna!"always.
                                   PURPORT     In this connection it may be mentioned that sometimes the sahajiya
class of devotees opine that Prakasananda Sarasvati and PrabodhanandaSarasvati are the same man. Prabodhananda Sarasvati was a great Vaisnavadevotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but Prakasananda Sarasvati, thehead of the Mayavadi sannyasis in Benares, was a different person.Prabodhananda Sarasvati belonged to the Ramanujasampradaya, whereasPrakasananda Sarasvati belonged to the Sankaracaryasampradaya.Prabodhananda Sarasvati wrote a number of books, among which areCaitanya-candramrta, Radha-rasa-sudha-nidhi, Sangita-madhava, Vrndavana-sataka and Navadvipa-sataka. While traveling in Southern India, CaitanyaMahaprabhu met Prabodhananda Sarasvati, who had two brothers, VyenkataBhatta and Tirumalaya Bhatta, who were Vaisnavas of the Ramanuja-sampradaya. Gopala Bhatta Gosvami was the nephew of PrabodhanandaSarasvati. From historical records it is sakabda during the Caturmasyaperiod, and it was at that time that He met Prabodhananda, who belongedto the Ramanuja-sampradaya. How then could sakabda, two years later? I tis to be concl uded that the guess of the sahijiya- sampradaya thatPrabodhananda Sarasvati and Prakasananda Sarasvati were the same man isa mistaken idea.
                                   TEXT 150                       eimate tan-sabara ksami' apardha
                      sabakare krsna-nama karila prasada
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Lord Caitanya excused all the offenses of the Mayavadi
sannyasis and very mercifully blessed them with Krsna-nama.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the mercy incarnation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He is addressed by Srila Rupa Gosvami as maha-vadanyavatara, or the most magnanimous i ncarnation. Srila Ru pa Gosvamialso says, karunayavatirnah kalau.- it is only by His mercy that He hasdescended in this age of Kali. Here thisis exem plified. Sri Caitan ya Mahap rab h u d id n ot I i ke to seeMayavadi sannyasis because He thought of them as offenders to the lotusfeet of Krsna, but here He excuses them (tan-sabara ksami' aparadha).This is an example in preaching. Apani acari' bhakti-sikhaimu sabare.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu teaches us that those whom preachers meet arealmost all offenders who are opposed to Krsna consciousness, but it is apreacher's duty to convince them of the Krsna consciousness movement andthen induce them to chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Our propagation ofthe sankirtana movement is continuing, despite many opponents, andpeople are taking this chanting process even in remote parts of theworld like Africa. By inducing the offenders to chant the Hare Krsnamantra, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu exemplified the success of the Krsnaconsciousness movement. We should follow very respectfully in thefootsteps of Lord Caitanya, and there is no doubt that we shall besuccessful in our attempts.
                                   TEXT 151                     tabe saba sannyasimahaprabhuke laiya
                    bhiksa karilena sabhe, madhye vasaiya
                                 TRANSLATION     After this, all the sannyasis took the Lord in their midst, and
thus they all took their meal together.
                                   PURPORT     Previously Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu neither mixed nor talked with
the Mayavadi sannyasis, but now He is taking lunch with them. It is tobe concluded that when Lord Caitanya induced them to chant Hare Krsnaand excused them for their offenses, they were purified, and thereforethere was no objection to taking lunch or Bhagavat-prasada with them,although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu knew that the foodstuffs were notoffered to the Deity. Mayavadi sannyasis do not worship the Deity, or ifthey do so they generally worship the deity of Lord Siva or thepancopasana (Lord Visnu, Lord Siva, Durgadevi, Ganesa and Surya). Herewe do not find any mention of the demigods or Visnu, and yet CaitanyaMahaprabhu accepted food in the midst of the sannyasis on the basis thatthey had chanted the Hare Krsna maha-mantra and that He had excusedtheir offenses.
                                   TEXT 152                    bhiksa kari' mahaprabhu aila vasaghara
                    hena citra-lila kare gauranga-sundara
                                 TRANSLATION     After taking lunch among the Mayavadi sannyasis, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who is known as Gaurasundara, returned to His residence.Thus the Lord performs His wonderful pastimes.
                                   TEXT 153
                  candrasekhara, tapana misra, ara sanatana
                     suni' dekhi' anandita sabakara mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing the arguments of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and seeing His
victory, Candrasekhara, Tapana Misra and Sanatana were all extremelypleased.
                                   PURPORT     Here is an example of how a sannyasi should preach. When Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Varanasi, He went there alone, not with abig party. Locally, however, He made friendships with Candrasekhara andTapana Misra, and Sanatana Gosvami also came to see Him. Therefore,although He did not have many friends there,due to His sound preachingand His victory in arguing with the local sannyasis on Vedantaphilosophy, He became greatly famous in that part of the country, asexplained in the next verse.
                                   TEXT 154                    prabhuke dekhite aise sakala sannyasi
                     prabhura prasamsa kare saba varanasi
                                 TRANSLATION     Many Mayavadi sannyasis of Varanasi came to see the Lord after this
incident, and the entire city praised Him.
                                   TEXT 155
                     varanasi-puriaila sri-krsna-caitanya
                    puri-saha sarva-ioka haila maha-dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited the city of Varanasi, and all of
its people were very thankful.                                   TEXT 156
                    laksa laksa loka aise prabhuke dekhite
                    maha-bhida haila dvare, nare pravesite
                                 TRANSLATION     The crowd at the door of His residence was so great that it
numbered hundreds and thousands.
                                   TEXT 157
                    prabhu yabe ya'na visvesvara-darasane
                    laksa laksa loka asi' mile sei sthane
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord went to visit the temple of Visvesvara, hundreds and
thousands of people assembled to see Him.
                                   PURPORT     The important point in this verse is that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
regularly visited the temple of Visvesvara (Lord Siva) at Varanasi.Vaisnavas generally do not visit a demigod's temple, but here we seethat Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu regularly visited the temple of Visvesvara,who was the predominating deity of Varanasi. Generally Mayavadisannyasis and worshipers of Lord Siva live in Varanasi, but how is itthat Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who took the part of a Vaisnava sannyasi, alsovisited the Visvesvara temple? The answer is that a Vaisnava does notbehave impudently toward the demigods. A Vaisnava gives proper respectto all, although he never accepts a demigod to be as good as the SupremePersonality of Godhead.     In the Brahma-samhita there are mantras offering obeisances to LordSiva, Lord Brahma, the sun-god and Lord Ganesa, as well as Lord Visnu,all of whom are worshiped by the impersonalists as pancopasana. In theirtemples impersonalists alsoinstall deities of Lord Visnu, Lord Siva, the sun-god, goddess Durga andsometimes Lord Brahma also, and this system is continuing at present inIndia under the guise of the Hindu religion. Vaisnavas can also worshipall these demigods, but only on the principles of Brahma-samhita, whichis recommended by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. We may note in thisconnection the mantras for worshiping Lord Siva, Lord Brahma, goddessDurga, the sun-god and Ganesa, as described in the Brahma-samhita.-     srsti-sthiti-praiaya-sadhana-saktir eka     chaye va yasya bhu vanani bibharti durga     icchanurupam api yasya ca cestate sa     go vindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami"The external potency, m\ya, who is of the nature of the shadow of thecit [spiritual ] potency, is worshiped by all people as Durga, thecreating, preserving and destroying agency of this mundane world. Iadore the primeval Lord Govinda, in accordance with whose will Durga
conducts herself." (Bs. 5.44)     ksiram yatha dadhi vikara-visesa-yogat     sanj\yate na hi tatah prthag asti hetoh     yah sambhutam api tatha samupaiti karyad     govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami"Milk is transformed into curd by the actions of acids, yet the effect`curd' is neither the same as nor different from its cause, viz., milk.I adore the primeval Lord Govinda, of whom the state of Sambu is asimilar transformation for the performance of the work of destruction."(Bs. 5.45)     bhasvan yathasma-sakalesu nijesu tejah     sviyam kiyat prakatayaty api tad-vadatra     brahma ya esa jagadanda-vidhana-karta     govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami"I adore the primeval Lord Govinda, from whom the separated subjectiveportion Brahma receives his power for the regulation of the mundaneworld,just as the sun manifests a portion of his own light in all theeffulgent gems that bear such names as surya-kanta." ( Bs. 5.49)     yat-pada-palla va-yugam vinidhaya kumbha-     dvandve pranama-samaye sa ganadhirajah     vighnan vihantum aiam asya jagat-trayasya     govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami"I worship the primeval Lord Govinda. Ganesa always holds His lotus feetupon the pair of tumuli protruding from his elephant head in order toobtain power for his function of destroying all obstacles on the path ofprogress in the three worlds.,, (Bs. 5.50)     yac caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam     raja samasta-sura-murtir asesa-tejah     yasyajnaya bhramati sambhrta-kaja-cakro     govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami"The sun, full of infinite effulgence, who is the king of all theplanets and the image of the good soul, is like the eye of this world. Iadore the primeval Lord Govinda, in pursuance of whose order the sunperforms his journey, mounting the wheel of time."(Bs.5.52)     All the demigods are servants of Krsna; they are not equal withKrsna. Therefore even if one goes to a temple of the pancopasana, asmentioned above, one should not accept the deities as they are acceptedby the impersonalists. All of them are to be accepted as personaldemigods, but they all serve the order of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Sankaracarya, for example, is understood to be an incarnationof Lord Siva, as described in the padma purana. He propagated theMayavada philosophy under the order of the Supreme Lord. We have alreadydiscussed this point in text 1 14 of this chapter:     tanra dosa nahi, tenho ajnakari dasa     ara yei sune tara haya sarva-aasa"Sankaracarya is not at fault, for he has thus covered the real purposeof the Vedas under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead."Although Lord Siva, in the form of a brahmana (San karacarya), preachedthe false philosophy of Mayavada, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu neverthelesssaid that since he did it on the order of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, there was no fault on his part (tanra dosa nahi,).     We must offer proper respects to all the demigods. If one can offerrespects even to an ant, why not to the demigods? One must always know,however, that no demigod is equal to or above the Supreme Lord. Ekala
isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya. "Only Krsna is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, and all others, including the demigods such as Lord Siva, LordBrahma, goddess Durga and Ganesa, are His servants." Everyone serves thepurpose of the Supreme Godhead, and what to speak of such small andinsignificant living entities as ourselves? We are surely eternalservants of the Lord. The Mayavada philosophy maintains that thedemigods living entities and Supreme Personality of Godhead are allequal. It is therefore a most foolish misrepresentation of Vedicknowledge.
                                   TEXT 158                      snana karite yabe ya'na ganga-tire
                      tahani sakala loka haya maha-bhide
                                 TRANSLATION     Whenever Lord Caitanya went to the banks of the Ganges to take
bath, big crowds of many hundreds and thousands of people also assembledthere.
                                   TEXT 159
                  bahu tuli' prabhu bale,--bala hari hari                 hari-dh vani kare loka svarga-martya bhari'
                                 TRANSLATION     Whenever the crowds were too great, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stood
up, raised His hands and chanted, "Hari! Hari!" to which all the Peopleagain responded, filling both the land and sky with the vibration.
                                   TEXT 160
                  loka nistariya prabhura calite haila mana
                       vrndavane pathaila sri-sanatana
                                 TRANSLATION     After thus delivering the people in general, the Lord desired to
leave Varanasi. After instructing Sri Sanatana Gosvami, He sent himtoward Vrndavana.
                                   PURPORT     The actual purpose of Lord Caitanya's stay at Varanasi after coming
back from Vrndavana was to meet Sanatana Gosvami and teach him. SanatanaGosvami met Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu after the Lord's return to Varanasi,where the Lord taught him for two months about the implications ofVaisnava philosophy and Vaisnava activities. After completelyinstructing him, He sent him to Vrndavana to execute His orders. WhenSanatana Gosvami went to Vrndavana, there were no temples. The city waslying vacant like an open field. Sanatana Gosvami sat down on the bank
of the Yamuna, and after some time he gradually constructed the firsttemple; then other temples were constructed, and now the city is full oftemples, numbering about 5,000.
                                   TEXT 161                      ratri-divase lokera suni' kolahala
                     varanasi chadi' prabhu aila nilacala
                                 TRANSLATION     Because the city of Varanasi was always full of tumultuous crowds,
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, after sending Sanatana to Vrndavana, returnedto J agannatha Pu ri.
                                   TEXT 162
                      ei lila kahiba age vistara kariya
                     sanksepe kahilan ihan prasanga paiya
                                 TRANSLATION     I have here given a brief account of these pastimes of Lord
Caitanya, but later I shall describe them in an extensive way.
                                   TEXT 163
                    ei pancatattva-rupe sri-krsnayaitanya
                   krsna-nama-prema diya visva kaila dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His associates of the Panca-
tattva distributed the holy name of the Lord to invoke love of Godheadthroughout the universe, and thus the entire universe was thankful.
                                   PURPORT     Here it is said that Lord Caitanya made the entire universe
thankful to Him for propagating the sankirtana movement with Hisassociates. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu has already sanctified the entireuniverse by His presence 500 years ago, and therefore anyone whoattempts to serve Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sincerely by following in Hisfootsteps and following the instructions of the acaryas willsuccessfully be able to preach the holy names of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra all over the universe. There are some foolish critics who saythat Europeans and Americans cannot be offered sannyasa, but here wefind that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to preach the sankirtanamovement all over the universe. For preaching work, sannyasis areessential.These critics think that only Indians or Hindus should beoffered sannyasa to preach, but their knowledge is practically nil.Without sannyasis, the preaching work will be impeded. Therefore, under
the instruction of Lord Caitanya and with the blessings of Hisassociates, there should be no discrimination in this matter, but peoplein all parts of the world should be trained to preach and given sannyasaso that the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's sankirtana movement willexpand boundlessly. We do not care about the criticism of fools. Weshall go on with our work and simply depend on the blessings of LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu and His associates, the Panca-tattva.
                                   TEXT 164                       mathurate pathaila rupa-sanatana
                     dui sena-patl kaila bhakti pracarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya dispatched the two generals Rupa Gosvamiand Sanatana
Gosvami to Vrndavana to preach the bhakti cult.
                                   PURPORT     When Rupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami went to Vrndavana, there was
not a single temple, but by their preaching they were gradually able toconstruct various temples. Sanatana Gosvami constructed the Madana-mohana temple, and Rupa Gosvami constructed the Govindaji temple.Similarly, their nephew Jiva Gosvami constructed the Radha-Damodaratemple, Sri Gopala Bhatta Gosvami constructed the Radha-ramana temple,Sri Lokanatha Gosvami constructed the Gokulananda temple, and SyamanandaGosvami constructed the Syamasundara temple. In this way, many templeswere gradually constructed. For preaching, construction of temples isalso necessary. The Gosvamis not only engaged in writing books but alsoconstructed temples because both are needed for preaching work. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu wanted the cult of His sankirtana movement to spreadall over the world. Now that the International Society for KrishnaConsciousness has taken up this task of preaching the cult of LordCaitanya, its members should not only construct temples in every townand village of the globe but also distribute books which have alreadybeen written and further increase the number of books. Both distributionof books and construction of temples must continue side by side inparallel lines.
                                   TEXT 165                    nityananda-gosane pathaila gauda-dese
                     tenho bhakti pracarila asesa-visese
                                 TRANSLATION     As Ru pa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami were sent toward Math ura, so
Nityananda Prabhu was sent to Bengal to preach extensively the cult ofCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     The name of Lord Nityananda is very famous in Bengal. Of course,
anyone who knows Lord Nityananda knows Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu also, butthere are some misguided devotees who stress the importance of LordNityananda more than that of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This is not good.Nor should Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu be stressed more than LordNityananda. The author of Caitanya-carltamrta, Krsnadasa KavirajaGosvami, left his home because of his brother's stressing theimprortance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu over that of Nityananda Prabhu.Actually, one should offer respect to the Panca-tattva without suchfoolish discrimination, not considering Nityananda Prabhu to be greater,Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be greater or Advaita Prabhu to be greater. Therespect should be offered equally: sri-krsna- caitanya prabhu nityanandasri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. All devotees of LordCaitanya or Nityananda are worshipable persons.
                                   TEXT 166                       \oane daksina desa karila gamana
                    grame grame kaila krsna-nama pracarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally went to South India, and He
broadcast the holy name of Lord Krsna in every village and town.     Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
                                   TEXT 167
                  setubandha paryanta kaila bhaktira pracara
                    krsna-prema diya kaila sabara nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the Lord went to the southernmost tip of the Indian peninsula,
known as Setubandha [Cape Comorin]. Everywhere He distributed the bhakticult and love of Krsna, and in this way He delivered everyone.
                                   TEXT 168
                    ei ta' kahila panca-tattvera vyakhyana
                   ihara sravane haya caitanya-tattva jnana
                                 TRANSLATION     I thus explain the truth of the Panca-tattva. One who hears this
explanation increases in knowledge of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     The Panca-tattva is a very important factor in understanding Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. There are sahajiyas who, not knowing the importanceof the Panca-tattva, concoct their own slogans such as bhaja nitaigaura, radhe syama, japa hare krsna hare rama or sri krsna caitanya
prabhu nityananda hare krsna hare rama sri radhe govlnda. Such chantsmay be good poetry, but they cannot help us to go forwardin devotional service. In such chants there are also many discrepancies,which need not be discussed here. Strictly speaking, when chanting thenames of the Pancatattva, one should fully offer his obeisances: sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda sri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. By such chanti ng one is blessed with the competency tochant the Hare Kisna maha-mantra without offense. When chanting the HareKrsna maha-mantra, one should also chant it fully: Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare. One should not foolishly adopt any of the slogans concocted byimaginative devotees. If one actually wants to derive the effects ofchanting, one must strictly follow the great acaryas. This is confi rmedi n the Mahabharata. Mahajano yena gatah sa panthah: "The real path ofprogress is that which is traversed by great acaryas and authorities."
                                   TEXT 169                sri'-caitanya, nityananda, advaita,--tina jana
                    srivasa-gadadhara-adi yata bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     While chanting the Panca-tattva maha-mantra, one must chant the
names of Sri Caitanya, Nityananda, Advaita, Gadadhara and Srivasa withtheir many devotees. This is the process.
                                   TEXT 170
                      sabakara padapadme koti namaskara
                   yaiche taiche kahi kichu caitanya-vihara
                                 TRANSLATION     I again and again offer obeisances unto the Panca-tattva. Thus I
think that I will be able to describe something about the pastimes ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 171
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to preach the sankirtana movement of
love of Krsna throughout the entire world, and therefore during Hispresence He inspired the sankirtana movement. Specifically, He sent RupaGosvami to Vrndavana and Nityananda to Bengal and personally went toSouth India. In this way He kindly left the task of preaching His cultin the rest of the world to the International Society for KrishnaConsciousness. The members of this Society must always remember that ifthey stick to the regulative principles and preach sincerely accordingto the instructions of the scaryas, surely they will have the profoundblessings of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and their preaching work will besuccessful everywhere throughout the world.     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,Adi-lila, Seventh Chapter, describing Lord Caitanya in five features.
                                Chapter Eight
     The Eighth Chapter of Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta is summarized by
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. In this EighthChapter, the glories of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda aredescribed, and it also stated that if one commits offenses in chantingthe Hare Krsna mantra, he does not achieve love of Godhead even afterchanting for many years. In this connection, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakurawarns against artificial displays of the bodily symptoms called asta-sattvika-vikara. That is also another offense. One should seriously andsincerely continue to chant the Panca-tattva names sri-krsna-caitanyaprabhu nityananda sri- advaita gaoadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. AIl th ese acaryas will bestow thei r causeless mercy upon a devotee andgradually purify his heart. When he is actually purified, automaticallyhe will experience ecstasy in chanting the Hare Krsna maha- mantra.Previous to the composition of Caitanya-caritamrta, Srila Vrndavana dasaT haku ra w rote a boo k called Sri-Caitanya-bhagavata. On ly those subj ects wh ic h were not discussed by Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura inhis Caitanya-bhagavata have been taken u p by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami to be depicted in Sri-Caitanya- caritamrta. I n his very old age,Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami went to Vrndavana, and by the order of SriMadana-mohanaji he wrote Sri-Caitanya-carltamrta. Thus we are now ableto relish its transcendental bliss.
                                    TEXT 1               vande caitanya-devam tam bhagavantam yad-icchaya
              prasabham nartyate citram lekharange jado 'py ayam
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respects to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, by whose desire I have become like a dancing dogand, although I am a fool, I have suddenly taken to the writing of Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta.
                                    TEXT 2                   jaya jaya sri-krsna-caitanya gauracandra
                    jaya jaya paramananda jaya nityananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Sri Krsna Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who is known as Gaurasundara. I also offer my respectfulobeisances unto Nityananda Prabhu, who is always very joyful.
                                    TEXT 3
                       jaya jayadvaita acarya krpamaya
                     jaya jaya gadadhara pandita mahasaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Advaita Acarya, who is
very merciful, and also to that great personality Gadadhara Pandita, thelearned scholar.
                                    TEXT 4
                     jaya jaya srivasadi yata bhakta-gana
                     pranata ha-i ya vandon sabara carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Srivasa Thakura and all
other devotees of the Lord. I fall down to offer them respect. I worshiptheir lotus feet.
                                   PURPORT     Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami teaches us first to offer respect to the
Panca-tattva--Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu, AdvaitaPrabhu, Gadadhara Prabhu and Srivasa and other devotees. We muststrictly follow the principle of offering our respects to the Panca-tattva, as summarized in the mantra--sri-krsna- caitanya prabhunityananda sri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. A t thebeginning of every function in preaching, especially before chanting theHare Krsna maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--we must chant the Panca-tattva's names and offer our respects to them.
                                    TEXT 5                     muka kavitva kare yan-sabara smarane
                   pangu giri langhe, andha dekhe tara-gane
                                 TRANSLATION     By remembering the lotus feet of the Panca-tattva, a dumb man can
become a poet, a lame man can cross mountains, and a blind man can seethe stars in the sky.
                                   PURPORT     I n Vaisnava philosophy there are three ways for perfection--
namely, sadhana- siddha, perfection attained by executing devotionalservice according to the rules and regulations, nitya-siddha, eternalperfection attained by never forgetting Krsna at any time, and krpa-siddha, perfection attained by the mercy of the spiritual master or aVaisnava. Kaviraja Gosvami here stresses krpa-siddha, perfection by themercy of superior authorities. This mercy does not depend on thequalifications of a devotee. By such mercy, even if a devotee is dumb hecan speak or write to glorify the Lord splendidly,even if lame he cancross mountains, and even if blind he can see the stars in the sky.
                                    TEXT 6                      e-saba na mane yei pandita sakala
                     ta-sabara vidya-patha bheka-kolahala
                                 TRANSLATION     The education cultivated by so-called learned scholars who do not
believethese statements of Caitanya-caritamrta is like the tumultuouscroaking of frogs.
                                   PURPORT     The croaking of the frogs in the rainy season resounds very loudly
in the forest, with the result that snakes, hearing the croaking in thedarkness, approach the frogs and swallow them. Similarly, the so-callededucational vibrations of the tongues     , of university professors who do not have spiritual knowledge islike the croaking of frogs.
                                    TEXT 7                    ei saba na mane yeba kare krsna-bhakti
                     krsna-krpa nahi tare, nahi tara gati
                                 TRANSLATION     One who does not accept the glories of the Panca-tattva but still
makes a show of devotional service to Krsna can never achieve the mercyof Krsna nor advance to the ultimate goal.
                                   PURPORT     If one is seriously interested in Krsna conscious activities, he
must be ready to follow the rules and regulations laid down by theacaryas, and he must understand their conclusions. The sastra says:dharmasya tattvam nihitam guhayam mahajano yena gatah sa panthah(Mahabharata, Vana Parva 313.1 1 7). It is very difficult to understand
the secret of Krsna consciousness, but one who advances by theinstruction of the previous acaryas and follows in the footsteps of hispredecessors in the line of disciplic succession will have success.Others will not. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura says in this con nection,chadiya vaisnava-seva nistara payeche keba: "Unless one serves thespiritual master and acaryas, one cannot be liberated." Elsewhere hesays:     ei chaya gosani yanra--mui tanra oasa     tan-sabara pada-renu mora panca-grasa"I simply accept a person who follows in the footsteps of the sixGosvamis, and the dust of such a person's lotus feet is my foodstuff."
                                    TEXT 8                     purve yaiche jarasandhadi raja-gana
                    veda-dharma kari' kare visnura pujana
                                 TRANSLATION     Formerly kings like Jarasandha [the father-in-law of Kamsa]
strictly followed the Vedic rituals, thus worshiping Lord Visnu.
                                   PURPORT     In these verses the author of Caitanya-caritamrta, Krsnadasa
Kaviraja Gosvami, is very seriously stressing the importance of worshipof the Panca-tattva. If one becomes a devotee of Gaurasundara or Krsnabut does not give importance to the Panca-tattva (sri-krsna-caitanyaprabhu nityananda sri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi- gaura-bhakta-vrnda),his activities are considered to be offenses, or, in the words of SrilaRupa Gosvami, utpata (disturbances). One must therefore be ready tooffer due respects to the Panca-tattva before becoming a devotee of LordGaurasundara or of Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                    TEXT 9                   krsna nahi mane, tate daitya kari' mani
                  caitanya na manile taiche daitya tare jani
                                 TRANSLATION     One who does not accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is certainly a demon. Similarly, anyone who does not accept Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu as Krsna, the same Supreme Lord, is also to be considered ademon.
                                   PURPORT     Formerly there were kings like J arasandha who strictly followed
the Vedic rituals, acted as charitable, competent ksatrlyas, possessedall ksatriya qualities and were even obedient to the brahminical culturebut who did not accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Jarasandha attacked Krsna many times, and each time, of course, he wasdefeated. Like Jarasandha, any man who performs Vedic rituals but does
not accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead must beconsidered an asura or demon. Similarly, one who does not accept SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu as Krsna Himself is also a demon. This is theconclusion of authoritative scriptures. Therefore, both so-calleddevotion to Gaurasundara without devotional service to Krsna and so-called Krsna-bhakti without devotional service toGaurasundara are nondevotional activities. If one wants to be successfulon the path of Krsna consciousness, he must be thoroughly conscious ofthe personality of Gaurasundara as well as the personality of Krsna.Knowing the personality of Gaurasundara means k n owi ng th e pe rson alities of sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda sri-advaita gadadharasrivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. The a uth o r of Caitanya-caritamrta, p ursu a n t to the authorities, stresses this principle for perfection inKrsna consciousness.
                                   TEXT 10                      more na manile saba loka habe nasa
                  ithi Iagi' krpardra prabhu karila sannyasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thought that unless people accepted
Him they would all be destroyed. Thus the merciful Lord accepted thesannyasa order.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said, kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-
sangah param vrajet: "Simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, or LordKrsna's name, one is liberated and goes back home, back to Godhead."(SB. 12.3.51) This Krsna consciousness must be achieved through themercy of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. One cannot be complete in Krsnaconsciousness unless he accepts Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Hisassociates as the only means for success. It is because of theseconsiderations that the Lord accepted sannyasa, for thus people wouldoffer Him respect and very quickly come to the platform of Krsnaconsciousness. Since Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is Krsna Himself,inaugurated the Krsna consciousness movement, without His mercy onecannot be elevated to the transcendental platform of Krsnaconsciousness.
                                   TEXT 11                    sannyasi-buddhye more karibe namaskara
                    tathapi khandibe duhkha, paibe nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     If a person offers obeisances to Lord Caitanya, even due to
accepting Him only as an ordinary sannyasi, his material distresses willdiminish, and he will ultimately get liberation.                                   PURPORT
     Krsna is so merciful that He always thinks of how to liberate the
conditioned souls from the material platform. It is for this reason thatKrsna incarnates, as clearly indicated in Bhagavad-gita:     yada yada hi dharmasya     glanir bhavati bharata     abhyutthanam adharmasya     tadatmanam srjamy aham"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, Odescendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at thattime I descend Myself." (Bg. sends His own confidential devotees, and Heleaves behind Him sastras like Bhagavad- gita Why? It is so that peoplemay take advantage of the benediction to be liberated from the clutchesof maya Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa so that even a foolishperson who accepted Him as an ordinary sannyasi would offer Him respect,for this would help diminish his material distresses and ultimatelyliberate him from the material clutches. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatipoints out in this connection that Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu is thecombined form of Sri Radha and K rsna (mahaprabhu sri-caitanya, radha-krsna--nahe anya). Th erefo re when fools considered Caitanya Mahaprabhuto be an ordinary human being and thus treated Him disrespectfully, themerciful Lord, in order to deliver these offenders, accepted sannyasa sothat they would offer Him obeisances, accepting Him as a sannyasi. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa to bestow His great mercy onpeople in general who cannot appreciate Him as Radha and KrsnaThemselves.
                                   TEXT 12                   hena krpamaya caitanya na bhaje yei jana
                     sarvottama ha-ileo tare asure ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     One who does not show respect unto this merciful Lord, Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, or does not worship Him should be considered a demon, evenif he is very exalted in human society.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiMaharaja says in this connection: "O
living entities, simply engage yourselves in Krsna consciousness. Thisis the message of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu." Lord Caitanya preached thiscult, instructing the philosophy of Krsna consciousness in His eightverses, or Siksastaka, and He said, iha haite sarva- siddhi haibetomara.- "By chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, one will get all perfectionin life." Therefore one who does not show Him respect or cannotappreciate His mercy despite all these merciful gestures is still anasura, or opponent of bona fide devotional service to Lord Visnu, eventhough he is very exalted in human society. Asura refers to one who isagainst devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Visnu.It should be noted that unless one worships Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu itis useless to become a devotee of Krsna, and unless one worships Krsnait is also useless to become a devotee of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Such
devotional service is to be understood to be a product of Kali-yuga.Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura remarks in this connection thatatheist smartas, or worshipers of the five kinds of demigods, worshipLord Visnu for a little satisfaction in material success but have norespect for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thinking Him to be one of theordinary living entities, they discriminate between Gaurasundara and SriKrsna. Such understanding is also demoniac and is against the conclusionof the acaryas. Such a conclusion is a product of Kali-yuga.
                                   TEXT 13                     ataeva punah kahon urdhva-bahu hana
                  caitanya-nityananda bhaja kutarka chadiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore I say again, lifting my arms: O fellow human beings,
please worship Sri Caitanya and Nityananda without false arguments!
                                   PURPORT     Because a person who performs Krsna-bhaktl but does not understand
Sri Krsna Caitanya and Prabhu Nityananda will simply waste his time, theauthor, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami; requests everyone take to theworship of Sri Caitanya and Nityananda Prabhu and the Panca-tattva. Heassures everyone that any person who does so will be successful in Krsnaconsciousness.
                                   TEXT 14                   yadi va tarkika kahe,--tarka se pramana
                   tarka-sastre siddha yei, sei se vyamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Logicians say, "Unless one gains understanding through logic and
argument, how can one decide upon a worshipable Deity?"
                                   TEXT 15
                    sri-krsna-caitanya-daya karaha vicara
                      vicara kariie citte pabe camatkara
                                 TRANSLATION     If you are indeed interested in logic and argument, kindly apply it
to the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. If you do so, you will find itto be strikingly wonderful.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments in this connection
that people in general, in their narrow-minded conception of life,create many different types of humanitarian activities, but thehumanitarian activities inaugurated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu aredifferent. For logicians who want to accept only that which is proventhrough logic and argument, it is a fact that without logic and reasonthere can be no question of accepting the Absolute Truth. Unfortunately,when such logicianstake to this path withoutthe mercy of SriCaitanyaMahaprabhu, they remain on the platform of logic and argument and do notadvance in spiritual life. However, if one is intelligent enough toapply his arguments and logic to the subtle understanding of thefundamental spiritual substance, he will be able to know thata poor fundof knowledge established on the basis of material logic cannot help oneunderstand the Absolute Truth, which is beyond the reach of imperfectsenses. The Mahabharata therefore says: acintyah khalu ye bhava na tamstarkena yojayet (Mahabharata, Bhisma parva. 5.22). How can that which isbeyond the imagination or sensory speculation of mundane creatures beapproached simply by logic? Logic and argument are very poor inspiritual strength and always imperfect when applied to spiritualunderstanding. By putting forward mundane logic one frequently comestothe wrong conclusion regarding the Absolute Truth, and as a result ofsuch a conclusion one may fall down to accept a body like that of ajackal.     Despite all this, those who are actually inquisitive to understandthe philosophy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu through logic and argument arewelcome. Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami addresses them, "Please put SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy to your crucial test, and if you areactually a logician you will come to the right conclusion that there isno personality more merciful than Lord Caitanya." Let the logicianscompare all the results of other humanitarian work with the mercifulactivities of Lord Caitanya. If their judgment is impartial, they willunderstand that no other humanitarian activities can surpass those ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.     Everyone is engaged in humanitarian activities on the basis of thebody, but from Bhnnd-gita (2. 1 8) we u nd e rstand, nt\ vnt\ ime dehanitysyoktah sririnh: The material body is ultimately subject todestruction, whereas the spiritual soul is eternal. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu's philanthropic activities are performed in connection withthe eternal soul. However one tries to benefit the body, it will bedestroyed, and one will have to accept another body according to hispresent activities. If one does not, therefore, understand this scienceof transmigration but considers the body to be all in all, hisintelligence is not very advanced. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, withoutneglecting the necessities of the body, imparted spiritual advancementto purify the existential condition of humanity. Therefore if a logicianmakes his judgment impartially, he will surely find that SriCaitanyaMahaprabhu is the maha- vadanyavatara, the most magnanimous incarnation.He is even more magnanimous than Lord Krsna Himself. Lord Krsna demandedthat one surrender unto Him, but He did not distribute love of Godheadas magnanimously as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Therefore Srila RupaGosvami offers Lord Caitanya his respectful obeisances with th e wo rd snamo mha-vadanyaya krsna-prem-prdaya te krsnaya krsna caitanya-namnegaura-tvlse namah. Lord Krsna sim ply gave Bhagavad-gita, by which onecan understand Lord Krsna as He is, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is
also Krsna Himself, gave people love of Krsna without discrimination.
                                   TEXT 16                      bahu jnma kre yadi srnana, kirtna
                    tabu ta' na paya krsn-pde prema-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     If one is infested with the ten offenses in the chanting of the
Hare Krsna mahamantra, despite his endeavor to chant the holy name formany births, he will not get the love of Godhead which is the ultimategoal of this chanting.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says in this connection
that unless one accepts Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, although one goes onchanting the Hare Krsna mantra for many,many years, there is nopossibility of his attaining the platform of devotional service. Onemust follow strictly the instruction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu given inthe Siksastla:     trnad api sunicena taror api shisnuna     amanma manadena kirtniyah sada harih"One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be moretolerant than a tree,devoid of all sense of false prestige, and should be ready to offer allrespect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy nameof the Lord constantly." (Siksastaka, 3) One who follows this direction,being freed from the ten kinds of offenses, becomes successful in Krsnaconsciousness and ultimately reaches the platform of loving service tothe Personality of Godhead.     One must come to the understanding that the holy name of the Lordand the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself are identical. One cannotreach this conclusion unless one is offenseless in chanting the holyname. By our material calculation we see a difference between the nameand the substance, but in the spiritual world the Absolute is alwaysabsolute; the name, form, quality and pastimes of the Absolute are allas good as the Absolute Himself. As such, one is understood to be aneternal servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he considershimself an eternal servant of the holy name and in this spiritdistributes the holy name to the world. One who chants in that spirit,without offenses, is certainly elevated to the platform of understandingthat the holy name and the Personality of Godhead are identical. Toassociate with the holy name and chant the holy name is to associatewith the Personality of Godhead directly. In Bhakti- rsamrt-sindhu it isclearly said: sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svaym eva sphuraty adah. The holyname becomes manifest when one engages in the service of the holy name.This service in a submissive attitude begins with one's tongue.Sevonmukhe hijihvadu: One must engage his tongue in the service of theholy name. Our Krsna consciousness movement is based on this principle.We try to engage all the members of the Krsna consciousness movement inthe service of the holy name. Since the holy name and Krsna are
nondifferent, the members of the Krsna consciousness movement not onlychant the holy name of the Lord offenselessly, but also do not allowtheir tongues to eat anything which is not first offered to the SupremePersonality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord declares:     patram puspam phlam toyam     yo me bhaktya prayacchati     tad aham bhakty-uphrtm     asnami pr\yatatmnh"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit orwater, I will accept it." (Bg. 9.26) Therefore the International Societyfor Krishna Consciousness has many temples all over the world,and ineach and every temple the Lord is offered these foodstuffs. On the basisof His demands, the devotees chant the holy name of the Lordoffenselessly and never eat anything that is not first offered to theLord. The functions of the tongue in devotional service are to chant theHare Krsna maha- mantra and eat prasada that is offered to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 17                           jnanatah sul\bha muktir
                           bhuktir yajnadi-punyatah                           seyam sadhana-sahasrair                            hri-bhaktih sudurlabha
                                 TRANSLATION     "By cultivating philosophical knowledge one can understand his
spiritual position and thus be liberated, and by performing sacrificesand pious activities one can achieve sense gratification in a higherplanetary system, but the devotional service of the Lord is so rare thateven by executing hundreds and thousands of such sacrifices one cannotobtain it."
                                   PURPORT     Prahlada Maharaja instructs:
     matir na krsne paratah svato va     mitho 'bhipadyeta grha-vratanam     (SB. 7 5.30)     naisam matis tavad urukramanghrim     sprsaty anarthapagamo yad arthah     mahiyasam pada-rajo 'bhisekam     niskincananam na vrnita yavat     (SB. 7.5.32)These sloks are to be discussed. Their purport is that one cannot obtainKrsna- bhakti, or the devotional service of the Lord, by officialexecution of the Vedic rituals. One has to approach a pure devotee.Narottama dasa Thakura sings, chadiya vaisnava-se va nistara payechekeba: " Who h as been elevated withou t re nd e ri ng service to a pureVaisnava?" It is the statement of Prahlada Maharaja that unless one isable to accept the dust from the lotus feet of a pure Vaisnava there isno possibility of his achieving the platform of devotional service. Thatis the secret. The above-mentioned Tantra-vacana, q uoted from the
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, is ou r perfect guidance in this connection.
                                   TEXT 18                  krsna yadi chute bhakte bhukti mukti diya
                  kabhu prema-bhlti na dena rakhena lukaiya
                                 TRANSLATION     If a devotee wants material sense gratification or liberation from
the Lord, Krsna immediately delivers it, but pure devotional service Hekeeps hidden.
                                   TEXT 19
                   rajan patir gurur alam bhavatam yadunam-
                 daivam priyah kula-patih kva ca kinkaro vah                   astv evam anga bhagavan bhajatam mukundo                  muktim dadati karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam
                                 TRANSLATION     "The great sage Narada said: `My dear Maharaja Yudhisthira, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna is always ready to help you. He isyour master, guru, God, very dear friend and head of your family. Yetsometimes He agrees to act as your servant or order carrier. You aregreatly fortunate because this relationship is only possible by bhakti-yoga. The Lord can give liberation [mukti] very easily, but He does notgive one bhakti-yoga because by that process He is bound to thedevotee."'
                                   PURPORT     This passage is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.6.18). While
Sukadeva Gosvami was describing the character of Rsabhadeva, hedistinguished between bhakti-yoga and liberation by reciting this verse.I n relationship with the Yadus and Pandavas, the Lord acted sometimesas their master, sometimes as their advisor, sometimes as their friend,sometimes as the head of their family and sometimes even as theirservant. Krsna once had to carry out an order of Yudhisthira's bycarrying a letter he had written to Duryodhana regarding peacenegotiations. Similarly, He also became the chariot driver of Arjuna.This illustrates that in bhakti- yoga there is a relationshipestablished between the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the devotee.Such a relationship is established in the transcendental mellows knownas dasya, sakhya, vatsalya and madhurya. If a devotee wants simpleliberation, he gets it very easily from the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, as confirmed by Bilvamangala Thakura. Muktih svayammukulitanjali sevate'sman: for a devotee, mukti is not very importantbecause mukti is always standing on his doorstep waiting to serve him insome way. A devotee, therefore, must be attracted by the behavior of theinhabitants of Vrndavana who live in a relationship with Krsna. I heland, water, cows, trees and flowers serve Krsna in santa-rasa, Krsna's
servants serve K rsna i n dasya-rasa, and K rsna's cowhe rd frien ds serve Him i n sakhya-rasa. Similarly, the elderly gopis and gopas serveKrsna as father and mother, uncle and other relatives, and the gopis,the young girls, serve Krsna in conjugal love.     While executing devotional service, one must be naturally inclinedto serve Krsna in one of these transcendental relationships. That is theactual success of life. For a devotee, to get liberation is not verydifficult. Even one who is unable to establish a relationship with Krsnacan achieve liberation by merging in the Brahman effulgence. This iscalled sayujya-mukti. Vaisnavas never accept sayujya-mukti, althoughsometimes they accept the other forms of liberation, namely, sarupya,salokya, samipya and sarsti. A pure devotee, however, does not acceptany kind of mukti. He wants only to serve Krsna in a transcendentalrelationship. This is the perfectional stage of spiritual life. Mayavadiphilosophers desire to merge in the existence of the Brahman effulgence,although this aspect of liberation is always neglected by devotees.Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvati Thakura, describing this kind of mukti,which is called kaivalya, or becoming one with the Supreme, has said,kaivalyam naraka--yate.- "Becoming one with the Supreme is as good asgoing to hell." Therefore the ideal of Mayavada philosophy, becoming onewith the Supreme, is hellish for a devotee; he never accepts it.Mayavadi philosophers do not know that even if they merge in theeffulgence of the Supreme, this will not give them ultimate rest. Anindividual soul cannot live in the Brahman effulgence in a state ofinactivity; after some time, he must desire to be active. However, sincehe is not related with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thereforehas no spiritual activity, he must come down for further activities inthis material world. This is confirmed in Srimad- Bhagavatam:     aru ya krcc rena param padam tatah     patanty adho 'nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah     (SB. 10.2.32)Because Mayavadi philosophers have no information regarding thetranscendental service of the Lord, even after attaining liberation frommaterial activities and merging in the Brahman effulgence, they mustcome down again to this material world to open hospitals or schools orperform similar philanthropic activities.
                                   TEXT 20                   hena prema sri-caitanya dila yatha tatha
                    jagai madhai paryanta--anyera ka katha
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has freely given this love of Krsna
everywhere and anywhere, even to the most fallen, such as J agai andMadhai. What then to speak of those who are already pious and elevated?
                                   PURPORT     The distinction between Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's gift to human
society and the gifts of others is that whereas so-called philanthropicand humanitarian workers have given some relief to human society as faras the body is concerned, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu offers the best
facilities for going back home, back to Godhead, with love of Godhead.If one seriously makes a comparative study of the two gifts, certainlyif he is at all sober he will give the greatest credit to Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. It was with this purpose that Kaviraja Gosvami said:.     sri-krsna-caitanya-daya karaha vicara     vicara karile citte pabe camatkara"If you are indeed interested in logic and argument, kindly apply it tothe mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. If you do so, you will find it tobe strikingly wonderful." (Cc. Adi 8.15)     Srila Narottama dasa Thakura says:     dina-hina yata chila,     hari-name uddharila,     tara saksijagai madhai The two brothers Jagai and Madhai epitomizethe sinful population of this age of Kali. They were most disturbingelements in society because they were meat eaters, drunkards, womenhunters, rogues and thieves. Yet Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu delivered them,to say nothing of others who were sober, pious, devoted andconscientious. Bhagavad-gita also confirms (kim punar brahmanah punyabhakta rajar- sayas tatha) that to say nothing of the brahminicallyqualified devotees and rajarsis, anyone who by the association of a puredevotee comes to Krsna consciousness becomes eligible to go back home,back to Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord declares:     mam hi partha vyapasritya     ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayah     striyo vaisyas tatha sudras     te 'pi yanti param gatim"O son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lowerbirth--women, vaisyas [ merchants], as well as sudras [workers]--canapproach the supreme destination." (Bg. 9.32)     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu delivered the two fallen brothers Jagaiand Madhai, but the entire world is presently full of J agais andMadhais, or, in other words, women hunters, meat eaters, gamblers,thieves and other rogues, who create all kinds of disturbance insociety. The activities of such persons have now become commonpractices. It is no longer considered abominable to be a drunkard, womanhunter, meat eater, thief or rogue, for these elements have beenassimilated by human society. That does not mean, however, that theabominable qualities of such persons will help free human society fromthe clutches of maya. Rather, they will entangle humanity more and morein the reactions of the stringent laws of material nature. One'sactivities are all performed under the influence of the modes of mate rial n atu re (prakrteh kri yamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah). Be ca u sepeo ple are now associating with the modes of ignorance (tamo-guna) and,to some extent, passion (rajo-guna), with no trace of good ness (sattva-guna), they are becom ing increasingly greedy and lusty, for that is theeffect of associating with these modes. Tada rajas-tamo-bhavah kama-iobhadayas ca ye: "By associating with the two lower qualities ofmaterial nature, one becomes lusty and greedy." (SB. 1.2.19) Actually,in modern human society, everyone is greedy and lusty, and therefore theonly means for deliverance is Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's sankirtanamovement, which can promote all the Jagais and Madhais to the topmostposition of sattva- guna, or brahminical culture.     Srimad-Bhagavatam states:     nasta-prayesv abhadresu
     nityam bhagavata-se vaya     bhagavaty uttama-sloke     bhaktir bhavati naisthiki     tada rajas-tamo-bhavah     (SB. 1.2.18-19)Considering the chaotic condition of human society, if one actuallywants peace and tranquility, one must take to the Krsna consciousnessmovement and engage always in bhagavata-dharma. E ngagement inbhagavata-dharma dissipates all ignorance and passion, and whenignorance and passion are dissipated one is freed from greed and lust.When freed from greed and lust, one becomes brahminically qualified, andwhen a brahminically qualified person makes further advancement, hebecomes situated on the Vaisnava platform. It is only on this Vaisnavaplatform that it is possible to awaken one's dormant love of Godhead,and as soon as one does so, his life is successful.     At present, human society is specifically cultivating the mode ofignorance (tamo-guna), although there may also be some symptoms ofpassion (rajo-guna). Full of kama and lobha, lust and greed, the entirepopulation of the world consists mostly of sudras and a few vaisyas, andgradually it is coming about that there are sudras only. Communism is amovement of sudras, and capitalism is meant for vaisyas. In the fightingbetween these two factions, the sudras and vaisyas, gradually, due tothe abominable condition of society, the communists will emergetriumphant, and as soon as this takes place, whatever is left of societywill be ruined. The only possible remedy that can counteract thetendency toward communism is the Krsna consciousness movement, which cangive even communists the real idea of communist society. According tothe doctrine of communism, the state should be the proprietor ofeverything. But the Krsna consciousness movement, expanding this sameidea, accepts God as the proprietor of everything. People can'tunderstand this because they have no sense of God, but the Krsnaconsciousness movement can help them to understand God and to understandthat everything belongs to God.Since everything isthe property of God,and all living entities--not only human beings but even animals, birds,plants and so on--are children of God, everyone has the right to live atthe cost of God with God consciousness. This is the sum and substance ofthe Krsna consciousness movement.
                                   TEXT 21                   svatan tra isvara prema-nigudha-bhandara
                      bilaila yare tare, na kaila vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Himself, is fully independent. Therefore, although it is the mostconfidentially stored benediction, He can distribute love of Godhead toanyone and everyone without consideration.
                                   PURPORT     This is the benefit of Lord Caitanya's movement. If one somehow or
other comes in contact with the Hare Krsna movement, withoutconsideration of his being a sudra, vaisya, jagai, Madhai or even lower,he becomes advanced in spiritual consciousness and immediately developslove of Godhead. We now have actual experience that throughout theentire world this movement is making many such persons lovers of Godsimply by the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Actually, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu has appeared as the spiritual master of the entireworld. He does not discriminate between offenders and the innocent.Krsna- prema-pradaya te: He liberally gives love of Godhead to anyoneand everyone. This can be actually experienced, as stated in the nextverse.
                                   TEXT 22                    adyapiha dekha caitanya-nama yei laya
                    krsna-preme pulakasru-vihvala se haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Whether he is offensive or inoffensive, anyone who even now chants
sri-krsnacaitanya prabhu nityananda is immediately overwhelmed withecstasy, and tears fill his eyes.
                                   PURPORT     The prakrta sahajiyas who chant nitai gaura radhe syama have very
little knowledge of the Bhnavata conclusion, and they hardly follow theVaisnava rules and regulations, and yet because they chant bhaja nitaigaura, their chanting im mediatelyinvokes tears and other signs of ecstasy. Although they do not know theprinciples of Vaisnava philosophy and are not very advanced ineducation, by these symptoms they attract many men to become theirfollowers. Their ecstatic tears will of course help them in the longrun, for as soon as they come in contact with a pure devotee their liveswill become successful. Even in the beginning, however, because they arechanting the holy names of nitai-gaura, their swift advancement on thepath of love of Godhead is very prominently visible.
                                   TEXT 23                   `nityananda' balite haya krsna-premodaya
                     aulaya sakala anga, asru-ganga vaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Simply by talking of Nityananda Prabhu one awakens his love for
Krsna. Thus all his bodily limbs are agitated by ecstasy, and tears flowfrom his eyes like the waters of the Ganges.
                                   TEXT 24
                     `krsna-nama' kare aparadhera vicara                    krsna balile aparadhira na haya vikara
                                 TRANSLATION     There are offenses to be considered while chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra. Therefore simply by chanting Hare Krsna one does not becomeecstatic.
                                   PURPORT     It is very beneficial to chant the names sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu
nityananda before chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra because bychanting these two holy names sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda oneimmediately becomes ecstatic, and if he then chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra he becomes free of offenses.     There are ten offenses to avoid in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. The first offense is to blaspheme great personalities who areengaged in distributing the holy name of the Lord. It is said in thesastra (Cc. Antya. 7.1 1), krsna-sakti vina nahe tara pravartana: onecannot distribute the holy names of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra unless heis empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore one shouldnot criticize or blaspheme a devotee who is thus engaged.     Sri padma purana states:     satam ninda namnah paramam aparadham vitanute     yatah khyatim yatam katham u sahate tad-vigarhamTo blaspheme the great saintly persons who are engaged in preaching theglories of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra is the worst offense at the lotusfeet of the holy name. One should not criticize a preacher of theglories of the Hare Krsna maha- mantra. If one does so, he is anoffender. The Nama-prabhu, who is identical with Krsna, will nevertolerate such blasphemous activities, even from one who passes as agreat devotee.     The second namaparadha is described as follows:     si vasya sri-visnor ya iha guna-namadi-sakalam     dhiya bhinnam pasyet sa khalu hari-namahita-karahIn this material world,the holy name of Visnu is all-auspicious. Visnu'sname, form, qualities and pastimes are all transcendental absoluteknowledge. Therefore, if one tries to separate the Absolute Personalityof Godhead from His holy name or His transcendental form, qualities andpastimes, thinking them to be material, that is offensive. Similarly, tothink the names of demigods such as Lord Siva to be as good as the nameof Lord Visnu--or, in other words, to think Lord Siva and the otherdemigods to be other forms of God and therefore equal to Visnu--is alsoblasphemous. This is the second offense at the lotus feet of the Lord.     The third offense at the lotus feet of the holy name, which iscalled guror avajna, is to consider the spiritual master to be materialand therefore envy his exalted position. The fourth offense (sruti-sastra-nindanam) is to blaspheme Vedic literatures such as the fourVedas and the puranas. The fifth offense (tathartha-vadah) is toconsider the glories of the holy name to be exaggerations. Similarly,the sixth offense (hari-namni kalpanam) is to consider the holy name ofthe Lord to be imaginary.     The seventh offense is described as follows:     namno baiad yasya hi papa-buddhir     na vidyate tasya yamair hi suddhih
To think that since the Hare Krsna mantra can counteract all sinfulreactions one may therefore go on with his sinful activities and at thesame time chant the Hare Krsna mantra to neutralize them is the greatestoffense at the lotus feet of hari-nama.     T h e e igh th offe nse is stated th u s: dharma-vrata-tyaga-hutadi-sarva-subha-kriya- samyam api pramadah. It is offensive toconsider the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra to be a religiousritualistic ceremony. Performing religious ceremonies, following vowsand practicing renunciation and sacrifice are all materialisticauspicious activities. The chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra mustnot be compared to such materialistic religiosity.This is an offense atthe lotus feet of the Lord.     The ninth offense is described as follows:     asraddadhane vimukhe 'py asrn vatl     yas copadesah siva-namaparadhahIt is an offense to preach the glories of the holy name among personswho have no intelligence or no faith in the subject matter. Such peopleshould be given the chance to hear the chanting of the Hare Krsnamantra, but in the beginning they should not be instructed about theglories of the spiritual significance of the holy name. By constanthearing of the holy name, their hearts will be purified, and then theywill be able to understand the transcendental position of the holy name.     The tenth offense is as follows:     srute 'pi nama-mahatmye yah priti-rahito narah     aham-mamadi-paramo namni so 'py aparadha-krtIf one has heard the glories of the transcendental holy name of the Lordbut nevertheless continues in a materialistic concept of life, thinking,"I am this body and everything belonging to this body is mine [ahammameti]," and does not show respect and love for the chanting of theHare Krsna maha-mantra, that is an offense.
                                   TEXT 25                        tad asma-saram hrdayam batedam
                      yad grhyamanair hari-nama-dheyaih                         na vikri vetatha yada vikaro                       netre jalam gatra-ruhesu harsah
                                 TRANSLATION     "If one's heart does not change, tears do not flow from his eyes,
his body does not shiver, nor his hairs stand on end as he chants theHare Krsna maha-mantra, it should be understood that his heart is ashard as iron. This is due to his offenses at the lotus feet of theLord's holy name."
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, commenting on this verse,
which is a q uotatio n from Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.3.24), rem ar ks th atso m eti mes a maha- bhagavata, or very advanced devotee, does notmanifest such transcendental symptoms as tears in the eyes, althoughsometimes a kanistha-adhikari, neophyte devotee, displays themartificially. This does not mean, however, that the neophyte is more
advanced than the maha-bhagavata devotee. The test of the real change ofheart that takes place when one chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra isthat one becomes detached from material enjoyment. This is the realchange. Bhaktirparasyanubhavo viraktir anyatra syat. If one is actuallyadvancing in spiritual life, he must become very much detached frommaterial enjoyment. If it is sometimes found that a kanistha-adhikari(neophyte devotee) shows artificial tears in his eyes while chanting theHare Krsna mantra but is still completely attached to material things,his heart has not really changed. The change must be manifested in termsof one's real activities.
                                   TEXT 26                     `eka' krsna-name kare sarva-papanasa
                     premera karana bhakti karena prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Simply chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra without offenses
vanquishes all sinful activities. Thus pure devotional service, which isthe cause of love of Godhead, becomes manifest.
                                   PURPORT     One cannot be situated in the devotional service of the Lord unless
one is free from sinful life. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:     yesam tv anta-gatam papam     jananam punya-karmanam     te dvandva-moha-nirmukta     bhajan te mam drdha-vratah"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life,whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed fromthe duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service withdetermination." (Bg. 7.28) A person who is already cleansed of alltinges of sinful life engages without deviation or duality of purpose inthe transcendental loving service of the Lord. In this age, althoughpeople are greatly sinful, simply chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantracan relieve them from the reactions of their sins. Eka krsna-name: onlyby chanting Krsna's name is this possi b le. T h is is also confi rm edi n Srimad-Bhagavatam (kirtanad eva krsnasya). Caitanya Mahaprabhu hasalso taught us this. While passing on the road, He used tochant:krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna he     krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna he     krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna raksa mam     krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna krsna pahi mam     rama raghava rama raghava rama raghava raksa mam     krsna kesava krsna kesava krsna kesava pahi mamIf one always chants the holy name Krsna, gradually one is freed fromall reactions of sinful life, provided he chants offenselessly and doesnot commit more sinful activities on the strength of chanting the HareKrsna mantra. In this way one is purified, and his devotional servicecauses the arousal of his dormant love of God. Simply by chanting theHare Krsna mantra and not committing sinful activities and offenses,one's life is purified, and thus one comes to the fifth stage of
perfection, or engagement in the loving service of the Lord(premapumartho mahan).
                                   TEXT 27                      premera udaye haya premera vikara
                    s veda-kampa-pulakadi gadgadasrudhara
                                 TRANSLATION     When one's transcendental loving service to the Lord is actually
awakened, it generates transformations in the body such as perspiration,trembling, throbbing of the heart, faltering of the voice and tears inthe eyes.
                                   PURPORT     These bodily transformations are automatically manifested when one
is actually situated in love of Godhead. One should not artificiallyimitate them. Our disease is desire for that which is material; evenwhile advancing in spiritual life, we want material acclaim. One must befreed from this disease. Pure devotion must be anyabhilsita-sunyam,without desire for an yth ing material. Advanced devotees manifest manybodily transformations which are symptoms of ecstasy, but one should notimitate them to achieve cheap adoration from the public. When oneactually attains the advanced stage, the ecstatic symptoms will appearautomatically,; one does not need to imitate them.
                                   TEXT 28                     anayase bhava-ksaya, krsnera se vana
                     eka krsna-namera phale pai eta dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     As a result of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, one makes such
great advancement in spiritual life that simultaneously his materialexistence terminates and he receives love of Godhead. The holy name ofKrsna is so powerful that by chanting even one name, one very easilyachieves these transcendental riches.
                                  TEXT 29-30
                     hena krsna-nama yadi laya bahu-bara
                     tabu yadi prema nahe, nahe asrudhara
                      tabe jani, aparadha tahate pracura
                     krsna-nama-bija tahe na kare ankura
                                 TRANSLATION     If one chants the exalted holy name of the Lord again and again and
yet his love for the Supreme Lord does not develop and tears do notappear in his eyes, it is evident that because of his offenses inchanting, the seed of the holy name of Krsna does not sprout.
                                   PURPORT     If one chants the Hare Krsna mantra offensively, one does not
achieve the desired result. Therefore one should carefully avoid theoffenses which have already been described in connection with verse 24.
                                   TEXT 31                    caitanya-nityanande nahi esaba vicara
                    nama laite prema dena, bahe asrudhara
                                 TRANSLATION     But if one only chants, with some slight faith,the holy names of
Lord Caitanya and Nityananda, very quickly he is cleansed of alloffenses. Thus as soon as he chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, he feelsthe ecstasy of love for God.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura remarks in this connection
that if one takes shelter of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu andNityananda, follows Their instructions to become moretolerant than thetree and humbler than the grass,and in this way chants the holy name ofthe Lord, very soon he achieves the platform of transcendental lovingservice to the Lord, and tears appear in his eyes. There are offenses tobe considered in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, but there are nosuch considerations in chanting the names of Gaura-Nityananda.Therefore, if one chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra but his life isstill full of sinfui activities, it will be very difficultfor him toachieve the platform of loving service to the Lord. But if in spite ofbeing an offender one chants the holy names of Gaura-Nityananda, he isvery quickly freed from the interactions of his offenses. Therefore, oneshould first approach Lord Caitanya and Nityananda, or worship Guru-Gauranga, and then come to the stage of worshiping Radha-Krsna. In ourKrsna consciousness movement, our students are first advised to worshipGuru-Gauranga, and then, when they are somewhat advanced,the Radha-KrsnaDeity is installed, and they are engaged in the worship of the Lord.     One should first take shelter of Gaura-Nityananda in order toreach, ultimately, Radha-Krsna. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura sings inthis connection:     gauranga balite ha'be pulaka sarira     hari hari balite nayane ba'be nira     ara kabe nitaicandera karuna ha-ibe     samsara-vasana mora kabe tuccha habe     visaya chadiya kabe suddha habe mana     kabe hama heraba sri-vrndavanaIn the beginning one should very regularly chant SriGaurasundara's holyname and then chant the holy name of Lord Nityananda. Thus one's heartwill be cleansed of impure desires for material enjoyment. Then one can
approach Vrndavana-dhama to worship Lord Krsna. Unless one is favored byLord Caitanya and Nityananda, there is no need to go to Vrndavana, forunless one's mind is purified, he cannot see Vrndavana, even if he goesthere. Actually going to Vrndavana involves taking shelter of the sixGosvamis by reading Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Vidagdha-madhava, Lalita-madhava and the other books that they have given. In this way one canunderstand the transcendental loving affairs between Radha and Krsna.Kabe hama bujhaba se yugala-piriti. The conjugal love between Radha andKrsna is not an ordinary human affair; it is fully transcendental. Inorder to understand Radha and Krsna, worship Them and engage in Theirloving service, one must be guided by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,Nityananda Prabhu and the six Gosvamis, Lord Caitanya's directdisciples.     For an ordinary man, worship of Sri Caitanya and Nityananda Prabhuor the Panca-tattva is easier than worship of Radha and Krsna. Unlessone is very fortunate, he should not be induced to worship Radha-Krsnadirectly. A neophyte student who is not sufficiently educated orenlightened should not indulge in the worship of Sri Radha and Krsna orthe chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra. Even if he does so, hecannot get the desired result. One should therefore chant the names ofNitai-Gaura and worship Them without false prestige. Since everyonewithin this material world is more or less influenced by sinfulactivities,in the beginning it is essential that one take to the worshipof Guru-Gauranga and ask their favor, for thus despite all hisdisqualifications one will very soon become qualified to worship theRadha-Krsna vlgraha.     It should be noted in this connection that the holy names of LordKrsna and Gaurasundara are both identical with the Supreme Personalityof Godhead. Therefore one should not consider one name to be more potentthan the other. Considering the position of the people of this age,however, the chanting of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's name is moreessential than the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha- mantra because SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu is the most magnanimous incarnation and His mercy isvery easily achieved. Therefore one must first take shelter of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu by chanting sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityanandasri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. By serving Gau ra-Nityananda one is freed from the entanglements of material existence andthus becomes qualified to worship the Radha-Krsna Deity.
                                   TEXT 32                    s vatantra isvara prabhu atyanta udara
                    tanre na bhajile kabhu na haya nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the independent Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is greatly magnanimous. Unless one worships Him, one can neverbe liberated.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura here remarks that one should
not give up the worship of Radha-Krsna to worship Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. By worshiping either Radha-Krsna or Lord Caitanya alone, onecannot become advanced. One should not try to supersede the instructionsof the six Gosvamis, for they are acaryas and very dear to LordCaitanya. Therefore Narottama dasa Thakura sings:     rupa-raghunatha-pade haibe akuti     kabe hama bujhaba se yugala-piriti One must be a submissive studentof the six Gosvamis, from Srila Rupa Gosvami to Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.Not following their instructions but imagining how to worshipGaurasundara and Radha-Krsna is a great offense, as a result of whichone clears a path to hell. If one neglects the instructions of the sixGosvamis and yet becomes a so-called devotee of Radha-Krsna, he merelycriticizes the real devotees of Radha-Krsna. As a result of speculation,he considers Gaurasundara to be an ordinary devotee and therefore cannotmake progress in serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Radha-Krsna.
                                   TEXT 33                    ore mudha loka, suna caitanya-mangala
                      caitanya-mahima yate janibe sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     O fools, just read Caitanya-mangala! By reading this book you can
understand all the glories of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Vrnd avana dasa Thak u ra's Caitanya-bhagavata was o riginally
entitled Caitanya- mangala, but when Srila Locana dasa Thakura laterwrote another book named Caitanya-mangala, Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakurachanged the name of his own book, which is now therefore known asCaitanya-bhagavata. The life of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabh u is veryelaborately described in Caitanya-bhagavata, and Krsnadasa KavirajaGosvami has already informed us that in his Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta hehas described whatever Vrndavana dasa Thakura has not mentioned. Thisacceptance of Sri-Caitanya-bhagavata by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvamiindicates his acceptance of the disciplic succession. A writer oftranscendental literature never tries to surpass the previous acaryas.
                                   TEXT 34                     krsna-lila bhagavate kahe veda-vyasa
                    caitanya-lilara vyasa--vrndavana-dasa
                                 TRANSLATION     As Vyasadeva has compiled all the pastimes of Lord Krsna in the
SrimadBhagavatam, Thakura Vrndavana dasa has depicted the pastimes ofLord Caitanya.                                   TEXT 35
                   vrndavana-dasa kaila `caitanya-mangala'
                     yanhara sravane nase sarva amangala
                                 TRANSLATION     Thakura Vrndavana dasa has composed Caitanya-mangala. Hearing this
book will annihilate all misfortune.
                                   TEXT 36
                     caitanya-nitaira yate janiye mahima
                   yate jani krsna-bhakti-siddhantera sima
                                 TRANSLATION     By reading Caitanya-mangala one can understand all the glories or
truths of Lord Caitanya and Nityananda and come to the ultimateconclusion of devotional service to Lord Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Srimad-Bhagavatam is the authoritative reference book from which to
understand devotional service, but because it is very elaborate, few mencan understand its purpose. Srimad-Bhagavatam is the original commentaryon Vedanta-sutra, which is called nyaya-prasthana. It was written toenable one to understand the Absolute Truth through infallible logic andargument, and therefore its natural commentary, Srimad-Bhagavatam, isextremely elaborate. Professional reciters have created the i m pression that Srimad-Bhagavatam d eals o n I y with Krsna's rasa-lila,although Krsna's rasa-lila is only described in the Tenth Canto(Chapters 29-35). They have in this way presented Krsna to the Westernworld as a great woman hunter, and therefore we sometimes have to dealwith such misconceptions in preaching. Another difficulty inunderstanding Srimad-Bhagavatam is that the professional reciters haveintroduced Bhagavata-saptaha, or seven-day readings of the Bhagavatam.They want to finish Srimad-Bhagavatam in a week, although it is sosublime that even one verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam, if properly explained,cannot be completed in three months. Under these circumstances,it is agreat aid for the common man to read Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura'sCaitanya-bhagavata, for thus he can actually understand devotionalservice, Krsna, Lord Caitanya and Nityananda. Srila Rupa Gosvami hassaid:     sruti-smrti-puranadi-pancaratra-vidhim vina     aikan tikiharer bhaktir utpatayaiva kalpate"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedicliteratures like the Upanisads, puranas, Narada-pancaratra, etc., is sim ply a n u n necessary d istu rbance in society." Due tomisunderstanding Srimad-Bhagavatam, people are misled regarding thescience of Krsna. However, by reading Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura'sbook one can very easily understand this science.                                   TEXT 37
                    bhagavate yata bhakti-siddhantera sara
                    likhiyachena inhajani' kariya uddhara
                                 TRANSLATION     In Caitanya-mangala [ later known as Sri-Caitanya-bhagavata] Srila
Vrndavana dasa Thakura has given the conclusion and essence ofdevotional service by quoting the authoritative statements of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
                                   TEXT 38
                 `caitanya-mangala' sune yadi pasandi ya vana
                      seha maha-vaisnava haya tataksana
                                 TRANSLATION     If even a great atheist hears Caitanya-mangala, he immediately
becomes a great devotee.
                                   TEXT 39
                  manusye racite nare aiche grantha dhan va
                   vrndavana-dasa-mukhe vakta sri-caitanya
                                 TRANSLATION     The subject matter of this book is so sublime that it appears that
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has personally spoken through the writings ofSri Vrndavana dasa Thakura.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Sanatana Gosvami has written in his Hari-bhakti-vilasa..
     avaisnava-mukhodgirnam putam hari-kathamrtam     sravanam naiva kartavyam sarpocchistam yatha payahTranscendental literature that strictly follows the Vedic principles andthe conclusion of the puranas and pancaratrika-vidhi can be written onlyby a pure devotee. It is not possible for a common man to write books onbhakti, for his writings will not be effective. He may be a very greatscholar and expert in presenting literature in flowery language, butthis is not at all helpful in understanding transcendental literature.Even if transcendental literature is written in faulty language, it isacceptable if it is written by a devotee, whereas so-calledtranscendental literature written by a mundane scholar, even if it is avery highly polished literary presentation, cannot be accepted. Thesecret in a devotee's writing is that when he writes about the pastimesof the Lord, the Lord helps him; he does not write himself. As stated inBhagavad-gita, dadami buddhi-yogam tam yena mam upayanti te (Bg. 10. somuch intelligence that he sits down near the Lord and goes on writingbooks. Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami confirms that what Vrndavana dasa
Thaku ra wrote was actually spoken by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and hesimply repeated it. The sam e hold s tru e for Caitanya-caritmrta. Krsnadasa Kaviraja G osvami wrote Caitanya- caritamrta in his old age in aninvalid condition, but it is such a sublime literature that SrilaBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja used to say, "The time willcome when the people of the world will learn Bengali to read Sri-Caitanya- caritamrta." We are trying to present Sri-Caitanya-caritmrtain English and do not know how successful it will be, but if one readsthe original Caitanya-caritamrta in Bengali he will relish increasingecstasy in devotional service.
                                   TEXT 40                      vrndavana-dasa-pade koti namaskara
                   aiche grantha kari' tenho tarila samsara
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer millions of obeisances unto the lotus feet of Vrndavana
dasa Thakura. No one else could write such a wonderful book for thedeliverance of all fallen souls.
                                   TEXT 41
                    narayani--caitanyera ucchista-bhajana
                   tanra garbhe janmila sri-dasa-vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     Narayani eternally eats the remnants of the foodstuffs of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura was born of her womb.
                                   PURPORT     I n Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, a book written by Kavikarnapura that
describes all the associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and who theypreviously were, there is the following statement regarding Narayani:.     ambikayah svasa yasin namna srila-kilimbika     krsnocchistam prabhunjana seyam narayani mataWhen Lord Krsna was a child, He was nursed by a woman named Ambika whohad a younger sister named Kilimbika. During the time of Lord Caitanya'sincarnation, the same Kilimbika used to eatthe remnants of foodstuffsleft by Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. That Kilimbika was Narayani, whowas a niece of Srivasa Thakura's. Later on, when she grew up andmarried, Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura was born from her womb. A devoteeof Lord Sri Krsna is celebratedin terms of devotional service renderedto the Lord; thus we know Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura as the son ofNarayani. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura notes in thisconnection that there is no reference to his paternal ancestry becausethere is no need to understand it.
                                   TEXT 42                   tanra ki adbhuta caitanya-carita-varnana
                   yahara sravane suddha kaila tri-bhuvana
                                 TRANSLATION     What a wonderful description he has given of the pastimes of Lord
Caitanya! Anyone in the three worlds who hears it is purified.
                                   TEXT 43
                   atae va bhaja, loka, caitanya-nityananda
                   khandibe samsara-duhkha, pabe premananda
                                 TRANSLATION     I fervently appeal to everyone to adopt the method of devotional
service given by Lord Caitanya and Nityananda and thus be freed from themiseries of material existence and ultimately achieve the loving serviceof the Lord.
                                   TEXT 44
                   vrndavana-dasa kaila `caitahya-mangala'
                     tahate caitanya-lila varnila sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has written Caitanya-mangala and
therein described in all respects the pastimes of Lord Caitanya.
                                   TEXT 45
                    sutra kari' saba lila karila granthana
                    pache vistariya tahara kaila vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     He first summarized all the pastimes of the Lord and later
described them vividly in detail.
                                   TEXT 46
                     caitanya-candrera lila ananta apara
                    varnite varnite grantha ha-ila vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Lord Caitanya are unlimited and unfathomable.
Therefore, in describing all those pastimes, the book became voluminous.                                   TEXT 47
                   vistara dekhiya kichu sankoca haila mana
                    sutra-dhrta kona iila na kaila varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     He saw them to be so extensive that he later felt that some had not
been Properly described.
                                   TEXT 48
                     nityananda-lila-varnane ha-ila avesa
                     caitanyera sesa-lila rahila avasesa
                                 TRANSLATION     He ecstatically described the pastimes of Lord Nityananda, but the
later pastimes of Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained untold.
                                   TEXT 49
                       sei saba lilara sunite vivarana
                    vrndavana-vasibhaktera utkanthita mana
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees of Vrndavana were all very anxious to hear those
Pastimes.
                                   TEXT 50
                    vrndavane kalpa-drume su varna-sadana
                    maha-yogapitha tahan, ratna-simhasana
                                 TRANSLATION     In Vrndavana, in a great place of pilgrimage underneath the desire
trees, is a golden throne bedecked with jewels.
                                   TEXT 51
                    tate vasi' ache sada vrajendra-nandana
                   `sri-go vinda-deva ' nama saksat madana
                                 TRANSLATION     On that throne sits the son of Nanda Maharaja, Sri Govindadeva, the
transcendental cupid.
                                   TEXT 52
                     raja-seva haya tanha vicitra prakara
                     divya samagri divya vastra, alankara
                                 TRANSLATION     Varieties of majestic service are rendered to Govinda there. His
garments, ornaments and paraphernalia are all transcendental.
                                   TEXT 53
                      sahasra sevaka seva kare anuksana
                     sahasra-vadane seva na yaya varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     In that temple of Govindaji, thousands of servitors always render
service to the Lord in devotion. Even with thousands of mouths, onecould not describe this service.
                                   TEXT 54
                    se vara adhyaksa--sri-pandita haridasa
                    tanra yasah-guna sarva jagate prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In that temple the chief servitor was Sri Haridasa Pandita. His
qualities and fame are known all over the world.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Haridasa Pandita was a disciple of Sri Ananta Acarya, who was a
disciple of Gadadhara Pandita.
                                   TEXT 55                  susila, sahisnu, santa, vadanya, gambhira
                  madhura-vacana, madhura-cesta, maha-dhira
                                 TRANSLATION     He was gentle, tolerant, peaceful, magnanimous, grave, sweet in his
words and very sober in his endeavors.
                                   TEXT 56                   sabara sammana-karta, karena sabra hita
                  kautilya-matsarya-himsa na jane tanra cita
                                 TRANSLATION     He was respectful to everyone and worked for the benefit of all.
Diplomacy, envy and jealousy were unknown to his heart.
                                   TEXT 57
                    krsnera ye sadharana sad-guna pancasa
                      se saba gunera tanra sarire nivasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The fifty qualities of Lord Krsna were all present in his body.                                   PURPORT     In Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, the transcendental qualities of Sri
Krsna are mentioned. Among these, fifty are primary (ayam netasuramyangah, etc.), and in minute quantity they were all present in thebody of Sri Haridasa Pandita. Since every living entity is a part of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, all fifty of these good qualities of SriKrsna are originally minutely present in every living being. Due to hiscontact with material nature, these qualities are not visible in theconditioned soul, but when one becomes a purified devotee, they allautomatically manifest themselves. This is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam(5.18.12), as mentioned in the text below.
                                   TEXT 58                     yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akincana
                     sarvair gunais tatra samasate surah                       harav abhaktasya kuto mahad-guna                        mano-rathenasati dhavato bahih
                                 TRANSLATION     "In one who has unflinching devotional faith in Krsna, all the good
qualities of Krsna and the demigods are consistently manifested.However, one who has no devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godheadhas no good qualifications because he is engaged by mental concoction inmaterial existence, which is the external feature of the Lord."
                                   TEXT 59
                    pandita-gosanira sisya--ananta acarya
                   krsna-premamaya-tanu, udara, sarva-arya
                                 TRANSLATION     Ananta Acarya was a disciple of Gadadhara Pandita. His body was
always absorbed in love of Godhead. He was magnanimous and advanced inall respects.
                                   TEXT 60
                     tanhara ananta guna ke karu prakasa
                   tanra priya sisya inha--pandita haridasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Ananta Acarya was a reservoir of all good qualities. No one can
estimate how great he was. Pandita Haridasa was his beloved disciple.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Ananta Acarya is one of the eternal associates of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Previously, during the advent of Lord Sri Krsna, AnantaAcarya was Sudevi, one of the eight gopis. This is stated in the Gaura-ganoddesa-oipika, verse 165, as follows: anantacarya-gosvami ya sudevipura vraje. "Ananta Acarya Gosvami was formerly Sudevi-gopi in Vraja [Vrndavana]." In Jagannatha Puri, or Purusottama-ksetra, there is amonastery known as Ganga-mata Matha that was established by AnantaAcarya. In the disciplic succession of the Ganga-mata Matha, he is knownas Vinoda-manjari. One of his disciples was Haridasa Pandita Gosvami,who is also known as Sri Raghu Gopala and as Sri Rasa-manjari. Hisdisciple Laksmipriya was the maternal aunt of Ganga-mata, a princess whowas the daughter of the King of Putiya. Ganga-mata brought a Deity ofthe name Sri Rasika Raya from Krsna Misra of Jaipur and installed Him inthe house of Sarvabhauma in Jagannatha Puri. The disciple in the fifthgeneration after Sri Ananta Acarya was Sri Vanamali; in the sixthgeneration, Sri Bhagavan dasa, who was a Bengali; in the seventhgeneration, Madhusudana dasa, who was an Oriya; in the eighthgeneration, Nilambara dasa; in the ninth generation, Sri Narottama dasa;in the tenth generation, Pitambara dasa; and in the eleventh generation,Sri Madhava dasa. The disciple in the twelfth generation is presently incharge of the Ganga-mata monastery.
                                   TEXT 61                   caitanya-nityanande tanra parama visvasa
                     caitanya-carite tanra parama ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Pandita Haridasa had great faith in Lord Caitanya and Nityananda.
Therefore he took great satisfaction in knowing about Their pastimes andqualities.
                                   TEXT 62                    vaisnavera guna-grahi, na dekhaye dosa
                    kaya-mano-vakye kare vaisnava-santosa
                                 TRANSLATION     He always accepted the good qualities of Vaisnavas and never found
fault in them. He engaged his heart and soul only to satisfy theVaisnavas.
                                   PURPORT     It is a qualification of a Vaisnava that he is adosa-darsi; he
never sees others' faults. Of course, every human being has both goodqualities and faults. Therefore it is said, saijana gunam icchanti dosamicchanti pamarah: everyone has a combination of faults and glories. Buta Vaisnava, a sober man, accepts only a man's glories and not hisfaults, for flies seek sores whereas honeybees seek honey. HaridasaPandita never found fault with a Vaisnava but considered only his goodqualities.
                                   TEXT 63                    nirantam sune tenho `caitanya-mangala,
                    tanhara prasade sunena vaisnava-sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     He always heard the reading of Sri Caitanya-mangala, and all the
other Vaisnavas used to hear it by his grace.
                                   TEXT 64
                kathaya sabha ujj vala kare yena purna-candra
                     nija-gunamrte badaya vaisnava-ananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Like the full moon, he illuminated the entire assembly of the
Vaisnavas by speaking Caitanya-mangala, and by the nectar of hisqualities he increased their transcendental bliss.
                                   TEXT 65
                     tenho ati krpa kari' ajna kaila more
                     gaurangera sesa-lila varnibara tare
                                 TRANSLATION     By his causeless mercy he ordered me to write about the last
pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.                                   TEXT 66
                  kasisvara gosanira sisya--go vinda gosani
                    govindera priya-sevaka tanra sama nani
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda Gosani, the priest engaged in the service of Lord Govinda
in Vrndavana, was a disciple of Kasisvara Gosani. There was no servantmore dear to the Govinda Deity.
                                   PURPORT     Kasisvara Gosani, also known as Kasisvara Pandita, was a disciple
of Isvara Puri and son of Vasudeva Bhattacarya, who belonged to thedynasty of Kanjilala Kanu. His surname was Caudhuri. His nephew, hissister's son, who was named Rudra Pandita, was the original priest ofVallabhapura, which is situated about one mile from the Sriramapurarailway station in the village of Catara. Installed there are theDeities of Radha-Govinda and Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. KasisvaraGosani was a very strong man, and therefore when Lord Caitanya visitedthe temple of Jagannatha, he used to protect the Lord from the crowds.Another of his duties was to distribute prasada to the devotees afterkirtana. He was also one of the contemporaries of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu who was with the Lord in Jagannatha Puri.     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura also visited this temple atVallabhapura. At that time the person in charge was a Saivite, SriSivacandra Caudhuri, who was a descendant of Kasisvara Gosani's brother.In Vallabhapura there was a permanent arrangement to cook nine kilos ofrice, vegetables and other foodstuffs, and near the village thereissufficient land, which belongs to the Deity, on which this rice wasgrown. Unfortunately, the descendants of Kasisvara Gosani's brother havesold a major portion of this land, and therefore the Deity worship hasnow been hampered.     It is said in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika that the servant of Kisnain Vrndavana named Bhingara descended as Kasisvara Gosani during thepastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In our householder life we alsosometimes visited this temple of Vallabhapura and took prasada there atnoon. The Deities of this temple, Sri Sri Radha-Govinda and the Gaurangavigraha, are extremely beautiful. Near Vallabhapura is another beautifultemple of jagannatha. We sometimes used to take prasada in thisJagannatha Temple also. These two temples are situated within a onemileradius of the Sriramapura railway station near Calcutta.
                                   TEXT 67                     yada vacarya gosani sri-rupera sangi
                     caitanya-carite tenho ati bada rangi
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Yadavacarya Gosani, a constant associate of Srila Rupa Gosvami,
was also very enthusiastic in hearing and chanting about Lord Caitanya'spastimes.                                   TEXT 68
                   pandita-gosanira sisya--bhugarbha gosani
                     gaura-katha vina ara mukhe anya nai
                                 TRANSLATION     Bhugarbha Gosani, a disciple of Pandita Gosani, was always engaged
in topics regarding Lord Caitanya, knowing nothing else.
                                   TEXT 69
                  tanra sisya--govinda pujaka caitanya-dasa
                  mukundananda cakravarti, premi-krsna-dasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Among his disciples were Caitanya dasa, who was a priest of the
Govinda Deity, as well as Mukundananda Cakravarti and the great devoteeKrsnadasa.
                                   TEXT 70
                  acarya-gosanira sisya--cakravartisivananda
                  niravadhi tanra citte caitanya-nityananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Among the disciples of Ananta Acarya was Sivananda Cakravarti, in
whose heart dwelled constantly Lord Caitanya and Nityananda.
                                   TEXT 71
                     ara yata vrndavane baise bhakta-gana
                      sesa-lila sunite sabara haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     In Vrndavana there were also many other great devotees, all of whom
desired to hear the last pastimes of Lord Caitanya.
                                   TEXT 72
                     more ajna karila sabe karuna koriya
                    tan-sabara bole likhi nirlajj a haiya
                                 TRANSLATION     By their mercy, all these devotees ordered me to write of the last
pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Because of their order only,although I am shameless, I have attempted to write this Caitanya-caritamrta.
                                   PURPORT     To write about the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is not an ordinary endeavor. Unless one isempowered by the higher authorities, or advanced devotees, one cannotwrite transcendental literature, for all such literature must be abovesuspicion, or, in other words, it must have none of the defects ofconditioned souls, namely, mistakes, illusions, cheating and imperfectsense perceptions. The words of Krsna and the disciplic succession thatcarries the orders of Krsna are actually authoritative. To be empoweredto write transcendental literature is a privilege in which a writer cantake great pride. As a humble Vaisnava, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami,being thus empowered, felt very much ashamed that it was he who was tonarrate the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 73                     vaisnavera ajna pana cintita-antare
                      madana-gopale geian ajna magibare
                                 TRANSLATION     Having received the order of the Vaisnavas but being anxious within
my heart, I went to the temple of Madana-mohana in Vrndavana to ask Hispermission also.
                                   PURPORT     A Vaisnava always follows the order of guru and Krsna. Sri-
Caitanya-caritamrta was written by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami by theirmercy. Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami considered all the devotees that havebeen mentioned to be his preceptor gurus or spiritual masters, andMadana-gopala (Sri Madana-mohana vigraha) is Krsna Himself. Thus he tookpermission from both of them, and when he received the mercy of bothguru and Krsna, he was able to write this great literature, Sri-Caitanya- caritamrta. This example should be followed. Anyone whoattempts to write aboutKrsna must first take permission from the spiritual master and Krsna.Krsna is situated in everyone's heart, and the spiritual master is Hisdirect external representative. Thus Kisna is situated antar-bahih,within and without. One must first become a pure devotee by followingthe strict regulative principles and chanting sixteen rounds daily, andwhen one thinks that he is actually on the Vaisnava platform, he mustthen take permission from the spiritual master, and that permission mustalso be confirmed by Krsna from within his heart. Then, if one is verysincere and pure, he can write transcendental literature, either proseor poetry.
                                   TEXT 74                     darasana kari kailun carana vandana
                    gosani-dasa pujari kare carana-se vana
                                 TRANSLATION     When I visited the temple of Madana-mohana, the priest Gosani dasa
was serving the feet of the Lord, and I also prayed at the Lord's lotusfeet.
                                   TEXT 75
                       prabhura carane yadi ajna magila
                   prabhu-kantha haite mala khasiya padila
                                 TRANSLATION     When I prayed to the Lord for permission, a garland from His neck
immediately slipped down.
                                   TEXT 76
                     saba vaisnava-gana hari-dhvani dila
                     gosani-dasa ani' mala mora gale dila
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as this happened, the Vaisnavas standing there all loudly
chanted, "Haribol!" and the priest, Gosani dasa, brought me the garlandand put it around my neck.
                                   TEXT 77
                      ajna-mala pana amara ha-ila ananda
                      tahani karinu ei granthera arambha
                                 TRANSLATION     I was greatly pleased to have the garland signifying the order of
the Lord, and then and there I commenced to write this book.
                                   TEXT 78
                   ei grantha lekhaya more `madana-mohana'
                      amara likhana yena sukera pathana
                                 TRANSLATION     Actually Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta is not my writing but the
dictation of Sri Madana-mohana. My writing is like the repetition of aparrot.
                                   PURPORT     This should be the attitude of all devotees. When the Supreme
Personality of Godhead recognizes a devotee, He gives him intelligenceand dictates how he may go back home, back to Godhead. This is confirmedin Srimad-Bhagavad-gita:     tesam satata-yuktanam     bhajatam priti-purvakam     dadami buddhi-yogam tam-     yena mam upayanti te"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I givethe understanding by which they can come to Me." (Bg. 10.10) Theopportunity to engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lordis open to everyone because every living entity is constitutionally aservant of the Lord. To engage in the service of the Lord is the naturalfunction of the living entity, but because he is covered by theinfluence of maya material energy, he thinks it to be a very difficulttask. But if he places himself under the guidance of a spiritual masterand does everything sincerely, immediately the Lord, who is situatedwithin everyone's heart, dictates how to serve Him (dadami buddhi-yogamtam). The Lord gives this direction, and thus the devotee's life becomesperfect. Whatever a pure devotee does is done by the dictation of theSupreme Lord. Thus it is confirmed by the author of Caitanya- caritamrtathat whatever he wrote was written under the direction of the SriMadana-mohana Deity.
                                   TEXT 79                     sei likhi, madana-gopala ye likhaya
                      kasthera puttaliyena kuhake nacaya
                                 TRANSLATION     As a wooden doll is made to dance by a magician, I write as Madana-
gopala orders me to do so.
                                   PURPORT     This is the position of a pure devotee. One should not take any
responsibility on his own but should be a soul surrendered to theSupreme Personality of Godhead, who will then give him dictation ascaitya-guru, or the spiritual master within. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead is pleased to guide a devotee from within and without. Fromwithin He guides him as the Supersoul, and from without He guides him asthe spiritual master.
                                   TEXT 80                      kuladhidevata mora--madana-mohana
                   yanra sevaka--raghunatha, rupa, sanatana                                 TRANSLATION
     I accept as my family Deity Madana-mohana, whose worshipers are
Raghunatha dasa, Sri Rupa and Sanatana Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 81
                   vrndavana-dasera pada-padma karl' dhyana
                     tanra ajna lana iikhi yahate kaiyana
                                 TRANSLATION     I took permission from Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura by praying at
his lotus feet, and upon receiving his order I have attempted to writethis auspicious literature.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami took permission not only from the
Vaisnavas and Madana-mohana but also from Vrndavana dasa Thakura, who isunderstood to be the Vyasa of the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 82                   caitanya-lilate `vyasa'--vrndavana-dasa
                     tanra krpa vina anye na haya prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura is the authorized writer on the
pastimes of Lord Caitanya. Without his mercy, therefore, one cannotdescribe these pastimes.
                                   TEXT 83
                   murkha, nica, ksudra muni visaya-lalasa
                      vaisnavajna-bale kari eteka sahasa
                                 TRANSLATION     I am foolish, lowborn and insignificant, and I always desire
material enjoyment; yet by the order of the Vaisnavas I am greatlyenthusiastic to write this transcendental literature.
                                   TEXT 84
                     sri-rupa-raghunatha-caranera ei bala
                   yanra smrte siddha haya vanchita-sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     The lotus feet of Sri Rupa Gosvami and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami are
my source of strength. Remembering their lotus feet can fulfill allone's desires.
                                   TEXT 85
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Adi-lila, Eighth Chapter, in the matter of the author's receiving theorders of the authorities, Krsna and gu ru.
                                 Chapter Nine
     A summary of Chapter Nine has been given as follows by Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. In the Ninth Chapterthe author of Caitanya-caritamrta has devised a figurative example bydescribing the "plant of bhakti." He considers Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu,who is known as Visvambhara, to be the gardener of this plant because Heis the main personality who has taken charge of it. As the supremeenjoyer, He enjoyed the flowers Himself and distributed them as well.The seed of the plant was first sown in Navadvipa, the birthsite of LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu, and then the plant was brought to Purusottama-ksetra (Jagannatha Puri) and then to Vrndavana. The seed fructifiedfirst in Srila Madhavendra Puri and then his disciple Sri Isvara Puri.It is figuratively described that both the tree itself and the trunk ofthe tree are Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The devotees, headed byParamananda Puri and eight other great sannyasis, are like the spreadingroots of the tree. From the main trunk there extend two specialbranches, Advaita Prabhu and Sri Nityananda Prabhu, and from thosebranches grow other branches and twigs. The tree surrounds the entireworld, and the flowers of the tree are to be distributed to everyone. Inthis way the tree of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu intoxicates the entireworld. It should be noted that this is a figurative example meant toexplain the mission of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 1              tam srimat-krsna-caitanya-de vam vande jagad-gurum
               yasyanukampaya svapi mahabdhim san taret sukham
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the spiritual master of
the entire world, Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, by whose mercyeven a dog can swim across a great ocean.
                                   PURPORT     Sometimes it is to be seen that a dog can swim in the water for a
few yards and then come back to the shore. Here, however, it is statedthat if a dog is blessed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he can swim acrossan ocean. Similarly, the author of Caitanya-caritamrta, KrsnadasaKaviraja Gosvami, placing himself in a helpless condition, states thathe has no personal power, but by the desire of Lord Caitanya, expressedthrough the Vaisnavas and Madana-mohana vigraha, it is possible for himto cross a transcendental ocean to present Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta.
                                    TEXT 2                   jaya jaya sri-krsna-caitanya gauracandra
                     jaya jayadvaita jaya jaya nityananda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Krsna Caitanya, who is known as Gaurahari! All
glories to Advaita and Nityananda Prabhu!
                                    TEXT 3
                    jaya jaya srivasadi gaura-bhakta-gana
                    sarvabhista-purti-hetu yanhara smarana
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to the devotees of Lord Caitanya, headed by Srivasa
Thakura! In order to fulfill all my desires, I remember their lotusfeet.
                                   PURPORT     The author here continues to follow the same principles of worship
of the Pancatattva that were described in the Seventh Chapter of Adi-lila.
                                    TEXT 4                    sri rupa, sanatana, bhatta raghunatha
                   sri jiva, gopala-bhatta, dasa-raghunatha
                                 TRANSLATION     I also remember the six Gosvainis--Rupa, Sanatana, Bhatta
Raghunatha, Sri Jiva, Gopala Bhatta and Dasa Raghunatha.
                                   PURPORT     This is the process for writing transcendental literature. A
sentimentalist who has no Vaisnava qualifications cannot producetranscendental writings. There are many fools who consider Krsna-lila tobe a subject of art and write or paint pictures about the pastimes ofLord Krsna with the gopis, sometimes depicting them in a mannerpractically obscene. These fools take pleasure in material sensegratification, but one who wants to make advancement in spiritual lifemust scrupulously avoid their literature. Unless one is a servant ofKrsna and the Vaisnavas, as Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami presents himselfto be in offering respects to Lord Caitanya, His associates and Hisdisciples, one should not attempt to write transcendental literature.
                                    TEXT 5                    esaba-prasade likhi caitanya-lila-guna
                     jani va na jani, kari apana-sodhana
                                 TRANSLATION     It is by the mercy of all these Vaisnavas and gurus that I attempt
to write about the pastimes and qualities of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Whether I know or know not, it is for self-purification that I writethis book.
                                   PURPORT     This is the sum and substance of transcendental writing. One must
be an authorized Vaisnava, humble and pure. One should writetranscendental literature to purify oneself, not for credit. By writingabout the pastimes of the Lord, one associates with the Lord directly.One should not ambitiously think,"I shall become a great author. I shallbe celebrated as a writer." These are material desires. One shouldattempt to write for self-purification. It may be published, or it maynot be published, but that does not matter. If one is actually sincerein writing, all his ambitions will be fulfilled. Whether one is known asa great author is incidental. One should not attempt to writetranscendental literature for material name and fame.
                                    TEXT 6                majakarah svayam krsna-premamara-taruh svayam
              data bhokta tat-phalanam yas tam caitanyam asraye
                                 TRANSLATION     I take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who Himself is the tree of transcendental love of Krsna, itsgardener and also the bestower and enjoyer of its fruits.
                                    TEXT 7
                    pr\bhu khe, ami `visvambhra' nam\ dhri                   nam\ sarthla h\y\, yadi preme visv\ bhri
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya thought: "My name is Visvambhara, `one who maintains
the entire universe.' Its meaning will be actualized if I can fill thewhole universe with love of Godhead."
                                    TEXT 8
                   e ta cin ti' lila prabhu malakara-dharma
                     navadvipe arambhila phalodyana-karma
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking in this way, He accepted the duty of a planter and began
to grow a garden in Navadvipa.
                                    TEXT 9
                      sri-citnya malakar\ prthivite ani'
                   bhakti-klpataru ropiia sinci' iccha-pani
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the Lord brought the desire tree of devotional service to this
earth and became its gardener. He sowed the seed and sprinkled upon itthe water of His will.
                                   PURPORT     In many places devotional service has been compared to a creeper.
One has to sow the seed of the devotional creeper, bhakti-lata, withinhis heart. As he regularly hears and chants, the seed will fructify andgradually grow into a mature plant and then produce the fruit ofdevotional service, namely, love of Godhead, which the gardener(malakar\) can then enjoy without impediments.
                                   TEXT 10                     j\ya sri madhavapuri krsna-prem-pura
                    bhlti-kalpatarur\ tenho prthm\ ankura
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Madhavendra Puri, the storehouse of all
devotional service unto Krsna! He is a desire tree of devotionalservice, and it is in him that the seed of devotional service firstfructified.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Madhavendra Puri, also known as Sri Madhava Puri, belonged to
the disciplic succession from Madhvacarya and was a greatly celebratedsannyasi. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was the third disciplic descendantfrom Sri Madhavendra Puri. The process of worship in the disciplicsuccession of Madhvacarya was full of ritualistic ceremonies, withhardly a sign of love of Godhead; Sri Madhavendra Puri was the firstperson in that disciplic succession to exhibit the symptoms of love ofGodhead and the first to write a poem beginning with the words ayi dina-dayardra-natha, "Osupremely merciful Personality of Godhead." In that poetry is the seedof Caitanya Mahaprabhu's cultivation of love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 11                    sri-isvarapuri-rupe ankura pusta haila
                      apane caitanya-maliskandha upajila
                                 TRANSLATION     The seed of devotional service next fructified in the form of Sri
Isvara Puri, and then the gardener Himself, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, becamethe main trunk of the tree of devotional service.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Isvara Puri was a resident of Kumara-hatta, where there is now
a railroad station known as Kamarhatty. Nearby there is also anotherstation named Halisahara, which belongs to the eastern railway that runsfrom the eastern section of Calcutta. Isvara Puri appeared in a brahmanafamily and was the most beloved disciple of Srila Madhavendra Puri. Inthe last portion of Caitanya-caritamrta, Chapter Eight, verses 26-29, itis stated:     is vara-puri kare sri-pada se vana     sva-haste karena mala-mutradi marjana     nirantara krsna-nama karaya smarana     krsna-nama krsna-Iila sunaya anuksana     tusta hana puri tanre kaila alingana     vara dila krsne tomara ha-uk prema-dhana     sei haite isvara-puri premera sagara"At the last stage of his life Sri Madhavendra Puri became an invalidand was completely unable to move, and Isvara Puri so completely engagedhimself in his service that he personally cleaned up his stool andurine. Always chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra and reminding SriMadhavendra Puri about the pastimes of Lord Krsna in the last stage ofhis life, Isvara Puri gave the best service among his disciples. ThusMadhavendra Puri, being very pleased with him, blessed him, saying, `Mydear boy, I can only pray to Krsna that He will be pleased with you.'Thus Isvara Puri, by the grace of his spiritual master, Sri MadhavendraPuri, became a great devotee in the ocean of love of Godhead." SrilaVisvanatha Cakravarti states in his Gurvastaka praye r, yasya prasadadbhagavat-prasado yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto'pi: " By the mercy of thespiritual master one is benedicted by the mercy of Krsna. Without thegrace of the spiritual master one cannot make any advancement." It is bythe mercy of the spiritual master that one becomes perfect, as vividlyexemplified here. A Vaisnava is always protected by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but if he appears to be an invalid, this gives achance to his disciples to serve him. Isvara Puri pleased his spiritualmaster by service, and by the blessings of his spiritual master hebecame such a great personality that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu acceptedhim as His spiritual master.     Srila Isvara Puri was the spiritual master of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, but before initiating Lord Caitanya he went to Navadvipa andlived for a few months in the house of Gopinatha Acarya. At that timeLord Caitanya became acquainted with him, and it is understood that heserved Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by reciting his boo k, Krsna-Iilamrta. This is exp lai n ed i n Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-lila, Seve n th Chapter.     To teach others by example how to be a faithful disciple of one'sspiritual master, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, visited the birthplace of Isvara Puri at Kamarhatty andcollected some earth from his birthsite. This He kept very carefully,and He used to eat a small portion of it daily. This is stated in theCaitanya-bhagavata, Chapter Twelve. It has now become customary fordevotees,following the example of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,to go thereand collect some earth from that place.
                                   TEXT 12                   nijacintya-saktye maji hana skandha haya
                     sakala sakhara sei skandha mulasraya
                                 TRANSLATION     By His inconceivable powers, the Lord became the gardener, the
trunk and the branches simultaneously.
                                  TEXT 13-15
                     paramananda puri, ara kesava bharati
                   bmhmananda puri, ara brahmananda bharati
                  visnu-puri, kesa va-puri, puri krsnananda
                    sri-nrsimhatirtha, ara purisukhananda
                       ei nava mula nikasila vrksa-mule
                      ei nava mule vrksa karila niscale
                                 TRANSLATION     Paramananda Puri, Kesava Bharati, Brahmananda Puri and Brahmananda
Bharati, Sri Visnu Puri, Kesava Puri, Krsnananda Puri, Sri Nrsimhatirthaand Sukhananda Puri--these nine sannyasi roots all sprouted from thetrunk of the tree. Thus the tree stood steadfastly on the strength ofthese nine roots.
                                   PURPORT     paramananda Puri. Paramananda Puri belonged to a brahmana family of
the Trihut district in Uttara Pradesh. Madhavendra Puri was hisspiritual master. In relationship with Madhavendra Puri, ParamanandaPuri was very dear to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter Eleven, there is the following statement:     sannyasira madhye isvarera priya-patra     ara nahi eka puri gosani se matra     damodara-s varupa paramananda-puri     sannyasi-parsade ei dui adhikari     niravadhi nikate thakena dui jana     prabhura sannyase kare dandera grahana     puri dhyana-para damodarera kirtana      yata-priti isvarera puri-gosanire     damodara-svarupere-o tata priti kare"Among his sannyasi disciples, Isvara Puri and Paramananda Puri werevery dear to Madhavendra Puri. Thus Paramananda Puri, like SvarupaDamodara, who was also a sannyasi, was very dear to Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu and was His constant associate. When Lord Caitanya acceptedthe renounced order, Paramananda Puri offered Him the danda. ParamanandaPuri was always engaged in meditation, and Sri Svarupa was alwaysengaged in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. As Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu offered full respect to His spiritual master, Isvara Puri, Hesimilarly respected Paramananda Puri and Svarupa Damodara." It isdescribed in Caitanya- bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter Three, that whenSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu first saw Paramananda Puri He made the followingstatement:     aji dhanya locana, saphala aji janma     saphala amara aji haila sarva-dharma     prabhu bale aji mora saphala sannyasa     aji madhavendra more ha-ila prakasa"My eyes, My mind, My religious activities and My acceptance of thesannyasa order have now all become perfect because today MadhavendraPuri is manifest before Me in the form of Paramananda Puri." Caitanya-bhagavata further states:     kathoksane anyo 'nye karena pranama     paramananda-puri caitanyera priya-dhama"Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu exchanged respectful obeisances withParamananda Puri, who was very dear to Him." Paramananda Puriestablished a small monastery behind the western side of the JagannathaTemple, where he had a well dug to supply water.The water, however, wasbitter, and therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu prayed to Lord Jagannathato allow Ganges water to come into the well to make it sweet. When LordJ agannatha granted the request, Lord Caitanya told all the devoteesthat from that day hence, the water of Paramananda Puri's well should becelebrated as Ganges water, for any devotee who would drink it or bathein it would certainly get the same benefit as that derived from drinkingor bathing in the waters of the Ganges. Such a person would certainlydevelop pure love of Godhead. It is stated in the Caitanya-bhagavata:     prabhu bale ami ye achiye prthivite     niscayai janiha puri-gosanira prite"Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to say: `I am living in this world only onaccount of the excellent behavior of Sri Paramananda Puri."' The Gaura-ganoddesa-oipika, verse 118, states, puri sri-paramanando ya asiduddhavah pura.- " Paramananda Puri is none other than Uddhava." Uddhava
was Lord Krsna's friend and uncle, and inthe Caitanya-lila the same Uddhava became the friend of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu and His uncle in terms of their relationship in the disciplicsuccession.     Kesava Bharati. T h e Sarasvati, B ha rati an d Pu ri samprad\yasbe lo n g to th e Srngeri Matha in South India, and Sri Kesava Bharati,who at that time was situated in a monastery in Katwa, belonged to theBharati-sampradaya. According to some authoritative opinions, althoughKesava Bharatibelonged to the San kara-sampradaya, he was formerlyinitiated by a Vaisnava. He is supposed to have been a Vaisnava onaccount of having been initiated by Madhavendra Puri, for some say thathe took sannyasa from Madhavendra Puri. The temple and Deity worshipstarted by Kesava Bharati are still existing in the village known asKhatundi, which is under the postal jurisdiction of Kandara in thedistrict of Burdwan. According to the managers of that matha, thepriests are descendants of Kesava Bharati, and some say that theworshipers of the Deity are descendants of the sons of Kesava Bharati.In his householder life he had two sons, Nisapati and Usapati, and abrahmana of the name Sri Nakadicandra Vidyaratna, who was a member ofthe family of Nisapati, was the priest in charge at the time that SriBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati visited this temple. Accordingto some,thepriests of the temple belongto the family of Kesava Bharati's brother.Still another opinion is that they descend from Madhava Bharati, who wasanother disciple of Kesava Bharati. Madhava Bharati's discipleBalabhadra, who also later became a sannyasi of the Bharati-sampradaya,had two sons in his family life named Madana and Gopala. Madana, whosefamily's surname was Bharati, lived in the village of Auriya, andGopala, whose family's surname was Brahmacari, lived in the village ofDenduda. There are still many living descendants of both families.     I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 52, it is said:     mathurayam yajna-sutram pura krsnaya yo munih     dadau sanoioanih so 'bhud adya kesava-bharati"Sandipani Muni, who formerly offered the sacred thread to Krsna andBalarama, later became Kesava Bharati." It is he who offered sannyasa toSri Caitanya Mahaprabh u. There is another statement from the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 117. Iti kecit prabhasante 'krurah kesava-bharati - ` ` Accord i ng to so me authoritative opinions, KesavaBharati is an incarnation of Akrura." Kesava Bharati offered thesannyasa order to SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu in the year 1432sakabda (1510A.D.) in Katwa. This is stated in the Vaisnava-manjusa, Part Two.     Brahmananda puri. Sri Brahmananda Puri was one of the associates ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu while He was performing kirtana in Navadvipa,and he also joined Lord Caitanya in Jagannatha Puri. We may note in thisconnection that the name Brah mananda is accepted not on ly by Mayavadisannyasis but Vaisnava sannyasis also. One of our foolish Godbrotherscriticized our sannyasi Brahmananda Svami, saying that this was aMayavadiname. The foolish man did not know that Brahmananda does notalways refer to the impersonal. Parabrahman, the Supreme Brahman, isKrsna. A devotee of Krsna can therefore also be called Brahmananda; thisis evident from the fact that Brahmananda Puri was one of the chiefsannyasi associates of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.     Brahmananda Bharati. Brahmananda Bharati went to see Sri KrsnaCaitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha-dhama. At that time he used to wearonly a deerskin to cover himself, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu indirectly
indicated that He did not like this deerskin covering. BrahmanandaBharatitherefore gave it up and accepted a loincloth of saffron color asused by Vaisnava sannyasis. For some time he lived with Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 16                    madhya-mula pammananda puri maha-dhira
                    asta dike asta mula vrksa kaila sthira
                                 TRANSLATION     With the sober and grave Paramananda Puri as the central root and
the other eight roots in the eight directions, the tree of CaitanyaMahaprabhu stood firmly.
                                   TEXT 17
                     skandhera upare bahu sakha upaji la
                      upari upari sakha asankhya ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     From the trunk grew many branches and above them innumerable
others.
                                   TEXT 18
                    visa visa sakha kari' eka eka mandala
                   maha-maha-sakha cha-ila brahmanda sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the branches of the Caitanya tree formed a cluster or society,
with great branches covering all the universe.
                                   PURPORT     Our International Society for Krishna Consciousness is one of the
branches of the Caitanya tree.
                                   TEXT 19                      ekaika sakhate upasakha sata sata
                      yata upajiia sakha ke ganibe kata
                                 TRANSLATION     From each branch grew many hundreds of sub-branches. No one can
count how many branches thus grew.                                   TEXT 20
                   mukhya mukhya sakha-ganera nama aganana
                     age ta' kariba, suna vrksera varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     I shall try to name the foremost of the innumerable branches.
Please hear the description of the Caitanya tree.
                                   TEXT 21
                    vrksera upare sakha haila dui skandha
                     eka `advaita' nama, ara `nityananda'
                                 TRANSLATION     At the top of the tree the trunk branched into two. One trunk was
named Sri Advaita Prabhu and the other Sri Nityananda Prabhu.
                                   TEXT 22
                      sei dui-skandhe bahu sakha upajila
                       tara upasakha-gane jagat chaila
                                 TRANSLATION     From these two trunks grew many branches and sub-branches that
covered the entire world.
                                   TEXT 23
                     bada sakha, upasakha, tara upasakha
                      yata upajila tara ke karibe lekha
                                 TRANSLATION     These branches and sub-branches and their sub-branches became so
numerous that no one can actually write about them.
                                   TEXT 24
                      sisya, prasisya, ara upasisya-gana
                       jagat vyapila tara nahika ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the disciples and the grand-disciples and their admirers
spread throughout the entire world, and it is not possible to enumeratethem all.
                                   TEXT 25
                     udumbara-vrksa yena phale sarva ange
                   ei mata bhakti-vrkse sarvatra phala Iage
                                 TRANSLATION     As a big fig tree bears fruits all over its body, each part of the
tree of devotional service bore fruit.
                                   PURPORT     This tree of devotional service is notof this material world. It
grows in the spiritual world, where there is no distinction between onepart of the body and another. It is something like a tree of sugar, forwhichever part of such a tree one tastes, it is always sweet. The treeof bhakti has varieties of branches, leaves and fruits, but they are allmeant for the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There arenine different processes of devotional service (sravanam kirtanam visnohsmaranam pada-se vanam arcanam vandanam dasyam sakhyam atma-nivedanam),but all of th e m are meant only for the service of the Supreme Lord.Therefore whether one hears, chants, remembers or worships, hisactivities will yield the same result. Which one of these processes willbe the most suitable for a particular devotee depends upon his taste.
                                   TEXT 26                    mula-skandhera sakha ara upasakha-gane
                     Iagila ye prema-phala,--amrtake jme
                                 TRANSLATION     Since Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu was the original trunk, the
taste of the fruits that grew on the branches and sub-branches surpassedthe taste of nectar.
                                   TEXT 27
                     pakila ye prema-phaia amrta-madhura
                     vilaya caitanya-maji, nahi laya mula
                                 TRANSLATION     The fruits ripened and became sweet and nectarean. The gardener,
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, distributed them without asking any price.
                                   TEXT 28                     tri jagate yata ache dhana-ratnamani
                    eka-phalera mulya kari' taha nahi gani
                                 TRANSLATION     All the wealth in the three worlds cannot equal the value of one
such nectarean fruit of devotional service.
                                   TEXT 29
                    mage va na mage keha, patra va apatra
                      ihara vicara nahi jane, deya matra
                                 TRANSLATION     Not considering who asked for it and who did not, nor who was fit
and who unfit to receive it, Caitanya Mahaprabhu distributed the fruitof devotional service.
                                   PURPORT     This is the sum and substance of Lord Caitanya's sankirtana
movement. There is no distinction made between those who are fit andthose who are not fit to hear or take part in the sankirtana movement.It should therefore be preached without discrimination.The only purposeof the preachers of the sankirtana movement must be to go on preachingwithout restriction. That is the way in which Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuintroduced this sankirtana movement to the world.
                                   TEXT 30                     anjali anjali bhari' phele caturdise
                     darldra k udana khaya, malakara hase
                                 TRANSLATION     The transcendental gardener, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, distributed
handful after handful of fruit in all directions, and when the poorhungry people ate the fruit, the gardener smiled with great pleasure.
                                   TEXT 31
                     majakara kahe,--suna, vrksa-parivara
                      mulasakha-upasakha yateka prakara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya thus addressed the multifarious varieties of branches
and subbranches of the tree of devotional service:                                   TEXT 32
                    alaukika vrksa kare sarvendriya-karma
                   sthavara ha-i ya dhare jangamera dharma
                                 TRANSLATION     "Since the tree of devotional service is transcendental, every one
of its parts can perform the action of all the others. Although a treeis supposed to be immovable, this tree nevertheless moves.
                                   PURPORT     It is our experience in the material world that trees stand in one
place, but in the spiritual world a tree can go from one place toanother. Therefore everything in the spiritual world is called alaukika,uncommon or transcendental. Another feature of such a tree is that itcan act universally. In the material world the roots of a tree go deepwithin the earth to gather food, but in the spiritual world the twigs,branches and leaves of the upper portion of the tree can act as well asthe roots.
                                   TEXT 33                      e vrksera anga haya saba sa-cetana
                      badiya vyapila sabe sakala bhuvana
                                 TRANSLATION     "All the parts of this tree are spiritually cognizant, and thus as
they grow up they spread all over the world.
                                   TEXT 34
                     ekala malakara ami kahan kahan yaba
                      ekaia va kata phala padiya vilaba
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am the only gardener. How many places can I go? How many fruits
can I pick and distribute?
                                   PURPORT     Here Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu indicates that the distribution of the
Hare Krsna maha-mantra should be performed by combined forces. AlthoughHe is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He laments, "How can I actalone? How can I alone pick the fruit and distribute it all over theworld?" This indicates that all classes of devotees should combine todistribute the Hare Krsna maha-mantra without consideration of the time,place or situation.
                                   TEXT 35                       ekala uthana dite haya parlsrama
                  keha paya, keha na paya, rahe mane bhrama
                                 TRANSLATION     "It would certainly be a very laborious task to pick the fruits and
distribute them alone, and still I suspect that some would receive themand others would not.
                                   TEXT 36
                       atae va ami ajna dilun sabakare
                   yahan tahan prema-phaia deha' yare tare
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore I order every man within this universe to accept this
Krsna consciousness movement and distribute it everywhere.
                                   PURPORT     In this connection there is a song sung by Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura:     enechi ausadhi maya nasibara lagi'     harinama-mahamantra lao tumi magi'     bhakativinoda prabhu-carane padiya     sei harinama-mantra la-iia magiyaThe sankirtana movement has been introduced by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhujust to dispell the illusion of maya, by which everyone in this materialworld thinks himself to be a product of matter and therefore to havemany duties pertaining to the body. Actually, the living entity is nothis material body; he is a spirit soul. He has a spiritual need to beeternally blissful and full of knowledge, but unfortunately heidentifies himself with the body, sometimes as a human being, sometimesas an animal, sometimes a tree, sometimes an aquatic, sometimes ademigod, and so on. Thus with each change of body he develops adifferent type of consciousness with different types of activities andthus becomes increasingly entangled in material existence,transmigrating perpetually from one body to another. Under the spell ofm\ya, or illusion, he does not consider the past or future but is simplysatisfied with the short life span that he has gotten for the present.To eradicate this illusion, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has brought thesankirtana movement, and He requests everyone to accept and distributeit. A person who is actually a follower of Sri Bhaktivinoda Thakura must immediately accept the request of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu by offering respectful obeisances unto His lotus feet andthus beg from Him the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. If one is fortunate enoughto beg from the Lord this Hare Krsna maha-mantra, his life issuccessful.
                                   TEXT 37                     ekala majakara ami kata phala khaba
                      na diya va ei phala ara ki kariba
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am the only gardener. If I do not distribute these fruits, what
shall I do with them? How many fruits can I alone eat?
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu produced so many fruits of devotional
service that they must be distributed all over the world; otherwise, howcould He alone relish and taste each and every fruit? The originalreason that Lord Sri Krsna descended as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was tounderstand Srimati Radharani's love for Krsna and to taste that love.The fruits of the tree of devotional service were innumerable, andtherefore He wanted to distribute them unrestrictedly to everyone. SrilaRupa Gosvami therefore writes:     anarpita-carim cirat karunayavatirnah kalau     samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasam s va-bhak ti-sriyam     harih purata-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sanoipitah     sada hrdaya-kandare sphuratu vah saci-nandanahThere were many precious incarnations of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, but none were so generous, kind and magnanimous as Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, for He distributed the most confidential aspect ofdevotional service, namely, the conjugal love of Radha and Krsna.Therefore Sri Rupa Gosvami Prabhupada desires that Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu live perpetually in the hearts of all devotees, for thus theycan understand and relish the loving affairs of Srimati RadharaniandKrsna.
                                   TEXT 38                     atma-icchamrte vrksa sinci nirantara
                     tahate asankhya phala vrksera upara
                                 TRANSLATION     "By the transcendental desire of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, water has been sprinkled all over the tree, and thus there areinnumerable fruits of love of Godhead.
                                   PURPORT     God is unlimited, and His desires are also unlimited. This example
of unlimited fruits is factually appropriate even within the materialcontext, for with the good will of the Supreme Personality of Godheadthere can be enough fruits, grains and other foodstuffs produced so thatall the people in the world could not finish them, even if they ate tentimes their capacity. In this material world there is actually noscarcity of anything but Krsna consciousness. If people become Krsnaconscious, by the transcendental will of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead there will be enough foodstuffs produced so that people willhave no economic problems at all. One can very easily understand thisfact. The production of fruits and flowers depends not upon our will but
the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead. If He is pleased, He cansupply enough fruits, flowers, etc., but if people are atheistic andgodless, nature, by His will, restricts the supply of food. For example,in several provinces in India, especially Maharastra, Uttara Pradesh andother adjoining states, there is sometimes a great scarcity offoodstuffs due to lack of rainfall. So-called scientists and economistscannot do anything about this. Therefore, to solve all problems, onemust seek the good will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead bybecoming Krsna conscious and worshiping Him regularly in devotionalservice.
                                   TEXT 39                      ataeva saba phala deha' yare tare
                        khaiya ha-uk loka ajara amare
                                 TRANSLATION     "Distribute this Krsna consciousness movement all over the world.
Let people eat these fruits and ultimately become free from old age anddeath.
                                   PURPORT     The Krsna consciousness movement introduced by Lord Caitanya is
extremelly important because one who takes to it becomes eternal, beingfreed from birth, death and old age. People do not recognize that thereal distresses in life are the four principles of birth, death, oldageand disease. They are so foolish that they resign themselves to thesefour miseries, not knowing the transcendental remedy of the Hare Krsnamaha-mantra. Simply by chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra one canbecome free from all misery, but because they are enchanted by theillusory energy, people do not take this movement seriously. Thereforethose who are actually servants of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu mustseriously distribute this movement all over the world to render thegreatest benefit to human society. Of course, animals and other lowerspecies are not capable of understanding this movement, but if even asmall number of living beings takke it seriously, by their chantingloudly, all living entities, including even trees, animals and otherlower species, will be benefited. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquiredfrom Haridasa Thakura how he was to benefit living entities other thanhumans, Srila Haridasa Thakura replied that the Hare Krsna maha-mantrais so potent that if it is chanted loudly, everyone will benefit,including the lower species of life.
                                   TEXT 40                     jagat vyapiya mora habe punya khyati
                    sukhi ha-iya loka mora gahibeka kirti
                                 TRANSLATION     "If the fruits are distributed all over the world, My reputation as
a pious man will be known everywhere, and thus all people will glorifyMy name with great pleasure.
                                   PURPORT     This prediction of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is now actually coming
to pass. The Krsna consciousness movement is being distributed all overthe world through the chanting of the holy name of the Lord,the HareKrsna maha-mantra, and people who were leading confused, chaotic livesare now feeling transcendental happiness. They are finding peace insankirtana, and therefore they are acknowledging the supreme benefit ofthis movement. This is the blessing of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Hisprediction is now factually being fulfilled, and those who are sober andconscientious are appreciating the value of this great movement.
                                   TEXT 41                   bharata-bhumite haila manusya janma yara
                    janma sarthaka kari' kara para-upakara
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India
[Bharata-varsa] should make his life successful and work for the benefitof all other people.
                                   PURPORT     The magnanimity of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is expressed in this
very important verse. Although He was born in Bengal and Bengalistherefore have a special duty toward Him, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu isaddressing not only Bengalis but all the inhabitants of India. It is inthe land of India that actual human civilization can be developed.     Human life is especially meant for God realization, as stated inthe Veaanta-sutra (athato brahma-jijnasa). Anyone who takes birth in theland of India (Bharata-varsa) has the special privilege of being able totake advantage of the instruction and guidance of the Vediccivilization. He automatically receives the basic principles ofspiritual life, for 99.9% of the Indian people, even simple villagefarmers and others who are neither educated nor sophisticated, believein the transmigration of the soul, believe in past and future lives,believe in God and naturally want to worship the Supreme Personality ofGodhead or His representative. These ideas are the natural inheritanceof a person born in India. India has many holy places of pilgrimage suchas Gaya, Benares, Mathura, Prayag, Vrndavana, Haridvar, Ramesvaram andJagannatha Puri, and still people go there by the hundreds andthousands. Although the present leaders of India are influencing thepeople not to believe in God, not to believe in a next life and nottobelieve in a distinction between pious and impious life, and they areteachingthem how to drink wine, eat meat and become supposedlycivilized, people are nevertheless afraid of the four activities ofsinful life--namely, illicit sex, meat eating, intoxication andgambling--and whenever there is a religious festival, they gathertogether by the thousands. We have actual experience of this. Whenever
the Krsna consciousness movement holds a sankirtana festival in a bigcity like Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, Ahmedabad or Hyderabad, thousands ofpeople come to hear. Sometimes we speak in English, but even though mostpeople do not understand English, they nevertheless come to hear us.Even when imitation incarnations of Godhead speak, people gather inthousands, for everyone who is born in the land of India has a naturalspiritual inclination and is taught the basic principles of spirituallife; they merely need to be a little more educated in the Vedicprinciples. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, janma sarthaka kari'kara para- upakara: if an Indian is educated in the Vedic principles, heis able to perform the most beneficial welfare activity for the entireworld.     At present, for want of Krsna consciousness or God consciousness,the entire world is in darkness, having been covered by the fourprinciples of sinful life--meat eating, illicit sex, gambling andintoxication. Therefore there is a need for vigorous propaganda toeducate people to refrain from sinful activities. This will bring peaceand prosperity;the rogues, thieves and debauchees will naturallydecrease in number, and all of human society will be God conscious.     The practical effect of our spreading the Krsna consciousnessmovement all over the world is that now the most degraded debauchees arebecoming the most elevated saints. This is only one Indian's humbleservice to the world. If all Indians had taken to this path, as advisedby Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, India would have given a unique gift to theworld, and thus India would have been glorified. Now, however, India isknown as a poverty-stricken country, and whenever anyone from America oranother opulent country goes to India, he sees many people lying by thefoot paths for whom there are not even provisions for two meals a day.There are also institutions collecting money from all parts of the worldin the name of welfare activities for poverty-stricken people, but theyare spending it for their own sense gratification. Now, on the order ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Krsna consciousness movement has beenstarted, and people are benefiting from this movement. Therefore it isnow the duty of the leading men of India to consider the importance ofthis movement and train many Indians to go outside of India to preachthis cult. People will accept it, there will be cooperation among theIndian people and among the other people of the world, and the missionof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu will then be fulfilled. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu will then be glorified all over the world, and people willnaturally be happy, peaceful and prosperous, not only in this life butalso in the next, for as stated in Bhagavad-gita, anyone who understandsKrsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will very easily getsalvation, or freedom from the repetition of birth and death, and goback home, back to Godhead. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore requestsevery Indian to become a preacher of His cult to save the world fromdisastrous confusion.     This is not only the duty of Indians but the duty of everyone, andwe are very happy that American and European boys and girls areseriously cooperating with this movement. One should know definitelythat the best welfare activity for all of human society is to awakenman's God consciousness, or Krsna consciousness. Therefore everyoneshould help this great movement. This is confirmed in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, Tenth Canto, Twenty-second Chapter, verse 35, which is next
quoted in Caitanya-caritamrta.
                                   TEXT 42                  etavaj janma-saphalyam dehinam iha dehisu
                pranair arthair dhiya vaca sreya-acaranam sada
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is the duty of every living being to perform welfare activities
for the benefit of others with his life, wealth, intelligence, andwords."
                                   PURPORT     There are two kinds of general activities--sreyas, or activities
which are ultimately beneficial and auspicious, and preyas, or thosewhich are immediately beneficial and auspicious. For example, childrenare fond of playing. They don't want to go to school to receive aneducation, and they think that to play all day and night and enjoy withtheir friends is the aim of life. Even in the transcendental life ofLord Krsna, we find that when He was a child He was very fond of playingwith His friends of the same age, the cowherd boys. He would not even gohome to take His dinner. Mother Yasoda would have to come out to induceHim to come home. Thus it is a child's nature to engage all day andnight in playing, not caring even for his health and other importantconcerns. This is an example of preyas, or immediately beneficialactivities, but there are also sreyas, or activities which areultimately auspicious. According to Vedic civilization, a human beingmust be God conscious. He should understand what God is, what thismaterial world is, who he is and what their interrelationships are. Thisis called sreyas, or ultimately auspicious activity.     In this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said that one should beinterested in sreyas. To achieve the ultimate goal of sreyas, or goodfortune, one should engage everything, including his life, wealth andwords, not only for himself but for others also. However, unless one isinterested in sreyas in his own life, he cannot preach of sreyas for thebenefit of others.     This verse cited by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu applies to humanbeings, not to animals. As indicated in the previous verse by the wordsmanusyajanma, these injunctions are for human beings. Unfortunately,human beings, although they have the bodies of men,are becoming lessthan animals in their behavior.This is the fault of modern education.Modern educators do not know the aim of human life; they are simplyconcerned with how to develop the economic condition of their countriesor of human society. This is also necessary; the Vedic civilizationconsiders all aspects of human life, including dharma (religion), artha(economic development), kama (sense gratification) and moksa(liberation). But humanity's first concern should be religion. To bereligious, one must abide by the orders of God, but unfortunately peoplein this age have rejected religion,and they are busy in economicdevelopment. Therefore they will adopt any means to get money. Foreconomic development one does not need to get money by hook or by crook;one needs only sufficient money to maintain his body and soul. However,
because modern economic development is going on with no religiousbackground, people have become lusty, greedy and mad after money. Theyare simply developing the qualities of rajas (passion) and tamas(ignorance), neglecting the other quality of nature, sattva (goodness),and the brahminical qualifications. Therefore the entire society is inchaos.     The Bhagavatam says that it is the duty of an advanced human beingto act in such a way as to facilitate human society's attainment of theultimate goal of life. There is a similar verse in the Visnu purana,Part Three, Chapter Twelve, verse 45, which is quoted in this chapter ofCaitanya-caritamrta as verse 43.
                                   TEXT 43                   praninam upakaraya yad eveha paratra ca
                  karmana manasa vaca tad eva matiman bhajet
                                 TRANSLATION     "`By his work, thoughts and words, an intelligent man must perform
actions which will be beneficial for all living entities in this lifeand in the next.'
                                   PURPORT     Unfortunately, people in general do not know what is to take place
in the next life. To prepare oneself for his next life is common sense,and it is a principle of the Vedic civilization, but presently peoplethroughout the world do not believe in a next life. Even influentialprofessors and other educators say that as soon as the body is finished,everything is finished. This atheistic philosophy is killing humancivilization. People'are irresponsibly performing all sorts of sinfulactivities, and thus the privilege of the human life is being taken awayby the educational propaganda of the so-called leaders. Actually it is afact that this life is meant for preparation for the next life; byevolution one has come through many species or forms, and this humanform of life is an opportunity to promote oneself to a better life. Thisis explained in Bhagavad-gita:     yan ti de va-vrata de van     pitr-n yanti pitr-vratah     bhutani yanti bhutejya     yan ti mad-yajino 'pi mam"Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods;thosewho worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; thosewho worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me willlive with Me." (Bg. are the residence of the demigods, one can promotehimself to the Pitrloka, one can remain on earth, or one can also goback home, back to Godhead. This is further confirmed by Bhagavad-gita(4.9): tyaktva deham punar janma naiti main eti so'rjuna. After givingup the body, one who knows Krsna in truth does not come back again tothis world to accept a material body, but he goes back home, back toGodhead. This knowledge is in the sastras, and people should be giventhe opportunity to understand it. Even if one is not able to go back toGodhead in one life, the Vedic civilization at least gives one the
opportunity to be promoted to the higher planetary systems where thedemigods live and not glide down again to animal life. At present,people do not understand this knowledge, although it constitutes a greatscience, for they are uneducated and trained not to accept it. This isthe horrible condition of modern human society. As such, the Krsnaconsciousness movement is the only hope to direct the attention ofintelligent men to a greater benefit in life.
                                   TEXT 44                      malimanusya amara nahi rajya-dhana
                    phala-phula diya kari' punya uparjana
                                 TRANSLATION     "1 am merely a gardener. I have neither a kingdom nor very great
riches. I simply have some fruits and flowers that I wish to utilize toachieve piety in My life.
                                   PURPORT     In performing welfare activities for human society, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu presents Himself as being not very rich, thus indicating thata man need not be rich or opulent to act for the welfare of humanity.Sometimes rich men are very proud that they can perform beneficialactivities for human society whereas others cannot. A practical exampleis that when there is a scarcity of food in India on account of meagerrainfall, some members of the richer class very proudly distributefoodstuffs, making huge arrangements with the help of the government, asif merely by such activities people will be benefited. Suppose therewere no food grains. How would the rich men distribute food? Productionof grainsis completely in the hands of God. If there were no rain, therewould be no grains, and these so-called rich men would be unable todistribute grains to the people.     The real purpose of life, therefore, is to satisfy the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Srila Rupa Gosvami describes in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu that devotional service is so exalted that it isbeneficial and auspicious for every man. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu alsodeclared that to propagate the bhakti cult of devotional service inhuman society,one does not need to be very rich. Anyone can do it andthus render the highest benefit to humanity if he knows the art. LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu takes the part of a gardener because although agardener is naturally not a very rich man, he has some fruits andflowers. Any man can collect some fruits and flowers and satisfy theSupreme Personality of Godhead in devotional service, as recommended inBhagavad-gita.-     patram puspam phalam toyam     yo me bhaktya prayacchati     tad aham bhakty-upahrtam     asnami prayatatmanah     (Bg. 9.26)One cannot satisfy the Supreme Lord by his riches, wealth or opulentposition, but anyone can collect a little fruit or flower and offer itto the Lord. The Lord says that if one brings such an offering in
devotion, He will accept it and eat it. WhenKrsna eats, the entire world becomes satisfied. There is the story inthe Mahabharata illustrating how by Krsna's eating, the 60,000 disciplesof Durvasa Muni were all satisfied. Therefore it is a fact that if byour life (pranaih), by our wealth (arthaih), by our intelligence (dhiya)or by our words (vaca) we can satisfy the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, naturally the entire world will become happy. Therefore ourmain duty is to satisfy the Supreme Godhead by our actions, our moneyand our words. This is very simple. Even if one does not have money, hecan preach the Hare Krsna mantra to everyone. One can go everywhere,toevery home, and request everyone to chant the Hare Krsna mantra. Thusthe entire world situation will become very happy and peaceful.
                                   TEXT 45                    malihana vrksa ha-ilan ei ta' icchate
                   sarva-pranir a upakara haya vrksa haite
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although I am acting as a gardener, I also want to be the tree,
for thus I can bestow benefit upon all.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the most benevolent personality in human
society because His only desire is to make people happy. His sankirtanamovement is especially meant for the purpose of making people happy. Hewanted to become the tree Himself because a tree is supposed to be themost benevolent living entity. I n the following verse, which is fromSrimad-Bhagavatam (10.22.33), Krsna Himself highly praised the existenceof a tree.
                                   TEXT 46                 aho esam varam janma sarva-prany-upajivinam
                sujanasyeva yesam vai vimukha yanti narthinah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `J ust see how these trees are maintaining every living entity!
Their birth is successful. Their behavior is just like that of greatpersonalities, for anyone who asks anything from a tree never goes awaydisappointed."'
                                   PURPORT     According to Vedic civilization, ksatriyas are considered to be
great personalities because if anyone goes to a ksatriya king to ask forcharity, the king will never refuse. The trees are compared to thosenoble ksatriyas because everyone derives all kinds of benefits fromthem--some people take fruit, others take flowers, others take leaves,others take twigs, and others even cut the tree, and yet the tree gives
to everyone without hesitation.     Unnecessarily cutting trees without consideration is anotherexample of human debauchery. The paper industry cuts many hundreds andthousands of trees for its mills, and with the paper so much rubbishliterature is published for the whimsical satisfaction of human society.Unfortunately, although these industrialists are now happy in this lifeby dint of their industrial development, they do not know that they willincurthe responsibility for killing these living entities who are in theforms of trees.     This verse, quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam, was spoken by Lord Krsnato His friends when He was taking rest underneath a tree after Hispastime of stealing the clothes of the gopis (vastra-harana-lila). Byquoting this verse, Caitanya Mahaprabhu teaches us that we should betolerant like trees and also beneficial like trees, which giveeverything to the needy persons who come underneath them. A needy personmay derive many advantages from trees and also from many animals, but inmodern civilization people have become so ungrateful that they exploitthe trees and animals and kill them. These are some of the sinfulactivities of modern civilization.
                                   TEXT 47                     ei aina kaila yadi caitanya-maiakara
                      parama ananda paila vrksa-parivara
                                 TRANSLATION     The descendants of the tree [the devotees of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu] were very glad to receive this order directly from the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     It is the desire of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu that the benevolent
activities of the sankirtana movement which was inaugurated 500 yearsago in Navadvipa be spread all over the world for the benefit of allhuman beings. Unfortunately, there are many so-called followers ofCaitanya Mahaprabhu who are satisfied simply to construct a temple, makea show of the Deities, collect some funds and utilize them for eatingand sleeping. There is no question of their preaching the cult of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu all over the world, but even though they are unableto do so, if anyone else does it they become envious. This is thecondition of the modern followers of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The age ofKali is so strong that it affects even the so-called followers of LordCaitanya. At least the followers of Caitanya Mahaprabhu must come out ofIndia to preach His cult all over the world, for this is the mission ofLord Caitanya. The followers of Lord Caitanya must execute His will withheart and soul, being more tolerant than the trees and humbler than thestraw in the street.
                                   TEXT 48                    yei yahan tahan dana kare prema-phala
                     phalasvade matta loka ha-ila sakala                                 TRANSLATION
     The fruit of love of God is so tasteful that wherever a devotee
distributes it, those who relish the fruit, anywhere in the world,immediately become intoxicated.
                                   PURPORT     Here the wonderful fruit of love of Godhead distributed by Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu is described. We have practical experience thatanyone who accepts this fruit and sincerely tastes it immediatelybecomes mad after it and gives up all his bad habits, being intoxicatedby Caitanya Mahaprabhu's gift, the Hare Krsna maha- mantra. Thestatements of Caitanya-caritamrta are so practical that anyone can testthem. As far as we are concerned, we are most confident of the successof the distribution of the great fruit of love of Godhead through themedium of chanting of the maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, KrsnaKrsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
                                   TEXT 49                  maha-madaka prema-phala peta bhari' khaya
                     matila sakaia loka--hase, nace, gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The fruit of love of Godhead distributed by Caitanya Mahaprabhu is
such a great intoxicant that anyone who eats it, filling his belly,immediately becomes maddened by it, and automatically he chants, dances,laughs and enjoys.
                                   TEXT 50
                     keha gadagadi y\ya, keha ta' hunkara
                      dekhi' anandita hana hase majakara
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the great gardener, sees that people
are chanting, dancing and laughing and that some of them are rolling onthe floor and some are making loud humming sounds, He smiles with greatpleasure.
                                   PURPORT     This attitude of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is very important for
persons engaged in the Hare Krsna movement of Krsna consciousness. Inevery center of our institution, ISKCON, we have arranged for a lovefeast every Sunday, and when we actually see people come to our center,chant, dance, take prasada, become jubilant and purchase books, we knowthat certainly Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is always present in suchtranscendental activities, and He is very pleased and satisfied.Therefore the members of ISKCON must increase this movement more and
more, according to the principles that we are presently trying toexecute. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, thus being pleased, will smilinglyglance upon them, bestowing His favor, and the movement will besuccessful.
                                   TEXT 51                       ei malakara khaya ei prema-phala
                    nira vadhi matta rahe, vlvasa-vih vala
                                 TRANSLATION     The great gardener, Lord Caitanya, personally eats this fruit, and
as a result He constantly remains mad, as if helpless and bewildered.
                                   PURPORT     It is the mission of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu to act Himself and
teach the people. He says, apani acari' bhakti karila pracara (Cc. Adi.4.41). One must first act hi mself and then teach. This is the functionof a real teacher. Unless one is able to understand the philosophy thathe speaks, it will not be effective. Therefore one should not onlyunderstand the philosophy of the Caitanya cult but also implement itpractically in one's life.     While chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhusometimes fainted and remained unconscious for many hours. He prays inHis Siksastaka:      yugnitam nimesena caksusa pravrsayitam     sunyayitam jagat sarvam go vinda-virahena me"O Govinda! Feeling Your separation, I am considering a moment to belike twelve years or more. Tears are flowing from My eyes like torrentsof rain, and I am feeling all vacant in the world in Your absence."(Siksastaka 7) This is the perfectional stage of chanting the Hare Krsnamantra and eating the fruit of love of Godhead, as exhibited by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. One should not artificially imitate this stage, butif one is serious and sincerely follows the regulative principles andchants the Hare Krsna mantra, the time will come when these symptomswill appear. Tears will fill his eyes, he will be unable to chantdistinctly the maha-mantra, and his heart will throb in ecstasy. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu says that one should not imitate this, but a devoteeshould long for the day to come when such symptoms of trance willautomatically appear in his body.
                                   TEXT 52                     sarva-loke matta kaila apana-samana
                     preme matta loka vina nahi dekhi ana
                                 TRANSLATION     With His sankirtana movement the Lord made everyone mad like
Himself. We do not find anyone who was not intoxicated by His sankirtanamovement.                                   TEXT 53
                   ye ye purve ninda kaila, bali' matoyala
                   seho phala khna, nace, bale--bhala bhda
                                 TRANSLATION     Persons who had formerly criticized Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
calling Him a drunkard, also ate the fruit and began to dance, saying,"Very good! Very good!"
                                   PURPORT     When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu started the sankirtana movement, even
He was unnecessarily criticized by Mayavadis, atheists and fools.Naturally we are also criticized by such men. They will always remainand will always criticize anything that is actually good for humansociety, but the preachers of the sankirtana movement should not bedeterred by such criticism. Our method should be to convert such foolsgradually by asking them to come and take prasada and chant and dancewith us. This should be our policy. Anyone who comes to join us, ofcourse, must be sincere and serious regarding spiritual advancement inlife; then such a person, simply by joining us, chanting with us,dancing with us and takingprasada with us, will gradually also come tosay that this movement is very good. But one who joins with an ulteriorpurpose, to get material benefit or personal gratification, will neverbe able to grasp the philosophy of this movement.
                                   TEXT 54                     ei ta' kahilun prema-phala-vitarana
                    ebe suna, phala-data ye ye sakha-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     After describing the Lord's distribution of the fruit of love of
Godhead, I now wish to describe the different branches of the tree ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 55
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri-Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the S ri Caitanya-
caritamrta, Adi-lila, Ninth Chapter, describing the tree of devotionalservice.
                                 Chapter Ten
     This chapter describes the branches of the tree named Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 1
                sricaitanya-padambhoja -madhupebhyo namo namah
             kathancid asrayad yesam svapi tad-gandha-bhag bhavet
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me repeatedly offer my respectful obeisances unto the beelike
devotees who always taste the honey of the lotus feet of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu. If even a doggish nondevotee somehow takes shelter of suchdevotees, he enjoys the aroma of the lotus flower.
                                   PURPORT     The example of a dog is very significant in this connection. A dog
naturally does not become a devotee at any time, but still it issometimes found that a dog of a devotee gradually becomes a devoteealso. We have actually seen that a dog has no respect even for thetulasi plant. Indeed, a dog is especially inclined to pass urine on thetulasi plant. Therefore the dog is the number one nondevotee. But SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu's sankirtana movement is so strong that even adoglike nondevotee can gradually become a devotee by the association ofa devotee of Lord Caitanya. Srila Sivananda Sena, a great householderdevotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, attracted a dog on the street whilegoing to Jagannatha Puri. The dogbegan to follow him and ultimately went to see Caitanya Mahaprabhu andwas liberated. Similarly, cats and dogs in the household of SrivasaThakura were also liberated. Cats and dogs and other animals are notexpected to become devotees, but in the association of a pure devoteethey are also delivered.
                                    TEXT 2                   jaya jaya sri-krsna-caitanya-aityananda
                   jayadvaitacandra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Nityananda! All
glories to Advaita Prabhu and all glories to the devotees of LordCaitanya, headed by Srivasa!                                    TEXT 3
                    ei malira--ei viksera akathya kathana
                    ebe suna mukhya-sakhara nama-vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     The description of Lord Caitanya as the gardener and the tree is
inconceivable. Now hear with attention about the branches of this tree.
                                    TEXT 4
                     caitanya-gosanira yata parisada-caya
                    guru-laghu-bhava tanra na haya niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu were many, but none of
them should be considered lower or higher. This cannot be ascertained.
                                    TEXT 5
                  yata yata mahanta kaila tan-sabara ganana
                    keha karibare nare jyestha-laghu-krama
                                 TRANSLATION     All the great personalities in the line of Lord Caitanya enumerated
these devotees, but they could not distinguish between the greater andthe lesser.
                                    TEXT 6
                      atae va tan-sabare kari' namaskara
                     nama-matra kari, dosa na labe amara
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my obeisances unto them as a token of respect. I request
them not to consider my offenses.
                                    TEXT 7
                 vande srikrsnacaitanya-premamarataroh priyan
              sakha-rupan bhakta-ganan krsna-prema-phala-pradan
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my obeisances to all the dear devotees of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, the eternal tree of love of Godhead. I offer my respects toall the branches of the tree, the devotees of the Lord who distributethe fruit of love of Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami sets the example of offering
obeisances to all the preacher devotees of Lord Caitanya, withoutdistinction as to higher and lower. Unfortunately, at present there aremany foolish so-called devotees of Lord Caitanya who make suchdistinctions. For example, the title "prabhupada" is offered to aspiritual master, especially to a distinguished spiritual master such asSrila Rupa Gosvami Prabhupada, Srila J iva Gosvami Prabhupada or SrilaBhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiGosvami Prabhupada. When our disciplessimilarly wanted to address their spiritual master as Prabhupada, somefoolish people became envious. Not considering the propaganda work ofthe Hare Krsna movement, simply because these disciples addressed theirspiritual master as Prabhupada they became so envious that they formed afaction along with other such envious persons just to minimize the valueof the Krsna consciousness movement. To chastise such fools, KrsnadasaKaviraja Gosvami very fran kly says, keha karibre nre jyestha-laghu-krama. A nyone who is a bona fide preacher of the cult of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu must be respectful to the real devotees of Lord Caitanya; oneshould not be envious, considering one preacher to be very great andanother to be very lowly. This is a material distinction and has noplace on the platform of spiritual activities. Krsnadasa KavirajaGosvami therefore offers equal respect to all the preachers of thecultof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who are compared to the branches of thetree. ISKCON is one of these branches, and it should therefore berespected by all sincere devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 8                      srivsa pandita, ra sri-rma pandita
                       dui bhi--dui slha, jagate vidita
                                 TRANSLATION     The two brothers Srivasa Pandita and Sri Rama Pandita started two
branches that are well known in the world.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipik\, verse 90, Srivasa Pandita is
described to be an incarnation of Narada Muni, and Sri Rama Pandita, hisyounger brother, is said to be an incarnation of Parvata Muni, a greatfriend of Narada's. Srivasa Pandita's wife, Malini, is celebrated as anincarnation of the nurse Ambika, who fed Lord Krsna with her breastmilk, and as already noted, his niece Narayani, the mother of Thaku raVrndavana dasa, the author of Caitanya-bhnavata, was the sister of Am bika i n krsna-lila. We also u nderstand from the desc ription ofCaitanya- bhagavata that after Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's acceptance ofthe sannysa order, S rivasa Pandita left Navadvipa, possibly because of
feelings of separation, and domiciled at Kumarahatta.
                                    TEXT 9                    sripati, srinidhi--tanra dui sahodara
                      cri bhira dsa-dasi, grha-parikara
                                 TRANSLATION     Their two brothers were named SriPati and Srinidhi. These four
brothers and their servants and maidservants are considered one bigbranch.
                                   TEXT 10
                   dui sakhara upasakhaya tan-sabara ganana
                   yanra grhe mahaprabhura sada sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     There is no counting the sub-branches of these two branches. Sri
Caitanya MahaPrabhu held congregational chanting daily at the house ofSrivasa Pandita.
                                   TEXT 11
                  cari bhai sa-varnse kare caitanyera se va
                    gauracandra vlna nahi jane de vi-de va
                                 TRANSLATION     These four brothers and their family members fully engaged in the
service of Lord Caitanya. They knew no other god or goddess.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has said, anya-devasraya nai, tomare
kahinu bhai, ei bhakti parama-karana: if one wants to become a pure,staunch devotee, one should not take shelter of any of the demigods orgoddesses. Foolish Mayavadis say that worshiping demigods is as good asworshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but that is not a fact.This philosophy misleads people to atheism. Onewho has no idea what God actually is thinks that any form he imagines orany rascal he accepts can be God. This acceptance of cheap gods orincarnations of God is actually atheism. It is to be concluded,therefore, that those who worship demigods or self-proclaimedincarnations of God are all atheists. They have lost their knowledge, asconfirmed i n Bhagavad-gita. Kamais tais tair hrta jnanah prapadyante'nya- devatah: "Those whose minds are distorted by material desiressurrender unto demigods." (Bg. 7.20) Unfortunately, those who do notcultivate Krsna consciousness and do not properly understand the Vedicknowledge accept any rascal to be an incarnation of God, and they are of
the opinion that one can become an incarnation simply by worshiping ademigod.This philosophical hodge-podge exists under the name of theHindu religion, but the Krsna consciousness movement does not approve ofit. Indeed, we strongly condemn it. Such worship of demigods andsocalled incarnations of God should never be confused with the pureKrsna consciousness movement.
                                   TEXT 12                   `acaryaratna' nama dhare bada eka sakha
                     tanra parikara, tanra sakha-upasakha
                                 TRANSLATION     Another big branch was Acaryaratna, and his associates were sub-
branches.
                                   TEXT 13
                   acaryaratnera nama `sri-candrasekhara'--
                     yanra ghare devi-bhave nacila isvara
                                 TRANSLATION     Acaryaratna was also named Sri Candrasekhara Acarya. In a drama in
his house, Lord Caitanya Played the goddess of fortune.
                                   PURPORT     Dramatic performances were also enacted during the presence of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but the players who took part in such dramas wereall pure devotees; no outsiders were allowed. The members of ISKCONshould follow this example. Whenever they stage dramatic performancesabout the lives of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu or Lord Krsna, the playersmust be pure devotees. Professional players and dramatic actors have nosense of devotional service, and therefore although they can performvery artistically, there is no life in such performances. SrilaBhaktisidd hanta Sarasvati Tha k ura used to refer to such an actor asyatra-dale narada, which means "farcical Narada." Sometimes an actor ina drama plays the part of Narada Muni, although in his private life heis not at all like Narada Muni because he is not a devotee. Such actorsare not needed in dramatic performances about the lives of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu and Lord Krsna.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to perform dramas with Advaita Prabhu,Srivasa Thakura and other devotees in the house of Candrasekhara. Theplace where Candrasekhara's house was situated is now known asVrajapattana. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura established abranch of his Sri Caitanya Matha at this place. When Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu decided to accept the renounced order of life, CandrasekharaAcarya was informed of this by Sri Nityananda Prabhu, and therefore hewas also present when Lord Caitanya accepted sannyasa from KesavaBharati in Katwa. It is he who first spread word in Navadvipa of LordCaitanya's accepting sannyasa. Sri Candrasekhara Acarya was present
during many important incidents in the pastimes of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu. He therefore forms the second branch of the tree of LordCaitanya.
                                   TEXT 14                    pundarika vidyanidhi--bada-sakha jani
                     yanra nama lana prabhu kandija apani
                                 TRANSLATION     Pundarika Vidyanidhi, the third big branch, was so dear to Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu that in his absence Lord Caitanya Himself wouldsometimes cry.
                                   PURPORT     In the Gaura-ganoddesa-aioika Srila Pundarika Vidyanidhi is
described to be the father of Srimati Radharani in krsna-lila. CaitanyaMahaprabhu therefore treated him as His father. Pundarika Vidyanidhi'sfather was known as Banesvara or, according to another opinion,Suklambara Brahmacari, and his mother's name was Gangadevi. According toone opinion, Banesvara was a descendent of Sri Sivarama Gangopadhyaya.The original home of Pundarika Vidyanidhi was in East Bengal in avillage near Dacca named Baghiya which belonged to the Varendra group ofbrahmana fam ilies. Sometimes these Varendra brahmanas were at odds withanother group known as Radhiya brahmanas, and therefore PundarikaVidyanidhi's family was ostracized and at that time was not living as arespectable family. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati informs us that one of themembers of this family is living in Vrndavana and is named SarojanandaGosvami. One special characteristic of this family is that each of itsmembers had only one son or no son at all, and therefore the family wasnot very expansive. There is a place in the district of Cattagrama inEast Bengal that is known as Hatahajari, and a short distance from thisplace is a village known as Mekhala-grama in which PundarikaVidyanidhi's forefathers lived. One can approach Mekhala-grama fromCattagrama either on horseback, by bullock cart or by steamer. Thesteamer station is known as Annapurnara-ghata. The birthplace ofPundarika Vidyanidhi is about two miles southwest of Annapurnara-ghata.The temple constructed there by Pundarika Vidyanidhi is now very old andmuch in need of repair. Without repair, the temple may soon crumble.There are two inscriptions on the bricks of that temple, but they are soold that one cannot read them. There is another temple, however, about200 yards south of this one, and some people say that this is the oldtemple constructed by Pundarika Vidyanidhi.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu called Pundarika Vidyanidhi "father," andHe gave him the title Premanidhi. Pundarika Vidyanidhi later became thespiritual master of Gadadhara Pandita and an intimate friend of SvarupaDamodara. Gadadhara Pandita at first misunderstood Pundarika Vidyanidhito be an ordinary pounds and shillings man, but later, upon beingcorrected by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he became his disciple. Anotherincident in the life of Pundarika Vidyanidhi involves his criticizingthe priest of the Jagannatha temple, for which Jagannatha Prabhuchastised him personally by slapping his cheeks. This is described in
Caitanya-bhnavata, antya- lila, Chapter Seven. Sri BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Thakura informs us that there are still two living descendantsof the family of Pundarika Vidyanidhi, who are named Sri HarakumaraSmrtitirtha and Sri Krsnakinkara Vidyalankara. For further informationone should refer to the dictionary known as Vaisnava- manjus\.
                                   TEXT 15                    bada sakha,--gadadhara pandita-gosani
                    tenho laksmi-rupa, tanra sama keha nai
                                 TRANSLATION     Gadadhara Pandita, the fourth branch, is described as an
incarnation of the pleasure potency of Sri Krsna. No one, therefore, canequal him.
                                   PURPORT     In the Gaura-ganoddesa-aipika, verses 147 through 153, it is
stated: "The pleasure potency of Sri Krsna formerly known asVrndavanesvari is now personified in the form of Sri Gadadhara Panditain the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Sri Svarupa DamodaraGosvami has pointed out that in the shape of Laksmi, the pleasurepotency of Krsna, she was formerly very dear to the Lord asSyamasundara-vallabha. The same Syamasundara-vallabha is now present asGadadhara Pandita. Formerly, as Lalita-sakhi, she was always devoted toSrimati Radharani. In the Twelfth Chapter of this part of Caitanya-caritamrta there is a description of the descendants or disciplicsuccession of Gadadhara Pandita.
                                   TEXT 16                    tanra sisya-upasisya,--tanra upasakha
                      eimata saba sakha-upasakhara lekha
                                 TRANSLATION     His disciples and grand-disciples are his sub-branches. To describe
them all would be difficult.
                                   TEXT 17
               vakres vara pandita--prabhura bada priya bhrtya
                    eka-bhave cabbisa prahara yanra nrtya
                                 TRANSLATION     Vakresvara Pandita, the fifth branch of the tree, was a very dear
servant of Lord Caitanya's. He could dance with constant ecstasy forseventy-two hours.                                   PURPORT
     In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 71, it is stated that
Vakresvara Pandita was an incarnation of Aniruddha, one of the quadrupleexpansions of Visnu (Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Aniruddha and Pradyumna). Hecould dance wonderfully for seventytwo continuous hours. When LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu played in dramatic performances in the house ofSrivasa Pandita, Vakresvara Pandita was one of the chief dancers, and hedanced continually for that length of time. Sri Govinda dasa, an Oriyadevotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, has described the life ofVakresvara Pandita in his book Gaura-krsnodaya. There are many disciplesof Vakresvara Pandita in Orissa, and they are known as Gaudiya Vaisnavasalthough they are Oriyas. Among these disciples are Sri Gopalaguru andhis disciple Sri Dhyanacandra Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 18                    apane mahaprabhu gaya yanra nrtya-kale
                    prabhura carana dhari' vakresvara bale
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally sang while Vakresvara Pandita
danced and thus Vakresvara Pandita fell at the lotus feet of the Lordand spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 19
                dasa-sahasra gandharva more deha' candramukha
                    tara gaya, muni nacon--tabe mora sukha
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Candramukha! Please give me 10,000 Gandharvas. Let them sing as
I dance, and then I will be greatly happy."
                                   PURPORT     The Gandharvas, who are residents of Gandharvaloka, are celebrated
as celestial singers. Whenever singing is needed in the celestialplanets, the Gandharvas are invited to sing. The Gandharvas can singcontinuously for days, and therefore Vakresvara Pandita wanted to danceas they sang.
                                   TEXT 20                    prabhu bale--tumi mora paksa eka sakha
                       akase uditama yadi pan ara pakha
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya replied: "I have only one wing like you, but if I had
another, certainly I would fly in the sky!"                                   TEXT 21
                   pandita jagadananda prabhura prana-rupa
                    loke khyata yenho satyabhamara svarupa
                                 TRANSLATION     Pandita J agadananda, the sixth branch of the Caitanya tree, was
celebrated as the life and soul of the Lord. He is known to have been anincarnation of Satyabhama [one of the chief queens of Lord Krsna].
                                   PURPORT     There are many dealings of Jagadananda Pandita with Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Most importantly, he was the Lord's constantcompanion and especially took part in all the pastimes of the Lord inthe houses of Srivasa Pandita and Candrasekhara Acarya.
                                   TEXT 22                  pritye karite cahe prabhura lalana-palana
                  vairagya-loka-bhaye prabhu na mane kakhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita [as an incarnation of Satyabhama] always wanted
to see to the comfort of Lord Caitanya, but since the Lord was asannyasi He did not accept the luxuries that Jagadananda Panditaoffered.
                                   TEXT 23
                       dui jane khatmaji Iagaya kondala
                    tanra prityera katha age kahiba sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     They sometimes appeared to fight over trifles, but these quarrels
were based on their affection, of which I shall speak later.
                                   TEXT 24
                    raghava-pandita--prabhura adya-anucara
                  tanra eka sakha mukhya--makaradhvaja kara
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghava Pandita, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's original follower,
is understood to have been the seventh branch. From him proceededanother sub-branch, headed by Makaradhvaja Kara.                                   PURPORT
     Kara was the surname of Makaradhvaja. At present this surname is
generally found in the Kayastha community. The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika,verse 166 states:     dhanistha bhaksya-samagrim krsnavadad vraje 'mitam     saiva sampratam gauranga-priyo raghava-panditahRaghava Pandita was formerly a confidentialgopiin Vraja during the timeof Lord Krsna's pastimes, and his former name was Dhanistha. This gopi,Dhanistha, always engaged in preparing foodstuffs for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 25                 tanhara bhagini damayantiprabhura priya dasi
                   prabhura bhoga-samagriye kare vara-masi
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghava Pandita's sister Damayanti was the dear maidservant of the
Lord. She     always collected various ingredients with which to cook for LordCaitanya.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-aipika, verse 1 67, it is mentioned,
gunamla vraje yasid damayanti tu tat-svasa: "The gopi named Gunamala hasnow appeared as his sister Damayanti." On the East Bengal railway linebeginning from the Sealdah station in Calcutta, there is a station namedSodapura which is not very far from Calcutta. Within one mile of thisstation, toward the western side of the Ganges, is a village known asPanihati in which the residential quarters of Raghava Pandita stillexist. On Raghava Pandita's tomb is a creeper on a concrete platform.There is also a Madana-mohana Deity in a broken-down temple nearby. Thistemple is managed by a local Zamindar of the name Sri Sivacandra RayaCaudhuri. Makaradhvaja Kara was also an inhabitant of Panihati.
                                   TEXT 26                     se saba samagriyata jhalite bhariya
                      raghava la-iya ya'na gupata kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     The foodstuffs Damayanti cooked for Lord Caitanya when He was at
Puri were carried in a bag by her brother Raghava without the knowledgeof others.
                                   TEXT 27
                    vara-masa taha prabhu karena angikara
                   `raghavera jhaji' bali' prasiddhi yahara                                 TRANSLATION
     The Lord accepted these foodstuffs throughout the entire year. That
bag is still celebrated as Raghavera jhali ["the bag of RaghavaPandita"].
                                   TEXT 28
                      se-saba samagriage kariba vistara
                    yahara sravane bhaktera vahe asrudhara
                                 TRANSLATION     I shall describe the contents of the bag of Raghava Pandita later
in this book. Hearing this narration, devotees generally cry, and tearsglide down from their eyes.
                                   PURPORT     A vivid description of this Raghavera jhali is to be found in
Chapter Ten of the Antya-lila porti o n of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta.
                                   TEXT 29                  prabhura atyanta priya--pandita gangadasa
                    yanhara smarane haya sarva-bandha-nasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Pandita Gangadasa was the eighth dear branch of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. One who remembers his activities attains freedom from allbondage.
                                   TEXT 30
                    caitanya-parsada--sri-acarya purandara
                    pita kari' yanre bale gauranga-sundara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Acarya Purandara, the ninth branch, was a constant associate of
Lord Caitanya. The Lord accepted him as His father.
                                   PURPORT     It is described in the Caitanya-bhagavata that whenever Lord Caitan
ya Mahaprabhu visited the house of Raghava Pandita, He also visitedPurandara Acarya immediately upon receiving an invitation. PurandaraAcarya is to be considered most fortunate because the Lord used to greethim by addressing him as His father and embracing him in great love.                                   TEXT 31
                   damodara-pandita sakha premete pracanda
                    prabhura upare yenho kaila vakya-danda
                                 TRANSLATION     Damodara Pandita, the tenth branch of the Caitanya tree, was so
elevated in love of Lord Caitanya that he once unhesitatingly chastisedthe Lord with strong words.
                                   TEXT 32
                    danda-katha kahiba age vistara kariya
                  dande tusta prabhu tanre pa.thaiia naoiya
                                 TRANSLATION     I shall describe in detail this incident of chastisement later in
Caitanya-caritamrta. The Lord, being very much satisfied by thischastisement, sent Damodara Pandita to Navadvipa.
                                   PURPORT     Damodara Pandita, who was formerly known as Saibya in Vrajadhama,
used to carry messages from Lord Caitanya to Sacimata, and during theRathayatra festival he carried messages from Sacimata to Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 33                     tanhara anuja sakha--sankara-pandita
                    `prabhu-padopadhana' yanra nama vidita
                                 TRANSLATION     The eleventh branch, the younger brother of Damodara Pandita, was
known as Sankara Pandita. He was celebrated as the shoes of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 34
                    sadasiva-pandita yanra prabhu-pade asa
                   prathamei nityanandera yanra ghare vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Sadasiva Pandita, the twelfth branch, was always anxious to serve
the lotus feet of the Lord. It was his good fortune that when LordNityananda came to Navadvipa He resided at his house.
                                   PURPORT     It is mentioned in the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter
Nine, that Sadasiva Pandita was a pure devotee and that NityanandaPrabhu resided at his house.
“Caitanya-caritamrita – Adi Lila ” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Summary: Caitanya-caritamrita is the biography of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
written by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami in the 16
th century, now published
with elaborate translations and commentaries in English by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami. The multi-volume Caitanya-caritamrita is dividedinto three sections, Adi Lila, Madhya Lila, and Antya Lila, representingthe beginning, middle, and concluding pastimes of Lord ChaitanyaMahaprabhu. This file comprises the text of the several volumes thatmake up the Adi Lila section.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluationcopy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyrightinformation intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Caitanya Caritamrita” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1974-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .
                                   TEXT 35
                  sri-nrsimha-upasaka--pradyumna brahmacari
                 prabhu tanra nama kaila `nrsimhananda' kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirteenth branch was Pradyumna Brahmacari. Since he was a
worshiper of Lord Nrsimhadeva, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu changed his nameto Nrsimhananda Brahmacari.
                                   PURPORT     Pradyumna Brahmacari is described in the Antya-lila, Second
Chapter, of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. He was a great devotee of LordCaitanya, who changed his name to Nrsimhananda. While coming from thehouse of Raghava Pandita at Panihati to the house of Sivananda, LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu appeared in the heart of Nrsimhananda Brahmacari.Toacknowledge this, Nrsimhananda Brahmacari used to accept as eatables thefoodstuffs of three Deities, namely, J agannatha, Nrsimhadeva and LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu. This is stated in the Caitanya- caritamrta, Antya-lila, Second Chapter, verses 48 through 78. Upon receiving informationthat Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was proceeding toward Vrndavana fromKulia, Nrsimhananda absorbed himself in meditation and by his mentalactivities constructed a very nice road from Kulia to Vrndavana. All ofa sudden, however, he broke his meditation and told the other devoteesthat this time Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu would not go to Vrndavana butonly as far as the place known as through 62. The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 74, says, avesas ca tathajneyo misre pradyumna-samjnake:Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu changed the name of Pradyumna Misra, orPradyumna Brahmacari, to Nrsimhananda Brahmacari, for i n his heart LordNrsimhadeva was manifest. It is said that Lord Nrsimhadeva used to talkwith him directly.
                                   TEXT 36                       narayana-pandita eka badai udara
                      caitanya-carana vinu nahijane ara
                                 TRANSLATION     Narayana Pandita, the fourteenth branch, a great and liberal
devotee, did not know any shelter but Lord Caitanya's lotus feet.
                                   PURPORT     Narayana Pandita was one of the associates of Srivasa Thakura. It
is mentioned in Caitanya-bhagavata, Ninth Chapter, verse 93, that hewent to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri with SrivasaThakura's brother Sri Rama Pandita.
                                   TEXT 37                  srimn-pandita sakha--prabhura nija bhrtya
                   deuti dharena, yabe prabhu karena nrtya
                                 TRANSLATION     The fifteenth branch was Sriman Pandita, who was a constant
servitor of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He used to carry a torch while theLord danced.
                                   PURPORT     Sriman Pandita was among the companions of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
when the Lord performed sankirtana. When Lord Caitanya dressed Himselfin the form of the goddess Laksmi and danced in the streets of
Navadvipa, Sriman Pandita carried a torch to light the way.
                                   TEXT 38                     suklambara-brahmacari bada bhagyavan
                    yanra anna magi' kadi' khaila bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     I he sixteenth branch, Suklambara Brahmacari, was very fortunate
because Lord Caitanya MahaPrabhu jokingly or seriously begged food fromhim or sometimes snatched it from him forcibly and ate it.
                                   PURPORT     It is stated that Suklambara Brahmacari, an inhabitant of
Navadvipa, was Lord Caitan-ya Mahaprabhu's first companion in thesahkirtana movement. When Lord Caitanya returned from Gaya afterinitiation, He stayed with Suklambara Brahmacari because He wanted tohear from this devotee about the pastimes of Lord Krsna. SuklambaraBrahmacari collected alms of rice from the inhabitants of Navadvipa, andSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took pleasure in eating the rice that he cooked.It is said that Suklambara Brahmacari was one of the wives of the yajnicbrahmanas d u ri ng the tim e of Lord Krsn a's pasti m es i n Vrndavana. Lo rd Krsna begged foodstuffs from the wives of the yajnicbrahmanas, and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed a similar pastime bybegging rice from Suklambara Brahmacari.
                                   TEXT 39                      nandana-acarya-sakhajagate vidita
                   lukai ya dui prabhura yanra ghare sthita
                                 TRANSLATION     Nandana Acarya, the seventeenth branch of the Caitanya tree, is
celebrated within the world because the two Prabhus [ Lord Caitanya andNityananda] sometimes hid in his house.
                                   PURPORT     Nandana Acarya was another companion of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
during His kirtana pastimes in Navadvipa. Srila Nityananda Prabhu, asAvadhuta, traveled on many pilgrimages, and when He first came to SriNavadvipa-dhama He remained hidden in the house of Nandana Acarya. It isthere that He first met all the devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.When Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His maha- prakasa, He asked RamaiPandita to call Advaita Prabhu, who was hiding in thehome of Nandana Acarya, for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu could understandthat He was hiding. Similarly, Lord Caitanya also sometimes hid in thehome of Nandana Acarya. I n this con nection one may refer to Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-lila Chapters Six and Seventeen.                                   TEXT 40
                 sri-mukunda-datta sakha--prabhura samadhyayi
                     yanhara kirtane nace caitanya-gosani
                                 TRANSLATION     Mukunda Datta, a class friend of Lord Caitanya's, was another
branch of the Caitanya tree. Lord Caitanya danced while he sang.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Mukunda Datta was born in the Cattagrama district in the
village of Chanhora, which is under the jurisdiction of the policestation named Patiya. This village is situated ten krosas, or abouttwenty miles, from the home of Pundarika Vidyanidhi. I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika ( 1 40) it is said:     vraje sthitau gayakau yau madhukan tha-madhuvratau     mukunda-vasude vau tau dattau gauranga-gayakau"In Vraja there were two very nice singers named Madhukantha andMadhuvrata. They appeared in caitanya-lila as Mukunda and VasudevaDatta, who were singers in the society of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu."When Lord Caitanya was a student, Mukunda Datta was His class friend,and they frequently engaged in logical arguments. Sometimes LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu would fight with Mukunda Datta, usi ng tric ks oflogic. This is described in Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-lila, Chapters Sevenand Eight. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned from Gaya, MukundaDatta gave Him pleasure by reciting verses from Srmad-Bhagavatam aboutkrsna- lila. It was by his endeavor that Gadadhara Pandita Gosvamibecame a disciple of Pundarika Vidyanidhi, as stated in Madhya-lila,Chapter Seven. When Mu kunda Datta sang in the courtyard of SrivasaPrabhu, Mahaprabhu danced with His singing, and when Lord Caitanya fortwenty-one hours exhibited an ecstatic manifestation known as sata-prahariya, M u ku nda Datta inaugurated the fu nction by singing.Sometimes Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu chastised Mukunda Datta by callinghim kharjhatia beta because he attended many functions held by differentclasses of nondevotees. This is stated in Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-lila, Chapter Ten. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu dressed Himself as thegoddess of fortune to dance in the house of Candrasekhara, Mukunda Dattabegan the first song.     Before disclosing His desire to take the renounced order of life,Lord Caitanya first went to the house of Mukunda Datta, but at that timeMukunda Datta requested Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to continue Hissankirtana movement for a few days more before taki ng sannyasa. Th isis stated in Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-lila Chapter Twenty-five. Theinformation of Lord Caitanya's accepting the renounced order was madeknown to Gadadhara Pandita, Candrasekhara Acarya and Mukunda Datta byNityananda Prabhu, and therefore all of them went to Katwa and arrangedfor kirtana and all the paraphernalia for Lord Caitanya's acceptance ofsannyasa. After the Lord took sannyasa, they all followed Him,especially Sri Nityananda Prabhu, Gadadhara Prabhu and Govinda, whofollowed Him all the way to Purusottama-ksetra. In this connection onemay refer to Antya-lila, Chapter Two. In the place known as Jalesvara,Nityananda Prabhu broke the sannyasa rod of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. MukundaDatta was also present at that time. He went every year from Bengal to
see Lord Caitanya at Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 41                   vasudeva datta--prabhura bhrtya mahasaya
                   sahasra-mukhe yanra guna kahile na haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Vasudeva Datta, the nineteenth branch of the Sri Caitanya tree, was
a great personality and a most confidential devotee of the Lord. Onecould not describe his qualities even with thousands of mouths.
                                   PURPORT     Vasudeva Datta, the brother of Mukunda Datta, was also a resident
of Cattagrama. I n the Caitanya-bhagavata it is said, yanra sthane krsnahaya apane vlkraya: Vas u deva Datta was such a powerful devotee thatKrsna was purchased by him. Vasudeva Datta stayed at Srivasa Pandita'shouse, and in Caitanya-bhagavata it is describedthat Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was so pleased with Vasudeva Datta and soaffectionate toward him that He used to say, "I am only Vasudeva Datta'sman. My body is only meant to please Vasudeva Datta, and he can sell Meanywhere." Thrice He vowed that this was a fact and that no one shoulddisbelieve these statements. "All My dear devotees," He said, "I tellyou the truth. My body is especially meant for Vasudeva Datta." VasudevaDatta initiated Sri Yadunandana Acarya, the spiritual master ofRaghunatha dasa, who later became Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. This will befound in the Antya-lila, Sixth Chapter, verse 161. Vasudeva Datta spentmoney very liberally; therefore Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked SivanandaSen to become his sarakhela, or secretary, in order to control hisextravagant expenses. Vasudeva Datta was so kind to the living entitiesthat he wanted to take all their sinful reactions so that they might bedelivered by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. This is described in the FifteenthChapter of Adi-lila, verses 159 through 180.     There is a railway station named Purvasthali near the Navadviparailway station, and about one mile away, in a village known asMamagachi, which is the birthplace of Vrndavana dasa Thakura, there ispresently a temple of Madana-gopala that was established by VasudevaDatta. The Gaudiya Matha devotees have now taken charge of this temple,and the seva-puja is going on very nicely. Every year all the pilgri mson the navadvipa-parikrama visit Mamagach i. Si nce S ri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura inaugu rated the navadvioa-parikrama function,the temple has been very well managed.
                                   TEXT 42                      jagate yateka jiva, tara papa lana
                      naraka bhunjite cahe jiva chadaiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Vasudeva Datta Thakura wanted to suffer for the sinful
activities of all the people of the world so that Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu might deliver them.
                                   TEXT 43
                   haridasa-thakura sakhara adbhuta carita
                     tlna laksa nama tenho layena apatita
                                 TRANSLATION     The twentieth branch of the Caitanya tree was Haridasa Thakura. His
character was wondeful. He used to chant the holy name of Krsna 300,000times a day without fail.
                                   PURPORT     Certainly the chanting of 300,000 holy names of the Lord is
wonderful. No ordinary person can chant so many names, nor should oneartificially imitate Haridasa Thakura's behavior. It is essential,however, that everyone fulfill a specific vow to chant the Hare Krsnamantra. Therefore we have prescribed in our society that all ourstudents must chant at least sixteen rounds daily. Such chanting must beoffenseless in order to be of high quality. Mechanical chanting is notas powerful as chanting of the holy name without offenses. It is statedin the Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-lila, Chapter Two, that Haridasa Thakurawas born in a village known as Budhana but after some time came to liveon the bank of the Ganges at Fulia near Santipura. From the descriptionof his chastisement by a Muslim magistrate, which is found in theEleventh Chapter of the Adi-lila of Caitanya-bhagavata, we canunderstand how humble and meek Haridasa Thakura was and how he achievedthe causeless mercy of the Lord. In the dramas performed by LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu, Haridasa Thakura played the part of a police chief.While chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra in Benapola, he was personallytested by Mayadevi herself. Haridasa Tha ku ra's passi ng away is descri bed i n the A ntya-lila of Caitanya-caritamrta, Eleventh Chapter. Itis not definitely certain whether Sri Haridasa Thakura appeared in thevillage named Budhana that is in the district of Khulana. Formerly thisvillage was within a district of twenty-four parganas within theSataksira division.
                                   TEXT 44                      tanhara ananta guna--kahi dinmatra
                  acarya gosani yanre bhunjaya sraddha-patra
                                 TRANSLATION     There was no end to the transcendental qualities of Haridasa
Thakura. Here I mention but a fraction of his qualities. He was soexalted that Advaita Gosvami, when performing the sraddha ceremony ofhis father, offered him the first plate.                                   TEXT 45
                     prahlada-samana tanra gunera taranga
                   yavana-tadaneo yanra nahika bhru-bhanga
                                 TRANSLATION     The waves of his good qualities were like those of Prahlada
Maharaja. He did not even slightly raise an eyebrow when persecuted bythe Mohammedan ruler.
                                   TEXT 46
                   tenho siddhi paile tanra deha lana kole
                     nacila caitanya-prabhu maha-kutuhale
                                 TRANSLATION     After the Passing away of Haridasa Thakura, the Lord Himself took
his body on His lap, and He danced with it in great ecstasy.
                                   TEXT 47
                    tanra lila varniyachena vrndavana-dasa
                      yeba avasista, age karlba prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura vividly described the pastimes of
Haridasa Thakura in his Caitanya-bhagavata. Whatever has remainedundescribed I shall try to explain later in this book.
                                   TEXT 48
                    tanra upasakha--yata kulina-gramijana
                     satyaraja-adi--tanra krpara bhajana
                                 TRANSLATION     One sub-branch of Haridasa Thakura consisted of the residents of
Kulina-grama. The most important among them was Satyaraja Khana, orSatyaraja Vasu, who was a recipient of all the mercy of HaridasaThakura.
                                   PURPORT     Satyaraja Khana was the son of Gunaraja Khana and father of
Ramananda Vasu. Haridasa Thakura lived for some time during theCaturmasya period in the village named Kulina-grama, where he chantedthe holy name, the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, and distributed his mercy tothe descendants of the Vasu family. Satyaraja Khana was allotted the
service of supplying silk ropes for the Jagannatha Deity during theRathayatra festival. The answers to his inquiries from Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu about the duty of householder devotees are vividly describedin the Madhya-lila, Chapters Fifteen and Sixteen. The village of Kulina-grama is situated two miles from the railway station named Jaugrama onthe Newcord line from Howrah to Burdwan. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu veryhighly praised the people of Kulinagrama, and He stated that even a dogof Kulina-grama was very dear to Him.
                                   TEXT 49                   sri-murari gupta sakha--premera bhandara
                   prabhura hrdaya drave suni' dainya yanra
                                 TRANSLATION     Murari Gupta, the twenty-first branch of the tree of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, was a storehouse of love of Godhead. His great humility andmeekness melted the heart of Lord Caitanya.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Murari Gupta wrote a book called SriCaitanya-carlta. He
belonged to a vaidya physician family of Srihatta, the paternal home ofLord Caitanya, and later became a resident of Navadvipa. He was amongthe elders of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Lord Caitanya exhibited HisVaraha form in the house of Murari Gupta, as described in the Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-lila, Th ird Chapter. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuexhibited His mahaprakasa form, He appeared before Murari Gupta as LordRamacandra. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu weresitting together in the house of Srivasa Thakura, Murari Gupta firstoffered his respects to Lord Caitanya and then to Sri Nityananda Prabhu.Nityananda Prabhu, however, was older than Caitanya Mahaprabhu, andtherefore Lord Caitanya remarked that Murari Gupta had violated socialetiquette, for he should have first shown respect to Nityananda Prabhuand then to Him. In this way, by the grace of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu,Murari Gupta was informed about the position of Sri Nityananda Prabhu,and the next day he offered obeisances first to Lord Nityananda and thento Lord Caitanya. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave chewed pan or betel nutto Murari Gupta. Once Murari Gupta offered foodstuffs to Lord Caitanyathat were cooked with excessive ghee, and the next day the Lord becamesick and went to Murari Gupta for treatment. Lord Caitanya accepted somewater from the water pot of Murari Gupta, and thus He was cured. Thenatural remedy for indigestion is to drink a little water, and sinceMurari Gupta was a physician, he gave the Lord some drinking water andcured Him. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared in the house of SrivasaThakura in His Caturbhuja murti, Murari Gupta became His carrier in theform of Garuda, and in these pastimes of ecstasy the Lord then got up onhis back. It was the desire of Murari Gupta to leave his body before thedisappearance of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but the Lord forbade him to do so.This is described in Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-lila, Chapter Twenty.When Sri Caitanya M ahaprabhu one day appeared in ecstasy as the Varahamurti, M urari Gu pta offered Him prayers. He was a great devotee ofLord Ramacandra, and his staunch devotion is vividly described in the
Madhya-lila, Fifteenth Chapter, verses 137 through 157.
                                   TEXT 50                   pratigraha nahi kare, na laya kara dhana
                    atma-vrtti kari' kare kutumba bharana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Murari Gupta never accepted charity from friends, nor did he
accept money from anyone. He practiced as a physician and maintained hisfamily with his earnings.
                                   PURPORT     It should be noted that a grhastha (householder) must not make his
livelihood by begging from anyone. Every householder of the highercastes should engage himself in his own occupational duty as a brahmana,ksatriya or vaisya, but he should not engage in the service of others,for this is the duty of a sudra. One should simply accept whatever heearns by his own profession. The engagements of a brahmana are yajana,yajana, pathana, pathana, dana and pratigraha. A brahmana sh ou Id be aworshiper of Visnu, and he should also instruct others how to worshipHim. A ksatriya can become a landholder and earn his livelihood bylevyingtaxes or collecting rent from tenants. A vaisya can acceptagriculture or general trade as an occupational duty. Since Murari Guptawas born in a physician's family (vaidya-vamsa), he practiced as aphysician, and with whatever income he earned he maintained his family.As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam, everyone should execute his occupationalduty, and thus he should satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead.That is the perfection of life. This system is called daiva-varnasrama.Murari Gupta was an idealgrhastha, for he was a great devotee of Lord Ramacandra and CaitanyaMahaprabhu. By practicing as a physician he maintained his family and atthe same time satisfied Lord Caitanya to the best of his ability. Thisis the ideal of householder life.
                                   TEXT 51                      cikitsa karena yare ha-iya sadaya
                    deha-roga bhava-roga,--dui tara ksaya
                                 TRANSLATION     As Murari Gupta treated his patients, by his mercy both their
bodily and spiritual diseases subsided.
                                   PURPORT     Murari Gupta could treat both bodily and spiritual disease because
he was a physician by profession and a great devotee of the Lord interms of spiritual advancement. This is an example of service tohumanity. Everyone should know that there are two kinds of diseases inhuman society. One disease, which is called adhyat- mika, or material
disease, pertains to the body, but the main disease is spiritual. Theliving entity is eternal, but somehow or other, when in contact with thematerial energy, he is subjected to the repetition of birth, death, oldage and disease. The physicians of the modern day should learn fromMurari Gupta. Although modern philanthropic physicians open gigantichospitals, there are no hospitals to cure the material disease of thespirit soul. The Krsna consciousness movement has taken up the missionof curing this disease, but people are not very appreciative becausethey do not know what this disease is. A diseased person needs bothproper medicine and a proper diet, and therefore the Krsna consciousnessmovement supplies materially stricken people with the medicine of thechanting of the holy name, or the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, and the dietof prasada. There are many hospitals and medical clinics to cure bodilydiseases, but there are no such hospitals to cure the material diseaseof the spirit soul. The centers of the Krsna consciousness movement arethe only established hospitals that can cure man of birth, death, oldage and disease.
                                   TEXT 52                     sriman sena prabhura sevaka pradhana
                      caitanya-carana vinu nahijane ana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sriman Sena, the twenty-second branch of the Caitanya tree, was a
very faithful servant of Lord Caitanya. He knew nothing else but thelotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     Sriman Sena was one of the inhabitants of Navadvipa and was a
constant companion of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 53                      sri-gadadhara dasa sakha sarvopari
                     kajiganera mukhe yenha bolaila hari
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Gadadhara dasa, the twenty-third branch, was understood to be
the topmost, for he induced all the Mohammedan Kazis to chant the holyname of Lord Hari.
                                   PURPORT     About eight or ten miles from Calcutta on the banks of the Ganges
is a village known as Endiyadaha-grama. Srila Gadadhara dasa was knownas an inhabitant of th is vil lage (endiyadaha-vasi gadadhara dasa). The Bhakti-ratnakara, Seve n th Chapter, informs us that after thedisappearance of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Gadadhara dasa came fromNavadvipa to Katwa. Thereafter he came to Endiyadaha and resided there.He is stated to be the luster of the body of Srimati Radharani, just as
Srila Gadadhara Pandita Gosvami is an incarnation of Srimati RadharaniHerself. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is sometimes explained to be radhabhava-dyuti- subalita, or characterized by the emotions and bodily luster ofSrimati Radharani. Gadadhara dasa is this dyuti, or luster. I n theGaura-ganoddesa-dipika he is described to be the expansion potency ofSrimati Radharani. He counts among the associates of both SrilaGaurahari and Nityananda Prabhu; as a devotee of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhuhe was one of the associates of Lord Krsna in conjugal love, and as adevotee of Lord Nityananda he is considered to have been one of thefriends of Krsna in pure devotional service. Even though he was anassociate of Lord Nityananda Prabhu, he was not among the cowherd boysbut was situated in the transcendental mellow of conjugal love. Heestablished a temple of Sri Gaurasundara in Katwa.     In 1434 sakabda (1534 A.D.) when Lord Nityananda Prabhu wasempowered by Lord Caitanya to preach the sankirtana movement in Bengal,Sri Gadadhara dasa was one of Lord Nityananda's chief assistants. Hepreached the sankirtana movement by requesting everyone to chant theHare Krsna maha-mantra. This simple preaching method of Srila Gadadharadasa can be followed by anyone and everyone in any position of society.One must simply be a sincere and serious servant of Nityananda Prabhuand preach this cult door to door.     When Srila Gadadhara dasa Prabhu was preaching the cult of harl-kirtana, there was a magistrate who was very much against his sankirtanamovement. Following in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, SrilaGadadhara dasa one night went to the house of the Kazi and requested himto chant the Hare Krsna maha- mantra. The Kazi replied, "All right, Ishall chant Hare Krsna tomorrow." On hearing this, Srila Gadadhara dasaPrabhu began to dance, and he said, "Why tomorrow? You have alreadychanted the Hare Krsna mantra, so simply continue."     In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (Verses 154, 1 55) it is said:     radha-vibhuti-rupa ya candrakantih pura vraje     sa sri-gauranga-nikate dasa-vamsyo gadadharah     purnananda vraje yasid baladeva-priyagrani     sapi karya-vasad eva pravisat tam gadadharamSrila Gadadhara dasa is considered to be a united form of Candrakanti,who is the effulgence of Srimati Radharani, and Purnananda, who is anexpansion of Lord Balarama's very dear girl friend. Thus Srila Gadadharadasa Prabhu was one of the associates of both Caitanya Mahaprabhu andNityananda Prabhu. Once while Srila Gadadhara dasa Prabhu was returningto Bengal from Jagannatha Puri with Nityananda Prabhu, he forgot himselfand began talking very loudly as if he were a girl of Vrajabhumi sellingyogurt, and Srila Nityananda Prabhu noted this. Another time, whileabsorbed in the ecstasy of thegopis, he carried a jug filled with Gangeswater on his head as if he were selling milk. When Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu appeared in the house of Raghava Pandita while going toVrndavana, Gadadhara dasa went to see Him, and SriCaitanya Mahaprabhuwas so glad that He put His foot on his head. When Gadadhara dasa Prabhuwas present in Endiyadaha he established a Balagopala murti for worshipthere. Sri Madhava Ghosh performed a drama known as "Dana-khanda" withthe help of Sri Nityananda Prabhu and Sri Gadadhara casa. This isexplained in Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-khanda, Fifth Chapter.     The tomb of Gadadhara dasa Prabhu, which is in the village ofEndiyadaha, was under the control of the Samyogi Vaisnavas and laterunder the direction of Siddha Bhagavan dasa Babaji of Kalna. By his
order, Sri Madhusudana Mullik, one of the members of the aristocraticMullik family of the Narikeladanga in Calcutta, established a patavati(monastery) there in the Bengali year 1256. He also arranged for theworship of a Deity named Sri Radhakanta. His son Balaicanda Mullik,established Gaura-Nitai Deities there in the Bengali year 1312. Thus onthe throne of the temple are both Gaura-Nityananda Deities and Radha-Krsna Deities. Below the throne is a tablet with an inscription writtenin Sanskrit. In that temple there is also a small Deity of Lord Siva asGopesvara. This is all described on a stone by the side of the entrancedoor.
                                   TEXT 54                  sivananda sena--prabhura bhrtya antaranga
                 prabhu-sthane yaite sabe layena yanra sanga
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena, the twenty-fourth branch of the tree, was an
extremely confidential servant of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Everyone whowent to Jagannatha Puri to visit Lord Caitanya took shelter and guidancefrom Sri Sivananda Sena.
                                   TEXT 55
                     prativarse prabhugana sangete laiya
                     nilacale calena pathe palana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Every year he took a party of devotees from Bengal to Jagannatha
Purito visit Lord Caitanya. He maintained the entire party as theyjourneyed on the road.
                                   TEXT 56
                   bhakte krpa karena prabhu e-tina svarupe
                   `saksat,' `avesa' ara `avlrbhava'--rupe
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bestows His causeless mercy uPon His
devotees in three features: His own direct apPearance [saksat], HisProwess within someone He empowers [avesa], and His manifestation[avirbhava].
                                   PURPORT     The saksat feature of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is His personal
presence. Avesa refers to invested power, like that invested in NakulaBrahmacari. Avirbhava is a manifestation of the Lord that appears eventhough He is personally not present. For example, Sri Sacimata offered
foodstuffs at home to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu although He was far awayin Jagannatha Puri, and when she opened her eyes after offering thefoodstuffs she saw that they had actually been eaten by SriCaitanyaMahaprabhu. Similarly, Srivasa Thakura performed sankirtana, andeveryone felt the presence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu even in Hisabsence. This is another example of avirbhava.
                                   TEXT 57                   `saksate' sakala bhakta dekhe nirvisesa
                   nakula brahmacari-dehe prabhura `avesa'
                                 TRANSLATION     The appearance of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in every devotee's
presence is called saksat. His apPearance in Nakula Brahmacari as asymptom of special prowess is an example of avesa.
                                   TEXT 58
                 `pradyumna brahmacari' tanra age nama chija
                 `nrsimhananda' nama prabhu pache ta' rakhila
                                 TRANSLATION     The former Pradyumna Brahmacari was given the name Nrsimhananda
Brahmacari by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 59
                    tanhate ha-ila caitanyera `avirbhava'
                    alaukika aiche prabhura aneka svabhava
                                 TRANSLATION     In his body there were symptoms of avirbhava. Such appearances are
uncommon, but Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu displayed many such pastimesthrough His different features.
                                   PURPORT     In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (74) it is said that Nakula
Brahmacari displayed the prowess(avesa) and Pradyumna Brahmacari theappearance (avirbhava) of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. There are manyhundreds and thousands of devotees of Lord Caitanya among whom there areno special symptoms, but when a devotee of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhufunctions with specific prowess, he displays the feature called avesa. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabh u pe rsonall y sp read the sankirtana movement,and He advised all the inhabitants of Bharata-varsa to take up His cultand preach it all over the world. The visible bodily symptoms ofdevotees who follow such instructions are called avesa. Srila SivanandaSena observed such avesa symptoms in Nakula Brahmacari, who displayed
symptoms exactly like those of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Caitanya-caritamrta states that in this age of Kali the only spiritual functionis to broadcast the holy name of the Lord, but this function can beperformed only by one who is actually empowered by Lord Krsna. Theprocess by which a devotee is thus empowered is called avesa, orsometimes it is cal led saktyavesa.     Pradyumna Brahmacari was formerly a resident of a village known asPiyariganja in Kalna. There is a description of him in the Antya-Iila ofCaitanya-caritamrta, Second Chapter, and in the Antya-Iila of Caitanya-bhagavata, Chapters Three and Nine.
                                   TEXT 60                     asvadila e saba rasa sena sivananda
                       vistari' kahiba age esaba ananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Sivananda Sena experienced the three features saksat, avesa
and avirbhava. Later I shall vividly describe this transcendentallyblissful subject.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Sivananda Sena has been described by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Maharaja as follows. He was a resident of Kumarahatta, whichis also known as Halisahara, and was a great devotee of the Lord. Aboutone and a half miles from Kumarahatta is another village, known asKancadapada, in which there are Gaura-Gopala Deities installed bySivananda Sena, who also established a temple of Krsnaraya that is stillexisting. Sivananda Sena was the father of Paramananda Sena, who wasalso known as Puridasa or Karnapura. Paramananda Sena wrote in hisGaura-ganoddesa-dipika (176) that two of the gopis of Vrndavana, whoseformer names were Vira and Duti, combined to become his father. SrilaSivananda Sena guided all the devotees of Lord Caitanya who went fromBengal to Jagannatha Puri,and he personally bore all the expenses fortheir journey. This is described in the Madhya-lila, Chapter Sixteen,verses 19 through 26. Srila Sivananda Sena had three sons, namedCaitanya dasa, Ramadasa and Paramananda. This last son later becameKavikarnapura, and he is the author of Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika. Hisspiritual master was Srinatha Pandita, who was Sivananda Sena's priest.Due to Vasudeva Datta's lavish spending, Sivananda Sena was engaged tosupervise his expenditures.     Sri Sivananda Sena actually experienced Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'sfeatures of saksat, avesa and avirbhava. He once picked up a dog whileon his way to J agannatha Puri, and it is described in the Antya-Iila,First Chapter, that this dog later attained salvation by hisassociation. When Srila Raghunatha dasa, who later became Raghunathadasa Gosvami, fled his paternal home to join Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,his father wrote a letter to Sivananda Sena to get information abouthim. Sivananda Sena supplied him the details for which he asked, andlater Raghunatha dasa Gosvami's father sent some servants and money toSivananda Sena to take care of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. Once SriSivananda Sena invited Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to his home and fed Him
so sumptuously that the Lord felt indigestion and was somewhat sick.Thisbecame known to his son, who gave the Lord some medicine for Hisdigestion, and thus Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased. This isdescribed in the Antya-lila, Tenth Chapter, verses 124 through 151.     Once while going to Jagannatha Puri all the devotees had to stayunderneath a tree, without the shelter of a house or even a shed, andNityananda Prabhu became very angry, as if He were greatly disturbed byhunger. Thus He cursed Sivananda's sons to die. Sivananda's wife wasvery much aggrieved at this, and she began to cry. She very seriouslythought that since her sons had been cursed by Nityananda Prabhu,certainly they would die. When Sivananda later returned and saw his wifecrying, he said, "Why are you crying? Let us all die if Sri NityanandaPrabhu desires." When Sivananda Sena returned and Srila NityanandaPrabhu saw him, the Lord kicked him severely, complaining that He wasvery hungry, and asked why he did not arrange for His food. Such is thebehavior of the Lord with His devotees. Srila Nityananda Prabhu behavedlike an ordinary hungry man, as if completely dependent on thearrangements of Sivananda Sena.     There was a nephew of Sivananda Sena's named Srikanta who left thecompany in protest of Nityananda Prabhu's curse and went directly to SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri, where the Lord pacified him. Onthat occasion, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu allowed His toe to be sucked byPuridasa, who was then a child. It is by the order of CaitanyaMahaprabhu that he could immediately compose Sanskrit verses. During themisunderstanding with Sivananda's family, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuordered His personal attendant Govinda to give them all the rem nants ofHis foodstuffs. This is described in the A ntya-khanda, Chapter Twelve,verse 53.
                                   TEXT 61                     sivanandera upasakha, tanra parikara
                    putra-bhrtyadi kari' caitanya-kinkara
                                 TRANSLATION     The sons, servants and family members of Sivananda Sena constituted
a subbranch. They were all sincere servants of Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 62
                    caitanya-dasa, ramadasa, ara karnapura
                 tina putra sivanandera prabhura bhakta-sura
                                 TRANSLATION     The three sons of Sivananda Sena, named Caitanya dasa, Ramadasa and
KarnaPura, were all heroic devotees of Lord Caitanya.
                                   PURPORT     Caitanya dasa, the eldest son of Sivananda Sena, wrote a commentary
on Krsna- karnamita which was later translated by Srila BhaktivinodaThakura in his paper Saijana-tosani. According to expert opinion,Caitanya dasa was the author of the book Caitanya-carita, which waswritten in Sanskrit. The author was not Kavikarnapura, as generallysupposed. This is the opinion of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura. Sri Ramadasa was the second son of Sivananda Sena. It is statedin the Gaura-ganoddesa-dioika (145) that two experienced servants ofLord Krsna named Suka and Daksa in krsna-Iila became the elder brothersof Kavikarnapura, namely, Caitanya dasa and Ramadasa. Karnapura, thethird son, who was also known as Paramananda dasa or Puridasa, wasinitiated by Srinatha Pandita, who was a disciple of Sri Advaita Prabhu.Karnapura wrote many books that are important in Vaisnava literatu re,such as Ananda-vindavana-campu, A lankara-kaustubha, Gaura- ganoddesa-dipika and the great epic Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka. He was born in theyear sakabda 1448. He continually wrote books for ten years, from 1488until
                                   TEXT 63                     sri-vallabhasena, ara sena srikanta
                  sivananda-sambandhe prabhura bhakta ekanta
                                 TRANSLATION     Srivallabha Sena and Srikanta Sena were also sub-branches of
Sivananda Sena, for they were not only his nephews but also unalloyeddevotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     When Lord Nityananda Prabhu rebuked Sivananda Sena on the way to
Puri, these two nephews of Sivananda left the company as a protest andwent to see SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu at J agannatha Puri. The Lord couldunderstand the feelings of the boys, and He asked His personal assistantGovinda to supply them prasada until the party of Sivananda arrived.During the Rathayatra sankirtana festival these two brothers were members of the party led by M u ku nda. I n the Gaura-ganoddesa- dipika itis said that the gopi whose name was Katyayaniappeared as Srikanta Sena.
                                   TEXT 64                  prabhu-priya go vindananda mahabhagava ta
                   prabhura kirtaniya adi sri-govinda datta
                                 TRANSLATION     Govindananda and Govinda 0atta, the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth
branches of the tree, were performers of kirtana in the company ofSriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. Govinda Datta was the principal singer in LordCaitanya's kirtana party.
                                   PURPORT     Govinda Datta appeared in the village of Sukhacara near Khadadaha.
                                   TEXT 65                    sri-vijaya-dasa-nama prabhura akhariya
                    prabhure aneka pu~thi diyache likhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Vijaya dasa, the twenty-seventh branch, another of the Lord's
chief singers, gave the Lord many books written by hand.
                                   PURPORT     Formerly there were no printing presses nor printed books. All
books were handwritten. Precious books were kept in manuscript form intemples or important places, and anyone who was interested in a book hadto copy it by hand. Vijaya dasa was a professional writer who copiedmany manuscripts and gave them to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 66                  `ratnabahu' bali' prabhu thuija tanra nama
                   akincana prabhura prijya krsnadasa-nama
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave Vijaya dasa the name Ratnabahu
["jewel-handed"] because he copied for Him many manuscripts. The twenty-eighth branch was Krsnadasa, who was very dear to the Lord. He was knownas Akincana Krsnadasa.
                                   PURPORT     Akincana means "one who possesses nothing in this world."                                   TEXT 67                    khola-veca sridhara prabhura priyadasa
                    yanha-sane prabhu kare nitya parihasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The twenty-ninth branch was Sridhara, a trader in banana tree bark.
He was a very dear servant of the Lord. On many occasions, the Lordplayed jokes on him.
                                   PURPORT     Sridhara was a poor brahmana who made a living by selling banana
tree bark to be made into cups. Most probably he had a banana treegarden and collected the leaves, skin and pulp of the banana trees tosell daily in the market. He spent fifty percent of his income toworship the Ganges, and the balance he used for his subsistence. WhenSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu started His civil disobedience movement in
defiance of the Kazi, Sridhara danced in jublilation.The Lord used todrink water from his water jug. Sridhara presented a squash to Sacidevito cook before Lord Caitanya tooksannyasa. Every year he went to seeLord Caitanya Mahaprabhuat Jagannatha Puri. According to Kavikarnapura, Sridhara was a cowherdboy of Vrndavana whose name was Kusumasava. In his Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 1 33, it is stated:     kholavecataya khyatah panditah sridharo dvliah     asid vraje hasya-karo yo namna kusumasavah"The cowherd boy known as Kusumasava in ktsna-Iila later becameKholaveca Sridhara during Caitanya Mahaprabhu's Iila at Navadvipa.',
                                   TEXT 68                   prabhu yanra nitya laya thoda-moca-phala
                   yanra phuta-lauhapatre prabhu pila jala
                                 TRANSLATION     Every day Lord Caitanya MahaPrabhu jokingly snatched fruits,
flowers and pulp from Sridhara and drank from his broken iron pot.
                                   TEXT 69
                   prabhura atipriya dasa bhagavan pandita
                   yanra dehe krsna purve haila adhisthita
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirtieth branch was Bhagavan Pandita. He was an extremely dear
servant of the Lord, but even previously he was a great devotee of LordKrsna who always kept the Lord within his heart.
                                   TEXT 70
                    jagadisa pandita, ara hiranya mahasaya
                    yare krpa kaila balye prabhu dayamaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirty-first branch was Jagadisa Pandita, and the thirty-second
was Hiranya Mahasaya, unto whom Lord Caitanya in His childhood showedHis causeless mercy.
                                   PURPORT     Jagadisa Pandita was formerly a great dancer in krsna-Iila and was
known as Candrahasa. Regarding Hiranya Pandita, it is said that onceLord Nityananda, decorated with valuable jewels, stayed at his home, anda 8reat thief attempted all night long to plunder these jewels but wasunsuccessful. Later he came to Nityananda Prabhu and surrendered unto
Him.
                                   TEXT 71                       ei dui-ghare prabhu ekadasi dine
                     visnura nai vedya magi' khaila apane
                                 TRANSLATION     In their two houses Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu begged foodstuffs on
the Ekadasi day and ate them Personally.
                                   PURPORT     The injunction to fast on Ekadasi is especially meant for devotees;
on Ekadasi there are no restrictions regarding foodstuffs that may beoffered to the Lord. LordSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took the foodstuffs of Lord Visnu in His ecstasyas visnu- tattva.
                                   TEXT 72                  prabhura paduya dui,--purusottama, sanjaya
                      vyakarane dui sisya--dui mahasaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirty-third and thirty-fourth branches were the two students
of Caitanya Mahaprabhu named Purusottama and Sanjaya, who were stalwartstudents in grammar. They were very great Personalities.
                                   PURPORT     These two students were inhabitants of Navadvipa and were the
Lord's first companions in the sankirtana movement. According toCaitanya-bhagavata, Purusottama Sanjaya was the son of Mukunda Sanjaya,but the author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta has clarified that Purusottamaand Sanjaya were two people, not one.
                                   TEXT 73                    vanamalipandita sakha vikhyata jagate
                   sonara musala hala dekhila prabhura hate
                                 TRANSLATION     Vanamali Pandita, the thirty-fifth branch of the tree, was very
celebrated in this world. He saw in the hands of the Lord a golden cluband plow.
                                   PURPORT     Vanamali Pandita saw Lord Caitanya in the ecstasy of Balarama. This
is described vividly in Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter N ine.
                                   TEXT 74                  sri caitanyera ati priya buddhimanta khan
                    ajanma ajnakari tenho se vaka-pradhana
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirty-sixth branch, Buddhimanta Khan, was extremely dear to
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He was always prepared to carry out the Lord'sorders, and therefore he was considered to be a chief servant of theLord.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Buddhimanta Khan was one of the inhabitants of Navadvipa. He
was very rich, and it is he who arranged for the marriage of LordCaitanya with Visnupriya, the daughter of Sanatana Misra, who was thepriest of the local Zamindar. He personally defrayed all theexpenditures for the marriage ceremony. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhuwas attacked by vayu-vyadhi (derangement of the air within the body)Buddhimanta Khan paid for all requisite medicines and treatments to curethe Lord. He was the Lord's constant companion in the kirtana movement.He collected ornaments for the Lord when He played the part of thegoddess of fortune in the house of Candrasekhara Acarya. He also went tosee Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu when He was staying at Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 75                     garuda pandita laya srinama-mangala
                     nama-bale visa yanre na karila bala
                                 TRANSLATION     Garuda Pandita, the thirty-seventh branch of the tree, always
engaged in chanting the auspicious name of the Lord. Because of thestrength of this chanting, even the effects of poison could not touchhim.
                                   PURPORT     Garuda Pandita was once bitten by a poisonous snake, but the
snake's poison could not affect him because of his chanting the HareKrsna maha-mantra.
                                   TEXT 76                     gopinatha simha--eka caitanyera dasa
                   akrura bali' prabhu yanre kaila parihasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Gopinatha Simha, the thirty-eighth branch of the tree, was a
faithful servant of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord jokinglyaddressed him as Akrura.
                                   PURPORT     Actually he was Akrura, as stated in Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika.                                   TEXT 77                    bhagavati de vananda vakresvara-krpate
                 bhagavatera bhakti-artha paila prabhu haite
                                 TRANSLATION     Devananda Pandita was a professional reciter of Srimad-Bhagavatam,
but by the mercy of Vakresvara Pandita and the grace of the Lord heunderstood the devotional interpretation of the Bhagavatam.
                                   PURPORT     In the Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-Iila, Chapter Twenty-one, it is
stated that Devananda Pandita was an inhabitant of the same village inwhich the father of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Visarada, lived. He was aprofessional reciter of Srimad- Bhagavatam, but Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhudid not like his interpretation of it. In the present town of Navadvipa,which was formerly known as Kuliya, Lord Caitanya showed such mercy tohim that he gave up the Mayavadiinterpretation of Srimad-Bhaga vatam andI earned how to ex p lai n Srimad-Bhagavatam i n te rm s of bhakti.Formerly, when Devananda was expounding the Mayavadi interpretation,Srivasa Thakura was once present in his meeting, and when he began tocry, Devananda's students drove him away. Some days later, CaitanyaMahaprabhu passed that way, and when He met Devananda He chastised himseverely because of his Mayavada interpretation of Srimad-Bhagavatami Atthat time Devananda had little faith in Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as anincarnation of Lord Krsna, but one night some time later VakresvaraPandita was a guest in his house, and when he explained the science ofKrsna, Devananda was convinced about the identity of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu. Thus he was induced to explain Srimad-Bhagavatam accordingto the Vaisnava understandingi In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika it isdescribed that he was formerly Bhaguri Muni, who was the sabha-pandiitawho recited Vedic literatures in the house of Nanda Maharaja.
                                  TEXT 78-79                  khandavasi mukunda-dasa, sri-raghunandana
                      narahari-dasa, ciranjiva, sulocana
                    ei saba mahasakha--caitanya-krpadhama
                   prema-phala-phula kare yahan tahan dana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Khandavasi Mukunda and his son Raghunandana were the thirty-
ninth branch of the tree, Narahari was the fortieth, Ciranjiva theforty-first and Sulocana the forty-second. They were all big branches ofthe all-merciful tree of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. They distributed thefruits and flowers of love of Godhead anywhere and everywhere.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Mukunda dasa was the son of Narayana dasa and eldest brother of
Narahari Sarakara. His second brother's name was Madhava dasa, and hisson was named Raghunandana dasai Descendants of Raghunandana dasa stilllive four miles west of Katwa in the village named Srikhanda, whereRaghunandana dasa used to live. Raghunandana had one son named Kanai,who had two sons--Madana Raya, who was a disciple of Narahari Thakura,and Vamsivadanai It is estimated that at least four hundred mendescended in this dynastyi All their names are recorded in the villageknown as Srikhandai. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika it is stated that thegopi whose name was Vrndadevi became Mukunda dasa, lived in Srikhandavillage and was very dear to SriCaitanya Mahaprabhui His wonderfuldevotion and love for Krsna are described in the Madhya-Iila, ChapterFifteeni It is stated in the Bhakti-ratnakara, Chapter Eight, thatRaghunandana used to serve a Deity of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.     Narahari dasa Sarakara was a very famous devotee. Locana dasaThakura, the celebrated author of Caitanya-mangala, was his disciplei InCaitanya-mangala it is stated that Sri Gadadhara dasa and NarahariSarakara were extremely dear to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but there is nospecific statement regarding the inhabitants of the village ofSrikhanda.     Ciranjiva and Sulocana were both residents of Srikhanda, wheretheir descendants are still living. Of Ciranjiva's two sons, the elder,Ramacandra Kaviraja, was a disciple of Srinivasacarya and an intimateassociate of Narottama dasa Thakura. The younger son was Govinda dasaKaviraja, the famous Vaisnava poet. Ciranjiva,s wife was Sunanda, andhis father-in-law was Damodara Sena Kaviraja. Ciranjiva previously livedon the bank of the Ganges River in the village of Kumaranagara. TheGaura-ganoddesa-diplka (verse 207) states that he was formerly Candrikain Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 80                     kulmagrama-vasi satyaraja, ramananda
                 yadunatha, purusottama, sankara, vidyananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Satyaraja, Ramananda, Yadunatha, Purusottama, Sankara and
Vidyananda all belonged to the twentieth branch. They were inhabitantsof the village known as Kulina-grama.
                                   TEXT 81
                      vaninatha vasu adi yata gramijana
                 sabei caitanya-bhrtya,--caitanya-pranadhana                                 TRANSLATION
     All the inhabitants of Kulina-gama village, headed by Vaninatha
Vasu, were servants of Lord Caitanya, who was their only life andwealth.
                                   TEXT 82
                  prabhu kahe, kulinagramera ye haya kukkura
                     sei mora priya, anya jana rahu dura
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord said: "Not to speak of others, even a dog in the village
of Kulina-grama is My dear friend.
                                   TEXT 83
                     kulinagramira bhagya kahane na yaya
                     sukara caraya doma, seha krsna gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "No one can speak about the fortunate position of Kulina-grama. It
is so sublime that even sweepers who tend their hogs there also chantthe Hare Krsna mahamantra."
                                   TEXT 84
                     anupama-vallabha, sri-rupa, sanatana
                   ei tina sakha vrksera pascime sarvottama
                                 TRANSLATION     On the western side were the forty-third, forty-fourth and forty-
fifth branches--Sri Sanatana, Sri Rupa and Anupama. They were the bestof all.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Anupama was the father of Srila Jiva Gosvami and youngest
brother of Sri Sanatana Gosvami and Sri Rupa Gosvamii His former namewas Vallabha, but after Lord Caitanya met him He gave him the nameAnupamai Because of working in the Mohammedan government, these threebrothers were given the title Mulliki Our personal family is connectedwith the Mulliks of Mahatma Gandhi Road in Calcutta, and we often usedto visit their Radha-Govinda templei They belong to the same family aswe doi Our family gotra, or original genealogical line, is the gautama-gotra, or line of disciples of Gautama Muni, and our surname is Dei Butdue to their accepting the posts of Zamindars in the Mohammedangovernment, they received the title Mulliki Similarly, Rupa, Sanatana
and Vallabha were also given the title Mullik. Mullik means "lordi" Justas the English government gives rich and respectable persons the title"lord," so the Mohammedans give the title Mullik to rich, respectablefamilies that have intimate connections with the governmenti The titleMullik is found not only among the Hindu aristocracy but also amongMohammedansi This title is not restricted to a particular family but isgiven to different families and castes. The qualifications for receivingit are wealth and respectabilityi     Sanatana Gosvami and Rupa Gosvami belonged to the bharadvaja-gotra,which indicates that they belonged either to the family or disciplicsuccession of Bharadvaja Munii As members of the Krsna consciousnessmovement, we belong to the family or disciplic succession of SarasvatiGosvami, and thus we are known as Sarasvatasi Obeisances are thereforeoffered to the spiritual master as sarasvata-deva, or a member of theSarasvata family (namas te sarasvate devam), whose mission is tobroadcast the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu (gaura-vani-pracarine) andto figh t with i m perso nal ists and void ists (nirvisesa-sunyavadi-pascatya-desa-tarine). Th is was also the occupational duty of SanatanaGosvami, Rupa Gosvami and Anupama Gosvami.     The genealogical table of Sanatana Gosvami, Rupa Gosvami andVallabha Gosvami can be traced back to the Twelfth Century sakabda, whena gentleman of the name Sarvajna appeared in a very rich and opulentbrahmana family in the province of Karnatai He had two sons namedAniruddhera Rupesvara and Harihara, who were both bereft of theirkingdoms and thus obliged to reside in the highlandsi The son ofRupesvara, who was named Padmanabha, moved to a place in Bengal known asNaihati on the bank of the Gangesi There he had five sons, of whom theyoungest, Mukunda, had a well-behaved son named Kumaradeva, who was thefather of Rupa, Sanatana and Vallabha. Kumaradeva lived inBaklacandradvipa, which was in the district of Yasohara and is now knownas Phateyabad. Of his many sons, three took to the path of VaisnavismiLater, Sri Vallabha and his elder brothers Sri Rupa and Sanatana camefrom Candradvipa to the village in the Maldah district of Bengal knownas Ramakelii It is in this village that Srila Jiva Gosvami took birth,accepting Vallabha as his father. Because of engaging in the service ofthe Mohammedan government, the three brothers received the title MullikiWhen Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu visited the village of Ramakeli, He metVallabha there. Later, Sri RupaGosvami, after meeting SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, resigned from governmentservice, and when he went to Vrndavana to meet Lord Caitanya, Vallabhaaccompanied himi The meeting of Rupa Gosvami and Vallabha with CaitanyaMahaprabhu at Allahabad is described in the Madhya-Iila, ChapterNineteen.     Actually, it is to be understood from the statement of SanatanaGosvami that Sri Rupa Gosvami and Vallabha went to Vrndavana under theinstructions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhui First they went to Mathura,where they met a gentleman named Subuddhi Raya who maintained himself byselling dry fuel woodi He was very pleased to meet Sri Rupa Gosvami andAnupama, and he showed them the twelve forests of Vrndavanai Thus theylived in Vrndavana for one month and then again went to search forSanatana Gosvami. Following the course of the Ganges, they reachedAllahabad, or Prayaga-tirtha, but because Sanatana Gosvami had comethere by a different road, they did not meet him there, and whenSanatana Gosvami came to Mathura he was informed of the visit of Rupa
Gosvami and Anupama by Subuddhi Raya. When Rupa Gosvami and Anupama metCaitanya Mahaprabhu at Benares, they heard about Sanatana Gosvami'stravels from Him, and thus they returned to Bengal, adjusted theiraffairs with the state and, on the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,went to see the Lord at J agannatha Purii     In the year 1436 sakabda, the youngest brother, Anupama, died andwent back home, back to Godheadi He went to the abode in the spiritualsky where Sri Ramacandra is situated. At Jagannatha Puri, Sri RupaGosvami informed Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu of this incident. Vallabha wasa great devotee of Sri Ramacandra; therefore he could not seriouslyconsider the worship of RadhaGovinda according to the instructions ofSriCaitanya Mahaprabhui Yet he directly accepted Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuas an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Ramacandra. I nthe Bhakti-ratnakara there is the following statement: "Vallabha wasgiven the name Anupama by Sri Gaurasundara, but he was always absorbedin the devotional service of Lord Ramacandra. He did not know anyone butSri Ramacandra, but he knew that Caitanya Gosani was the same LordRamacandra."     I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-oipika (180) Sri Rupa Gosvami is describedto be the gopi named Sri Rupa-manjarii In the Bhakti-ratnakara there isa list of the books Sri Rupa Gosvami compiledi Of all his books, thefollowing sixteen are very popular among Vaisn avas: ( 1) Hamsaduta, (2)Uddhava-sandesa, (3) Krsna janma-tithi-vidhi, (4 and 5) Ganoddesa-dipika, Brhat ( m ajor) and Laghu ( m i nor), (6) Stavamala, (7)Vidagdha-madhava, (8) Lalita-madhava, (9) Dana-keli-kaumudi ( 10) Bhakti- rasamrta-sindhu (this is the m ost celebrated boo k by S ri Ru paGosva mi), ( 1 1) Ujjvala-nilamani, (1 2) A khyata-candrika, ( 1 3)Mathura-mahima, ( 1 4) padyavali, ( 1 5) Nataka-candrika a nd ( 1 6)Laghu-bhagavatamrtai S ri R u pa G osvam i gave u p al I familyconnections, joined the renounced order of life and divided his money,giving fifty percent to the brahmanas and Vaisnavas and twenty-fivepercent to his kutumbas (family members) and keeping twenty-five percentfor personal emergenciesi He met Haridasa Thakura in Jagannatha Puri,where he also met Lord Caitanya and His other associates. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu used to praise the handwriting of Rupa Gosvami. Srila RupaGosvami could compose verses according to the desires of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and by His direction he wrote twobooks named Lalita-madhava and Vidagdha-madhava. Lord Caitanya desiredthe two brothers, Sanatana Gosvami and Rupa Gosvami, to publish manybooks in support of the Vaisnava religioni When Sanatana Gosvami met SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord advised him also to go to Vrndavana.     Sri Sanatana Gosvami is described in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika(181). He was formerly known as Rati-manjari or sometimes Labanga-manjarii In the Bhakti- ratnakara it is stated that his spiritualmaster, Vidyavacaspati, sometimes stayed in the village of Ramakeli, andSanatana Gosvami studied all the Vedic literature from him. He was sodevoted to his spiritual master that this cannot be described. Accordingto the Vedic system, if someone sees a Mohammedan he must performrituals to atone for the meeting. Sanatana Gosvami always associatedwith Mohammedan kings. Not giving much attention to the Vedicinjunctions, he used to visit the houses of Mohammedan kings, and thushe considered himself to have been converted into a Mohammedan. He wastherefore always very humble and meek. When Sanatana Gosvami presentedhimself before Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he admitted, "I am always in
association with lower class people, and my behavior is therefore veryabominable." He actually belonged to a respectable brahmana family, butbecause he considered his behavior to be abominable, he did not try toplace himself among the brahmanas but always remained among people ofthe lower castesi He wrote Hari-bhakti-vilasa and Vaisnava-tosani, whichis a commentary on the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam. In the year1476 sakabda he completed the Brhad- vaisnava-tosani com mentary onSrimad-Bhagavatam. I n the year 1 504 sakabda he fi n ished the Laghu-tosani.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught his principles through four chieffollowers. Among them, Ramananda Raya is exceptional, for through himthe Lord taught how a devotee can completely vanquish the power ofCupidi By Cupid's power, as soon as one sees a beautiful woman he isconquered by her beauty. Sri Ramananda Raya vanq uished Cupid's pridebecause in the Jagannatha-vallabha-nataka he personally directedextremely beautiful young girls in dancing, but he was never affected bytheir youthful beautyi Sri Ramananda Raya personally bathed these girls,touching them and washing them with his own hands, yet he remained calmand passionless, as a great devotee should bei Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhucertified that this was possible only for Ramananda Rayai Similarly,Damodara Pandita was notable for his objectivity as a critic. He did noteven spare Caitanya Mahaprabhu from his criticism. This also cannot beimitated by anyone elsei Haridasa Thakura is exceptional for hisforbearance because although he was beaten with canes in twenty-twomarketplaces, nevertheless he was tolerant. Similarly, Sri SanatanaGosvami, although he belonged to a most respectable brahmana family, wasexceptional for his humility and meekness.     In the Madhya-lila, Chapter Nineteen, the device adopted bySanatana Gosvami to get free from the government service is described.He served a notice of sickness to the Nawab, the Moslem governer, butactually he was studying Srimad-Bhagavatam with brahmanas at home. TheNawab received information of this through a royal physician, and heimmediately went to see Sanatana Gosvamito uncover his inten-tionsi The Nawab requested Sanatana to accompany him on an expedition toOrissa, but when Sanatana Gosvami refused, the Nawab ordered that he beimprisonedi When Rupa Gosvami left home, he wrote a note for SanatanaGosvami informing him of some money that he had entrusted to a localgrocer. Sanatana Gosvami took advantage of this money to bribe the jailkeeper and get free from detention. Then he left for Benares to meetCaitanya Mahaprabhu, bringing with him only one servant, whose name wasIsana. On the way they stopped at a sarai, or hotel, and when the hotelkeeperfound out that Isana had some golden coins with him, he planned tokill both Sanatana Gosvami and Isana to take away the coins. LaterSanatana Gosvami saw that although the hotel keeper did not know them,he was being especially attentive to their comfort. Therefore heconcluded that Isana was secretly carrying some money and that the hotelkeeper was aware of this and therefore planned to kill them for iti Uponbeing questioned by Sanatana Gosvami, Isana admitted that he indeed hadmoney with him, and immediately Sanatana Gosvami took the money and gaveit to the hotel keeper, requesting him to help them get though thejunglei Thus with the help of the hotel keeper, who was also the chiefof the thieves of that territory, he crossed over the Hazipur mountains,which are presently known as the Hazaribags. He then met his brotherin-law Srikanta, who requested that he stay with himi Sanatana Gosvami
refused, but before they parted, Srikanta gave him a valuable blanketi     Somehow or other Sanatana Gosvami reached Varanasi and met LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu at the house of Candrasekharai By the order of theLord, Sanatana Gosvami was cleanly shaved and his dress changed to thatof a mendicant, or babaji. He put on old garments of Tapana Misra andtook prasada at the house of a Maharastra brahmana. Then, in discourseswith Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord Himself explained everythingabout devotional service to Sanatana Gosvamii He advised SanatanaGosvami to write books on devotional service, including a book ofdirections for Vaisnava activities, and to excavate the lost places ofpilgrimage in Vrndavanai Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave him His blessingsto do all this work and also explained to Sanatana Gosvami the import ofthe atmarama verse from sixty-one different angles of visioni     Sanatana Gosvami went to Vrndavana by the main road, and when hereached Mathura he met Subuddhi Raya. Then he returned to J agannathaPuri through Jharikhanda, the Uttara Pradesh junglei At Jagannatha Purihe decided to give up his body by falling down beneath a wheel of theJagannatha ratha, but Caitanya Mahaprabhu saved him. Then SanatanaGosvami met Haridasa Thakura and heard about the disappearance ofAnupamai Sanatana Gosvami later described the glories of HaridasaThakura. Sanatana observed the etiquette of Jagannatha's temple by goingthrough the beach to visit Lord Caitanya, although it was extremely hotdue to the sun. He requested Jagadananda Pandita to give him permissionto return to Vrndavana. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu praised the characterof Sanatana Gosvami, and He embraced Sanatana, accepting his body asspiritual. Sanatana Gosvami was ordered by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu tolive at Jagannatha Purifor one yeari When he returned to Vrndavana aftermany years, he again met Rupa Gosvami, and both brothers remained inVrndavana to execute the orders of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.      Theplace where Sri Rupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami formerly lived has nowbecome a place of pilgrimage. It is generally known as Gupta Vrndavana,or hidden Vrndavana, and is situated about eight miles south ofImrejabajara. There the following places are still visited: (1) thetemple of SriMadana-mohana Deity, (2) the Keli-kadamba tree under whichSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu met Sanatana Gosvami at night and (3)Rupasagara, a large pond excavated by Sri Rupa Gosvami. A society namedRamakeli-samskara-samitiwas established in 1924 to repair the temple andrenovate the pond.
                                   TEXT 85                    tanra madhye rupa-sanatana--bada sakha
                      anupama, jiva, rajendradi upasakha
                                 TRANSLATION     Among these branches, Rupa and Sanatana were principal. Anupama,
Jiva Gosvami and others, headed by Rajendra, were their sub-branches.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika it is said that Srila Jiva Gosvami
was formerly Vilasa-manjari gopi. F rom his very ch ildhood J ivaGosvami was greatly fond of Srimad-Bhagavatami He later came to
Navadvipa to study Sanskrit, and, following in the footsteps of SriNityananda Prabhu, he circumambulated the entire Navadvipadhamai Aftervisiting Navadvipa-dhama he went to Benares to study Sanskrit underMadhusudana Vacaspati, and after finishing his studies in Benares, hewent to Vrndavana and took shelter of his uncles, Sri Rupa and Sanatana.This is described in the Bhakti-ratnakara. As far as our informationgoes, Srila Jiva Gosvami composed and edited at least twenty-fivebooks.They are all very celebrated, and they are listed as fol I ows: (1) Hari-namamrta-vyakarana, (2) Sutra-malika, (3) Dhatu-sangraha, (4)Krsnarca-dipika, (5) Gopala-virudavali, (6)a Rasamrta-sesa, (7) SriMadhava-mahotsava, (8) Sri Sankalpa-kalpavrksa, (9) Bhavartha-sucaka-campu, ( 1 0) Gopala-tapani-tika, ( 1 1) a com mentary on Brahma-samhita, (1 2) a commentary on Bhakti rasamrta- sindhu, (13) acommentary on Ujjvala-nilamani, (14) a commentary on Yogasara- stava,(15) a commentary on the Gayatri-mantra as described in the Agni purana,(16) a description derived from the padma purana of the lotus feet ofthe Lord, (1 7)a description of the lotus feet of Srimati Radharani, (18) Gopala-campu(in two parts) and ( 1 9-25) seve n sandarbhas.i th e Krama, Tattva,Bhagavat, paramatma, Krsna, Bhakti and priti Sandarbhasi After thedisappearance of Srila Rupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami in Vrndavana,Srila Jiva Gosvami became the acarya of all the Vaisnavas in Bengal,Orissa and the rest of the world, and it is he who used to guide them intheir devotional service. In Vrndavana he established the Radha-Damodaratemple, where we had the opportunity to live and retire until the age of65, when we decided to come to the United States of America. When JivaGosvamiwas still present, Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami compiled hisfamous Caitanya-caritamrta. Later, Srila Jiva Gosvami inspired SrinivasaAcarya, Narottama dasa Thakura and Duhkhi Krsnadasa to preach Krsnaconsciousness in Bengal. Jiva Gosvami was informed that all themanuscripts that were collected from Vrndavana and sent to Bengal forpreaching purposes were plundered near Visnupura in Bengal, but later hereceived the information that the books had been recoveredi Sri J ivaGosvami awarded the designation Kaviraja to Ramacandra Sena, a discipleof Srinivasa Acarya, and his younger brother Govinda. While J ivaGosvami was alive, Srimati J ahnavi-devi, the pleasure potency of SriNityananda Prabhu, went to Vrndavana with a few devotees. J iva Gosvamiwas very kind to the Gaudiya Vaisnavas, the Vaisnavas from Bengal.Whoever went to Vrndavana he provided with a residence and prasada. Hisdisciple Krsnadasa Adhikari listed all the books of the Gosvamis inhisdiaryi     The sahajiyas level three accusations against Srila Jiva Gosvami.This is certainly not congenial with the execution of devotionalservice.The first accusation concerns a materialist who was very proudof his reputation as a great Sanskrit scholar and approached Sri Rupaand Sanatana to argue with them about the revealed scriptures. SrilaRupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami, not wanting to waste their time, gavehim a written statement that he had defeated them in a debate on therevealed scriptures. Taking this paper, the scholar approached JivaGosvami for a similar certificate of defeat, but Jiva Gosvami did notagree to give him one. On the contrary, he argued with him regarding thescriptures and defeated him. Certainly it was right for J iva Gosvami tostop such a dishonest scholar from advertising that he had defeatedSrila Rupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami, but due to their illiteracy the
sahajiya class refer to this incident to accuse Srila Jiva Gosvamiofdeviating from the principle of humility. They do not know, however,that humility and meekness are appropriate when one's own honor isinsulted. But when Lord Visnu or the acaryas are blasphemed, one shouldnot be humble and meek but must act. One should follow the example givenby SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. Lord Caitanya says in His prayerii     trnad api sunicena     taror api sahisnuna     amanina manadena     kirtaniyah sada harih"One can chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state ofmind,thinking himself lower than the straw in the street; one should bemore tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige, andshould be ready to offer all respect to others. In such a state of mindone can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly. Nevertheless, whenthe Lord was informed that Nityananda Prabhu was injured by Jagai andMadhai, He immediately went to the spot, angry like fire, wanting tokill them. Thus Lord Caitanya has explained His verse by the example ofHis own behavior. One should tolerate insults against oneself, but whenthere is blasphemy committed against superiors such as other Vaisnavas,one should be neither humble nor meek; one must take proper steps tocounteract such blasphemy. This is the duty of a servant of a guru andVaisnavasi Anyone who understands the principle of eternal servitude tothe guru and Vaisnavas will appreciate the action of Sri jiva Gosvami inconnection with the so-called scholar's victory over his gurus, SrilaRupa and Srila Sanatana Gosvami.     Another story fabricated to defame Srila Jiva Gosvami states thatafter compiling Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami showed the manuscript to Jiva Gosvami, who thought that it wouldhamper his reputation as a big scholar and therefore threw it in a well.Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami was greatly shocked, and he diedimmediately. Fortunately a copy of the manuscript of Caitanya-caritamita had been kept by a person named Mukunda, and therefore laterit was possible to publish the book. This story is another ignominiousexample of blasphemy against a guru and Vaisnava. Such a story shouldnever be accepted as authoritative.     According to another accusation, Srila Jiva Gosvami did not approveof the priinciples of the parakiya-rasa of Vrajadhama and thereforesupported svakiya-rasa, showing that Radha and Krsna are eternallymarried. Actually, when Jiva Gosvami was alive, some of his followersdisliked the parakiya-rasa of the gopis. Therefore Srila Jiva Gosvami,for their spiritual benefit, supported svakiya-rasa, for he couldunderstand that sahajiyas would otherwise exploit the parakiya-rasa, asthey are actually doing at the present. Unfortunately, in Vrndavana andNavadvipa it has become fashionable among sahajiyas, in theirdebauchery, to find an unmarried sexual partner to live with to executedevotional service in parakiya-rasa. Foreseeing this, Srila Jiva Gosvamisupported svakiya-rasa, and later all the Vaisnava acaryas also approvedof iti Srila Jiva Gosvami was never opposed to the transcendentalparakiya-rasa, nor h as an y other Vaisnava d isapp roved of it. S ril aJ iva G osvami strictly followed his predecessor gurus and Vaisnavas,Srila Rupa and Sanatana Gosvami, and Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvamiaccepted h im as one of his instructor gurusi                                   TEXT 86
                      malira icchaya sakha bahuta badila
                      badiya pascima desa saba acchadila
                                 TRANSLATION     By the will of the supreme gardener, the branches of Srila Rupa
Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami grew many times over, expanding throughoutthe western countries and covering the entire region.
                                   TEXT 87
                        a-sindhunadi-tira ara himalaya
                     vrndavana-mathuradi yata tirtha haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Extending to the borders of the River Sindhu and the Himalayan
Mountain valleys, they expanded throughout India, including all thePlaces of pilgrimage such as Vrndavana, Mathura and Haridvara.
                                   TEXT 88
                    dui sakhara prema-phale sakala bhasila
                     prema-phalasvade loka unmatta ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     The fruits of love of Godhead which fructified on these two
branches were distributed in abundance. Tasting these fruits, everyonebecame mad after them.
                                   TEXT 89
                      pascimera loka saba mudha anacara
                    tahan pracarila donhe bhakti-sadacara
                                 TRANSLATION     The people in general on the western side of India were neither
intelligent nor well behaved, but by the influence of Srila Rupa Gosvamiand Sanatana Gosvami they were trained in devotional service and goodbehavior.
                                   PURPORT     Although it is not only in western I ndia that people were
contaminated by association with Mohammedans, it is a fact that thefarther west one goes in India the more he will find the people to be
fallen from the Vedic culturei Even until **** missing line *****enced by non-Vedic culture, and they lost sight of how to behave inconnection with devotional service. Srila Rupa Gosvami and SanatanaGosvami very kindly preached the bhakti cult in western India, andfollowing in their footsteps the propagators of the Caitanya cult in thewestern countries are spreading the sankirtana movement and inculcatingthe principles of Vaisnava behavior, thus purifying and reforming manypersons who were previously accustomed to the culture of mlecchas andyavanas. All of our devotees in the western countries give up their oldhabits of illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. Ofcourse, tunately at present all of India has been victimized by thesenon-Vedic principles, which are sometimes even supported by thegovernmenti
                                   TEXT 90                  sastra-drstye kaila lupta-tirthera uddhara
                   vrndavane kaila srimurti-sevara pracara
                                 TRANSLATION     In accordance with the directions of the revealed scriptures, both
Gosvamis excavated the lost places of pilgrimage and inaugurated theworship of Deities in Vrndavana.
                                   PURPORT     The spot where we now find Sri Radhakunda was an agricultural field
during the time of Caitanya Mahaprabhui A small reservoir of water wasthere, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bathed in that water and pointed outthat originally Radhakunda existed in that location. Following Hisdirections, Srila Rupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami renovatedRadhakunda. This is one of the brilliant examples of how the Gosvamisexcavated lost places of pilgrimage. Similarly, it is through the theendeavor of the Gosvamis that all the important temples at Vrndavanawere establishedi Originally there were seven important Gaudiya Vaisnavatemples established in Vrndavana, namely, the Madana-mohana temple,Govinda temple, Gopinatha temple, Sri Radharamana temple, Radha-Syamasundara temple, RadhaDamodara temple and Gokulananda temple.
                                   TEXT 91                  mahaprabhura priya bhrtya--raghunatha-dasa
                  sarva tyaji' kaila prabhura pada-tale vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, the forty-sixth branch of the tree,
was one of the most dear servants of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He leftall his material possessions to surrender completely unto the Lord andlive at His lotus feet.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvamiwas most probably born in the year
1416 sakabda in a kayastha family as the son of Govardhana Majumdara,who was the younger brother of the then Zamindar Hiranya Majumdara. Thevillage where he took birth is known as Sri Krsnapura. On the railwayline between Calcutta and Burdwan is a station named Trisabagha, andabout one and a half miles away is the village of Sri Krsnapura, wherethe parental home of Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami was situated. A templeof SriSri Radha-Govinda is still there. In front of the temple is alarge open area but no large hall for meetings. However, a rich Calcuttagentleman named Haricarana Ghosh who resided in the Simla quarterrecently repaired the temple. The entire temple compound is surroundedby walls,and in a small room just to the side of the temple is a smallplatform on which Raghunatha dasa Gosvamiused to worship the Deity. Bythe side of the temple is the dying River Sarasvati.     The forefathers of Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami were all Vaisnavasand were very rich men. His spiritual master at home was YadunandanaAcarya. Although Raghunatha dasa was a family man, he had no attachmentfor his estate and wife. Seeing his tendency to leave home, his fatherand uncle engaged special bodyguards to watch over him, but neverthelesshe managed to escape their vigilance and went away to Jagannatha Puri tomeet SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. This incident took place in the year 1439sakabda. Raghunatha dasa Gosvami compiled three books named Stava-malaor Stavavali, Dana-carita and Muktacarita. He lived for a long durationof life. For most of his life he resided at Radhakunda. The place whereRaghunatha dasa Gosvami performed his devotional service still exists byRadhakunda. He almost completely gave up eating, and therefore he wasvery skinny and of weak health. His only concern was to chant the holyname of the Lord. He gradually reduced his sleeping until he was almostnot sleeping at all. It is said that his eyes were always full of tears.When Srinivasa Acarya went to see Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, the Gosvamiblessed him by embracing him. Srinivasa Acarya requested his blessingsfor preaching in Bengal, and Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami granted them.In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika ( 1 86) it is stated that Srila Raghunathadasa Gosvami was formerly the gopi named Rasa-manjari. Sometimes it issaid that he was Rati-manjari.
                                   TEXT 92                    prabhu samarpila tanre svarupera hate
                  prabhura gupta-seva kaila svarupera sathe
                                 TRANSLATION     When Raghunatha dasa Gosvami approached Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at
J agannatha Puri, the Lord entrusted him to the care of SvarupaDamodara, His secretary. Thus they both engaged in the confidentialservice of the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     This confidential service was the personal care of the Lord.
Svarupa Damodara, acting as His secretary, attended to the Lord's baths,meals, rest and massages, and Raghunatha dasa GosvamT assisted him. I neffect, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami acted as the assistant secretary of the
Lord.
                                   TEXT 93                    sodasa vatsara kaila antaranga-sevana
                     svarupera antardhane aila vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     He rendered confidential service to the Lord for sixteen years at
jagannatha Puri, and after the disappearance of both the Lord andSvarupa Damodara, he left Jagannatha Puri and went to Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 94
                     vrndavane dui bhaira carana dekhi ya
                   govardhane tyajiba deha bhrgupata kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami intended to go to Vrndavana to see
the lotus feet of Rupa and Sanatana and then give up his life by jumpingfrom Govardhana Hill.
                                   PURPORT     Jumping from the top of Govardhana Hill is a system of suicide
especially performed by saintly persons. After the disappearance of LordCaitanya and Svarupa Damodara, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami keenly felt theseparation of these two exalted personalities and therefore decided togive up his life by jumping from Govardhana Hill in Vrndavana. Beforedoing so, however, he wanted to see the lotus feet of Srila Rupa Gosvamiand Sanatana Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 95                     ei ta' niscaya kari' aila vrndavane
                     asi' rupa-sanatanera vandila carane
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami came to Vrndavana, visited Srila
Rupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami and offered them his obeisances.
                                   TEXT 96
                      tabe dui bhai tanre marite na dija
nija trtiya bhai kari' nikate rakhila
                                 TRANSLATION     These two brothers, however, did not allow him to die. They
accepted him as their third brother and kept him in their company.
                                   TEXT 97
                     mahaprabhura Iila yata bahira-antara
                     dui bhai tanra mukhe sune nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     Because Raghunatha dasa Gosvami was an assistant to Svarupa
Damodara, he knew much about the external and internal features of thePastimes of Lord Caitanya. Thus the two brothers Rupa and Sanatanaalways used to hear of this from him.
                                   TEXT 98
                      anna jala tyaga kaila anya-kathana
                     pala dui-tina matha karena bhaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa Gosvami gradually gave up all food and drink but a
few drops of buttermilk.
                                   TEXT 99
                    sahasra dandavat kare, laya laksa nama
                    dui sahasra vaisnavere nitya paranama
                                 TRANSLATION     As a daily duty, he regularly offered one thousand obeisances to
the Lord, chanted at least one hundred thousand holy names and offeredobeisances to two thousand Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 100
                   ratri-dine radha-krsnera manasa se vana
                    prahareka mahaprabhura caritra-kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     Day and night he rendered service within his mind to Radha-Krsna,
and for three hours a day he discoursed about the character of LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     We have many things to learn about bhajana, or worship of the Lord,
by following in the footsteps of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. All theGosvamis engaged in such transcendental activities, as described bySrinivasa Acarya in his poem about them (krsnotkirtana-gana-nartana-parau premamrtambho-nidhi). Fol I o w i ng i n th e footsteps ofRaghunatha dasa Gosvami, Srila Rupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami, onehas to execute devotional service very strictly, specifically bychanting the holy name of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 101                    tina sandhya radha-kunde apatita snana
                    vraja-vasi vaisnave kare alingana mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvamitook three baths daily in the Radha
kunda lake. As soon as he found a Vaisnava residing in Vrndavana, hewould embrace him and give him all respect.
                                   TEXT 102
                  sardha sapta-prahara kare bhaktira sadhane
                    cari danda nidra, seha nahe kona-dine
                                 TRANSLATION     He engaged himself in devotional service for more than twenty-two
and a half hours a day, and for less than two hours he slept, althoughon some days that also was not possible.
                                   TEXT 103
                    tanhara sadhana-riti sunite camatkara
                     sei rupa-raghunatha prabhu ye amara
                                 TRANSLATION     I am struck with wonder when I hear about the devotional service he
executed. I accept Srila Rupa Gosvami and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami as myguides.
                                   PURPORT     S rila Krsnadasa Kavi raja Gosvami accepted Ragh u natha dasa Gosva
mi as h is special guide. Therefore at the end of every chapter he says,sri-rupa-raghunatha- pade yara asa caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa.Sometimes it is misunderstood that by using the word raghunatha hewanted to offer his respectful obeisances to Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami,for it is sometimes stated that Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami was hisinitiator spiritual master. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami doesnot approve of this statement; he does not accept Raghunatha Bhatta
Gosvami as the spiritual master of Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 104                   inha-sabara yaiche haila prabhura milana
                      age vistariya taha kariba varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     I shall liter explain very elaborately how all these devotees met
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 105
                    sri-gopala bhatta eka sakha sarvottama
                   rupa-sanatana-sange yanra prema-alapana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, the forty-seventh branch, was one of the
great and exalted branches of the tree. He always engaged in discoursesabout love of Godhead in the company of Rupa Gosvami and SanatanaGosvami.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Gopala Bhatta Gosvami was the son of Venkata Bhatta, a resident
of Srirangam. Gopala Bhatta formerly belonged to the disciplicsuccession of the Ramanuja-sampradaya but later became part of theGaudiya-sampradaya. In the year 1433 sakabda, when Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu was touring South India, He stayed for four months during theperiod of Caturmasya at the house of Venkata Bhatta, who then got theopportunity to serve the Lord to his heart's content. Gopala Bhatta alsogot the opportunity to serve the Lord at this time. SriGopala BhattaGosvami was later initiated by his uncle, the great sannyasiPrabodhananda Sarasvati. Both the father and mother of Gopala BhattaGosvami were extremely fortunate, for they dedicated their entire livesto the service of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. They allowed Gopala BhattaGosvami to go to Vrndavana, and they gave up their lives thinking of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. When Lord Caitanya was later informed that GopalaBhatta Gosvami had gone to Vrndavana and met Sri Rupa and SanatanaGosvami, He was very pleased, and He advised Sri Rupa and Sanatana toaccept Gopala Bhatta Gosvami as their younger brother and take care ofhim. Sri Sanatana Gosvami, out of his great affection for Gopala BhattaGosvami, compiled the Vaisnava smrti named Hari-bhakti-vilasa andpublished it under his name. Under the instruction of Srila Rupa andSanatana, Gopala Bhatta Gosvami installed one of the seven principalDeities of Vrndavana, the Radharamana Deity. The sevaits (priests) ofthe Radharamana temple belong to the Gaudiya-sampradaya.     When Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami took permission from all theVaisnavas before writing Caitanya-caritamita, Gopala Bhatta Gosvami alsogave him his blessings, but he requested him not to mention his name inthe book. Therefore Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami has mentioned Gopala
Bhatta Gosvami only very cautiously in one or two passages of Caitanya-caritamrta. Srila Jiva Gosvami has written in the beginning of hisTattva-sandarbha, "A devotee from southern India who was born of abrahmana family and was a very intimate friend of Rupa GosvamiandSanatana Gosvami has written a book that he has not compiledchronologically. Therefore l, a tiny living entity known as jiva, amtrying to assort the events of the book chronologically, consulting thedirection of great personalities like Madhvacarya, Sridhara Svami,Ramanujacarya and other senior Vaisnavas in the disciplic succession."In the beginning of the Bhagavat-sandarbha there are similar statementsby Srila Jiva Gosvami. Srila Gopala Bhatta Gosvami compiled a bookcalled Sat-kriya--sara-dipika, edited the Hari-bhakti-vilasa, wrote aforward to the Sat-sandarbha and a com m entary on the Krsna-karnamrta,and i nstal led the Rad haramana Deity i n Vrndavana. I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 1 84, it is mentioned that his previous name inthe pastimes of Lord Krsna was Ananga-manjari. Sometimes he is also saidto have been an incarnation of Guna-manjari. Srinivasa Acarya andGopinatha Pujari were two of his disciples.
                                   TEXT 106                   sankararan ya--acarya-vrksera eka sakha
                  mukunda, kasinatha, rudra--upasakha lekha
                                 TRANSLATION     The acarya Sankararanya was considered the forty-eighth branch of
the original tree. From him proceeded sub-branches known as Mukunda,Kasinatha and Rudra.
                                   PURPORT     It is said that Sankararanya was the sannyasa name of Srila
Visvarupa, who was the elder brother of Visvambhara (the original nameof SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu). Sankararanya expired in 1432 sakabda atSolapura, where there is a place of pilgrimage known as Panderapura.This is referred to in the Madhya-Iila, Chapter Nine, verses 299 and300.     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu opened a primary school in the house ofMukunda, or Mukunda Sanjaya, and Mukunda's son, whose name wasPurusottama, became the Lord's student. Kasinatha arranged the marriageof Lord Caitanya in His previous asrama, when His name was Visvambhara.He induced the court pandita, Sanatana, to offer Visvambhara hisdaughter. I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse     , marriage of Krsna and Satya, and it is mentioned in verse 135that Rudra, or Sri Rudrarama Pandita, was formerly a friend of LordKrsna named Varuthapa. Sri Rudrarama Pandita constructed a big temple atVallabhapura, which is one mile north of Mahesa, for the Deities namedRadhavallabha. The descendants of his brother, YadunandanaBandyopadhyaya, are known as Cakravarti Thakuras, and they are in chargeof the maintenance of this temple as sevaits. Formerly the J agannathaDeity used to come to the temple of Radhavallabha from Mahesa during theRathayatra festival, but in the Bengali year 1262, due to amisunderstanding between the priests of the two temples, the Jagannatha
Deity stopped coming.
                                   TEXT 107                  srinatha pandita--prabhura krpara bhajana
                   yanra krsna-seva dekhi' vasa tri-bhuvana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srinatha Pandita, the forty-ninth branch, was the beloved recipient
of all the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Everyone in the threeworlds was astonished to see how he worshiped Lord Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     About one and a half miles away from Kumarahatta, or Kamarhati,
which is a few miles from Calcutta, is a village known as Kancadapadawhich was the home of Sri Sivananda Sena. There he constructed a templeof Sri Gauragopala. Another temple was established there with Sri Radha-Krsna murtis by Srinatha Pandita. The Deity of that temple is named SriKrsna Raya. The temple of Krsna Raya, which was constructed in the year1708 sakabda by a prominent Zamindar named Nimai Mullik of Pathuriya-ghata in Calcutta, is very large. There is a big courtyard in front ofthe temple, and there are residential quarters for visitors and goodarrangements for cooking prasada. The entire courtyard is surrounded byvery high boundary walls, and the temple is almost as big as the Mahesatemple. Inscribed on a tablet are the names of Srinatha Pandita and hisfather and grandfather and the date of construction of the temple.Srinatha Pandita, one of the disciples of Advaita Prabhu, was thespiritual master of the third son of Sivananda Sena, who was known asParamananda Kavikarnapura. It is supposed to be during the time ofKavikarnapura that the Krsna Raya Deity was installed. According tohearsay, Virabhadra Prabhu, the son of Nityananda Prabhu, brought a bigstone from Mursidabad from which three Deities were carved--namely, theRadhavallabha vigraha of Vallabhapura, the Syamasundara vigraha ofKhadadaha and the Sri Krsna Raya vigraha of Kancadapada.The home ofSivananda Sena was situated on the bank of the Ganges near an almostruined temple. It is said that the same Nimai Mullik of Calcutta sawthis broken-down temple of Krsna Raya while he was going to Benares andthereafter constructed the present temple.
                                   TEXT 108                    jagannatha acarya prabhura priya dasa
                    prabhura ajnate tenho kaila ganga-vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagannatha Acarya, the fiftieth branch of the Caitanya tree, was an
extremely dear servant of the Lord, by whose order he decided to live onthe bank of the Ganges.
                                   PURPORT     Jagannatha Acarya is stated in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (111) to
have formerly been Durvasa of Nidhuvana.
                                   TEXT 109                    krsnadasa vaidya, ara pandita-sekhara
                     kavicandra, ara kirtaniya sasthivara
                                 TRANSLATION     The fifty-first branch of the Caitanya tree was Krsnadasa Vaidya,
the fiftysecond was Pandita Sekhara, the fifty-third was Kavicandra, andthe fifty-fourth was Sasthivara, who was a great sankirtana Performer.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika ( 1 71) it is mentioned that
Srinatha M isra was Citrangi and Kavicandra was Manohara-gopi.
                                   TEXT 110                  srinatha misra, subhananda, srirama, isana
                    srinidhi, srigopikanta, misra bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     The fifty-fifth branch was Srinatha Misra, the fifty-sixth was
Subhananda; the fifty-seventh was Srirama, the fifty-eighth was Isana,the fifty-ninth was Srinidhi, the sixtieth was Sri Gopikanta, and thesixty-first was Misra Bhagavan.
                                   PURPORT     Subhananda, who formerly lived in Vrndavana as Malati, was one of
the kirtana performers who danced in front of the Rathayatra car duringthe J agannatha festival. It is said that he ate the foam that came outof the mouth of the Lord while He danced before the Rathayatra car.Isana was a personal servant of Srimati Sacidevi, who showed her greatmercy upon him. He was also very dear to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 111                  subuddhi misra, hrdayananda, kamala-nayana
                   mahesa pandita, srikara, sri-madhusudana
                                 TRANSLATION     The sixty-second branch of the tree was Subuddhi Misra, the sixty-
third was Hrdayananda, the sixty-fourth is Kamala-nayana, the sixty-fifth was Mahesa Pandita, the sixty-sixth was Srikara, and the sixty-seventh was Sri Madhusudana.
                                   PURPORT     Subuddhi Misra, who was formerly Gunacuda in Vrndavana, installed
GauraNityananda Deities in a temple in the village known as Belagan,which is about three miles away from Srikhanda. His present descendantis known as Govindacandra Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 112                  purusottama, sri-galim a, jagannatha-dasa
                   sri-candrasekhara vaidya, dvija haridasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The sixty-eighth branch of the original tree was Purusottama, the
sixty-ninth was Sri Galima, the seventieth was Jagannatha dasa, theseventy-first was Sri Candrasekhara Vaidya, and the seventy-second wasDvija Haridasa.
                                   PURPORT     There is some question about whether Dvija Haridasa was the author
of Astottara-sata-nama. He had two sons named Sridama and Gokulanandawho were disciples of Sri Advaita Acarya. Their village, Kancana-gadiya,is situated within five miles of the Bajarasau station, the fifthstation from Ajimaganja in the district of Mursidabad, West Bengal.
                                   TEXT 113                     ramadasa, kavicandra, sri-gopaladasa
                     bhagavatacarya, thakura sarangadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The seventy-third branch of the original tree was Ramadasa, the
seventy-fourth was Kavicandra, the seventy-fifth was Sri Gopala dasa,the seventy-sixth was Bhagavatacarya, and the seventy-seventh wasThakura Saranga dasa.
                                   PURPORT     In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (203) it is said, "Bhagavatacarya
compiled a book entitled Krsna-prema-tarangini, and he was the mostbeloved devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu." When Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu visited Varahanagara, a suburb of Calcutta, He stayed in thehouse of a most fortunate brahmana who was a very learned scholar inBhagavata literature. As soon as this brahmana saw Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu, he began to read Srimad-Bhagavatam. When Mahaprabhu heardhis explanation, which expounded bhakti-yoga, He immediately becameunconscious in ecstasy. Lord Caitanya later said, "I have never heardsuch a nice explanation of Srimad-Bhagavatam. I therefore designate youBhagavatacarya. Your only duty is to recite Srimad-Bhagavatam. That isMy injunction." His real name was Raghunatha. His monastery, which issituated in Varahanagara, about three and a half miles north of Calcuttaon the bank of the Ganges, still exists, and it is managed by theinitiated disciples of the late Sri Ramadasa Babaji. Presently, however,
it is not as well managed as in the presence of Babaji Maharaja.     Another name of Thakura Saranga dasa was Sarnga Thakura. Sometimeshe was also called Sarngapani or Sarngadhara. He was a resident ofNavadvipa in the neighborhood known asModadruma-dvipa,and he used toworship the Supreme Lord in a secluded place on the bank of the Ganges.He did not accept disciples, but he was repeatedly inspired from withinby the Supreme Personality of Godhead to do so. Thus one morning hedecided, "Whomever I see I shall make my disciple." When he went to thebank of the Ganges to take his bath, by chance he saw a dead bodyfloating in the water, and he touched it with his feet. This immediatelybrought the body to life, and Thakura Saranga dasa accepted him as hisdisciple. This disciple later became famous as Thakura Murari, and hisname is always associated with that of Sri Saranga. His disciplicsuccession still inhabits the village of Sar. There is a temple atMamagacchi that is supposed to have been started by Sarnga Thakura. Notlong ago, a new temple building was erected in front of a bakula treethere, and it is now being managed by the members of the Gaudiya Matha.It is said that the management of the temple is now far better thanbefore. In the Gaura- ganoddesa-dipika (172) it is stated that SarngaThakura was formerly a gopi named Nandimukhi. Some devotees say that hewas formerly Prahlada Maharaja, but Sri Kavikarnapura says that hisfather, Sivananda Sena, does not accept this proposition.
                                   TEXT 114                   jagannatha tirtha, viora sri-janakinatha
                      gopala acarya, ara viora vaninatha
                                 TRANSLATION     The seventy-eighth branch of the original tree was J agannatha
Tirtha, the seventyninth was the brahmana Sri Janakinatha, the eightiethwas Gopala Acarya, and the eighty-first was the brahmana Vaninatha.
                                   PURPORT     J agannatha Tirtha was one of the n ine principal sannyasis who
were Lord Caitanya's associates. Vaninatha Vipra was a resident ofCanpahati, a village in the district of Burdwan near the town ofNavadvipa, the police station of Purvasthali and the post office ofSamudragada. The temple there was very much neglected, but it wasrenovated in the Bengali year 1328 by Sri Paramananda Brahmacari, one ofSri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura's disciples, who reorganized theseva-puja (worship in the temple) and placed the temple under themanagement of the Sri Caitanya Matha of Sri Mayapur. In the temple as itnow exists, the Deity of Sri Gaura-Gadadhara is worshiped strictlyaccording to the principles of the revealed scriptures. Canpahati is twomiles away from both Samudragada and the Navadvipa station of theeastern railway.
                                   TEXT 115                    govinda, madhava, vasudeva--tina bhai                    yan-sabara kirtane nace caitanya-nitai
                                 TRANSLATION     The three brothers Govinda, Madhava and Vasudeva were the eighty-
second, eighty-third and eighty-fourth branches of the tree. LordCaitanya and Nityananda used to dance in their kirtana performances.
                                   PURPORT     The three brothers Govinda, Madhava and Vasudeva Ghosh all belonged
to a kayastha family. Govinda established the Gopinatha temple inAgradvipa, where he resided. Madhava Ghosh was ex pert in performi ngkirtana. No one with in this world could compete with him. He was knownas the singer of Vrndavana and was very dear to Sri Nityananda Prabhu.It is said that when the three brothers performed sankirtana,immediately Lord Caitanya and Nityananda would dance in ecstasy.According to the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (1 88), the three brothers wereformerly Kalavati, Rasollasa and Gunatunga, who recited the songscomposed by Sri Visakha-gopi. The three brothers were among one of theseven parties that performed kirtana when Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuattended the Rathayatra festival at Jagannatha Puri. Vakresvara Panditawas the chief dancer in their party. This is vividly described in theMadhya-Iila, Chapter Thirteen, verses 42 and 43.
                                   TEXT 116                     ramaoasa abhirama--sakhya-premarasi
                   solasangera kastha tuli' ye karila vansi
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramadasa Abhirama was fully absorbed in the mellow of friendship.
He made a flute of a bamboo stick with sixteen knots.
                                   PURPORT     Abhirama was an inhabitant of Khanakulakrsna-nagara.                                   TEXT 117                   prabhura ajnaya nityananda gaude calila
                   tanra sange tina jana prabhu-ajnaya aila
                                 TRANSLATION     By the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, three devotees accompanied
Lord Nityananda Prabhu when He returned to Bengal to preach.
                                   TEXT 118
                    ramadasa, madhava, ara vasudeva gh osa
                   prabhu-sange rahe govinda paiya santosa                                 TRANSLATION
     These three were Ramadasa, Madhava and Vasudeva Ghosh. Govinda
Ghosh, however, remained with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puriand thus felt great satisfaction.
                                   TEXT 119
                  bhagavatacarya, ciranjiva sri-raghunandana
                  madhavacarya, kamalakanta, sri-yadunandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Bhagavatacarya, Ciranjiva, Sri Raghunandana, Madhavacarya,
Kamalakanta and Sri Yadunandana were all among the branches of theCaitanya tree.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Madhavacarya was the husband of Lord Nityananda's daughter,
Gangadevi. He took initiation from Purusottama, a branch of NityanandaPrabhu. It is saidthat when Nityananda Prabhu's daughter married Madhavacarya, the Lordgave him the village named Panjinagara as a dowry. His temple issituated near the Jirat railway station on the eastern railway.According to Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (1 69) Sri Madhavacarya was formerlythe gopi named Madhavi. Kamalakanta belonged to the branch of SriAdvaita Prabhu. His full name was Kamalakanta Visvasa.
                                   TEXT 120                    maha-krpa-patra prabhura jagai, madhai
                    `patita-pavana' namera saksi dui bhai
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagai and Madhai, the eighty-ninth and nintieth branches of the
tree, were the greatest recipients of Lord Caitanya's mercy. These twobrothers were the witnesses who proved that Lord Caitanya was rightlynamed Patita-pavana, "the deliverer of the fallen souls."
                                   PURPORT     In the Gaura-ganoddesa-aipika (1 15) it is said that the two
brothers Jagai and Madhai were formerly the doorkeepers named Jaya andVijaya, who later became Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu. Jagai and Madhaiwere born in respectable brahmana families, but they adopted theprofessions of thieves and rogues and thus became implicated in allkinds of undesirable activities, especially woman hunting, intoxicationand gambling. Later, by the grace of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and SriNityananda Prabhu, they were initiated, and they got the chance to chantthe Hare Krsna maha-mantra. As a result of chanting, both brothers laterbecame exalted devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The descendants of
Madhai still exist, and they are respectable brahmanas. The tombs ofthese two brothers, Jagai and Madh-ai, are in a place known asGhosahata, or Madhaitala-grama, which is situated about one mile southof Katwa. It is said that Sri Gopicarana dasa Babaji established atemple of Nitai-Gaura at this place about 200 years ago.
                                   TEXT 121                  gauda-desa-bhaktera kaila sanksepa kathana
                    ananta caitanya-bhakta na yaya ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have given a brief description of the devotees of Lord Caitanya
in Bengal. Actually His devotees are innumerable.
                                   TEXT 122
                     nilacale ei saba bhakta prabhu-sange
                   dui sthane prabhu-seva kaila nana-range
                                 TRANSLATION     I have esPecially mentioned all these devotees because they
accompanied Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu in Bengal and Orissa and served Himin many ways.
                                   PURPORT     Most of the devotees of Lord Caitanya lived in Bengal and Orissa.
Thus they are celebrated as oriyas and gaudiyas. At present, however, bythe grace of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, His cult is being propagated allover the world, and it is most probable that in the future history ofLord Caitanya's movement, Europeans, Americans, Canadians, Australians,South Americans, Asians and people from all over the world will becelebrated as devotees of Lord Caitanya. The International Society forKrishna Consciousness has already constructed a big temple at Mayapur,Navadvipa, which is being visited by devotees from all parts of theworld, as foretold by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and anticipated by SriBhaktivinoda Thakura.
                                   TEXT 123                  kevala nilacale prabhura ye ye bhakta-gana
                    sanksepe kariye kichu se saba kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me briefly describe some of the devotees of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu in Jagannatha Puri.                                 TEXT 124-126
                    nilacale prabhu-sange yata bhakta-gana
                   sabara adhyaksa prabhura marma dui jana
                    paramananda-puri, ara svarupa-damodara
                 gadadhara, jagadananda, sankara, vakresvara
                      damodara pandita, thakura haridasa
                    raghunatha vaidya, ara raghunatha-dasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Among the devotees who accornpanied the Lord in Jagannatha Puri,
two of them--Paramananda Puri and Svarupa Damodara--were the heart andsoul of the Lord. Among the other devotees were Gadadhara, Jagadananda,Sankara, Vakresvara, Damodara Pandita, Thakura Haridasa, RaghunathaVaidya and Raghunatha dasa.
                                   PURPORT     The Caitanya-bhagavata, A ntya-Iila, Chapter Five, states that
Raghu natha Vaidya came to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu when the Lord wasstaying at Panihati. He was a great devotee and had all good qualities.According to the Caitanya-bhagavata, he was formerly Revati, the wife ofBalarama. Anyone he glanced upon would immediately attain Krsnaconsciousness. He lived on the seashore at J agannatha Puri and compileda book of the name Sthana-nirupana.
                                   TEXT 127                    ityadika purva-sangi bada bhakta-gana
                     nilacale rahi' kare prabhura sevana
                                 TRANSLATION     All these devotees were associates of the Lord from the very
beginning, and when the Lord took up residence in Jagannatha Puri theyremained there to serve Him faithfully.
                                   TEXT 128
                     ara yata bhakta-gana gauda-desa-vasi
                    pratyabde prabhure dekhe nilacale asi,
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees who resided in Bengal used to visit Jagannatha
Puri to see the Lord.
                                   TEXT 129                     nilacale prabhu-saha prathama milana
                     sei bhakta-ganera ebe kariye ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     Now let me enumerate the devotees of Bengal who first came to see
the Lord at Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 130
                   bada-sakha eka,--sarvabhauma bhattacarya
                     tanra bhagni-pati sri-gopinathacarya
                                 TRANSLATION     There was Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, one of the biggest branches of
the tree of the Lord, and his sister's husband, Sri Gopinathacarya.
                                   PURPORT     The original name of Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was Vasudeva
Bhattacarya. His place of birth, which is known as Vidyanagara, is abouttwo and a half miles away from the Navadvipa railway station, orCanpahati railway station. His father was a very celebrated man of thename Mahesvara Visarada. It is said that Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was thegreatest logician of his time in India. At Mithila in Bihar he became astudent of a great professor named Paksadhara Misra, who did not allowany student to note down his explanations of logic. SarvabhaumaBhattacarya was so talented, however, that he learned the explanationsby heart, and when he later returned to Navadvipa he established aschool for the study of logic, thus diminishing the importance ofMithila. Students from various parts of India still come to Navadvipa tostudy logic. According to some authoritative opinions, the celebratedlogician Raghunatha Siromani was also a student of SarvabhaumaBhattacarya. In effect, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya became the leader of allstudents of logic. Although he was a grhastha (householder), he eventaught many sannyasis in the knowledge of logic. He started a school atJ agannatha Puri for the study of Vedanta philosophy, of which he was agreat scholar. When Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya met Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,he advised the Lord to learn Vedanta philosophy from him, but later hebecame a student of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to understand the realmeaning of Vedanta. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was so fortunate as to seethe six-armed form of Lord Caitanya known as Sadbhuja. A Sadbhuja Deityis still situated at one end of the Jagannatha temple. Daily sankirtanaperformances take place in this part of the temple. The meeting ofSarvabhauma Bhattacarya with Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is vividlydescribed in the Madhya-Iila, Chapter Six. Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya wrotea book named Caitanya-sataka. Of the 100 verses of this book, twoverses, begi n n i ng wi th the word s vairagya-vidya-nijabhaktiyoga,are ve ry famous among Gaudiya Vaisnavas. The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (11 9) states that Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya was an incarnation ofBrhaspati, the learned scholar from the celestial planets.     Gopinatha Acarya, who belonged to a respectable brahmana family,
was also an inhabitant of Navadvipa and constant companion of the Lord.He was the husband of Sarvabhau ma Bhattacarya's sister. I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika ( 1 78) it is described that he was formerly thegopinamed Ratnavali. According to the opinion of others, he was anincarnation of Brahma.
                                   TEXT 131                  kasiisra, pradyumna-misra, raya bhavananda
                      yanhara milane prabhu paila ananda                                TRANSLATION
     In the list of devotees at Jagannatha Puri [which begins with
Paramananda Puri, Svarupa Damodara, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya andGopinatha Acarya], Kasi Misra
was the fifth, Pradyumna Misra the sixth and Bhavananda Raya the
seventh. Lord Caitanya took great Pleasure in meeting with them.
                                   PURPORT     In Jagannatha Puri Lord Caitanya lived at the house of Kasi Misra,
who was the priest of the king. Later this house was inherited byVakresvara Pandita and then by his disciple Gopalaguru Gosvami, whoestablished there a Deity of Radhakanta. The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika(193) states that Kasi Misra was formerly the gopiin Vrndavana namedKrsnavallabha. Pradyumna Misra, an inhabitant of Orissa, was a greatdevotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Pradyumna Misra was born of abrahmana family and Ramananda Raya of a non-brahmana family, yet LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu advised Pradyumna Misra to take instruction fromRamananda Raya. This incident is described in the Antya-lila, ChapterFive.     Bhavananda Raya was the father of Sri Ramananda Raya. His residencewas in Alalanatha (Brahmagiri), which is about twelve miles west ofJagannatha Puri. By caste he belonged to the karana community of Orissa,whose members were sometimes known as kayasthas and sometimes as sudras,but he was the governor of Madras under the control of King Prataparudraof Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 132                      alingana karl' tanre balila vacana
                  tumi pandu, panca-pandava--tomara nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Embracing Raya Bhavananda, the Lord declared to him: "You formerly
appeared as Pandu, and your five sons appeared as the five Pandavas."
                                   TEXT 133
                    ramananda raya, pattanayaka gopinatha                   kalanidhi, sudhanldhi, nayaka vaninatha
                                 TRANSLATION     The five sons of Bhavananda Raya were Ramananda Raya, Pattanayaka
Gopinatha, Kalanidhi, Sudhanidhi and Nayaka Vaninatha.
                                   TEXT 134
                    ei panca putra tomara mora priyapatra
                     ramananda saha mora deha-bheda matra
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Bhavananda Raya, "Your five sons are
all My dear devotees. Ramananda Raya and I are one, although our bodiesare different."
                                   PURPORT     The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (120-124) states that Ramananda Raya was
formerly Arjuna. He is also considered to have been an incarnation ofthe gopi Lalita, although in the opinion of others he was an incarnationof Visakhadevi. He was a most confidential devotee of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "Although I am a sannyasi, Mymind is sometimes perturbed when I see a woman. But Ramananda Raya isgreater than Me, for he is always undisturbed, even when he touches awoman." Only Ramananda Raya was endowed with the prerogrative to touch awoman in this way; no one should imitate him. Unfortunately, there arerascals who imitate the activities of Ramananda Raya. We need notdiscuss them further.     In Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's final pastimes, both Ramananda Rayaand Svaru pa Damodara al ways engaged i n rec iti ng su itable versesfrom Srimad-Bhagavatam to pacify the Lord's ecstatic feelings ofseparation from Krsna. It is said that when Lord Caitanya went tosouthern India, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya advised Him to meet RamanandaRaya, for he declared that there was no devotee as advanced inunderstanding the conjugal love of Krsna and the gopis. While touringSouth India,Lord Caitanya met Ramananda Raya by the bank of the Godavari, and intheir long discourses the Lord took the position of a student, andRamananda Raya instructed Him. Caitanya Mahaprabhu concluded thesediscourses by saying, "My dear Ramananda Raya, both you and I aremadmen, and therefore we met intimately on an equal level." LordCaitanya advised Ramananda Raya to resign from his government post andcome back to Jagannatha Purito live with Him. Although Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu refused to see Maharaja Prataparudra because he was a king,Ramananda Raya, by a Vaisnava scheme, arranged a meeting between theLord and the King. This is described in the Madhya-lila, Chapter Twelve,verses 41-57. Sri Ramananda Raya was present during the water sports ofthe Lord after the Rathayatra festival.     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu considered Sri Ramananda Raya and SriSanatana Gosvami to be equal in their renunciation, for although SriRamananda Raya was a grhastha engaged in government service and Sri
Sanatana Gosvami was in the renounced order of complete detachment frommaterial activities, they were both servants of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead who kept Krsna in the center of all their activities. SriRamananda Raya was one of the three and a half personalities with whomSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu discussed the most confidential topics of Krsnaconsciousness. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu advised Pradyumna Misra to learnthe science of Krsna from Sri Ramananda Raya. As Subala always assistedKrsna in His dealings with Radharani in krsna-Iila, so Ramananda Rayaassisted Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu in His feelings of separation fromKrsna. Sri Ramananda Raya was the author of Jagannatha-vallabha-nataka.
                                 TEXT 135-136                   prataparudra raja, ara odhra krsnananda
                    paramananda mahapatra, odhra sivananda
                   bhagavan acarya, brahmanandakhya bharati
                     sri-sikhi mahiti, ara murari mahiti
                                 TRANSLATION     King Prataparudra of Orissa, the Oriya devotees Krsnananda and
Sivananda, Paramananda Mahapatra, Bhagavan Acarya, Brahmananda Bharati,Sri Sikhi Mahiti and Murari Mahiti constantly associated with CaitanyaMahaprabhu while He resided in Jagannatha Puri.
                                   PURPORT     Prataparudra Maharaja, who belonged to the dynasty of the Ganga
kings and whose capital was in Cuttak, was the Emperor of Orissa and agreat devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. It was by the arrangement ofRamananda Raya and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya that he was able to serveLord Caitanya. In the Gaura- ganoddesa-dipika (1 1 8) it is said thatKing I nd radyumna, who established the temple of Jagannatha thousandsof years ago, later took birth again in his own family as MaharajaPrataparudra during the time of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. MaharajaPrataparudra was as powerful as King Indra. The drama named Caitanya-candrodaya was written under his direction.     In the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-Iila, Chapter Five, ParamanandaMahapatra is described as follows: "Paramananda Mahapatra was among thedevotees who took birth in Orissa and accepted Caitanya Mahaprabhu astheir only asset. In the ecstasy of conjugal love, he always thought ofCaitanya Mahaprabhu." Bhagavan Acarya, a very learned scholar, wasformerly an inhabitant of Halisahara, but he left everything to livewith Caitanya Mahaprabhu in Jagannatha Puri. His relationship withCaitanya Mahaprabhu was friendly, like that of a cowherd boy. He wasalways friendly to Svarupa Gosani, but he was staunchly devoted to thelotus feet of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He sometimes invited CaitanyaMahaprabhu to his house.     Bhagavan Acarya was very liberal and simple. His father, SatanandaKhan, was completely materialistic, and his younger brother, GopalaBhattacarya, was a staunch Mayavadi philosopher who had studied veryelaborately. When his brother came to J agannatha Puri, Bhagavan Acaryawanted to hear from him about Mayavada philosophy, but Svarupa Damodara
forbade him to do so, and there the matter stopped. Once a friend ofBhagavan Acarya's from Bengal wanted to recite a drama that he hadwritten that was against the principles of devotional service, andalthough Bhagavan Acarya wanted to recite this drama before LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu, Svarupa Damodara, the Lord's secretary, did notallow him to do so. Later Svarupa Damodara pointed out in the drama manymistakes and disagreements with the conclusion of devotional service,and the author became aware of the faults in his writing and thensurrendered to Svarupa Damodara, begging his mercy. This is described inthe Antya-lila, Chapter Five, verses 91-166.     I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 1 89, it is said that SikhiMahiti was formerly an assistant of Srimati Rad harani named Ragalekha.His sister Madhavi was also an assistant of Srimati Radharani and wasnamed Kalakeli. Sikhi Mahiti, Madhavi and their brother Murari Mahitiwere all unalloyed devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu who could notforget Him for a moment of their lives. There is a book in the Oriyalanguage called Caitanya-carlta-mahakavya in which there are manynarrations about Sikhi Mahiti. One narration concerns his seeing anecstatic dream.Sikhi Mahiti always engaged in serving the Lord in his mind. One night,while he was rendering such service, he fell asleep, and while he wasasleep his brother and sister came to awaken him. At that time he was infull ecstasy because he was having a wonderful dream that Lord Caitanya,while visiting the temple of Jagannatha, was entering and again comingout of the body of Jagannatha and looking at the Jagannatha Deity. Thusas soon as he awakened he embraced his brother and sister and informedthem, "My dear brother and sister, I have had a wonderful dream that Ishall now explain to you. The activities of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu,the son of Mother Saci, are certainly most wonderful. I saw that LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu, while visiting the temple of Jagannatha, wasentering the body of Jagannatha and again coming out of His body. I amstill seeing the same dream. Do you think I have become deranged? I amstill seeing the same dream! And the most wonderful thing is that assoon as I came near Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He embraced me with His longarms." As he spoke to his brother and sister in this way, Sikhi Mahiti'svoice faltered, and there were tears in his eyes. Thus the brothers andsister went to the temple of Jagannatha, and there they saw LordCaitanya in Jagamohana, looking at the beauty of Sri Jagannatha Deityjust as in Sikhi Mahiti's dream. The Lord was so magnanimous thatimmediately He embraced Sikhi Mahiti, exclaiming, "You are the elderbrother of Murari!" Being thus embraced, Sikhi Mahiti felt ecstatictranscendental bliss. Thus he and his brother and sister always engagedin rendering service to the Lord. Murari Mahiti, the youngest brother ofSikhi Mahiti, is described in the Madhya-lila, Chapter Ten, verse 44.
                                   TEXT 137                     madhavi-devi--sikhi-mahitira bhagini
                   sri-radhara dasi-madhye yanra nama gani
                                 TRANSLATION     Madhavidevi, the seventeenth of the Prominent devotees, was the
younger sister of Sikhi Mahiti. She is considered to have formerly beena maidservant of Srimati Radharani.
                                   PURPORT     In the Antya-lila of Caitanya-caritamrta, Chapter Two, verses 104-
106, there is a description of Madhavidevi. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuconsidered her to be one of the maidservants of Srimati Radharani.Within this world, Caitanya Mahaprabhu had three and a half veryconfidential devotees. The three were Svarupa Gosani, Sri Ramananda Rayaand Sikhi Mahiti, and Sikhi Mahiti's sister, Madhavidevi, being a woman,was considered to be the half. Thus it is known that Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu had three and a half confidential devotees.
                                   TEXT 138                  isvara-purira sisya--brahmacari kasisvara
                    sri-go vlnda nama tanra priya anucara
                                 TRANSLATION     Brahmacari Kasisvara was a disciple of Isvara Puri, and Sri Govinda
was another of his dear disciples.
                                   PURPORT     Govinda was the personal servant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In the
Gaura- ganoddesa-diplka, verse 137, it is stated that the servantsformerly named Bhrngara and Bhangura in Vrndavana became Kasisvara andGovinda in Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes. Govinda always engaged in theservice of the Lord, even at great risk.
                                   TEXT 139                   tanra siddhi-kale donhe tanra ajna pana
                     nilacale prabhu-sthane milila asiya
                                 TRANSLATION     In the list of prominent devotees at Nilacala [Jagannatha Puri],
Kasisvara was the eighteenth and Govinda the nineteenth. They both cameto see Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri, being thus ordered byIsvara Puri at the time of his passing away.
                                   TEXT 140
                    gurura sambandhe manya kaila dunhakare
                    tanra ajna mani' se va dilena donhare
                                 TRANSLATION     Both Kasisvara and Govinda were Godbrothers of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and thus the Lord duly honored them as soon as they arrived.But because Isvara Puri had ordered them to give Caitanya Mahaprabhupersonal service, the Lord accepted their service.
                                   TEXT 141
                      anga-seva govindere dilena isvara
                   jagannatha dekhite calena age kasisvara
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda cared for the body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu whereas
Kasisvara went in front of the Lord when He went to see Jagannatha inthe temple.
                                   TEXT 142
                      aparasa yaya gosani manusya-gahane
                   manusya theli' patha kare kasi balavane
                                 TRANSLATION     When Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the temple of Jagannatha,
Kasisvara, being very strong, cleared the crowds aside with his hands sothat Caitanya Mahaprabhu could pass untouched.
                                   TEXT 143
                     ramai-nandai--donhe prabhura kinkara
                     govindera sange seva kare nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramai and Nandai, the twentieth and twenty-first among the
important devotees in Jagannatha Puri, always assisted Govinda twenty-four hours a day in rendering service to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 144
                     baisa ghada jala dine bharena ramai
                       govinda jnaya seva karena nandai
                                 TRANSLATION     Every day Ramai filled twenty-two big water Pots, whereas Nandai
personally assisted Govinda.
                                   PURPORT     In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika (139) it is stated that two servants
who formerly supplied milk and water to Lord Krsna became Ramai andNandai in the pastimes of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 145                    krsnadasa nama suddha kulina brahmana
                    yare sange laiya kaila daksina gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     The twenty-second devotee, Krsnadasa, was born of a Pure and
respectable brahmana family. While touring southern India, Lord Caitanyatook Krsnadasa with Him.
                                   PURPORT     Krsnadasa is described in the Madhya-lila, Chapters Seven and Nine.
He went with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to carry His water pot. In theMalabar state, members of the Bhattathari cult tried to captivateKrsnadasa by supplying a woman to seduce him, but although Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu saved him from being harmed, when they returned to JagannathaPuri He asked Krsnadasa to remain there, for the Lord was neverfavorably disposed toward an associate who was attracted by a woman.Thus Krsnadasa lost the personal association of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 146                   balabhadra bhattacarya--bhakti adhikari
                  tnathura-gamane prabhura yenho brahmacari
                                 TRANSLATION     As a bona fide devotee, Balabhadra Bhattacarya, the twenty.third
Principal associate, acted as the brahmacari of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuwhen He toured Mathura.
                                   PURPORT     Balabhadra Bhattacarya acted as a brahmacari, or personal assistant
of a sannyasi. A sannyasi is not supposed to cook. Generally a sannyasitakes prasada at the house of a gihastha, and a brahmacari helps in thisconnection. A sannyasi is supposed to be a spiritual master and abrahmacari his disciple. Balabhadra Bhattacarya acted as a brahmacarifor Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu when the Lord toured Mathura and Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 147                      bada harldasa, ara chota harldasa
                     dui kirtaniya rahe mahaprabhura pasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Bada Haridasa and Chota Haridasa, the twenty-fourth and twenty-
fifth devotees in Nilacala, were good singers who always accompaniedLord Caitanya.
                                   PURPORT     Chota Haridasa was later banished from the company of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, as stated in the Antya-lila, Chapter Two.
                                   TEXT 148                    ramabhadracarya, ara odhra simhesvara
                     tapana acarya, ara raghu, nilambara
                                 TRANSLATION     Among the devotees who lived with Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu at
Jagannatha Puri, Ramabhadra Acarya was the twenty-sixth, Simhesvara thetwenty-seventh, Tapana Acarya the twenty-eighth, Raghunatha the twenty-ninth and Nilambara the thirtieth.
                                   TEXT 149
                  singabhatta, kamabhatta, dantura sivananda
                gaude purva bhrtya prabhura priya kamalananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Singabhatta was the thirty-first, Kamabhatta the thirty-second,
Sivananda the thirty-third and Kamalananda the thirty-fourth. They allformerly served Sri Caitanya MahaPrabhu in Bengal, but later theseservants left Bengal to live with the Lord in Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 150
                      acyutananda--advaita-acarya-tanaya
                     nilacale rahe prabhura carana asraya
                                 TRANSLATION     Acyutananda, the thirty-fifth devotee, was the son of Advaita
Acarya. He also lived with Lord Caitanya, taking shelter of His lotusfeet at Jagannatha Puri.
                                   PURPORT     There is a statement about Acyutananda in Chapter Twelve, verse 13,
of Adi-lila.
                                   TEXT 151                       nirloma gangadasa, ara visnudasa                     ei sabera prabhu-sange nilacale vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Nirloma Gangadasa and Visnudasa were the thirty-sixth and thirty-
seventh among the devotees who lived at J agannatha Puri as servants ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                 TEXT 152-154
                  varanasi-madhye prabhura bhakta tina jana
                    candrasekhara vaidya, ara misra tapana
                   raghunatha bhattacarya--misrera nandana
                    prabhu yabe kasi aila dekhi' vindavana
                    candrasekhara-grhe kalla dui masa vasa
                     tapana-misrera ghare bhiksa dai masa
                                 TRANSLATION     The Prominent devotees at Varanasi were the Physician
Candrasekhara, Tapana Misra and Raghunatha Bhattacarya, Tapana Misra'sson. When Lord Caitanya came to Varanasi after seeing Vrndavana, for twomonths He lived at the residence of Candrasekhara Vaidya and acceptedprasada at the house of Tapana Misra.
                                   PURPORT     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was in Bengal, Tapana Misra approached
Him to discuss spiritual advancement. Thus he was favored by LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu and received hari-nama initiation. After that, bythe order of the Lord, Tapana Misra resided in Varanasi, and when LordCaitanya visited Varanasi He stayed at the home of Tapana Misra.
                                   TEXT 155                    raghunatha balye kaila prabhura sevana
                     ucchista-marjana ara pada-samvahana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed at the house of Tapana Misra,
Raghunatha Bhatta, who was then a boy, washed His dishes and massagedHis legs.
                                   TEXT 156
                   bada haile nilacale gela prabhura sthane
                    asta-masa rahila bhiksa dena kona dine
                                 TRANSLATION     When Raghunatha grew to be a young man, he visited Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri and stayed there for eight months.Sometimes he offered Prasada to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 157
                     prabhura ajna pana vindavanere aila
                    asiya sri-rupa-gosanira nikate rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Later, by the order of Lord Caitanya, Raghunatha went to Vrndavana
and remained there under the shelter of Srila Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 158
                  tanra sthane rupa-gosani sunena bhagavata
                   prabhura krpaya tenho krsna-preme matta
                                 TRANSLATION     While he stayed with Srila Rupa Gosvami, his engagement was to
recite SrimadBhagavatam for him to hear. As a result of this Bhagavatamrecitation, he attained Perfectional love of Krsna, by which he remainedalways maddened.
                                   PURPORT     Raghunatha Bhattacarya, or Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami, one of the
six Gosvamis, was the son of Tapana Misra. Born in approximately 1425sakabda, he was expert in reciting Srimad-Bhagavatam, and in the Antya-lila, Chapter Thirty, it is stated that he was also expert in cooking;whatever he cooked would be nectarean. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wasgreatly pleased to accept the foodstuffs that he cooked, and RaghunathaBhatta used to take the remnants of foodstuffs left by Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. Raghunatha Bhatt-acarya lived for eight months in JagannathaPuri, after which Lord Caitanya ordered him to go to Vrndavana to joinSri Rupa Gosvami. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked Raghunatha Bhattacaryanot to marry but to remain a brahmacari and He also ordered him to readSrimad-Bhagavatam constantly. Thus he went to Vrndavana, where heengaged in reciting Srimad- Bhagavatam to Srila Rupa Gosvami. He was soexpert in reciting Srimad-Bhagavatam that he would recite each and everyverse in three melodious tunes. While Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami wasliving with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord blessed him by offeringhim betel nuts offered to the Jagannatha Deity and a garland of tulasisaid to be as long as fourteen cubits. The Govinda temple wasconstructed by Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami's order to one of hisdisciples. Raghunatha Bhaita Gosvami supplied all the ornaments of theGovinda Deity. He never talked of nonsense or worldly matters but alwaysengaged in hearing about Krsna twenty-four hours a day. He never caredto hear blasphemy of a Vaisnava. Even when there were points to becriticized, he used to say that since all the Vaisnavas were engaged in
the service of the Lord, he did not mind their faults. Later RaghunathaBhatta Gosvami lived by Rad hak u nda in a sm all cottage. I n th eGaura-ganoddesa-diplka, verse 185, it is said that Raghunatha BhattaGosvami was formerly the gopi named Raga-ma nja ri.
                                   TEXT 159                   ei-mata sankhyatita caitanya-bhakta-gana
                    dinmatra likhi, samyak na yaya kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     I list in this way only a Portion of the innumerable devotees of
Lord Caitanya. To describe them all fully is not possible.
                                   TEXT 160
                      ekaika-sakhate Iage koti koti dala
                      tara sisya-upasisya, tara upadala
                                 TRANSLATION     From each branch of the tree have grown hundreds and thouands of
subbranches of disciples and grand-disciples.
                                   PURPORT     It was the desire of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu that His cult be
spread all over the world. Therefore there is a great necessity formany, many disciples of the branches of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'sdisciplic succession. His cult should be spread not only in a fewvillages, or in Bengal, or in India, but all over the world. It is verymuch regrettable that complacent so-called devotees criticize themembers of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness foraccepting sannyasa and spreading the cult of Lord Caitanya all over theworld. It is not our business to criticize anyone, but because they tryto find fault with this movement, the real truth must be stated.SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu wanted devotees all over the world, and SrilaBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura and Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura alsoconfirmed this. It is in pursuit of their will that the ISKCON movementis spreading all over the world. Genuine devotees of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu must take pride in the spread of Krsna consciousness movementinstead of viciously criticizing its propaganda work.
                                   TEXT 161                    sakala bhariya ache prema-phula-phale
                     bhasaila tri jagat krsna-prema jale
                                 TRANSLATION     Every branch and sub-branch of the tree is full of innumerable
fruits and flowers. They inundate the world with the waters of love ofKrsna.
                                   TEXT 162
                     eka eka sakhara sakti ananta mahima
                     `sahasra vadane' yara dite nare sima
                                 TRANSLATION     Each and every branch of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's devotees has
unlimited spiritual Power and glory. Even if one had thousands ofmouths, it would be impossible to describe the limits of theiractivities.
                                   TEXT 163
                   sanksepe kahila mahaprabhura bhakta-gana
                     samagra balite nare `sahasra-vadana'
                                 TRANSLATION     I have briefly described the devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
in different Places. Even Lord Sesa, who has thousands of mouths, couldnot list them all.
                                   TEXT 164
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamra,following in their footsteps.
     Th us end the Bhaktivedanta purports of Sri Caitanyacaritamrta,
Adi-lila, Chapter Ten, in the matter of the Main Trunk of the CaitanyaTree, Its Branches and Its Sub-branches.
                                Chapter Eleven
     As the branches and sub-branches of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu were
described in the Tenth Chapter, in this Eleventh Chapter the branchesand sub-branches of Sri Nityananda Prabhu are similarly listed.
                                    TEXT 1               nityananda-padambhoja-bhrngan prema-madhunmadan
                natvakhilan tesu mukhya likhyante katicin maya
                                 TRANSLATION     After offering my obeisances unto all of the devotees of Sri
Nityananda Prabhu, who are like bumblebees collecting honey from Hislotus feet, I shall try to describe those who are the most prominent.
                                    TEXT 2
                   jaya jaya mahaprabhu sri-krsna-caitanya
                     tanhara caranasrita yei, sei dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! Anyone who has taken
shelter at His lotus feet is glorious.
                                    TEXT 3
                    jaya jaya sri-advaita, jaya nityananda
                  jaya jaya mahaprabhura sarva-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Advaita Prabhu, Nityananda Prabhu and all the
devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu!
                                    TEXT 4
               tasya sri-krsna-caitanya-sat-premamara-sakhinah
              urdh va-skandhavadhutendoh sakha-rupan ganan numah
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Nityananda Prabhu is the topmost branch of the indestructible
tree of eternal love of Godhead, Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu. I offermy respectful obeisances to all the sub-branches of that topmost branch.
                                    TEXT 5
                   sri-nityananda-vrksera skandha gurutara
                    tahate janmila sakha-prasakha vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Nityananda Prabhu is an extremely heavy branch of the Sri
Caitanya tree. From that branch grow many branches and sub-branches.                                    TEXT 6
                    malakarera iccha jale bade sakha-gana
                   prema-phula-phale bhari' chaila bhu vana
                                 TRANSLATION     Watered by the desire of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, these branches
and subbranches have grown unlimitedly and covered the entire world withfruits and flowers.
                                    TEXT 7
                     asankhya ananta gana ke karu ganana
                    apana sodhite kahi mukhya mukhya jana
                                 TRANSLATION     These branches and sub-branches of devotees are innumerable and
unlimited. Who could count them? For my personal purification I shalltry to enumerate only the most prominent among them.
                                   PURPORT     One should not write books or essays on transcendental subject
matter for material name, fame or profit. Transcendental literature mustbe written under the direction of a superior authority because it is notmeant for material purposes. If one tries to write under superiorauthority, he becomes purified. All Krsna conscious activities should beundertaken for personal purification (apana sodhite), not for materialgain.
                                    TEXT 8                   sri-virabhadra gosani--skandha-mahasakha
                   tanra upasakha yata, asankhya tara lekha
                                 TRANSLATION     After Nityananda Prabhu, the greatest branch is Virabhadra Gosani,
who also has innumerable branches and sub-branches. It is not possibleto describe them all.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura describes Virabhadra Gosani
as the direct son of Srila Nityananda Prabhu and disciple of Jahnava-devi. His real mother was Vasudha. I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse67, he is mentioned as an incarnation of Ksiroda kasayi Visnu. ThereforeVirabhad ra Gosan i is n ond ifferen t from Sri Krsna CaitanyaMahaprabhu. In a village of the name Jhamatapura in the district ofHugali, Virabhadra Gosani had a disciple named Yadunathacarya, who hadtwo daughters--a real daughter named Srimati and a foster daughter named
Narayani.Both these daughters married, and they are mentioned in Bhakti-ratnakara, ChapterGopijana-vallabha, Ramakrsna and Ramacandra. The youngest, Ramacandra,belonged to the Sandilya dynasty and had the surname Vatavyala. Heestablished his family at Khadadaha, and its members are known as thegosvamis of Khadadaha. The eldest disciple, Gopijana-vallabha, was aresident of a village known as Lata near the Manakara railway station inthe district of Burdwan. The second, Ramakrsria, lived near Maladaha ina village named Gayesapura. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura notesthat since these three disciples belonged to different gotras, ordynasties, and also had different surnames and lived in differentplaces, it is not possible to accept them as real sons of VirabhadraGosani. Ramacandra had four sons, of whom the eldest was Radhamadhava,whose third son was named Yadavendra. Yadavendra's son was Nandakisora,his son was Nidhikrsna, his son was Caitanyacanda, his son wasKrsnamohana, his son was J aganmohana, his son was Vrajanatha, and hisson was Syamalala Gosvami. This is the genealogical table given byBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura for the descendants of VirabhadraGosani.
                                    TEXT 9                     isvara ha-iya kah\ya maha-bhagavata
                    veda-dharmatita hana veda-dharme rata
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Virabhadra Gosani was the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
He presented Himself as a great devotee. And although the SupremeGodhead is transcendental to all Vedic injunctions, He strictly followedthe Vedic rituals.
                                   TEXT 10
                    antare is vara-cesta, bahire nirdambha
                  caitanya-bhakti-mandape tenho mula-stambha
                                 TRANSLATION     He is the main pillar in the hall of devotional service erected by
SrT Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He knew within Himself that He acted as theSupreme Lord Visnu, but externally He was prideless.
                                   TEXT 11
                      adyapi yanhara krpa-mahima ha-ite
                    caitanya-nityananda gaya sakala jagate
                                 TRANSLATION     It is by the glorious mercy of Sri Virabhadra Gosani that people
all over the world now have the chance to chant the names of Caitanyaand Nityananda.
                                   TEXT 12
                    sei virabhadra-gosanira la-inu sarana
                     yanhara prasade haya abhista-purana
                                 TRANSLATION     I therefore take shelter of the lotus feet of Virabhadra Gosani so
that by His mercy my great desire to write Sri Caitanya-caritamrta willbe properly guided.
                                   TEXT 13
                      sri-rama-dasa ara, gadadhara dasa
                   caitanya-gosanira bhakta rahe tanra pasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Two devotees of Lord Caitanya named Sri Ramadasa and Gadadhara dasa
always lived with Sri Virabhadra Gosani.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Ramadasa, later known as Abhirama Thakura, was one of the
twelve gopalas, cowherd boy friends, of Sri N ityananda Prabh u. TheGaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse Chapter Four, there is a description ofSrila Abhirama Thakura. By the order of Sri Nityananda Prabhu, AbhiramaThakura became a great acarya and preacher of the Caitanya cult ofdevotional service. He was a very influential personality, andnondevotees were very much afraid of him. Empowered by Sri NityanandaPrabhu, he was always in ecstasy and was extremely kind to all fallensouls. It is said that if he offered obeisances to any stone other thana salagrama-sila, it would immediately fracture.     Ten miles southwest of the railway station Canpadanga on the narrowgauge railway line from Howrah in Calcutta to Amta, a village in theHugali district, is a small town named Khanakula-krsnanagara where thetemple of Abhirama Thakura is situated. During the rainy season, whenthis area is inundated with water, people must go there by another line,which is now called the southeastern railway. On this line there is astation named Kolaghata, from which one has to go by steamer toRanicaka. Seven and a half miles north of Ranicaka is Khanakula.Thetemple of Abhirama Thakura is situated in Krsnanagara, which is near thekula (bank) of the Khana (Dvarakesvara River); therefore this place iscelebrated as Khanakulakrsnanagara. Outside of the temple is a bakulatree. This place is known as Siddhabakula-kunja. It is said that whenAbhirama Thakura came there, he sat down under this tree. In Khanakula-krsnanagara there is a big fair held every year in the month of caitra(March-April) on the krsna-saptami, the seventh day of the dark moon.Many hundreds and thousands of people gather for this festival. The
temple of Abhirama Thakura has a very old history. The Deity in thetemple is known as Gopinatha. There are many sevaita families livingnear the temple. It is said that Abhirama Thakura had a whip and thatwhoever he touched with it would immediately become an elevated devoteeof Krsna. Among his many disciples, Sriman Srinivasa Acarya was the mostfamous and the most dear, but it is doubtful that he was his initiateddisciple.
                                  TEXT 14-15                    nityanande ajna dila yabe gaude yaite
                      mahaprabhu ei dui dila tanra sathe
                        ataeva dui-gane dunhara ganana
                    madhava-vasudeva ghoserao ei vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Nityananda Prabhu was ordered to go to Bengal to preach, these
two devotees [Sri Ramadasa and Gadadhara dasa] were ordered to go withHim. Thus they are sometimes counted among the devotees of Lord Caitanyaand sometimes among the devotees of Lord Nityananda. Similarly, Madhavaand Vasudeva Ghosh belonged to both groups of devotees simultaneously.
                                   PURPORT     There is a place named Danihata near the Agradvipa railway station
and Patuli in the district of Burdwan where the Deity of Sri Gopinathajiis still situated. This Deity accepted Govinda Ghosh as His father. Evenuntil today, the Deity performs the sraddha ceremony on the anniversaryof the death of Govinda Ghosh. The temple of this Deity is managed bythe rajavamsa family of Krsnanagara, whose members are descendants ofRaja Krsnacandra. Every year in the month of vaisakha, when there is abaradola ceremony, this Gopinatha Deity is taken to Krsnanagara. Theceremony is performed with eleven other Deities, and then SriGopinathaji is again brought back to the temple in Agradvipa.
                                   TEXT 16                  rama-dasa--mukhya-sakha, sakhya-prema-rasi
                  sola-sangera kastha yei tuli' kaila vamsi
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramadasa, one of the chief branches, was full of fraternal love of
Godhead. He made a flute from a stick with sixteen knots.
                                   TEXT 17
                     gadadhara dasa gopibhave purnananda
                    yanra ghare danakeli kaila nityananda                                 TRANSLATION
     Srila Gadadhara dasa was always fully absorbed in ecstasy as a
gopi. In his house Lord Nityananda enacted the drama Danakeli.
                                   TEXT 18
                   sri-madhava ghosa--mukhya kirtaniya-gane
                   nityananda-prabhu nrtya kare yanra gane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Madhava Ghosh was a principal performer of kirtana. While he
sang Nityananda Prabhu danced.
                                   TEXT 19
                     vasudeva gite kare prabhura varnane
                      kastha-pasana drave yahara sravane
                                 TRANSLATION     When Vasudeva Ghosh performed kirtana, describing Lord Caitanya and
Nityananda, even wood and stone would melt upon hearing it.
                                   TEXT 20
                     murari-caitanya-dasera alaukika Iila
                   vyaghra-gale cada mare, sarpa-sane khela
                                 TRANSLATION     There were many extraordinary activities performed by Murari, a
great devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Sometimes in his ecstasy hewould slap the cheek of a tiger, and sometimes he would play with avenomous snake.
                                   PURPORT     Murari Caitanya dasa was born in the village of Sarvrndavana-pura,
which is situated about two miles from the Galasi station on the Burdwanline. When Murari Caitanya dasa came to Navadvipa, he settled in thevillage of Modadruma, or Maugachi-grama. At that time he became known asSarnga or Saranga Murari Caitanya dasa. The descendants of his familystill reside in Sarer Pata. I n the Caitanya-bhagavata, A ntya-Iil~Chapter Five, there is the following statement: "Murari Caitanya dasahad no material bodily features, for he was completely spiritual. Thushe would sometimes chase after tigers in the jungle and treat them justlike cats and dogs. He would slap the cheek of a tiger and take avenomous snake on his lap. He had no fear for his external body, ofwhich he was completely forgetful. He could spend all twenty-four hoursof the day chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra or speaking about Lord
Caitanya and Nityananda. Sometimes he would remain submerged in waterfor two orthree days, but he would feel no bodily inconvenience. Thus hebehaved almost like stone or wood, but he always used his energy inchanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. No one can describe his specificcharacteristics, but it is understood that wherever Murari Caitanya dasapassed, whoever was present would be enlightened in Krsna consciousnesssimply by the atmosphere he created."
                                   TEXT 21                   nityanandera gana yata--saba vraja-sakha
                    srnga-vetra-gopavesa, sire sikhi-pakha
                                 TRANSLATION     All the associates of Lord Nityananda were formerly cowherd boys in
Vrajabhumi. Their symbolic representations were the horns and sticksthey carried, their cowherd dress and the peacock Plumes on their heads.
                                   PURPORT     Jahnava-mata is also within the list of Lord Nityananda's
followers. She is described in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 66, asAnanga-manjari of Vrndavana. All the devotees who are followers ofJahnavaimata are counted within the list of Sri Nityananda Prabhu'sdevotees.
                                   TEXT 22                     raghunatha vaidya upadhyaya mahasaya
                   yanhara darsane krsna-prema-bhakti haya
                                 TRANSLATION     The physician Raghunatha, also known as Upadhyaya, was so great a
devotee that simply seeing him would awaken one's dormant love ofGodhead.
                                   TEXT 23
                sundarananda--nityanandera sakha, bhrtya marma
                   yanra sange nityananda kare vraja-narma
                                 TRANSLATION     Sundarananda, another branch of Sri Nityananda Prabhu, was Lord
Nityananda's most intimate servant. Lord Nityananda Prabhu perceived thelife of Vrajabhumi in his company.
                                   PURPORT     In the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-lila, Chapter Six, it is stated
that Sundarananda was an ocean of love of Godhead and the chiefassociate of Sri Nityananda Prabhu. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika he isstated to have been Sudama in krsna-lila. Thus he was one of the twelvecowherd boys who came down with Balarama when He descended as SriNityananda Prabhu. The holy place where Sundarananda lived is situatedin the village known as Mahesapura, which is about fourteen miles eastof the Majadiya railway station of the eastern railway from Calcutta toBurdwan. Thisplace is within the district of Jeshore, which is now in Bangladesh.Among the relics of this village,only the old residential house ofSundarananda still exists. At the end of the village resides a baula(pseudo-Vaisnava), and all the buildings, both the temples and thehouse, appear to be newly constructed. In Mahesapura there are Deitiesof Sri Radhavallabha and Sri Sri Radharamana. Near the temple is a smallriver of the name Vetravati.     Sundarananda Prabhu was a naisthika-brahmacari he never married inhis life. Therefore he had no direct descendants except his disciples,but the descendants of his family still reside in the village known asMangaladihi in the district of Birbhum. In that same village is a templeof Balarama, and the Deity there is regularly worshiped. The originalDeity of Mahesapura, Radhavallabha, was taken by the Saidabad Gosvamisof Berhampur, and since the present Deities were installed, a Zamindarfamily of Mahesapura has looked after Their worship. On the full moonday of the month of magha (January-February), the anniversary ofSundarananda's disappearance is regularly celebrated, and people fromthe neighboring areas gather together to observe this festival.
                                   TEXT 24                      kamalakara pippalai--alaukika rita
                     alaukika prema tanra bhuvane vidita
                                 TRANSLATION     Kamalakara Pippalai is said to have been the third gopala. His
behavior and love of Godhead were uncommon, and thus he is celebratedall over the world.
                                   PURPORT     In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 128, Kamalakara Pippalai is
described as the third gopala. His former name was Mahabala. TheJagannatha Deity at Mahesa in Sri Ramapura was installed by KamalakaraPippalai. This village of Mahesa is situated about two and a half milesfrom the Sri Ramapura railway station. The genealogy of the family ofKamalakara Pippalai is given as follows. Kamalakara Pippalai had a sonnamed Caturbhuja, who had two sons named Narayana and Jagannatha.Narayana had one son named Jagadananda, and his son's name wasRajivalocana. During the time of Rajivalocana, there was a scarcity offinances for the worship of the Jagannatha Deity, and it is said thatthe Nawab of Dacca, whose name was Shah Suja, donated 1,185 bigha-s ofland in the Bengali year 1060. The land being th possession of Jagannatha, the village was named Jagannatha-pura. It is said thatKamalakara Pippalai left home, and therefore his younger brother
Nidhipati Pippalai searched for him and in due course of time found himin the village of Mahesa. Nidhipati Pippalai tried his best to bring hiselder brother home, but he would not return. Under these circumstances,Nidhipati Pippalai, with all his family members, came to Mahesa toreside. The members of this family still reside in the vicinity of theMahesa village. Their family name is Adhikari, and they are a brahmanafamily.     The history of the Jagannatha Temple in Mahesa is as follows. Onedevotee of the name Dhruvananda went to see Lord J agannatha, Balaramaand Subhadra at J agannatha Puri, wanting to offer foodstuffs to Jagannathaji that he had cooked with his own hands. This being hisdesire, one night Jagannathajiappeared to him in a dream and asked himto go to Mahesa on the bank of the Ganges and there start worship of Himin a temple. Thus Dhruvananda went to Mahesa, where he saw the threeDeities--Jagannatha, Balarama and Subhadra--floating in the Ganges. Hepicked up all those Deities and installed Them in a small cottage, andwith great satisfaction he executed the worship of Lord Jagannatha. Whenhe became old, he was very much anxious to hand over the worship to thecharge of someone reliable, and in a dream he got permission fromJagannatha Prabhu to hand it over to a person whom he would meet thenext morning. The next morning he met Kamalakara Pippalai, who wasformerly an inhabitant of the village Khalijuli in the SundaravanaForest area of Bengal and was a pure Vaisnava, a great devotee of LordJagannatha; thus he immediately gave him charge of the worship. In thisway, Kamalakara Pippalai became the worshiper of Lord Jagannatha, andsince then his family members have been designated as Adhikari, whichmeans "one who is empowered to worship the Lord." These Adhikaris belongto a respectable brahmana family. Five types of upper-class brahmanasare recognized by the surname Pippalai.
                                   TEXT 25                  suryadasa sarakhela, tanra bhai krsnadasa
                   nityanande ardha visvasa, premera nivasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Suryadasa Sarakhela and his younger brother Krsnadasa Sarakhela
both possessed firm faith in Nityananda Prabhu. They were a reservoir oflove of Godhead.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Bhakti-ratnakara, Chapter Twelve, it is stated that a few
miles from Navadvipa is a place called Saligrama that was the residenceof Suryadasa Sarakhela. He was employed as a secretary of the Mohammedangovernment of that time, and thus he amassed a good fortune. Suryadasahad four brothers, all of whom were pure Vaisnavas. Vasudha and Jahnavawere two daughters of Suryadasa Sarakhela.
                                   TEXT 26                 gauridasa pandita yanra premoddanda-bhak ti                   krsna-prema dite, nite, dhare mahasakti
                                 TRANSLATION     Gauridasa Pandita, the emblem of the most elevated devotional
service in love of Godhead, had the greatest potency to receive anddeliver such love.
                                   PURPORT     It is said that Gauridasa Pandita was always patronized by King
Krsnadasa, the son of Harihoda. Gauridasa Pandita lived in the villageof Saligrama, which is situated a few miles from the railway stationMudagacha, and later he came to reside in Ambi ka-kalana. It is stated in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 1 28, that formerly he was Subala,one of the cowherd boy friends of Krsna and Balarama in Vrndavana.Gauridasa Pandita was the younger brother of Suryadasa Sarakhela, andwith the permission of his elder brother he shifted his residence to thebank of the Ganges, living there in the town known as Ambika-kalana.Some of the names of the descendants of Gauridasa Pandita are asfollows: (1) Sri Nrsimhacaitanya, (2) Krsnadasa, (3) Visnudasa, (4) BadaBalarama dasa, (5) Govinda, (6) Raghunatha, (7) Badu Gangadasa, (8)Auliya Gangarama, (9) Yadavacarya, ( 1 0) H rdayacaitanya, ( 1 1) CandaHaladara, (1 2) Mahesa Pandita, (1 3) M ukuta Raya, (14) BhatuyaGangarama, (1 5) Auliya Caitanya, (1 6) Kaliya Krsnadasa, ( 1 7) PatuyaGopala, (1 8) Bada Jagannatha, (19) Nityananda, (20) Bhavi, (21) Jagadisa, (22) Raiya Krsnadasa and (22 1/2) Annapurna. The eldest son ofGauridasa Pandita was known as big Balarama, and the youngest was knownas Raghunatha. The sons of Raghunatha were Mahesa Pandita and Govinda.Gauridasa Pandita's daughter was known as Annapurna.      The villageAmbika-kalana, which is situated just across the River Ganges fromSantipura, is two miles east of the Kalanakorta railway station on theeastern railway. In Ambika-kalana there is a temple constructed by theZamindar of Burdwan. In front of the temple there is a big tamarindtree, and it is said that Gauridasa Pandita and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhumet underneath this tree. The place where the temple is situated isknown as Ambika, and because it is in the area of Kalana, the village isknown as Ambika-kalana. It is said that a copy of Bhagavad-gita writtenby SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu still exists in this temple.
                                   TEXT 27                     nityanande samarpila jati-kula-panti
                    sri caitanya-nityanande kari pranapati
                                 TRANSLATION     Making Lord Caitanya and Lord Nityananda the Lords of his life,
Gauridasa Pandita sacrificed everything for the service of LordNityananda, even the fellow. ship of his own family.
                                   TEXT 28                 nityananda prabhura priya--pandita purandara
                   premarnava-madhye phire yaichana mandara
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirteenth important devotee of Sri Nityananda Prabhu was
Pandita Purandara, who moved in the ocean of love of Godhead just likethe Mandara Hill.
                                   PURPORT     Pandita Purandara met Sri Nityananda Prabhu at Khadadaha. When
Nityananda Prabhu visited this village, He danced very uncommonly, andHis dancing captivated Purandara Pandita.The pandita was in the top of atree, and upon seeing the dancing of Nityananda he jumped down on theground proclaiming himself to be Angada, one of the devotees in the campof Hanuman during the pastimes of Lord Ramacandra.
                                   TEXT 29                    paramesvara-dasa--nityanandaika-sarana
                  krsna-bhak ti paya, tanre ye kare smarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Paramesvara dasa, said to be the fifth gopala of krsna-Iila,
completely surrendered to the lotus feet of Nityananda. Anyone whoremembers his name, Paramesvara dasa, will get love of Krsna veryeasily.
                                   PURPORT     The Caitanya-bhagavata states that Paramesvara dasa, known
sometimes as Paramesvari dasa, was the life and soul of Sri NityanandaPrabhu. The body of Paramesvara dasa was the place of Lord Nityananda'spastimes. Paramesvara dasa, who lived for some time at Khadadahavillage, was always filled with the ecstasy of a cowherd boy. Formerlyhe was Arjuna, a friend of Krsna and Balarama. He was the fifth amongthe twelve gopalas. He accompanied Srimati J ahnava-devi when sheperformed the festival at Kheturi. It is stated in the Bhakti-ratnakarathat by the order of Srimati jahnava-mata, he installed Radha-Gopinathain the temple at Atapura in the district of Hugali.The Atapura stationis on the narrow gauge railway line between Howrah and Amata. Anothertemple in Atapura, established by the Mitra family, is known as theRadha-Govinda temple. In front of the temple, in a very attractive placeamong two bakula trees and a kadamba tree, is the tomb of ParamesvariThakura, and above it is an altar with a tulasibush. It is said thatonly one flower a year comes out of the kadamba tree. It is offered tothe Deity.     Paramesvari Thakura belonged, it is said, to a vaidya family. Adescendant of his brother is at present a worshiper in the temple. Someof their family members still reside in the district of Hugali near thepost office of Canditala. The descendants of Paramesvari Thakura tookmany disciples from brahmana fam ilies, but as these descendantsgradually took to the profession of physicians, persons from brahmana
families ceased becoming their disciples. The family titles ofParamesvari's descendants are Adhikari and Gupta. Unfortunately hisfamily members do not worship the Deity directly; they have engaged paidbrahmanas to worship the Deity. I n the temple, Baladeva and Sri SriRadha-Gopinatha are together on the throne. It is supposed that theDeity of Baladeva was installed later because according totranscendental mellow, Baladeva, Krsna and Radha cannot stay on the samethrone. On the full moon day of vaisakha (April-May), the disappearancefestival of Paramesvari Thakura is observed in this temple.
                                   TEXT 30                      jagadisa pandita haya jagat-pavana
                   krsna-premamrta varse, yena varsa ghana
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadis-a Pandita, the fifteenth branch of Lord Nityananda's
followers, was the deliverer of the entire world. 0evotional love ofKrsna showered from him like torrents of rain.
                                   PURPORT     Descriptions of Jagadisa Pandita are available from Caitanya-
bhagavata, Adi-Iila, Chapter Four, and Caitanya-carltamrta, Adi-lila,Chapter Fourteen. He belonged to the village of Yasada-grama in thedistrict of Nadia near the Cakadaha railway station. His father, the sonof Bhatta Narayana, was named Kamalaksa. Both his father and mother weregreat devotees of Lord Visnu, and after their death, Jagadisa, with hiswife Duhkhini and brother Mahesa, left his birthplace and came to SriMayapur to live in the company of Jagannatha Misra and other Vaisnavas.Lord Caitanya asked Jagadisa to go to Jagannatha Puri to preach thehari-nama-sankirtana movement. After returning from Jagannatha Puri, onthe order of Lord Jagannatha he established Deities of Jagannatha in thevillage of Yasada-grama. It is said that when Jagadisa Pandita broughtthe Deity of Jagannatha to Yasada-grama, he tied the heavy Deity to astick and thus brought Him to the village. The priests of the templestill show the stick used by Jagadisa Pandita to carry the JagannathaDeity.
                                   TEXT 31                  nityananda-priyabhrtya pandita dhananjaya
                    atyanta virakta, sada krsna-premamaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The sixteenth dear servant of Nityananda Prabhu was Ohananjaya
Pandita. He was very much renounced and always merged in love of Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Pandita Dhananjaya was a resident of the village in Katwa named
Sitala. He was one of the twelve goplas. His former name, according toGaura-ganoddesa-dipika, was Vasudama. Sitala-grama is situated near theMangalakota police station and Kaicara post office in the district ofBurdwan. On the narrow railway from Burdwan to Katwa is a railwaystation about nine miles from Kutwa known as Kaicara. One has to goabout a mile northeast of this station to reach Sitala. The temple was athatched house with walls made of dirt. Some time ago,the Zamindars ofBajaravana Kabasi, the Mulliks, constructed a big house for the purposeof a temple, but for the last sixty-five years the temple has beenbroken down and abandoned. The foundation of the old temple is stillvisible. There is a tulasi pillar near the temple, and every year duringthe month of January the disappearance day of Dhananjaya is observed. Itis said that for some time Pandita Dhananjaya was in a sankirtana partyunder the direction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and then he went toVrndavana. Before going to Vrndavana, he lived for some time in avillage named Sancadapancada, which is six miles south of the Memarirailway station. Sometimes this village is also known as the "place ofDhananjaya" (Dhananjayera Pata). After some time, he left theresponsibility for worship with a disciple and went back to Vrndavana.After returning from Vrndavana to Sitala-grama, he established a Deityof Gaurasundara in the temple. The descendants of Pandita Dhananjayastill live in Sitala-grama and look after the temple worship.
                                   TEXT 32                     mahesa pandita--vrajera udara gopala
                    dhakka-vadye nrtya kare preme matoyala
                                 TRANSLATION     Mahesa Pandita, the seventh of the twelve gopalas, was very
liberal. In great love of Krsna he danced to the beating of a kettledrumlike a madman.
                                   PURPORT     The village of Mahesa Pandita, which is known as Palapada, is
situated in the district of Nadia within a forest about one mile southof the Cakadaha railway station. The Ganges flows nearby. It is saidthat formerly Mahesa Pandita lived on the eastern side of Jirat in thevillage known as Masipura or Yasipura, and when Masipura merged in theriverbed of the Ganges, the Deities there were brought to Palapada, which is situated in the midst of various villages such as Beledanga,Berigrama, Sukhasagara, Candude and Manasapota. (There are aboutfourteen villages, and the entire neighborhood is known as PancanagaraParagana.) It is mentioned that Mahesa Pandita joined the festivalperformed by Sri Nityananda Prabhu at Panihati. Narottama dasa Thakuraalso joined in the festival, and Mahesa Pandita saw him on thatoccasion. In the temple of Mahesa Pandita there are Deities of Gaura-Nityananda, Sri Gopinatha, Sri Madana-mohana and Radha-Govinda as wellas a salagrama-sila.
                                   TEXT 33                    navadvipe purusottama pandita mahasaya
                     nityananda-name yanra mahonmada haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Purusottama Pandita, a resident of Navadvipa, was the eighth
gopala. He would become almost mad as soon as he heard the holy name ofNityananda Prabhu.
                                   PURPORT     I t is stated i n th e Caitanya-bhagavata that Pu rusottam a Pand
ita was born i n Navadvipa and was a great devotee of Lord NityanandaPrabhu. As one of the twelve gopalas, his former name was Stokakrsna.
                                   TEXT 34                     balarama dasa--krsna-prema-rasasvadi
                      nityananda-name haya parama unmadi
                                 TRANSLATION     Balarama dasa always fully tasted the nectar of love of Krsna. Upon
hearing the name of Nityananda Prabhu he would become greatly maddened.
                                   TEXT 35
                     maha-bhagavata yadunatha kavicandra
                     yanhara hrdaye nrtya kare nityananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Yadunatha Kavicandra was a great devotee. Lord Nityananda Prabhu
always danced in his heart.
                                   PURPORT     In the Caitanya-bhagavata Madhya-lila, Chapter One, it is said that
a gentleman known as Ratnagarbha Acarya was a friend of Sri NityanandaPrabhu's father. They were both residents of the same village, known asEkacakra-grama. He had four sons--Krsnapada-makaranda, Krsnananda, J ivaand Yadunatha Kavicandra.
                                   TEXT 36                    radhe yanra janma krsnadasa dvijavara
                    sri-nityanandera tenho parama kinkara
                                 TRANSLATION     The twenty-first devotee of Sri Nityananda in Bengal was Krsnadasa
Brahmana, who was a first-class servant of the Lord.                                   PURPORT
     Radha-desa refers to the part of Bengal where the Ganges does not
flow.
                                   TEXT 37                    kala-krsnadasa bada vaisnava-pradhana
                     nityananda-candra vinu nahi jane ana
                                 TRANSLATION     The twenty-second devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu was Kala
Krsnadasa, who was the ninth cowherd boy. He was a first-class Vaisnavaand did not know anything beyond Nityananda Prabhu.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-khanda, Chapter Six, it is said
that Krsnadasa, who was known as Kaliya Krsnadasa, was formerly a gopla(cowherd boy) of thename Labanga. He was one of the twelve cowherd boys. Kaliya Krsnadasahad his headquarters in a village named Akaihata, which is situated inthe district of Burdwan within the jurisdiction of the post office andpolice station of Katwa. It is situated on the road to Navadvipa. Toreach Akaihata, one has to go from the Vyandela junction station to theKatwa railway station and then go about two miles, or one has to get offat the Danihata station and from there go one mile. The village ofAkaihata is very small. In the month of Caitra, on the day of Varuni,there is a festival commemorating the disappearance day of KalaKrsnadasa.
                                   TEXT 38                     sri-sadasiva kaviraja--bada mahasaya
                     sri-purusottama-dasa--tanhara tanaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The twenty-third and twenty-fourth Prominent devotees of Nityananda
Prabhu were Sadasiva Kaviraja and his son Purusottama dasa, who was thetenth gopala.
                                   TEXT 39
                      ajanma nimagna nityanandera carane
                     nirantara balya-Iila kare krsna-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     Since birth, Purusottama dasa was merged in the service of the
lotus feet of Lord Nityananda Prabhu, and he always engaged in childishPlay with Lord Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Sadasiva Kaviraja and Nagara Purusottama, who were father and son,
are described in the Caitanya-bhagavata as maha-bhagyavan, greatlyfortunate. They belonged to the vaidya caste of physicians. The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 156, says that Candravali, a most beloved gopiof Krsna, later took birth as Sadasiva Kaviraja. It is said that KamsariSena, the father of Sadasiva Kaviraja, was formerly the gopi namedRatnavali in Krsna's pastimes. All the family members of SadasivaKaviraja were great devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Purusottamadasa Thakura sometimes lived at Sukhasagara, near the Cakadaha andSimurali railway stations. All the Deities installed by PurusottamaThakura were formerly situated in Beledanga-grama, but when the templewas destroyed the Deities were brought to Sukhasagara. When that templemerged in the bed of the Ganges, the Deities were brought with Jahnava-mata's Deity to Sahebadanga Bedigrama. Since that place also has beendestroyed, all the Deities are now situated in the village namedCandudegrama, which is situated one mile up from Palapada, as referredto above.
                                   TEXT 40                    tanra putra--mahasaya sri-kanu thakura
                     yanra dehe rahe krsna-premamrta-pura
                                 TRANSLATION     Srf Kanu Thakura, a very respectable gentleman, was the son of
Purusottama dasa Thakura. He was such a great devotee that Lord Krsnaalways lived in his body.
                                   PURPORT     To go to the headquarters of Kanu Thakura, one has to proceed by
boat from the J hikaragacha-ghata station to the river known asKapotaksa. Otherwise, if one goes about two or two and a half miles fromthe Jhikaragacha-ghata station, he can see Bodhakhana, the headquartersof Kanu Thakura. The son of Sadasiva was Purusottama Thakura, and hisson was Kanu Thakura. The descendants of Kanu Thakura know him as NagaraPurusottama. He was the cowherd boy named Dama during krsna-lila. It issaid that just after the birth of Kanu Thakura, his mother, Jahnava,died. When he was about twelve days old, Sri Nityananda Prabhu took himto His home at Khadadaha. It is ascertained that Kanu Thakura was bornsome time in the Bengali year 942. It is said that he took birth on theRathayatra day. Because he was a great devotee of Lord Krsna from thevery beginning of his Iife, Sri Nityananda Prabhu gave him the name SisuKrsnadasa. When he was fiveyears old he went to Vrndavana with Jahnava-mata, and upon seeing theecstatic symptoms of Kanu Thakura, the Gosvamis gave him the name KanaiThakura.     In the family of Kanu Thakura there is a Radha-Krsna Deity known as
Pranavallabha. It is said that his family worshiped this Deity longbefore the appearance of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. When there was aMaharastrian invasion of Bengal, the family of Kanu Thakura wasscattered, and after the invasion one Harikrsna Gosvami of that familycame back to their original home, Bodhakhana, and reestablished thePranavallabha Deity. The descendants of the family still engage in theservice of Pranavallabha. Kanu Thakura was present during the Khetari-utsava when J ahnava-devi and Virabhadra Gosvami were also present. Oneof Kanu Thakura's family members, Madhavacarya, married the daughter ofSri Nityananda Prabhu, who was named Gangadevi. Both Purusottama Thakuraand Kanu Thakura had many disciples from brahmana families. Most of thedisciplic descendants of Kanu Thakura now reside in the village namedGadabeta by the River Silavati in the Midnapore district.
                                   TEXT 41                    maha-bhagavata-srestha datta uddharana
                     sarva-bhave seve nityanandera carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Uddharana Oatta Thakura, the eleventh among the twelve cowherd
boys, was an exalted devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu. He worshiped thelotus feet of Lord Nityananda in all respects.
                                   PURPORT     The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 1 29, states that Uddharana Datta
Thaku ra was formerly the cowherd boy of Vrndavana named Subahu.Uddharana Datta Thakura, previously known as Sri Uddharana Datta, was aresident of Saptagrama, which is situated on the bank of the SarasvatiRiver near the Trisabigha railway station in the district of Hugali. Atthe time of Uddharana Thakura, Saptagrama was a very big town, encompassing many other places such as Vasudeva-pura, Bansabediya, Krsnapura,Nityananda-pura, Sivapura, Sankhanagara and Saptagrama.     Calcutta was developed under British rule by the influentialmercantile community and especially by the suvarna-vanik community whocame down from Saptagrama to establish their businesses and homes all over Calcutta. Theywere known as the Saptagrami mercantile community of Calcutta, and mostof them belonged to the Mullik and Sil families. More than half ofCalcutta belonged to this community, as did Srila Uddharana Thakura. Ourpaternal family also came from this district and belonged to the samecommunity. The Mulliks of Calcutta are divided into two families,namely, the Sil family and De family. All the Mulliks of the De familyoriginally belong to the same family and gotra. We also formerlybelonged to the branch of the De family whose members, intimatelyconnected with the Mohammedan rulers, received the title Mullik.     I n the Caitanya-bhagavata, A ntya-khanda, Chapter Six, it is saidthat Uddharana Datta was an extremely elevated and liberal Vaisnava. Hewas born with the right to worship Nityananda Prabhu. It is also statedthat Nityananda Prabhu, after staying for some time in Khadadaha, cameto Saptagrama and stayed in the house of Uddharana Datta. The suvarna-vanik comm u nity to which Uddharana Datta belonged was actually a
Vaisnava community. Its members were bankers and gold merchants (suvarnameans "gold," and vanik means "merchant"). Long ago there was amisunderstanding between Balla Sena and the suvarna-vanik communitybecause of the great banker Gauri Sena. Balla Sena was taking loans fromGauri Sena and spending money extravagantly, and therefore Gauri Senastopped supplying money. Balla Sena took revenge by instigating a socialconspiracy to make the suvarna-vaniks outcastes, and since then theyhave been ostracized from the higher castes, n am e ly, th e brahmanas,ksatriyas an d vaisyas. B u t by th e grace of S ril a NityanandaPrabhu, the suvarna-vanik community was again elevated. It is said inthe Caitanya-bhagavata, yateka vanik-kula uddharana haite pavltra ha-iladvidha nahika ihate.- there is no doubt that all the community membersof the suvarna- vanik society were again purified by Sri NityanandaPrabhu.     In Saptagrama there is still a temple with a six-armed Deity of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu that was personally worshiped by Srila UddharanaDatta Thakura. On the right side of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is a Deityof Sri Nityananda Prabhu and on the left side Gadadhara Prabhu. Thereare also a Radha-Govinda murti and salagrama-sila, and below the throneis a picture of Sri Uddharana Datta Thakura. In front of the templethere is now a big hall, and in front of the hall is a Madhavilataplant. The temple is in a very shady, cool and nicely situated location.When we returned from America in 1967, the executive committee membersof this temple invited us to visit it,and thus we had the opportunity tovisit this temple with some American students. Formerly, in ourchildhood, we visited this temple with our parents because all themembers of the suvarna-vanik community enthusiastically one babaji ofthe name Nitai dasa arranged for a donation of twelve bighas of land forthis temple. The management of the temple later deteriorated, but thenin 1306, through the cooperation of the famous Balarama Mullik ofHugali, who was a subjudge, and many rich suvarna-vanik communitymembers, the management of the temple improved greatly. Not more thanfifty years ago, one of the family members of Uddharana Datta Thakuranamed Jagamohana Datta established a wooden Deity of Uddharana DattaThakura in the temple, but that Deity is no longer there; atpresent, a picture of Uddharana Datta Thakura is worshiped. It isunderstood, however, that the wooden Deity of Uddharana Thakura wastaken away by Sri Madana-mohana Datta and is now being worshiped with asalagrama-siia by Srinatha Datta.     Uddharana Datta Thakura was the manager of the estate of a bigZamindar in Naihati, about one and a half miles north of Katwa. Therelics of this royal family are still visible near the Dainhata station.Since Uddharana Datta Thakura was the manager of the estate, it was alsoknown as Uddharana-pura. Uddharana Datta Thakura installed Nitai-GauraDeities that were later brought to the house of the Zamindar, which wasknown as Vanaoyaribada. Srila Uddharana Datta Thakura remained ahouseholder throughout his life. His father's name was Srikara Datta,his mother's name was Bhadravati, and his son's name was SrinivasaDatta.
                                   TEXT 42                     acarya vaisnavananda bhakti-adhikari                   purve nama chila yanra `raghunatha puri'
                                 TRANSLATION     The twenty-seventh prominent devotee of Nityananda Prabhu was
Acarya Vaisnavananda, a great personality in devotional service. He wasformerly known as Raghunatha Puri.
                                   PURPORT     In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 97, it is said that Raghunatha
Puri was previously very powerful in the eight mystic successes. He wasan incarnation of one of the successes.
                                   TEXT 43                   visnudasa,nandana, gangadasa--tina bhai
                    purve yanra ghare chila thakura nitai
                                 TRANSLATION     Another important devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu was Visnudasa,
who had two brothers, Nandana and Gangadasa. Lord Nityananda Prabhusometimes stayed at their house.
                                   PURPORT     The three brothers Visnudasa, Nandana and Gangadasa were residents
of Navadvipa and belonged to the Bhattacarya brahmana family. BothVisnudasa and Gangadasa stayed for some time with Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri, and the Caitanya-bhagavata states thatformerly Nityananda Prabhu stayed at their house.
                                   TEXT 44                   nityananda-bhrtya--paramananda upadhyaya
                    sri-jiva pandita nityananda-guna gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Paramananda Upadhyaya was Nityananda Prabhu's great servitor. Sri J
iva Pandita glorified the qualities of Sri Nityananda Prabhu.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Paramananda Upadhyaya was an advanced devotee. His name is
mentioned in the Caitanya-bhagavata, where Sri Jiva Pandita is alsomentioned as the second son of Ratnagarbha Acarya and a childhood friendof Hadai Ojha, the father of Nityananda Prabhu. In the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 169, it is said that Sri Jiva Pandita was formerly thegopi named Indira.
                                   TEXT 45                   paramananda gupta--krsna-bhakta mahamatl
                    purve yanra ghare nityanandera vasati
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirty-first devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu was Paramananda
Gupta, who was greatly devoted to Lord Krsna and highly advanced inspiritual consciousness. Formerly Nityananda Prabhu also resided at hishouse for some time.
                                   PURPORT     Paramananda Gupta composed a prayer to Lord Krsna known as Krsna-
stavavali. I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 1 94, it is stated thathe was formerly the gopi named Manjumedha.
                                   TEXT 46                       narayana, krsnadasa ara manohara
                     de vananda--cari bhai nitai-kinkara
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirty-second, thirty-third, thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth
Prominent devotees were Narayana, Krsnadasa, Manohara and Devananda, whoalways engaged in the service of Lord Nityananda.
                                   TEXT 47
                   hoda krsnadasa--nityananda-prabhu-prana
                      nityananda-pada vinu nahi jane ana
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirty-sixth devotee of Lord Nityananda was Hoda Krsnadasa,
whose life and soul was Nityananda Prabhu. He was always dedicated tothe lotus feet of Nityananda, and he knew no one else but Him.
                                   PURPORT     The residence of Krsnadasa Hoda was Badagachi, which is now in
Bangladesh.
                                   TEXT 48                  nakadi, mukunda, surya, madhava, sridhara
                    ramananda vasu, jagannatha, mahidhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Among Lord Nityananda's devotees, Nakadi was the thirty-seventh,
Mukunda the thirty-eighth, Surya the thirty-ninth, Madhava the fortieth,Sridhara the forty-first, Ramananda the forty-second, Jagannatha the
forty-third and Mahidhara the fortyfourth.
                                   PURPORT     Sridhara was the twelfth gopaja.                                   TEXT 49                     sri-manta, gokula-dasa hariharananda
                     si vai, nandai, avadhuta paramananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Manta was the forty-fifth, Gokula dasa the forty-sixth,
Hariharananda the forty-seventh, Sivai the forty-eighth, Nandai theforty-ninth and Paramananda the fiftieth.
                                   TEXT 50
                    vasanta, navani hoda, gopala sanatana
                     visnai hajara, krsnananda, sulocana
                                 TRANSLATION     Vasanta was the fifty-first, Navani Hoda the fifty-second, Gopala
the fifty-third, Sanatana the fifty-fourth, Visnai the fiftyififth,Krsnananda the fifty-sixth and Sulocana the fifty-seventh.
                                   PURPORT     Navani Hoda appears to have been the same person as Hoda Krsnadasa,
the son of the King of Badagachi. His father's name was Hari Hoda. Onecan visit Badagachi by taking the Lalagola-ghata railway line. Formerlythe Ganges flowed by Badagachi, but now it has become a canal known asthe Kalsira Khal. Near the Mudagacha station is a village known asSaligrama in which King Krsnadasa arranged for the marriage of SriNityananda Prabhu, as described in the Bhakti-ratnakara, Taranga Twelve.It is sometimes said that Navani Hoda was the son of Raja Krsnadasa. Hisdescendants still live in Rukunapu ra, a village near Bahiragachi. Theybelong to the daksina radhiya kayastha com munity, but, having beenreformed as brahmanas, they still initiate all classes of men.
                                   TEXT 51                 kamsari sena, ramasena, ramacandra kaviraja
                  govinda, sriranga, mukunda, tina kaviraja
                                 TRANSLATION     The fifty-eighth great devotee of Lord Nityananda Prabhu was
Kamsari Sena, the fifty-ninth was Ramasena, the sixtieth was RamacandraKaviraja, and the sixty-first, sixty-second and sixty-third were
Govinda, Sriranga and Mukunda, who were all Physicians.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Ramacandra KaviraJa, the son of Khandavasi Ciranjiva and
Sunanda, was a disciple of Srinivasa Acarya and the most intimate friendof Narottama dasa Thakura, who prayed several times for his association.His youngest brother was Govinda Kaviraja. Srila Jiva Gosvami very muchappreciated Sri Ramacandra Kaviraja's great devotion to Lord Krsna andtherefore gave him the title kaviraja. Sri Ramacandra Kaviraja, who wasperpetually disinterested in family life, greatly assisted in thepreaching work of Srinivasa Acarya and Narottama dasa Thakura. Heresided at first in Srikhanda but later in the village of Kumara-nagaraon the bank of the Ganges.     Govinda Kaviraja was the brother of Ramacandra Kaviraja andyoungest son of Ciranjiva of Srikhanda. Although at first a sakta, orworshiper of goddess Durga, he was later initiated by Srinivasa AcaryaPrabhu. Govinda Kaviraja also resided first in Srikhanda and then inKumara-nagara, but later he moved to the village known as Teliya Budharion the southern bank of the River Padma. Since Govinda Kaviraja, theauthor of two books, Sangita-madhava and Gitamrta, was a great Vaisnavakavi, or poet, Srila Jiva Gosvami gave him the title kavlraja. He isdescribed in the Bhakti- ratnakara, N i n th Taranga.     Kamsari Sena was formerly Ratnavali in VraJa, as described in theGaura- ganoddesa-dipika, verses 1 94 and 200.
                                   TEXT 52                    pitambara, madhavacarya, dasa damodara
                    sankara, mukunda, jnana-dasa, manohara
                                 TRANSLATION     Among the devotees of Lord Nityananda Prabhu, Pitambara was the
sixty-fourth, Madhavacarya the sixty-fifth, Damodara dasa the sixty-sixth, Sankara the sixtyseventh, Mukunda the sixty-eighth, Jnanadasa thesixty-ninth and Manohara the seventieth.
                                   TEXT 53
                  nartaka gopala, ramabhadra, gauranga-dasa
                    nrsimha-caitanya, minaketana rama-dasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The dancer Gopala was the seventy-first, Ramabhadra the seventy-
second, Gauranga dasa the seventy-third, Nrsimha-caitanya the seventy-fourth and Minaketana Ramadasa the seventy-fifth.
                                   PURPORT     The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 68, describes Minaketana Ramadasa
as an incarnation of Sankarsana.
                                   TEXT 54                      vrndavana-dasa--narayanira nandana
                   `caitanya-mangala ' yenho karila racana
                                 TRANSLATION     Vrndavana dasa Thakura, the son of Srimati Narayani, composed Sri
Caitanyamangala [later known as Sri Caitanya-bhagavata].
                                   TEXT 55
                    bhagavate krsna-Iila varnila vedavyasa
                    caitanya-Iilate vyasa--vrndavana dasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Vyasadeva described the Pastimes of Krsna in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam. The Vyasa of the Pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu wasVrndavana dasa.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura was an incarnation of Vedavyasa and
also a friendly cowherd boy named Kusumapida in krsna-lila. In otherwords, the author of Sri Caitanya-bhagavata, S rila Vrnd avan a dasa Thak u ra, th e so n of S rivasa T ha k u ra's niece Narayan-i, was acombined incarnation of Vedavyasa and the cowherd boy Kusumapida. Thereis a descriptive statement by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura inhis commentary on Sri Caitanya-bhagavata giving the biographical detailsof the life of Vrndavana dasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 56                     sarvasakha-srestha virabhadra gosani
                      tanra upasakha yata, tara anta nai
                                 TRANSLATION     Among all the branches of Sri Nityananda Prabhu, Virabhadra Gosani
was the topmost. His sub-branches were unlimited.
                                   TEXT 57
                   anan ta nityananda-gana--ke karu ganana
                    atma-pavitrata-hetu likhijan kata jana
                                 TRANSLATION     No one can count the unlimited followers of Nityananda Prabhu. I
have mentioned some of them just for my self-purification.
                                   TEXT 58
                   ei sarva-sakha purna--pak va prema-phale
                    yare dekhe, tare diya bhasaila sakale
                                 TRANSLATION     All these branches, the devotees of Lord Nityananda Prabhu, being
full of ripened fruits of love of Krsna, distributed these fruits to allthey met, flooding them with love of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 59
                    anargala prema sabara, cesta anargala
                    prema dite, krsna dite dhare mahabala
                                 TRANSLATION     All these devotees had unlimited strength to deliver unobstructed,
unceasing love of Krsna. By their own strength they could offer anyoneKrsna and love of Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has sung, krsna se tomara, krsna dite
para, tomara sakati ache, In this song, Bhaktivinoda Thakura describesthat a pure Vaisnava, as the proprietor of Krsna and love of Krsna, candeliver both to anyone and everyone he likes. Therefore to get Krsna andlove of Krsna one must seek the mercy of pure devotees. Srila VisvanathaCakravarti Thakura also says, yasya prasadad bhagavat- prasadoyasyaprasaoan na gatih kuto 'pi: "By the mercy of the spiritual masterone is benedicted by the mercy of Krsna. Without the grace of thespiritual master one cannot make any advancement." By the grace of aVaisnava or bona fide spiritual master one can get both love of Godhead,Krsna, and Krsna Himself.
                                   TEXT 60                     sanksepe kahijan ei nityananda-gana
                   yanhara avadhi na paya `sahasra-vadana'
                                 TRANSLATION     I have briefly described only some of the followers and devotees of
Lord Nityananda Prabhu. Even the thousand-mouthed Sesanaga cannotdescribe all of these unlimited devotees.
                                   TEXT 61                      sri-rupa-ragh unatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     With an ardent desire to serve the purpose of Sri Rupa and Sri
Raghunatha, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, following intheir footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Adi-lila, Eleventh Chapter, in the matter of the expansions of LordNityananda.
                                Chapter Twelve
           The Expansions of Advaita Acarya and Gadadhara Pandita
     Bhaktivinoda Thakura gives a summary of the Twelfth Chapter of Aai-
lila in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. This Twelfth Chapter describes thefollowers of Advaita Prabhu, among whom the followers of Acyutananda,the son of Advaita Acarya, are understood to be the pure followers whoreceived the cream of the philosophy Sri Advaita Acarya enunciated.Other so-called descendants and followers of Advaita Acarya are not tobe recognized.This chapter also includes narrations concerningthe son ofAdvaita Acarya named Gopala Misra and Advaita Acarya's servant namedKamalakanta Visvasa. In his early life Gopala fainted during thecleansing of the Gundica mandira at Jagannatha Puri and thus became arecipient of the mercy of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The story ofKamalakanta Visvasa concerns his borrowing three hundred rupees fromPrataparudra Maharaja to clear the debts of Advaita Acarya, for whichSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu chastised him when He came to know of it.Kamalakanta Visvasa was then purified by the request of Sri AdvaitaAcarya. After describing the descendants of Advaita Acarya, the chapterconcludes by describing the followers of Gadadhara Pandita Gosvami.
                                    TEXT 1            advaitanghry-abja-bhrngams tan sarasara-bhrto 'khilan
                hitva saran sara-bnrto naumi caitanya jivanan
                                 TRANSLATION     The followers of Sri Advaita Prabhu were of two kinds. Some were
real followers, and the others were false. Rejecting the falsefollowers, I offer my respectful obei-
sances to the real followers of Sri Advaita Acarya whose life and soul
were Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 2                   jaya jaya mahaprabhu sri-krsna-caitanya
                    jaya jaya nityananda jayadvaita dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord
Nityananda! All glories to Sri Advaita Prabhu! All of them are glorious.
                                    TEXT 3
               sri-caitanyamara-taror dviti ya-skandha-rupinah
               srimad-advaitacandrasya sakha-rupan ganan numah
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances to the all-glorious Advaita
Prabhu, who forms the second branch of the eternal Caitanya tree, and toHis followers, who form His sub-branches.
                                    TEXT 4
                    vrksera dvitiya skandha--acarya-gosani
                   tanm yata sakha ha-ila, tara lekha nani
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Prabhu was the second big branch of the tree. There are
many subbranches, but it is impossible to mention them all.
                                    TEXT 5
                      caitanya-malira krpa jalera secane
                    sei jale pusta skandha bade dine dine
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was also the gardener, and as He poured the
water of His mercy on the tree, all the branches and sub-branches grew,day after day.
                                    TEXT 6
                     sei skandhe yata prema-phala upaiila
                     sei krsna-prema-phale jagat bharila
                                 TRANSLATION     The fruits of love of Godhead that grew on those branches of the
Caitanya tree were so large that they flooded the entire world with loveof Krsna.                                    TEXT 7
                    sei jala skandhe kare sakhate sancara
                   phale-phule bade,--sakha ha-ila vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     As the trunk and branches were watered, the branches and sub-
branches spread lavishly, and the tree grew full with fruits andflowers.
                                    TEXT 8
                     prathame ta' eka-mata acaryera gana
                     pache dui-mata haila daivera karana
                                 TRANSLATION     At first all the followers of Advaita Acarya shared a single
opinion. But later they followed two different opinions, as ordained byprovidence.
                                   PURPORT     The words daivera karana indicate that by dint of providence, or by
God's will, the followers of Advaita Acarya divided into two parties.Such disagreement among the disciples of one acarya is also found amongthe members of the Gaudiya Matha. In the beginning, during the presenceof Om Visnupada Paramahamsa Parivrajakacarya Astottara-sata Sri SrimadBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura Prabhupada, all the disciples workedin agreement; but just after his disappearance, they disagreed. Oneparty strictly followed the instructions of Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura, but another group created their own concoction about executinghis desires. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, at the time of hisdeparture, requested all his disciples to form a governing body andconduct missionary activities cooperatively. He did not instruct aparticular man to become the next acarya. But just after his passingaway, his leading secretaries made plans, without authority, to occupythe post of acarya, and they split in two factions over who the nextacarya would be. Consequently, both factions were asara, or useless,because they had no authority, having disobeyed the order of thespiritual master. Despite the spiritual master's order to form agoverning body and execute the missionary activities of the GaudiyaMatha, the two unauthorized factions began litigation that is stillgoing on after forty years with no decision.     Therefore, we do not belong to any faction. But because the twoparties, busy dividing the material assets of the Gaudiya Mathainstitution, stopped the preaching work, we took up the mission ofBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura and Bhaktivinoda Thakura to preach thecult of Caitanya Mahaprabhu all over the world, under the protection ofall the predecessor acaryas, and we find that our humble attempt hasbeen successful. We followed the principles especially explained by
Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura in his commentary on the Bhagavad-gita verse vyavasayatmika buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana. Accord ing to thisinstruction of Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, it is the duty of adisciple to follow strictly the orders of his spiritual master. Thesecret of success in advancement in spiritual life is the firm faith ofthe disciple in the orders of his spiritual master. The Vedas confirmthis:     yasya deve para bhaktir     yatha deve tatha gurau     tasyaite kathita hy arthah     prakasante mahatmanah"To one who has staunch faith in the words of the spiritual master andthe words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the secret of success inVedic knowledge is revealed." The Krsna consciousness movement is beingpropagated according to this principle, and therefore our preaching workis going on successfully, in spite of the many impediments offered byantagonistic demons, because we are getting positive help from ourprevious acaryas. One mustjudge every action by its result. The membersof the self-appointed acarya's party who occupied the property of theGaudiya Matha are satisfied, but they could make no progress inpreaching. Therefore by the result of their actions one should know thatthey are asara, or useless, whereas the success of the ISKCON party, theInternational Society for Krishna Consciousness, which strictly followsguru and Gauranga, is increasing daily all over the world. SrilaBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura wanted to print as many books aspossible and distribute them all over the world. We have tried our bestin this connection, and we are getting results beyond our expectations.
                                    TEXT 9                  keha ta' acarya ainaya, keha ta' svatantra
                    sva-mata kalpana kare daiva-paratantra
                                 TRANSLATION     Some of the disciples strictly accepted the orders of the acarya,
and others deviated, independently concocting their own opinions underthe spell of daivi maya.
                                   PURPORT     This verse describes the beginning of a schism. When disciples do
not stick to the principle of accepting the order of their spiritualmaster, immediately there are two opinions. Any opinion different fromthe opinion of the spiritual master is useless. One cannot infiltratematerially concocted ideas into spiritual advancement. That isdeviation. There is no scope for adjusting spiritual advancement tomaterial ideas.
                                   TEXT 10                       acaryera mata yei, sei mata sara
                    tanra ajna langhi' cale, sei ta' asara                                 TRANSLATION
     The order of the spiritual master is the active principle in
spiritual life. Anyone who disobeys the order of the spiritual masterimmediately becomes useless.
                                   PURPORT     Here is the opinion of Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami. Persons
who strictly follow the orders of the spiritual master are useful inexecuting the will of the Supreme, whereas persons who deviate from thestrict order of the spiritual master are useless.
                                   TEXT 11                       asarera name ihan nahi prayoiana
                      bheda janibare kari ekatra ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     There is no need to name those who are useless. I have mentioned
them only to distinguish them from the useful devotees.
                                   TEXT 12
                     dhanya-rasi mape yaiche patna sahite
                     pascate patna udana samskara karite
                                 TRANSLATION     Paddy is mixed with straw at first, and one must fan it to separate
the paddy from the straw.
                                   PURPORT     This example given by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami is very
appropriate. In the case of the Gaudiya Matha members, one can apply asimilar process. There are many disciples of Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura, but to judge who is actually his disciple, to divide the usefulfrom the useless, one must measure the activities of such disciples inexecuting the will of the spiritual master. Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura tried his best to spread the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu tocountries outside India. When he was present he patronized the disciplesto go outside India to preach the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, butthey were unsuccessful because within their minds they were not actuallyserious about preaching His cult in foreign countries; they simplywanted to take credit for having gone to foreign lands and utilize thisrecognition in India by advertising themselves as repatriated preachers.Many svamis have adopted this hypocritical means of preaching for thelast eighty years or more, but no one could preach the real cult ofKrsna consciousness all over the world. They merely came back to Indiafalsely advertising that they had converted all the foreigners to theideas of Vedanta or Krsna consciousness, and then they collected funds
in India and lived satisfied lives of materiai comfort. As one fanspaddy to separate the real paddy from useless straw, by accepting thecriterion recommended by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami one can very easilyunderstand who is a genuine world-preacher and who is useless.
                                   TEXT 13                   acyutananda--bada sakna, acarya-nandana
                     ajanma sevila tenho caitanya-carana
                                 TRANSLATION     A big branch of Advaita Acarya was Acyutananda, His son. From the
beginning of his life he engaged in the service of the lotus feet ofLord Caitanya.
                                   TEXT 14
                    caitanya-gosanira guru--kesava bharati
                    ei pitara vakya suni' duhkha paila ati
                                 TRANSLATION     When Acyutananda heard from his father that Kesava Bharati was the
spiritual master of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he was very unhappy.
                                   TEXT 15
                     jagad-gurute tumi kara aiche upadesa
                     tomara ei upadese nosta ha-ila desa
                                 TRANSLATION     He told his father,"Your instruction that Kesava Bharati is the
spiritual master of Caitanya Mahaprabhu will spoil the entire country.
                                   TEXT 16
                   caudda bhu vanera guru--caitanya-gosani
                     tanra guru--anya, ei kona sastre nai
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the spiritual master of the fourteen
worlds, but You say that someone else is His spiritual master. This isnot supported by any revealed scripture."
                                   TEXT 17                 pancama varsera balaka kahe siddhantera sara
                      suniya paila acarya santosa apara
                                 TRANSLATION     When Advaita Acarya heard this statement from His five-year-old son
Acyutananda, He felt great satisfaction because of his conclusivejudgement.
                                   PURPORT     Commenting on verses 13 through 17, Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura gives an extensive description of the descendants of AdvaitaAcarya. The Caitanya- bhnavata, Antya-khanda, Chapter Nine, states thatAcyutananda was the eidest son of Advaita Acarya. The Sanskrit bookAdvaita-carita states, "Advaita Acarya Prabhu had three sons namedAcyuta, Krsna Misra and Gopala dasa, all born of the womb of His wifeSitadevi, who were devotees of Lord Caitanya. Advaita Acarya also hadthree more sons, whose names were Balarama, Svarupa and Jagadisa. Thusthere were six sons of Advaita Acarya." Among the six sons,three werestrict followers of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and of these three,Acyutananda was the eldest.     Advaita Prabhu married in the beginning of the FifteenthCenturysakabda. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to visit thevillage of Ramakeli while going from J agannatha Puri to Vrndavanaduring the sakabda years 1433 and 1434,Acyutananda was onl y five yearsold. Th e Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-khanda, Fou rth Chapte r, descri besAcy utanand a at that ti me as panca-varsa vayasa madhura oigambara, "only five years old and standing naked."Therefore it is to be concludedthat Acyutananda was born sometime in the year 1428. Before the birth ofAcyutananda, Advaita Prabhu's wife, Sitadevi, came to see Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu at His birth. Thus it is not impossible that she had theother three sons by Advaita within the twentyone years between 1407 and1428 sakabda. In an unauthorized book of the name Sitadvaita-caritapublished in Bengali in the unauthorized newspaper Nityananda- oayini in1792 sakabda, it is mentioned that Acyutananda was a ciass friend of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. According to Caitanya-bhagavata, this statement isnot at all valid. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted the renounced orderof sannyasa, He came to the house of Advaita Prabhu at Santipura in theyear 1431 sakabda. At that time, as stated in Caitanya-bhnavata, Antya-khanda, Chapter One, Acyutananda was only three years old. The Caitanya-bhagavata further states that the naked child, the son of AdvaitaPrabhu, immediateiy came and fell down at the lotus feet of Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord immediately took him on His lap, althoughhe was not very clean, having dust all over his body. Lord Caitanyasaid, "My dear Acyuta, Advaita Acarya is My father, and thus we arebrothers."     Before Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His spiritual forms duringHis residence at Navadvipa, He asked Sri Rama Pandita, SrinivasaAcarya's brother, to go to Santipura and bring back Advaita Acarya.Acyutananda joined his father at that time. I t is said, advaiteratanaya `acyutananda' nama/ parama-baiaka, seho kande avirama.Acyutananda also joined in crying in transcendental bliss. Again, whenLord Caitanya beat Advaita Acarya for expiaining Srimad-Bhagavatam froman impersonaiist viewpoint opposed to the principies of bhakti-yoga,
Acyutananda was also present. Therefore all these incidents must haveoccurred only two or three years before Lord Caitanya accepted thesannyasa order. In the Caitanya-bhagavata, Antya-khanda, ChapterNineteen, it is stated that Acyutananda, the son of Advaita Acarya,offered his obeisances to the Lord. Therefore it should be concludedthat from the very beginning of his life Acyutananda was a great devoteeof Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.     There is no information that Acyutananda ever married, but he isdescribed as the biggest branch of the Advaita Acarya family. From abook named Sakna-nirnayamrta it is understood that Acyutananda was adisciple of Gadadhara and that he took shelter of Lord Caitanya inJagannatha Puri and engaged in devotional service. The Caitanya-caritainrta, Adi-lila, Chapter Ten, states that Acyutananda, the son ofAdvaita Acarya, lived in Jagannatha Puri, taking shelter of LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu. Gadadhara Pandita, in the last years of his life,also lived with Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri. There is nodoubt, therefore, that Acyutananda was a disciple of Pandita Gadadhara.In the accounts of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's dancing in front of thecar during the Rathayatra festival, Acyutananda's name is to be foundmany times. It is stated that in the party of Advaita Acarya fromSantipura, Acyutananda was dancing and others were singing. At that timethe boy was only six years old. The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipik\ compiled bySri Kavi-karnapura has described Acyutananda as a disciple of GadadharaPandita and a great and dear devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.According to the opinion of some, he was an incarnation of Karttikeya,the son of Lord Siva,and according to others he was formerly the gopinamed Acyuta. The Gaura-ganoddesa- dipika has supported both theseopinions. Another book, Narottama-vilasa, compiled by Sri Narahari dasa,mentions Acyutananda's presence during the festival at Khetari.According to Sri Narahari dasa, during the last days of his lifeAcyutananda stayed in his house at Santipura, but during the presence ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu he lived at Jagannatha Puri with GadadharaPandita.     Of the six sons of Advaita Acarya, three, Acyutananda, Krsna Misraand Gopala dasa, lived faithfully in the service of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Since Acyutananda did not accept a wife, he had no issue. The second sonof Advaita Acarya, Krsna Misra, had two sons, Raghunatha Cakravarti andDolagovinda. The descendants of Raghunatha still live in Santipura inthe nieghborhoods of Madana-gopala-pada, Ganakara, Mrjapura andKumarakhali. Dolagovinda had three sons, namely, Canda, Kandarpa andGopinatha. The descendants of Kandarpa live in Maldah in the village Jikabadi. Gopinatha had three sons, Sri Vallabha, Pranavaliabha andKesava. The descendants of Sri Vallabha live in the villages known asMasiyadara (Mahisadera), Damukadiya and Candipura. There is agenealogical table for the family of Sri Vallabha beginning from hiseldest son, Ganga-narayana. The descendants of Sri Vallabha's youngestson, Ramagopala, still iive in Damukadiya, Candipura, Solamari, and soon. The descendants of Pranavallabha and Kesava live in Uthali. The sonof Pranavallabha was Ratnesvara, and his son was Krsnarama, whoseyoungest son was Laksmi-narayana. His son was Navakisora, andNavakisora's second son was Ramamohana, whose eldest son was Jagabandhuand whose third son, Viracandra, accepted the sannysa order andestablished a Deity of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu in Katwa. These two sonsof Ramamohana were known as Bada prabhu and Chota Prabhu, and they
inaugurated the circumambulation of Navadvipa-dhama. One may refer tothe Vaisnava-manjus\ for the complete geneological table of AdvaitaPrabhu in the line of Krsna Misra.
                                   TEXT 18                      krsna-misra-nama ara acarya-tanaya
                     caitanya-gosani baise yanhara hrdaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna Misra was a son of Advaita Acarya. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
always sat in his heart.
                                   TEXT 19
                      sri-gopala-name ara acaryera suta
                    tanhara caritra, suna, atyanta adbhuta
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Gopala was another son of Sri Advaita Acarya Prabhu. Now just
hear about his characteristics, for they are all very wonderful.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Gopala was one of the three devoted sons of Advaita Acarya. The
Madhya-lila of Caitanya-caritamrta, Chapter Twelve, texts 143 through149, describe his life and character.
                                   TEXT 20                    gundica-mandire mahaprabhura sammukhe
                    kirtane nartana kare bada prema-sukhe
                                 TRANSLATION     When Lord Caitanya personally cleansed the Gundica mandira in J
agannatha Puri, Gopala danced in front of the Lord with great love andhappiness.
                                   PURPORT     The Gundica manoim is situated in Jagannatha Puri, and every year
Jagannatha, Balabhadra and Subhadra come there from the Jagannathatemple to stay for eight days. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu lived at Jagannatha Puri, every year He personally cleansed this temple with Hisprincipal devotees. The Gundica-marjana chapter of Caitanya-caritamrtadescribes this vividly.
                                   TEXT 21                     nana-bhavodgama dehe adbhuta nartana
                    dui gosani `hari' bale, anandita mana
                                 TRANSLATION     While Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Advaita Prabhu danced and
chanted the Hare Krsna mantra, there were various ecstatic symptoms inTheir bodies, and Their minds were very pleased.
                                   TEXT 22
                    nacite nacite gopala ha-ila murcchita
                     bhumete padila, dehe nahika sam vita
                                 TRANSLATION     While all of them danced, Gopala, dancing and dancing, fainted and
fell to the ground unconscious.
                                   TEXT 23
                    duhkhita ha-ila acarya putra kole lana
                      raksa kare nrsimhera mantra padiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya Prabhu became very unhappy. Taking His son on His
lap, He began to chant the Nrsimha mantra for his protection.
                                   TEXT 24
                  nana mantra padena acarya, na haya cetana
                   acaryera duhkhe vaisnava karena krandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya chanted various mantras, but Gopala did not come to
consciousness. Thus all the Vaisnavas present cried in sorrow at Hisplight.
                                   TEXT 25
                   tabe mahaprabhu, tanra hrde hasta dhari'
                  `uthaha, gopala,' kaila bala `hari' `hari'
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu then put His hand on the chest of Gopala
and told him, "My dear Gopala, get up and chant the holy name of theLord!"                                   TEXT 26
                  uthila gopala prabhura sparsa-dhvani suni
                     anandita hana sabe kare hari-dh vani
                                 TRANSLATION     When he heard this sound and felt the touch of the Lord, Gopala
immediately got up, and all the Vaisnavas chanted the Hare Krsna maha-mantra in jubilation.
                                   TEXT 27
                       acaryera ara putra--sri-balarama
                 ara putra--`s varupa'-sakha, `jagadisa' nama
                                 TRANSLATION     The other sons of Advaita Acarya were Sri Balarama, Svarupa and J
agadisa.
                                   PURPORT     The Sanskrit book Advaita-carita states that Balarama, Svarupa and
Jagadisa were the fourth, fifth and sixth sons of Advaita Acarya.Therefore Sri Advaita Acarya had six sons. Balarama, Svarupa andJagadisa, being smartas or Mayavadis, were rejected by Vaisnava society.Sometimes Mayavadis pose themselves as Vaisnavas, or worshipers of LordVisnu, but actually they do not believe in Lord Visnu as the SupremePersonality of Godhead, for they consider demigods like Lord Siva,Durga, the sun-god and Ganesa equal to Him. They are generally known aspancopasaka- smartas, and one should not count them among the Vaisnavas.     Balarama had three wives and nine sons. The youngest son of hisfirst wife was known as Madhusudana Gosvami. He took the titleBhattacarya and accepted the path of the smarta or Mayavada philosophy.Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura notes that the son of GosvamiBhattacarya, Sri Radharamana Gosvami Bhattacarya, refused the titlegosvami because it is generally meant for sannyasis, those who havetaken the renounced order of life. One who is still in family lifeshould not misuse the title gosvami. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura did not recognize the caste gosvamis because they were not inthe line of the six Gosvamis in the renounced order who were directdisciples of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu--namely, Srila Rupa Gosvami, SrilaSanatana Gosvami, Srila Bhatta Raghunatha Gosvami, Sri Gopala BhattaGosvami, Sri J iva Gosvami and Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. SrilaBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura said that the grhasthasrama, or thestatus of family life, is a sort of concession for sense gratification.Therefore a grhastha should not falsely adopt the title gosvami. TheISKCON movement has never conferred the title gosvami upon ahouseholder. Although all the sannyasis we have initiated in ISKCON areyoung, we have awarded them the titles of the renounced order of life,svami and gosvami, because they have completely dedicated their lives to
preach the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Srila BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Thakura mentions that not only do the householder castegosvamis disrespect the title gosvami, but also, following theprinciples of the smarta Raghu nandana, they exhibit great foolishnessby bu rn ing a straw image of Advaita Acarya i n a sraddha ceremony,thus acting as Raksasas and disrespecting the cause of Hari-bhakti-vijasa, which is the guide for Vaisnavas. Srila BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Thakura says that sometimes these smarta caste gosvamis writebooks on Vaisnava philosophy or commentaries on the original scriptures,but a pure devotee should cautiously avoid reading them.
                                   TEXT 28                  `kamalakanta visvasa'-nama acarya-kinkara
                    acarya-vya vahara saba--tanhara gocara
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya's very confidential servant named Kamalakanta
Visvasa knew all the dealings of Advaita Acarya.
                                   PURPORT     The name Kamalananda mentioned in the Adi-lila (10.149) and the
name Kamalakanta mentioned in the Madhya-lila (10.94) both refer to thesame man. Kamalakanta, a very confidential servant of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu born in a brahmana family, engaged in the service of SriAdvaita Acarya as His secretary. When Paramananda Puri went fromNavadvipa to J agannatha Puri, he took Kamalakanta Visvasa with him, andthey both went to see Lord Caitanya at Jagannatha Puri. It is mentionedin the Madhya-lila (10.94) that one of the devotees of Lord Caitanya, abrahmana, Kamalakanta, went with Paramananda Puri to j agannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 29                      nilacale tenho eka patrika likhiya
                                  prataparu
                                 TRANSLATION     When Kamalakanta Visvasa was in Jagannatha Puri, he sent a note
through someone to Maharaja Prataparudra.
                                   TEXT 30
                      sei patrira katha acarya nahi jane
                    kona pake sei patri aila prabhu-sthane
                                 TRANSLATION     No one knew of that note, but somehow or other it reached the hands
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.                                   TEXT 31
                    se patrite lekha ache--ei ta' likhana
                    isvaratve acaryere kariyache sthapana
                                 TRANSLATION     That note established Advaita Acarya as an incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 32
                    kintu tanra daive kichu ha-iyache rna
                      rna sodhibare cahi tanka sata-tina
                                 TRANSLATION     But it also mentioned that Advaita Acarya had recently incurred a
debt of about three hundred rupees that Kamalakanta Visvasa wanted toliquidate.
                                   TEXT 33
                   patra padiya prabhura mane haila duhkha
                    bahire hasiya kichu bale candra-mukha
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu became unhappy upon reading the note,
although His face still shone as brightly as the moon. Thus, smiling, Hespoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 34
                      acaryere sthapiyache kariya isvara
                    ithe dosa nahi, acarya--daivata isvara
                                 TRANSLATION     "He has established Advaita Acarya as an incarnation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. There is nothing wrong in this, for He is indeedthe Lord Himself.
                                   TEXT 35
                   is varera dainya kari' kariyache bhiksa
                       ataeva danda kari' karaiba siksa                                 TRANSLATION
     "But he has made the incarnation of Godhead a poverty-stricken
beggar. Therefore I shall punish him for his correction."
                                   PURPORT     To describe a man as an incarnation of God, or Narayana, and at the
same time present him as poverty-stricken is contradictory, and it isthe greatest offense. The Mayavadi philosophers, engaged in themissionary work of spoiling the Vedic culture by preaching that everyoneis God, describe a poverty-stricken man as daridra- narayana, or "poorNarayana." Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu never accepted such foolish andunauthorized ideas. He strictly warned, mayavadi-bnasya suniie nayasarva-nasa.- "Anyone who follows the principles of Mayavada philosophyis certainly doomed." Such a fool needs to be reformed by punishment.     Although it is contradictory to say that the Supreme Personality ofGodhead or His incarnation is poverty-stricken, we find in the revealedscriptures that when the Lord incarnated as Vamana, He begged some landfrom Maharaja Bali. Everyone knows, however, that Vamanadeva was not atall poverty-stricken. His begging from Maharaja Bali was a device tofavor him. When Maharaja Bali actually gave the land, Vamanadevaexhibited His all-powerful position by covering the three worlds withthree steps. One should not accept the so-called daridra-narayanas asincarnations because they are completely unable to show the opulence ofthe genuine incarnations of God.
                                   TEXT 36                    govindere ajna dila,--"inha aji haite
                     bauliya visvase etha na dibe asite"
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord ordered Govinda, "From today on, do not allow that bauliya
Kamalakanta Visvasa to come here."
                                   PURPORT     The bauliyas, or baulas, are one of thirteen unauthorized sects
that pass as followers of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord ordered Govinda,His personal assistant, not to allow Kamalakanta Visvasa to come in Hispresence because he had become a bauliya. Th u s al th o u gh the baula-sampraoaya, aula-sampraaaya a n d sahaiiya- samprad\ya, as well as thesmartas, jata-gosanis, atibadis, cudadharis and gauranga- nagaris, claimto belong to the disciplic succession of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lordactually rejected them.
                                   TEXT 37                 danda suni' `visvasa' ha-ila parama duhkhita
                     suniya prabhura danda acarya harsita
                                 TRANSLATION     When Kamalakanta Visvasa heard about this punishment by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he was very much unhappy, but when Advaita Prabhuheard about it, He was greatly pleased.
                                   PURPORT     I n Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, samo 'nam sarva-bhutesu na me
dvesyo 'sti na priyah.- "I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I amequal to all." (Bg.9.29) The Supreme Personality of Godhead being equalto everyone, no one can be His enemy, nor can anyone be His friend.Since everyone is a part or son of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,the Lord cannot partially regard someone as a friend and someone as anenemy.Thus when Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu punished Kamalakanta Visvasa byno longer allowing him to come in His presence, although the punishmentwas actually very hard on him, Sri Advaita prabhu, understanding theinner meaning of such punishment, was happy because He appreciated thatthe Lord had actually favored Kamalakanta Visvasa. Therefore he was notat all unhappy. Devotees should always be happy with all the dealings oftheir master, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A devotee may be putinto difficulty or opulence, but he shouid accept both as gifts of theSupreme personality of Godhead and jubilantly engage in the service ofthe Lord in all circumstances.
                                   TEXT 38                    vis vasere kahe,--tumi bada bhagya van
                     tomare karila danda prabhu bhaga van
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing Kamalakanta Visvasa unhappy, Advaita Acarya Prabhu told him,
"You are greatly fortunate to have been punished by the Supreme Lord,the Personality of Godhead, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     This is an authoritative judgment by Sri Advaita Prabhu. He clearly
advises that one should not be unhappy when reverses come upon him bythe order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A devotee should alwaysbe happy to receive the fortune awarded him by the Supreme Lord, whichseems pleasant or unpleasant according to one's judgment.
                                   TEXT 39                     purve mahaprabhu more karena sammana
                     duhkha pai' mane ami kailun anumana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Formerly Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu always respected ME as His
senior, but I did not like such respect. Therefore, My mind beingafflicted by unhappiness, I made a plan.                                   TEXT 40
                mukti--srestha kari' kainu vasistha vyakhyana
                    kruddha hana prabhu more kaila apamana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Thus I expounded the Yoga-vasistha, which considers liberation the
ultimate goal of life. For this the Lord became angry at Me and treatedMe with apparent disrespect.
                                   PURPORT     There is a book of the name Yoga-vasistha that Mayavadis greatly
favor because it is full of impersonal misunderstandings regarding theSupreme Personality of Godhead, with no touch of Vaisnavism. Factually,all Vaisnavas should avoid such a book, but Advaita Acarya Prabhu,wanting punishment from the Lord, began to support the impersonalstatements of the Yoga-vasistha. Thus Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu becameextremely angry at Him and seemingly treated Him disrespectfully.
                                   TEXT 41                      danda pana hana mora parama ananda
                     ye danda paija bhagyavan sri-mukunda
                                 TRANSLATION     "When chastised by Lord Caitanya, I was very happy to receive a
punishment similar to that awarded Sri Mukunda.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Mukunda, a great friend and associate of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, used to visit many places where people were against theVaisnava cult. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to know of this, Hepunished Mukunda, forbidding him to see Him again. Although CaitanyaMahaprabhu was soft like a flower, He was also strict like athunderbolt, and everyone was afraid to allow Mukunda to come again intothe presence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Mukunda, therefore, being verysorry, asked his other friends whether he would one day be allowed tosee Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. When the devotees brought this inquiry toLord Caitanya, the Lord replied, "Mukunda will get permission to see Meafter many millions of years." When they gave this information toMukunda, he danced with jubilation, and when Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhuheard that Mukunda was so patiently waiting to meet Him after millionsof years, He immediately asked him to return. There is a statement aboutthis punishment of Mukunda in the Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-lila, TenthChapter.
                                   TEXT 42                      ye danda paila sri-saci bhagyavati                     se danda prasada anya loka pabe kati
                                 TRANSLATION     "A similar punishment was awarded to mother Sacidevi. Who could be
more fortunate than she to receive such punishment?"
                                   PURPORT     Mother Sacidevi was similarly punished, as mentioned in the
Caitanya-bhagavata, Madnya-lila, Chapter Twenty-two. Mother Sacidevi,apparently showing her feminine nature, accused Advaita Prabhu ofencouraging her son to become a sannyasi. Caitanya Mahaprabhu, takingthis accusation as an offense, asked Sacidevi to touch the lotus feet ofAdvaita Acarya to mitigate the offense she had supposedly committed.
                                   TEXT 43                     eta kahi' acarya tanre kariya asvasa
                     anandita ha-iya aila mahaprabhu-pasa
                                 TRANSLATION     After pacifying Kamalakanta Visvasa in this way, Sri Advaita Acarya
Prabhu went to see Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 44
                   prabhuke kahena--tomara na bujhi e Iila
                    ama haite prasada-patra karila kamala
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Advaita Acarya told Lord Caitanya,"l cannot understand Your
transcendental pastimes. You have shown more favor to Kamalakanta thanYou generally show to Me.
                                   TEXT 45
                      amareha kabhu yei na haya prasada
                     tomara carane ami ki kainu aparadha
                                 TRANSLATION     "The favor You have shown Kamalakanta is so great that even to Me
You have never shown such favor. What offense have I committed at Yourlotus feet so as not to be shown such favor?"
                                   PURPORT     This is a reference to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's former punishment
of Advaita Acarya. When Advaita Acarya Prabh u was read ing Yoga-vasistha, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu beat Him, but He never told Him not
to come in His presence. But Kamalakanta was punished with the ordernever to come in the Lord's presence. Therefore Sri Advaita AcaryaPrabhu wanted to impress upon Caitanya Mahaprabhu that He had shown morefavor to Kamalakanta Visvasa because He had prohibited Kamalakanta fromseeing Him, whereas He had not done so to Advaita Acarya. Therefore thefavor shown Kamalakanta Visvasa was greater than that shown AdvaitaAcarya.
                                   TEXT 46                      eta suni' mahaprabhu hasite lagila
                     bolaiya kamalakante prasanna ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu laughed with satisfaction
and immediately called Kamalakanta Visvasa.
                                   TEXT 47
                    acarya kahe, ihake kene dile darasana
                      dui prakarete kare more vidambana
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya then said to Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "Why have You
called back this man and allowed him to see You? He has cheated Me intwo ways."
                                   TEXT 48
                     suniya prabhura mana prasanna ha-ila
                     dunhara antara-katha dunhe se janila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard this, His mind was satisfied. Only
They could understand each other's minds.
                                   TEXT 49
                    prabhu kahe--bauliya, aiche kahe kara
                     acaryera lajj a-dharma-hani se acara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed Kamalakanta, "You are a
bauliya, one who does not know things as they are. Why do you act inthis way? Why do you invade the privacy of Advaita Acarya and damage Hisreligious principles?                                   PURPORT
     Kamalakanta Visvasa, out of his ignorance, asked the King of J
agannatha Puri, Maharaja Prataparudra, to liquidate the three-hu ndred-rupee debt of Advaita Acarya, but at the same time he establishedAdvaita Acarya as an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.This is contradictory. An incarnation of the Supreme Godhead cannot beindebted to anyone in this material world. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is neversatisfied by such a contradiction, which is technically calledrasabhasa, or overlapping of one humor (rasa) with another. This is thesame type of idea as the contradiction that Narayana is poverty-stricken(daridra-narayana).
                                   TEXT 50                    pratigraha kabhu na karibe raja-dhana
                     visayira anna khaile dusta haya mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Advaita Acarya, My spiritual master, should never accept charity
from rich men or kings because if a spiritual master accepts money orgrains from such materialists his mind becomes polluted.
                                   PURPORT     It is very risky to accept money or foodstuffs from materialistic
persons, for such acceptance pollutes the mind of the charity'srecipient. According to the Vedic system, one should give charity tosannyasis and brahmanas because one who thus gives charity becomes freefrom sinful activities. Formerly, therefore, brahmanas would not acceptcharity from a person unless he were very pious. Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu gave this instruction for all spiritual masters.Materialistic persons who are not inclined to give up their sinfulactivities like illicit sex, intoxication, gambling and meat-eatingsometimes want to become our disciples, but, unlike professionalspiritual masters who accept disciples regardless of their condition,Vaisnavas do not accept such cheap disciples. One must at least agree toabide by the rules and regulations for a disciple before a Vaisnavaacarya can accept him. In fact, a Vaisnava should not even acceptcharity or foodstuffs from persons who do not follow the rules andregulations of the Vaisnava principles.
                                   TEXT 51                    mana dusta ha-ile nahe krsnera smarana
                    krsna-smrti vinu haya nisphala jivana
                                 TRANSLATION     "When one's mind is polluted, it is very difficult to remember
Krsna; and when remembrance of Lord Krsna is hampered, one's life isunproductive.                                   PURPORT
     A devotee should always be alert, keeping his mind in a sanguine
state so that he can always remember Lord Sri Krsna. The sastras state,smartavyah satatam visnuh: in devotional life one should always rememberLord Visnu. Srila Sukadeva Gosvami also advised Maharaja Pariksit,smartavyo nityasah. In the Second Canto, First Chapter, of Srimad-Bhnavatam,Sukadeva Gosvami advised Pariksit Maharaja:     tasmad bharata sarvatma bhagavan isvaro harih     srotavyah kirtitavyas ca smartavyas cecchatabhayam"O descendant of King Bharata, one who desires to be free from allmiseries must hear, glorify and also remember the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, who is the Supersoul, the controller and the savior from allmiseries." (SB. 2.1.5) This is the summary of all the activities of aVaisnava,and the same instruction is repeated here (krsna-smrti vinuhaya nisphala jivana). Srila Rupa Gosvami states i n Bhakti- rasamrta-sindhu, avyartha-kalatvam: A Vaisnava must be very alert not to wasteeven a second of his valuable lifetime. This is a symptom of a Vaisnava.But association with pounds-and-shillings men, or visayis, materialistswho are simply interested in sense gratification, pollutes one's mindand hampers such continuous remembrance of Lord Krsna. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu therefore advised, asat-sanga- tyaga--ei vaisnava-acara: aVaisnava should behave in such a way as to never assosiate withnondevotees or materialists (Cc. Madhya 22.87). One can avoid suchassociation simply by always remembering Krsna within his heart.
                                   TEXT 52                   loka-lajja haya, dharma-kirti haya hani
                    aiche karma na kariha kabhu iha jani'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Thus one becomes unpopular in the eyes of the people in general,
for this damages his religiosity and fame. A Vaisnava, especially onewho acts as a spiritual master, must not act in such a way. One shouldalways be conscious of this fact."
                                   TEXT 53
                      ei siksa sabakare, sabe mane kaila
                       acarya-gosani mane ananda paila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave this instruction to Kamalakanta, all
present considered it to be meant for everyone. Thus Advaita Acarya wasgreatly pleased.
                                   TEXT 54                    acaryera abhioraya prabhu-matra bujhe
                    prabhura gambhira vakya acarya samujhe
                                 TRANSLATION     Only Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu could understand the intentions of
Advaita Acarya, and Advaita Acarya appreciated the grave instruction ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 55
                      ei ta' prastabe ache bahuta vicara
                     grantha-bahulya-bhaye nari likhibara
                                 TRANSLATION     In this statement there are many confidential considerations. I do
not write of them all, fearing an unnecessary increase in the volume ofthe book.
                                   TEXT 56
                    sri-yadunandanacarya--advaitera sakha
                    tanra sakha-upasakhara nahi haya lekha
                                 TRANSLATION     The fifth branch of Advaita Acarya was Sri Yadunandana Acarya, who
had so many branches and sub-branches that it is impossible to write ofthem.
                                   PURPORT     Yadunandana Acarya was the official initiator spiritual master of
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. In other words, when Raghunatha dasa Gosvamiwas a householder, Yadunandana Acarya initiated him at home. LaterRaghunatha dasa Gosvamitook shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 57                    vasude va dattera tenho krpara bhajana
                    sarva-bhave asriyache caitanya-carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Yadunandana Acarya was a student of Vasudeva Datta, and he
received all his mercy. Therefore he could accept Lord Caitanya's lotusfeet, from all angles of vision, as the supreme shelter.
                                   PURPORT     The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 140, describes that Vasudeva
Datta was formerly Madhuvrata, a singer in Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 58                      bnagavatacarya, ara visnudasacarya
                     cakrapani acarya, ara ananta acarya
                                 TRANSLATION     Bhagavata Acarya, Visnudasa Acarya, Cakrapani Acarya and Ananta
Acarya were the sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth branches of AdvaitaAcarya.
                                   PURPORT     In his AnubhsyaSri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Prabhupada
says that Bhagavata Acarya was formerly among the followers of AdvaitaAcarya but was later counted among the followers of Gadadhara Pandita.The sixth verse of Sakha- nirnayamrta, a book written by Yadunandanadasa, states that Bhagavata Acarya compiled a famous book of the nameprema-tarangini. According to the Gaura-ganoddesa- dipika, verse 195,Bhagavata Acarya formerly lived in Vrndavana as Sveta-manjari. VisnudasaAcarya was present during the Khetari-mahotsava. He went there withAcyutananda, as stated in the Bhakti-ratnakara, Tenth Taranga. AnantaAcarya was one of the eight principal gopis. His former name was Sudevi.Although he was among Advaita Acarya's followers, he later became animportant devotee of Gadadhara Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 59                     nandini ara kamadeva, caitanya-dasa
                     durlabha visvasa, ara vanamaji-dasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Nandini, Kamadeva, Caitanya dasa, Durlabha Visvasa and Vanamali
dasa were the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenthbranches of Sri Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 60
                    jagannatha kara, ara kara bha vanatha
                    hrdayananda sena, ara dasa bholanatha
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagannatha Kara, Bhavanatha Kara, Hrdayananda Sena and Bholanatha
dasa were the fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth branchesof Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 61                   yadava-dasa, viiaya-dasa, dasa janardana
                   ananta-dasa, kanu-pandita, dasa narayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Yadava dasa, Vijaya dasa, J anardana dasa, Ananta dasa, Kanu
Pandita and Narayana dasa were the nineteenth, twentieth, twenty-first,twenty-second, twentythird and twenty-fourth branches of Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 62
                    srivatsa pandita, brahmacari haridasa
                    purusottama brahmacari, ara krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srivatsa Pandita, Haridasa Brahmacari, Purusottama Brahmacari and
Krsnadasa were the twenty-fifth, twenty-sixth, twenty-seventh andtwenty, eighth branches of Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 63
                     purusottama pandita, ara raghunatha
                    vanamali ka vicandra, ara vaidyanatha
                                 TRANSLATION     Purusottama Pandita, Raghunatha, Vanamali Kavicandra and
Vaidyanatha were the twenty-ninth, thirtieth, thirty-first and thirty-second branches of Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 64
                    lokanatha pandita, ara murari pandita
                     sri-haricarana, ara madhava pandita
                                 TRANSLATION     Lokanatha Pandita, Murari Pandita, Sri Haricarana and Madhava
Pandita were the thirty-third, thirty-fourth, thirty-fifth and thirty-sixth branches of Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 65
                     vijaya pandita, ara pandita srirama
                   asankhya advaita-sakha kata la-iba naina
                                 TRANSLATION     Vijaya Pandita and Srirama Pandita were two important branches of
Advaita Acarya. There are innumerable branches, but I am unable tomention them all.
                                   PURPORT     Since Srivasa Pandita was an incarnation of Narada Muni, his
younger brother, Srirama Pandita, is accepted as an incarnation ofParvata Muni, Narada Muni's most intimate friend.
                                   TEXT 66                    mali-datta jala advaita-skandha yogaya
                    sei jale jiye sakha,--phula-phala paya
                                 TRANSLATION     The Advaita Acarya branch received the water supplied by the
original gardener, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In this way, the sub-branches were nourished, and their fruits and flowers grew luxuriantly.
                                   PURPORT     The branches of Advaita Acarya nourished by the water (jala)
supplied by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are to be considered bona fideacaryas. As we have discussed hereinbefore, the representatives ofAdvaita Acarya later divided into two groups--the bona fide branches ofthe acarya's disciplic succession and the pretentious branches ofAdvaita Acarya. Those who followed the principles of Caitanya Mahaprabhuflourished, whereas the others, who are mentioned below in thesixtyseventh verse, dried up.
                                   TEXT 67                    ihara madhye malipache kona sakha-gana
                    na mane caitanya-mali durdaiva karana
                                 TRANSLATION     After the disappearance of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, some of the
branches, for unfortunate reasons, deviated from His path.
                                   TEXT 68
                      srjaila, jiyaila, tanre na manila
                krtaghna ha-ila, tanre skandha kruddha ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     Some branches did not accept the original trunk that vitalized and
maintained the entire tree. When they thus became ungrateful, theoriginal trunk was angry at them.                                   TEXT 69
                  kruddha hana skandha tare jala na sancare
                      jalabhave krsa sakha sukaiya mare
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Lord Caitanya did not sprinkle upon them the water of His
mercy,and they gradually withered and died.
                                   TEXT 70
                    caitanya-rahita deha--suskakastha-sama
                      jivitei mrta sei, maile dande yama
                                 TRANSLATION     A person without Krsna consciousness is no better than dry wood or
a dead body. He is understood to be dead while living, and after deathhe is punishable by Yamaraja.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Srimad-Bhagavatam, Sixth Canto, Th ird Chapter, twenty-
ninth verse, Yamaraja, the superintendent of death, tells his assistantswhat class of men they should bring before him. There he states, "Aperson whose tongue never describes the qualities and holy name of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, whose heart never throbs as he remembersKrsna and His lotus feet, and whose head never bows in obeisances to theSupreme Lord, must be brought before me for punishment." I n otherwords, nondevotees are brought before Yamaraja for punishment, and thusmaterial nature awards them various types of bodies. After death, whichis dehantara, a change of body, nondevotees are brought before Yamarajafor justice. By the judgment of Yamaraja, material nature gives thembodies suitable for the resultant actions of their past activities. Thisis the process of dehantara, or transmigration of the self from one bodyto another. Krsna conscious devotees, however, are not subject to bejudged by Yamaraja. For devotees there is an open road, as confirmed inBhagavad-gita. After giving up the body(tyaktva deham), a devotee neveragain has to accept another material body, for in a spiritual body hegoes back home, back to Godhead. The punishments of Yamaraja are meantfor persons who are not Krsna conscious.
                                   TEXT 71                      ke vala e gana-prati nahe ei danda
                     caitanya-vimukha yei sei ta' pasanda
                                 TRANSLATION     Not only the misguided descendants of Advaita Acarya but anyone who
is against the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu should be considered anatheist subject to be punished by Yamaraja.
                                   TEXT 72
                   ki pandita, ki tapasvi, kiba grhi, yati
                      caitanya-vimukha yei, tara ei gati
                                 TRANSLATION     Be one a learned scholar, a great ascetic, a successful householder
or a famous sannyasi, if one is against the cult of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, he is destined to suffer the punishment meted out byYamaraja.
                                   TEXT 73
                      ye ye laila sri-acyutanandera mata
                      sei acaryera gana--maha-bhagavata
                                 TRANSLATION     The descendants of Advaita Acarya who accepted the path of Sri
Acyutananda were all great devotees.
                                   PURPORT     I n th is connection, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thaku ra, i n h is Amrta-
pravaha-bhasya, gives this short note: "Sri Advaita Acarya is one of theimportant trunks of the bhakti-kalpataru, or desire tree of devotionalservice. Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as a gardener, poured water onthe root of the bhakti tree and thus nourished all its trunks andbranches. But nevertheless, under the spell of maya, the mostunfortunate condition of a living entity, some of the branches, notaccepting the gardener who poured water on them, considered the trunkthe only cause of the great bhakti-kalpataru. In other words, thebranches or descendants of Advaita Acarya who considered Advaita Acaryathe original cause of the devotional creeper, and who thus neglected ordisobeyed the instructions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, deprivedthemselves of the effect of being watered and thus dried up and died. Itis further to be understood that not only the misguided descendants ofAdvaita Acarya but anyone who has no connection with CaitanyaMahaprabhu--even if he is independently a great sannyasi, learnedscholar or ascetic--is like a dead branch of a tree."     This analysis by Sri Bhaktivinoda Thakura, supporting thestatements of Sri Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, depicts the position ofthe present so-called Hindu religion, which, being predominantlyconducted by the Mayavada phiiosophy, has become a hodgepodgeinstitution of various concocted ideas. Mayavadis greatly fear the Krsnaconsciousness movement and accuse it of spoiling the Hindu religionbecause it accepts people from all parts of the world and all religioussects and scientifically engages them in the daiva-varnasrama-dharma. As
we have explained several times, however, we find no such word as"Hindu" in the Vedic literature. The word most probably came fromAfghanistan, a predominantly Mohammedan country, and originally referredto a pass in Afghanistan known as Hindukush that is still a part of atrade route between India and various Mohammedan countries.     The actual Vedic system of religion is called varnasrama-dharma, asconfirmed in the Visnu Purana:     varnasramacaravata purusena parah puman     visnur aradhyate pan tha nanyat tat-tosa-karanam     ( Visnu purana, 3.8.9)The Vedic literature recommends that a human being follow the principlesof varnasrama-dharma. A cce p ti ng th e p rocess of varnasrama-dharmawill make a person's life successful because this will connect him withthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the goal of human life.Therefore the Krsna consciousness movement is meant for all of humanity.Although human society has different sections or subdivisions, all humanbeings belong to one species, and therefore we accept that they all havethe ability to understand their constitutional position in connectionwith the Supreme personality of Godhead, Visnu. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabh uconfirms, jivera `svarupa' haya--krsnera nityadasa: "Fvery living entityis an eternal part, an eternal servant, of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead." Every living entity who attains the human form of life canunderstand the importance of his position and thus become eligible tobecome a devotee of Lord Krsna. We take it for granted, therefore, thatall humanity should be educated in Krsna consciousness. Indeed, in allparts of the world, in every country where we preach the sankirtanamovement, we find that people very easily accept the Hare Krsna maha-mantra without hesitation. The visible effect of this chanting is thatthe members of the Hare Krsna movement, regardless of their backgrounds,all give up the four principles of sinful life and come to an elevatedstandard of devotion.     Although posing as great scholars, ascetics, householders andsvamis, the so-called followers of the Hindu religion are all useless,dried-up branches of the Vedic religion. They are impotent; they cannotdo anything to spread the Vedic culture for the benefit of humansociety. The essence of the Vedic culture is the message of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. Lord Caitanya instructed:     yare dekha, tare kaha `krsna ` upadesa     amara ajnaya guru hana tara' ei desa     ( Cc. Madhya 7. 1 28)One should simply instruct everyone he meets regarding the principles ofkrsna- katha, as expressed in Bhagavad-gita As It Is and Srimad-Bhagavatam. One who has no interest in krsna-katha or the cult of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu is like dry, useless wood with no living force. TheISKCON branch, being directly watered by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, isbecoming undoubtedly successful, whereas the disconnected branches ofthe so-called Hindu religion that are envious of ISKCON are drying upand dying.
                                   TEXT 74                      sei sei,--acaryera krpara bhajana
                      anayase paija sei caitanya-carana                                 TRANSLATION
     By the mercy of Advaita Acarya, the devotees who strictly followed
the path of Caitanya Mahaprabhu attained the shelter of Lord Caitanya'slotus feet without difficulty.
                                   TEXT 75
                       acyutera yei mata, sei mata sara
                     ara yata mata saba haila charakhara
                                 TRANSLATION     It should be concluded, therefore, that the path of Acyutananda is
the essence of spiritual life. Those who did not follow this path simplyscattered.
                                   TEXT 76
                     sei acarya-gane mora koti namaskara
                 acyutananda-praya, caitanya--jivana yanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     I therefore offer my respectful obeisances millions of times to the
actual followers of Acyutananda whose life and soul were SriCaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 77
                     ei ta' kahilan acarya-gosanira gana
                  tina skandha-saknara kaila sanksepa ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have briefly described the three branches [Acyutananda,
Krsna Misra and Gopala] of Sri Advaita Acarya's descendants.
                                   TEXT 78
                      sakha-upasakha, tara nahika ganana
                     kichu-matra kahi' kari dig-darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     There are multifarious branches and sub-branches of Advaita Acarya.
It is very difficult to enurnerate them fully. I have simply given aglimpse of the whole trunk and its branches and sub-branches.                                   TEXT 79
                   sri-gadadhara pandita sakhate mahottama
                     tanra upasakha kichu kari ye ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     After describing the branches and sub-branches of Advaita Acarya, I
shall now attempt to describe some of the descendants of Sri GadadharaPandita, the most important among the branches.
                                   TEXT 80
               sakha-srestha dhru vananda, sridhara brahmacari
                      bhnavatacarya, haridasa brahmacari
                                 TRANSLATION     The chief branches of Sri Gadadhara Pandita were (1)Sri
Dhruvananda, (2) Sridhara Brahmacari, (3) Haridasa Brah macari and (4)Raghunatha Bhagavatacarya.
                                   PURPORT     Verse 152 of the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika describes Sri Dhruvananda
Brahmacari as an incarnation of Lalita, and verse 194 describes SridharaBrahmacari as the gopi known as Candralatika.
                                   TEXT 81                    ananta acarya, kavidatta, misra-nayana
                   gangamantri mamu thakura, kanthabharana
                                 TRANSLATION     The fifth branch was Ananta Acarya; the sixth, Kavi Datta; the
seventh, Nayana Misra; the eighth, Gangamantri; the ninth, Mamu Thakura;and the tenth, Kanthabharana.
                                   PURPORT     Verses 197 and 207 of the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika describe Kavi
Datta as the gopi named Kalakanthi, verses 196 and 207 describe NayanaMisra as the gopi named Nitya-manjari, and verses 196 and 205 describeGangamantri as the gopi named Candrika. Mamu Thakura, whose real namewas J agannatha Cakravarti, was the nephew of Sri Nilambara Cakravarti,Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's grandfather. I n Bengal a maternal uncle iscalled mama, and in East Bengal and Orissa, mamu.Thus J agannathaCakravarti was known as Mama or Mamu Thakura. Mamu Thakura's residencewas in the district of Faridpur in the village known as Magadoba. Afterthe demise of SriGadadhara Pandita, Mamu Thakura became the priest incharge of the temple known as Tota-gopinatha in Jagannatha Puri.According to the opinion of some Vaisnavas, Mamu Thakura was formerly
known as Sri Rupa-manjari. The followers of Mamu Thakura were RaghunathaGosvami, Ramacandra, Rad havallabha, Krsnajivana, Syamasu ndara,Santaman i, Harinatha, N avinacand ra, Matilala, Dayamayi andKunjavihari.     Kanthabharana, whose original name was Sri Ananta Cattaraja, wasthe gopi named Gopali in krsna-lila.
                                   TEXT 82                     bhugarbha gosani, ara bhagavata-dasa
                      yei dui asi' kaija vrndavane vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The eleventh branch of Gadadhara Gosvami was Bhugarbha Gosani, and
the twelfth was Bhagavata dasa. Both of them went to Vrndavana andresided there for life.
                                   PURPORT     Bhugarbha Gosani, formerly known as Prema-manjari, was a great
friend of Lokanatha Gosvami, who constructed the temple of Gokulananda,one of the seven important temples of Vrndavana--namely, Govinda,Gopinatha, Madana-mohana, Radharamana, Syamasundara, Radha-Damodara andGokulananda--that are authorized institutions of Gaudiya Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 83                     vaninatha brahmacari--bada mahasaya
                   vallabha-caitanya-dasa--krsna-premamaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The thirteenth branch was Vaninatha Brahmacari, and the fourteenth
was Vallabha-caitanya dasa. Both of these great personalities werealways filled with love of Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Vaninatha Brahmacari is described in the Tenth Chapter, 1 14th
verse, of Adi- lila. A disciple of Vallabha-caitanya named Nalini-mohanaGosvami established a temple of Madana-gopala in Navadvipa.
                                   TEXT 84                    srinatha cakravarti, ara uddhava dasa
                     jitamitra, kasthakatajagannatha-dasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The fifteenth branch was Srinatha Cakravarti; the sixteenth,
Uddhava; the seventeenth, J itamitra; and the eighteenth, J agannathadasa.                                   PURPORT
     The Sakha-nirnaya, verse 13, mentions Srinatha Cakravarti as a
reservoir of all mentions Uddhava dasa as being greatly qualified indistributing love of Godhead to everyone. The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika,verse 202, mentions J itamitra as the gopi named Syama-manjari. Jitamitra wrote a book entitled Krsna-mayurya. J agannatha dasa was aresident of Vikramapura, near Dacca. His birthplace was the villageknown as Kasthakata or Kathadiya. His descendants now reside in villagesknown as Adiyala, Kamarapada and Paikapada. He established a temple ofYasomadhava. The worshipers in this temple are the Gosvamis of Adiyala.As one of the sixty-four sakhis, he was formerly an assistant ofCitradevi-gopi named Tilakini. The following is a list of hisdescendants: Ramanrsimha, Ramagopala, Ramacandra, Sanatana, Mu ktarama,Gopinatha, Goloka, Harimohana Siromani, Rakhalaraja, Madhava andLaksmikanta. The Sakha-nirnaya mentions that J agannatha dasa preachedthe Hare Krsna movement in the district or state of Tripura.
                                   TEXT 85                     sri-hari acarya, sadi-puriya gopala
                      krsnadasa brahmacari, puspa-gopala
                                 TRANSLATION     The nineteenth branch was Sri Hari Acarya; the twentieth,
Sadipuriya Gopala; the twenty-first, Krsnadasa Brahmacari; and thetwenty-second, Puspagopala.
                                   PURPORT     The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verses 196 and 207, mentions that Hari
Acarya was formerly the gopi named Kalaksi. Sadipuriya Gopala iscelebrated as a preacher of the Hare Krsna movement in Vikramapura inEast Bengal. Krsnadasa Brahmacari was formerly among the group of sakhisknown as the asta-sakhis. His name was Indulekha. Krsnadasa Brahmacarilived in Vrndavana. There is a tomb in the RadhaDamodara temple known asKrsnadasa's tomb. Some say that this is the tomb of Krsnadasa Brahmacariand others Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami. In either case we offer ourrespects because both of them were expert in distributing love ofGodhead to the fallen souls of this age. The Sakha-nirnaya mentions thatPuspagopala was formerly known as Svarnagramaka.
                                   TEXT 86                  sriharsa, raghu-misra, pandita laksm-matha
                    bangavti-caitanya-dasa, sri-raghunatha
                                 TRANSLATION     The twenty-third branch was Sriharsa; the. twenty-fourth, Raghu
Misra; the twenty-fifth, Laksminatha Pandita; the twenty-sixth, Caitanyadasa; and the twenty-seventh, Raghunatha.                                   PURPORT
     Raghu Misra is described in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verses 195
and 201, as Karpura-manjari. Similarly, Laksminatha Pandita is mentionedas Rasonmada, and Bangavati Caitanya dasa is mentioned as Kali. TheSakha-nirnaya states that Bangavati Caitanya dasa was always seen witheyes full of tears. He also had a branch of descendants. Their nameswere Mathuraprasada, Rukminikanta, J ivanakrsna, Yugalakisora,Ratanakrsna, Radhamadhava, Usamani, Vaikunthanatha and Lalamohana, orLalamohana Saha Sankhanidhi. Lalamohana was a great merchant in Dacca City. The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, ve rses 1 94 an d 200, m en tions thatRaghunatha was formerly Varangada.
                                   TEXT 87               amogha pandita, hasti-gopala, caitanya-vallabha
                      yadu ganguli ara mangala vaisnava
                                 TRANSLATION     The twenty-eighth branch was Amogha Pandita; the twenty-ninth,
Hastigopala; the thirtieth, Caitanya-vallabha; the thirty-first, YaduGanguli; and the thirtysecond, Mangala Vaisnava.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Mangala Vaisnava was a resident of the village Titakana in the
district of Mursidabada. His forefathers were Saktas who worshiped thegoddess Kiritesvari. It is said that Mangala Vaisnava, formerly astaunch brahmacari, left home and later married the daughter of hisdisciple Prananatha Adhikari in the village of Mayanadala. Thedescendants of this family are known as the Thakuras of Kandada, whichis a village in the district of Burdwan near Katwa. Scattereddescendants of Mangala Vaisnava, thirty-six families altogether, stilllive there. Among the celebrated disciples of Mangala Thakura arePrananatha Adhikari, Purusottama Cakravarti of the village of Kankada,and Nrsimha-prasada Mitra, whose family members are well-known mrdangaplayers. Sudhakrsna M itra and Nikunjavihari Mitra are both especiallyfamous mrdanga players. In the family of Purusottama Cakravarti thereare famous persons like Kunjavihari Cakravarti and RadhavallabhaCakravarti, who now live in the district of Birbhum. They professionallyrecite songs from Caitanya-mangala. It is said that when Mangala Thakurawas constructing a road from Bengal to J agannatha Puri, he found aDeity of Radhavallabha while digging a lake. At that time he was livingin the locality of Kand ada i n the vil lage named Ranipu ra. Th esalagrama-sija personal i y worsh i ped by Mangala Thakura still existsin the village of Kandada. A temple has been constructed there for theworship of Vrndavana-candra. Mangala Thakura had three sons--Radhikaprasada, Gopiramana and Syamakisora. The descendants of thesethree sons are still living.
                                   TEXT 88                     cakravarti sivananda sada vrajavasi
                    mahasakha-madhye tenho sudrdha visvasi
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Cakravarti, the thirty-third branch, who always lived in
Vrndavana with firm conviction, is considered an important branch ofGadadhara Pandita.
                                   PURPORT     The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 1 83, mentions that Sivananda Cak
ravarti was formerly Labanga-manjari. The Sakha-nirnaya, written byYadunandana dasa, also names other branches, as follows:( 1)MadhavaAcarya, (2)Gopala dasa, (3)H rdayananda, (4)Vallabha Bhatta (theVallabha-sampradaya, or Pustimarga-sampradaya, is very famous), (5)Madhu Pandita (this famous devotee lived near Khadadaha in the villageknown as Sanibona-grama, about two miles east of the Khadadaha station,and constructed the temple of Gopinathaji in Vrndavana), (6)Acyutananda, (7) Candrasekhara, (8) Vakresvara Pandita, (9) Damodara,(10) Bhagavan Acarya, (11) Ananta Acaryavarya, (12) Krsnadasa, (13)Paramananda Bhattacarya, (14) B havananda Gosvami, (25) Caitanya dasa,(16) Lokanatha Bhatta, (this devotee, who lived in the village ofTalakhadi in the district of Yasohara and constructed the temple ofRadhavinoda, was the spiritual master of Narottama dasa Thakura and agreat friend of Bhugarbha Gosvami), ( 1 7) Govinda Acarya, (18) AkruraThakura, (19) Sanketa Acarya, (20) Pratapaditya, (21) KamalakantaAcarya, (22) Yadava Acarya and (23) Narayana Padihari (a resident of Jagannatha Puri).
                                   TEXT 89                    ei ta' sanksepe kahilan panditera gana
                      aiche ara sakha-upasakhara ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have briefly described the branches and sub-branches of
Gadadhara Pandita. There are still many more that I have not mentionedhere.
                                   TEXT 90
                    panditera gana saba,--bhnavata dhanya
                  prana-vallabha--sabara sri-krsna-caitanya
                                 TRANSLATION     All the followers of Gadadhara Pandita are considered great
devotees because they have Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as their lifeand soul.                                   TEXT 91
                    ei tma skandhera kailun sakhara ganana
                   yan-saba-smarane bha va-bandha-vimocana
                                 TRANSLATION     Simply by remembering the names of all these branches and sub-
branches of the three trunks I have described [ Nityananda, Advaita andGadadhara], one attains freedom from the entanglement of materialexistence.
                                   TEXT 92
                     yan-saba-smarane pai caitanya-carana
                    yan-saba-smarane haya vanchita purana
                                 TRANSLATION     Simply by remembering the names of all these Vaisnavas, one can
attain the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Indeed, simply byremembering their holy names, one achieves the fulfillment of alldesires.
                                   TEXT 93
                       ataeva tan-sabara vanoiye carana
                      caitanya-malira kahi lila-anukrama
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore, offering my obeisances at the lotus feet of them all, I
shall describe the pastimes of the gardener Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inchronological order.
                                   TEXT 94
                     gaura-lilamrta-sindhu--apara agadha
                      ke karite pare tahan avagaha-sadha
                                 TRANSLATION     The ocean of the pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is
immeasurable and unfathomable. Who can take the courage to measure thatgreat ocean?
                                   TEXT 95
                   tahara madhurya-gandhe lubdha haya mana
                       ataeva tate rani' caki eka kana                                 TRANSLATION
     It is not possible to dip into that great ocean, but its sweet
mellow flavor attracts my mind. I therefore stand on the shore of thatocean totrytotaste but a drop of it.
                                   TEXT 96
                      sri-r\pa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, l, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports ofS ri Caitan ya-caritamrta,
Adi-lila, Chapter Twelve, describing the expansions of Advaita Acaryaand Gadadhara pandita.
                               Chapter Thirteen
                 The Advent of Lord Sri Caitanya Maha-Prabhu     This Thirteenth Chapter of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta describes Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's appearance. The entire Adi-lila section describesLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's household life, and similarly the Antya-liladescribes His life in the sannyasa order. Within the Antya-lila, thefirst six years of His sannyasa life are called Madhya-lila. During thistime, Caitanya Mahaprabhu toured southern India, went to Vrndavana,returned from Vrndavana and preached the sankirtana movement.     A learned brhmana named Upendra Misra who resided in the districtof Srihatta was the father of Jagannatha Misra, who came to Navadvipa tostudy under the direction of Nilambara Cakravarti and then settled thereafter marrying Nilambara Cakravarti's daughter, Sacidevi. Sri Sacidevigave birth to eight children, all daughters, who died one after anotherimmediately after birth. After her ninth pregnancy, she gave birth to ason, who was named Visvarupa. Then, in 1407 Saka Era on the fullmoonevening of the month of Phalguna, during the constellation ofsimhalagna, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared as the son of Sri Sacideviand Jagannatha Misra. After hearing of the birth of Caitanya Mahaprabhu,learned scholars and brahmanas, bringing many gifts, came to see thenewly born baby. Nilambara Cakravarti, who was a great astrologer,immediately prepared a horoscope, and by astrological calculation he sawthat the child was a great personality. This chapter describes thesymptoms of this great personality.
                                    TEXT 1                            sa prasidatu caitanya-
                            de vo yasya prasadatah                           tal-Iila-varnane yogyah                         sadyah syad adhamo 'py ayam
                                 TRANSLATION     I wish the grace of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, by whose mercy even
one who is fallen can describe the pastimes of the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     To describe Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu or Lord Sri Krsna, one needs
supernatural power, which is the grace and mercy of the Lord. Withoutthis grace and mercy, one cannot compose transcendental literature. Bydint of the grace of the Lord, however, even one who is unfitfor aliterary career can describe wonderful transcendentai topics.Description of Krsna is possibie for one who is empowered. Krsna-saktivina nahe tara pravartana (Cc. Antya 7.11). Unless endowed with themercy of the Lord, one cannot preach of the Lord's name, fame, quality,form, entourage and so on. It should be concluded, therefore, that thedescription of Caitanya-caritamrta by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvamimanifests specific mercy bestowed upon the author, although he thoughtof himself as the most fallen. We should not consider him fallen becausehe describes himself as such. Rather, anyone who is abie to compose suchtranscendental literature is our esteemed master.
                                    TEXT 2                   jaya jaya sri-krsna-caitanya gauracandra
                    jayadvaitacandra jaya jaya nityananda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to
Advaitacandra! All glories to Lord Nityananda Prabhu!
                                    TEXT 3
                      jaya jaya gadadhara jaya srinivasa
                     jaya mukunda vasudeva jaya naridasa
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Gadadhara Prabhu! All glories to Srinivasa Acarya
Prabhu! All glories to Mukunda Prabhu and Vasudeva Prabhu! All gloriesto Haridasa Thakura!
                                    TEXT 4
                   jaya damodara-svarupa jaya murari gupta
                     ei saba candrodaye tamah kaiia iupta                                 TRANSLATION
     All glories to Svarupa Damodara and Murari Gupta! All these
brilliant moons have together dissipated the darkness of this materialworld.
                                    TEXT 5
                 jaya sri-caitanyacandrera bhakta candra-gana
                 sabara prema j votsnna ujjvala tri-bhu vana
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to the moons who are devotees of the principal moon,
Lord Caitanyacandra! Their bright moonshine illuminates the entireuniverse.
                                   PURPORT     I n this verse we find the moon described as candra-gana, which is
plural in number. This indicates that there are many moons. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, naksatranam aham sasi.- ` `A m o ng th e stars, I amth e m oo n." ( Bg. 10.21) All the stars are like the moon. Westernastronomers consider the stars to be suns, but Vedic astronomers,following the Vedic scriptures, consider them moons. The sun has theability to shine powerfully, and the moons reflect the sunshine andtherefore look brilliant. In Caitanya-caritamrta Krsna is described tobe like the sun. The supreme powerful is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead Sri Krsna, or Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and His devotees arealso bright and illuminating because they reflect the supreme sun. TheCaitanya-caritamrta states:     krsna--surya-sama; maya naya andhakara     yanan krsna, tahan nahi m\yara adhikara"Krsna is bright like the sun. As soon as the sun appears, there is noquestion of darkness or nescience." (Cc. Madhya 22.31) Similarly, thisverse also describes that by the illumination of all the moons,brightened by the reflection of the Krsna sun, or by the grace of allthe devotees of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the entire world will beilluminated,despite the darkness of Kali-yuga. Only the devotees of LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu can dissipate the darkness of Kali-yuga, theignorance of the population of this age. No one else can do so. Wetherefore wish that all the devotees of the Krsna consciousness movementmay reflect the supreme sun and thusdissipate the darkness of the entireworld.
                                    TEXT 6                  ei ta' kahila gran tharambhe mukha-bandha
                    ebe kahi caitanya-Iila-krama-anubandha
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have spoken the preface of Caitanya-caritamrta. Now I shall
give a synopsis of the entire book in the form of codes.
                                    TEXT 7
                    pratname ta' sutra-rupe kariye ganana
                      pacne taha vistari kariba vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     First let me state the pastimes of the Lord in codes. Then I shall
describe them in detail.
                                    TEXT 8
                     sri-krsna-caitanya navadvipe avatari
                      ata-cailisa vatsara prakata vihari
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, adventing Himself in Navadvipa, was
visible for forty-eight years, enjoying His pastimes.
                                    TEXT 9
                    caudda-sata sata sake janmera pramana
                    caudda-sata pancanne ha-ila antardhana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the year 1407 of the Saka Era, Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu
appeared, and in the year 1455 He disappeared from this world.
                                   TEXT 10
                    cabbisa vatsara prabhu kaila grha-vasa
                     nirantara kaila krsna-kirtana-vilasa
                                 TRANSLATION     For twenty-four years Lord Caitanya lived in the grhastha-asrama [
household life], always engaging in the pastimes of the Hare Krsnamovement.
                                   TEXT 11
                     cabbisa vatsara-sese kariya sannyasa
                   ara cabbisa vatsara kaila niiacale vasa                                 TRANSLATION
     After twenty-four years He accepted the renounced order of life,
sannyasa, and He resided for twenty, four years more at Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 12
                   tara madhye chaya vatsara--gamanagamana
                 kabhu daksina, kabhu gauda, kabhu vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     Of these last twenty-four years, He spent the first six years
continuously touring India, sometimes in South India, sometimes inBengal and sometimes in Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 13
                       astadasa vatsara rahiia niiacaie
                     krsna-prema-namamrte bhasa'ia sakale
                                 TRANSLATION     For the remaining eighteen years He continuously stayed in
Jagannatha Puri. Chanting the nectarean Hare Krsna maha-mantra, Heinundated everyone there in a flood of love of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 14
                  garnastnye prabhura iiia--`adi'-lilakhyana
                 `madhya'- `antya'-lila--sesa-lilara dui nama
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of His household life are known as Adi-lila,or the
original pastimes. His later pastimes are known as Madhya-lila andAntya-lila, or the middle and final pastimes.
                                   TEXT 15
                    adi-lila-madnye prabhura yateka carita
                   sutra-rupe murari gupta karila grathita
                                 TRANSLATION     All the pastimes enacted by Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in His
Adi-lila were recorded in the form of codes by Murari Gupta.
                                   TEXT 16                    prabnura ye sesa-lila svarupa-damodara
                  sutra kari' gran tnilena granthera bhitara
                                 TRANSLATION     His later pastimes [Madhya-lila and Antya-lila] were recorded by
His secretary, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, and thus kept within a book.
                                   TEXT 17
                      ei dui janera sutra dekhiya suniya
                   varnana karena vaisnava krama ye kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     By seeing and hearing the notes recorded by these two great
personalities, a Vaisnava, a devotee of the Lord, can know thesepastimes one after another.
                                   TEXT 18
               balya, pauganda, kaisora, yau vana,--cari bheda
                      ataeva adi-khande lila cari bheda
                                 TRANSLATION     In His original pastimes there are four divisions: balya, pauganda,
kaisora and yauvana [childhood, early boyhood, later boyhood and youth].
                                   TEXT 19
                          sarva-sad-guna-purnam tam
                           vande phalguna-purnimam                          yasyam sri-krsna-caitanyo                           'vatirnah krsna-namabhih
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances unto the full-moon evening in the
month of Phalguna, an auspicious time full of auspicious symptoms, whenLord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu advented Himself with the chanting of theholy name, Hare Krsna.
                                   TEXT 20
                phalguna-purnima-sandnyaya prabh ura janmodaya
                   sei-kale daiva-yoge candra-granana haya                                 TRANSLATION
     On the full-moon evening of the month of Phalguna when the Lord
took birth, coincidentally there was also a lunar eclipse.
                                   TEXT 21
                    'hari' `hari' bale loka narasita hana
                   janmila caitanya-prabhu `nama' janmaiya
                                 TRANSLATION     In jubilation everyone was chanting the holy name of the Lord--
"Hari! Hari!"--and Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then appeared, afterfirst causing the appearance of the holy name.
                                   TEXT 22
                   janma-baiya-pauganda-kaisora-yu va-kale
                     hari-nama laoyaila prabhu nana chale
                                 TRANSLATION     At His birth, in His childhood, in His early and later boyhood as
well as in His youth, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, under different pleas,induced people to chant the holy name of Hari [the Hare Krsna maha-mantra].
                                   TEXT 23
                   balya-bhava chaie prabhu karena krandana
                    `krsna' `hari, nama suni'rahaye rodana
                                 TRANSLATION     In His childhood, when the Lord was crying, He would stop
immediately upon hearing the holy names Krsna and Hari.
                                   TEXT 24
                       ataeva `hari"hari' bale narigana
                     dekhite aise yeba sarva bandhu jana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the friendly ladies who came to see the child would chant the
holy names, "Hari, Hari!" as soon as the child would cry.
                                   TEXT 25                    `gaurahari' bali' tare hase sarva nari
                     ataeva naila tanra nama `gaurahari'
                                 TRANSLATION     When all the ladies saw this fun, they enjoyed laughing and called
the Lord "Gaurahari." Since then, Gaurahari became another of His names.
                                   TEXT 26
                     balya vayasa--yavat hate khadi dila
                    pauganda vayasa--yavat vivaha na kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     His childhood lasted until the date of hate khadi, the beginning of
His education, and His age from the end of His childhood until Hemarried is called pauganda.
                                   TEXT 27
                      vivaha karile haila navina yauvana
                   sarvatra laoyaila prabhu nama-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     After His marriage His youth began, and in His youth He induced
everyone to chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra anywhere and everywhere.
                                   TEXT 28
                   pauganda-vayase padena, padana sisyagane
                    sarvatra karena krsna-namera vyaknyane
                                 TRANSLATION     During His pauganda age He became a serious student and also taught
disciples. In this way He used to explain the holy name of Krsnaeverywhere.
                                   TEXT 29
                   sutra-vrtti-panji-tika krsnete tatparya
                   sisyera pratita haya,--prabhava ascarya
                                 TRANSLATION     When teaching a course in grammar [vyakarana] and explaining it
with notes, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught His disciples about theglories of Lord Krsna. All explanations culminated in Krsna, and His
disciples would understand them very easily. Thus His influence waswonderful.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Jiva Gosvami compiled a grammar in two parts named Laghu-
hari-namamrta- vyakarana and Brhad-dhari-namamrta-vyakarana. I f someonestud ies these two texts in vyakarana, or grammar, he learns thegrammatical rules of the Sanskrit language and simuitaneously learns howto become a great devotee of Lord Krsna.     In the Caitanya-bhagavata, First Chapter, there is a statementabout the method by which Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught grammar.Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu explained the codes of grammar to be eternal,like the holy name of Krsna. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (15.15), vedaisca sarvair aham eva vedyah. The purport of all revealed scriptures isunderstanding of Krsna. Therefore if a person explains anything that isnot Krsna, he simply wastes his time laboring hard without fulfillingthe aim of his life. If one simply becomes a teacher or professor ofeducation but does not understand Krsna, it is to be understood that heis among the lowest of man k ind, as stated in Bhagavad-gita (naradhamahmnayapahrta-jnanah). If one does not know the essence of all revealedscriptures but still becomes a teacher, his teaching is like thedisturbing braying of an ass.
                                   TEXT 30                   yare dekhe, tare kahe,--kaha krsna-nama
                     krsna-name bhasaila navadvipa-grama
                                 TRANSLATION     When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was a student, He asked whomever He
met to chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. In this way He inundated thewhole town of Navadvipa with the chanting of Hare Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     The present Navadvipa-dhama is but a part of the whole of
Navadvipa. Navadvipa means "nine islands." These nine islands,whichoccupy an area of land estimated at thirty-two square miies, aresurrounded by different branches of the Ganges. In ail nine of thoseislands of the Navadvipa area there are different places for cultivatingdevotional service. It is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam that there arenava-vidha bhakti, n in e d iffe re n t activities of devotional service: sravanam kirtanam visnoh smaranam pada-se vanam arcanam vandanamdasyam sakhyam atma-nivedanam. There are different islands in theNavadvipa area for cultivation of these nine varieties of devotionalservice. They are as follows: (1) Antardvipa, (2) Simantadvipa, (3)Godrumadvipa, (4) Madhyadvipa, (5) Koladvipa, (6) Rtudvipa, (7)jahnudvipa, (8) Modadruma-dvipa and (9) Rudradvipa. According to thesettlement map, our ISKCON Navadvipa center is situated on theRudradvipa island. Below Rudradvipa, in Antardvipa, is Mayapur. ThereSri Jagannatha Misra, the father of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, used to reside.In all these different islands, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as a young
man, used to lead His sankirtana party. He thus inundated the entirearea with the waves of love of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 31                      kisora vayase arambhija sankirtana
                  ratra-dine preme nrtya, sange bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     just prior to His youthful life, He began the sankirtana movement.
Day and night He used to dance in ecstasy with His devotees.
                                   TEXT 32
                     nagare nagare bhrame kirtana kariya
                   bhasaila tri-bhu vana prema-bhakti di ya
                                 TRANSLATION     The sankirtana movement went on from one part of the town to
another, as the Lord wandered everywhere performing kirtana. In this wayHe inundated the whole world by distributing love of Godhead.
                                   PURPORT     One may raise the question how all three worlds became inundated
with love of Krsna since Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed kirtana only inthe Navadvipa area. The answer is that Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu isKrsna Himself. The entire cosmic manifestation results from the Lord'sfirst setting it in motion. Similarly, since the sankirtana movement wasfirst set in motion five hundred years ago by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'sdesire that it spread all over the universe, the Krsna consciousnessmovement, in continuity of that same motion, is now spreading all overthe world, and in this way it will gradually spread all over theuniverse. With the spread of the Krsna consciousness movement, everyonewill merge in an ocean of love of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 33                    cabbisa vatsara aiche navadvioa-grame
                     laoyaila sarva-loke krsna-prema-name
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu lived in the Navadvipa area for twenty-
four years, and He induced every person to chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra and thus merge in love of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 34                    cabbisa vatsara chila kariya sannyasa
                     bhakta-gana lana kaija nilacale vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     For His remaining twenty-four years, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, after
accepting the renounced order of life, stayed at Jagannatha Puriwith Hisdevotees.
                                   TEXT 35
                      tara madhye nilacale chaya vatsara
                   nrtya, gita, premabhakti-dana nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     For six of these twenty-four years in Nilacala [Jagannatha Puri],
He distributed love of Godhead by always chanting and dancing.
                                   TEXT 36
                    setubandha, ara gauda-vyapi vrndavana
                     prema-nama pracariya karila bhramana
                                 TRANSLATION     Beginning from Cape Comorin and extending through Bengal to
Vrndavana, during these six years He toured all of India, chanting,dancing and distributing love of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 37
                    ei `madhyalila' nama--lila-mukhyadhama
                    sesa ostadasa varsa--`antyalila' nama
                                 TRANSLATION     The activities of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu in His travels after He
accepted sannyasa are His principal pastimes. His activities during Hisremaining eighteen years are called antya-lila, or the final portion ofHis pastimes.
                                   TEXT 38
                  tara madhye chaya votsara bhaktagana-sange
                    prema-bhakti laoyaiia nrtya-gita-range
                                 TRANSLATION     For six of the eighteen years He continuously stayed in J agannatha
Puri, He regularly performed kirtana, inducing all the devotees to loveKrsna simply by chanting and dancing.
                                   TEXT 39
                     dvadasa vatsara sesa rahila nilacale
                     premavastha sikhaila asvadana-cchale
                                 TRANSLATION     For the remaining twelve years He stayed in Jagannatha Puri, He
taught everyone how to taste the transcendental mellow ecstasy of loveof Krsna by tasting it Himself.
                                   PURPORT     A person who is advanced in Krsna consciousness always feels
separation from Krsna because such a feeling of separation excels thefeeling of meeting Krsna. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in His last twelveyears of existence within this world at Jagannatha Puri, taught thepeople of the world how, with a feeling of separation, one can developHis dormant love of Krsna. Such feelings of separation or meeting withKrsna are different stages of love of Godhead. These feelings develop intime when a person seriously engages in devotional service. The higheststage is called prema-bhakti, but this stage is attained by executingsadhana-bhakti. One should not try to elevate himself artificially tothe stage of prema-bhakti without seriously following the regulativeprinciples of sadhana-bhakti. prema-bhakti is the stage of relishing,whereas sadhana-bhakti is the stage of improving in devotional service.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught this cult of devotional service in fulldetaii by practical application in His own life. It is said, therefore,apani acari' bhakti sikhaimu sabare.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is KrsnaHimself, and in the role of a krsna-bhakta, a devotee of Krsna, Heinstructed the entire world how one can execute devotional service andthus go back home, back to Godhead, in due course oftime.
                                   TEXT 40                      ratri-divase krsna-viraha-sphurana
                      unmadera cesta kare pral\oa-vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Day and night Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt separation from Krsna.
Manifesting symptoms of this separation, He cried and talked veryinconsistently, like a madman.
                                   TEXT 41
                  sri-radhara pralapa yaiche uddhava-darsane
                    seimata unmada-pralapa kare ratri-dine                                 TRANSLATION
     As Srimati Radharani talked inconsistently when She met Uddhava, so
also Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu relished, both day and night, such ecstatictalk in the mood of Srimati Radharani.
                                   PURPORT     In this connection one should refer to Srimati Radharani's
soliloquy after meeting Uddhava in Vrndavana. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhupresented a similar picture of such ecstatic imaginary talking. Fuli ofjealousy and madness symptomizing neglect of Krsna, Srimati Radharani,criticizing a bumblebee, talked just like a madwoman. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, in the last days of His pastimes, exhibited all the symptomsof such ecstasy. In this connection one should refer to the FourthChapter of Adi-lila, verses 107 and 108.
                                   TEXT 42                    vidyapati, jayade va, candidasera gita
                      asvadena ramananda-svarupa-sahita
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord used to read the books of Vidyapati, J ayadeva and
Candidasa, relishing their songs with His confidential associates likeSri Ramananda Raya and Svarupa Damodara Gosvami.
                                   PURPORT     Vidyapati was a famous composer of songs about the pastimes of
Radha-Krsna. He was an inhabitant of Mithila, born in a brahmana family.It is calculated that he composed his songs during the reign of KingSivasimha and Queen Lachimadevi in the beginning of the FourteenthCentury of the Saka Era, almost one hundred years before the appearanceof Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The twelfth generation of Vidyapati'sdescendants is still living. Vidyapati's songs about the pastimes ofLord Krsna express intense feelings of separation from Krsna, and SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu relished all those songs in His ecstasy ofseparation from Krsna.     Jayadeva was born during the reign of Maharaja Laksmana Sena ofBengal in the Eleventh or Twelfth Century of the Saka Era. His fatherwas Bhojadeva, and his mother was Vamadevi. For many years he lived inNavadvipa, then the capital of Bengal. His birthplace was in the Birbhumdistrict in the village Kendubilva. In the opinion of some authorities,however, he was born in Orissa, and still others say that he was born inSouthern India. He passed the last days of his iife in Jagannatha Puri.One of his famous books is Gita-govinda, which is full of transcendentaimellow feelings of separation from Krsna. The gopis felt separation fromKrsna before the rasa dance, as mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, andthe Gita-govinda expresses such feelings.There are many commentaries onthe Gita-govinda by many Vaisnavas.     Candidasa was born in the viiiage of Nannura, which is aiso in the
Birbhum district of Bengal. He was born of a brahmana family,and it issaid that he also took birth in the beginning of the Fourteenth Century,Sakabda Era. It has been suggested that Candidasa and Vidyapati weregreat friends because the writings of both express the transcendentalfeelings of separation profusely.The feelings of ecstasy described byCandidasa and Vidyapati were actually exhibited by Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. He relished all those feeiings in the role of Sri Radharani,and His appropriate associates for this purpose were Sri Ramananda Raya and Sri SvarupaDamodara Gosvami. These intimate associates of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhuhelped the Lord very much in the pastimes in which He felt likeRadharani.     Sri Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments in this connectionthat such feelings of separation as Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu enjoyedfrom the books of Vidyapati, Candidasa and Jayadeva are especiallyreserved for persons like Sri Ramananda Raya and Svarupa Damodara, whowere paramahamsas, men of the topmost perfection, because of theiradvanced spiritual consciousness. Such topics are not to be discussed byordinary persons imitating the activities of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.For critical students of mundane poetry and literary men without Godconsciousness who are after bodily sense gratification, there is no needto read such a high standard of transcendental iiterature. Persons whoare after sense gratification should not try to imitate raganugadevotional service. In their songs, Candidasa, Vidyapati and Jayadevahave described the transcendentai activities of the Supreme personalityof Godhead. Mundane reviewers of the songs of Vidyapati, Jayadeva andCandidasa simply help people in general become debauchees, and thisleads only to social scandals and atheism in the world. One should notmisunderstand the pastimes of Radha and Krsna to be the activities of amundane young boy and girl. The mundane sexual activities of young boysand girls are most abominable. Therefore, those who are in bodilyconsciousness and who desire sense gratification are forbidden toindulge in discussions of the transcendental pastimes of Sri Radha andKrsna.
                                   TEXT 43                      krsnera viyoge yata prema-cestita
                      asvadia purna kaila apana vanchita
                                 TRANSLATION     In separation from Krsna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu relished all
these ecstatic activities, and thus He fulfilled His own desires.
                                   PURPORT     In the beginning of Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that Lord
Caitanya appeared to taste the feelings Radharani felt upon seeingKrsna. Krsna Himself could not understand the ecstatic feelings ofRadharani toward Him, and therefore He desired to accept the role ofRadharani and thereby taste these feelings. Lord Caitanya is Krsnawith the feelings of Radharani; in other words, He is a combination of
Radha andSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu alone,one can relish the loving affairs of Radhaand Krsna together. One should therefore try to understand Radha-Krsnanot directly but through Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and through Hisdevotees. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura therefore says, rupa-raghunatha-pade haibe akuti, kabe hama bujhaba se yugala-piriti.- "When shall Idevelop a mentality of service toward Sri Rupa Gosvami, SanatanaGosvami, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami and the other devotees of Lord Caitanyaand thus become eligible to understand the pastimes of Sri Radha andKrsna?"
                                   TEXT 44                    ananta caitanya-lila ksudra jiva hana
                     ke varnite pare, taha vistara kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu are unlimited. How much
can a small living entity elaborate about those transcendental pastimes?
                                   TEXT 45
                      sutra kari' gane yaoi apane ananta
                     sahasra-vadane tenho nahi paya anta
                                 TRANSLATION     If Sesanaga Ananta personally were to make the pastimes of Lord
Caitanya into codes, even with His thousands of mouths there is nopossibility that He could find theirlimit.
                                   TEXT 46
                      damodara-svarupa, ara gupta murari
                  mukhya-mukhya-Iila sutre likhiache vicari,
                                 TRANSLATION     Devotees like Sri Svarupa Damodara and Mu rari Gu pta have recorded
all the principal pastimes of Lord Caitanya in the form of notes, afterdeliberate consideration.
                                   TEXT 47
                      sei, anusare likhi lila-sutragana
                   vistari' varniachena taha dasa-vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     The notes kept by Sri Svarupa Damodara and Murari Gupta are the
basis of this book. Following those notes, I write of all the pastimesof the Lord. The notes have been described elaborately by Vrndavana dasaThakura.
                                   TEXT 48
                    caitanya-lilara vyasa,--dasa vrndavana
                      madhura kariya lila karila racana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura, the authorized writer of the pastimes
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, is as good as Srila Vyasadeva. He hasdescribed the pastimes in such a way as to make them sweeter andsweeter.
                                   TEXT 49
                  grantha-vistara-bhaye chadija ye ye sthana
                    sei sei sthane kichu kariba vyakhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     Being afraid of his book's becoming too voluminous, he left some
places without vivid descriptions. I shall try to fill those places asfar as possible.
                                   TEXT 50
                    prabhura lilamrta tenho kaila asvadana
                    tanra bhukta-sesa kichu karie carvana
                                 TRANSLATION     The transcendental pastimes of Lord Caitanya have actually been
relished by Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura. I am simply trying to chew theremnants of foodstuffs left by him.
                                   TEXT 51
                   adi-lila-sutra likhi, suna, bhakta-gana
                   sanksepe likhi ve samyak na yna likhana
                                 TRANSLATION     My dear devotees of Lord Caitanya, let me now write the codes of
the Adi-lila in brief because it is not possible to describe thesepastimes in full.                                   TEXT 52
                  kona vancha purana lagi` vrajendra-kumara
                      avatirna haite mane karila vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     To fulfill a particular desire within His mind, Lord Krsna,
Vrajendra-kumara, decided to descend on this planet after maturecontemplation.
                                   TEXT 53
                      age avatarila ye ye guru-parivara
                    sanksepe kahiye, kaha na yaya vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna therefore first allowed His family of superiors to
descend on the earth. I shall try to describe them in brief because itis not possible to describe them fully.
                                  TEXT 54-55
                    sri-saci-jagannatha, sri-madhava puri
                     kesava bharati, ara sri-isvara puri
                     advaita acarya, ara pandita srivasa
                  acaryaratna, vidyanidhi, thakura haridasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Krsna, before appearing as Lord Caitanya, requested these
devotees to precede Him: Sri Sacidevi, Jagannatha Misra, MadhavendraPuri, Kesava Bharati, Isvara Puri, Advaita Acarya, Srivasa Pandita,Acaryaratna, Vidyanidhi and Thakura Haridasa.
                                   TEXT 56
                   sri-hatta-nivasi sri-upendra-misra-nama
                 vaisnava, pandita, dhani, sad-guna-pradhana
                                 TRANSLATION     There was also Sri Upendra Misra, a resident of the district of
Srihatta. He was a great devotee of Lord Visnu, a learned scholar, arich man and a reservoir of all good qualities.
                                   PURPORT     Upendra Misra is described in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 35,
as the gopala named Parjanya. The same personality who was formerly thegrandfather of Lord Krsna appeared as Upendra Misra at Srihatta andbegot seven sons. He was a resident of Dhaka-daksina-grama in thedistrict of Srihatta. There are still many residents of that part of thecountry who introduce themselves as belonging to the Misra family of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                  TEXT 57-58                   sapta misra tanra putra--sapta rsisvara
                 kamsari, paramananda, padmanabha, sarvesvara
                    jagannatha, janardana, trailokyanatha
                     nadiyate ganga-vasa kaila jagannatha
                                 TRANSLATION     Upendra Misra had seven sons, who were all saintly and most
influential: (1) Kamsari, (2) Para mananda, (3) Pad manabha, (4)Sarvesvara, (5) J agan natha, (6) Janardana and (7) Trailokyanatha.Jagannatha Misra, the fifth son, decided to reside on the bank of theGanges at Nadia.
                                   TEXT 59
                   jagannatha misravara--padavi `purandara'
                     nan da-vasude va-rupa sadguna-sagara
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagannatha Misra was designated as Purandara. Exactly like Nanda
Maharaja and Vasudeva, he was an ocean of all good qualities.
                                   TEXT 60
                   tanra patni `saci'-nama, pativrata sati
                    yanra pita`nilambara' nama cakravarti
                                 TRANSLATION     His wife, Srimati Sacidevi, was a chaste woman highly devoted to
her husband. Sacidevi's father's name was Nilambara, and his surname wasCakravarti.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-pika, verse 104, it is mentioned that
Nilambara Cakravarti was formerly Gargamuni. Some of the familydescendants of Nilambara Cakravarti still live in the village of thename Magdoba in the district of Faridpur in Bangladesh. His nephew wasJagannatha Cakravarti, also known as Mamu Thakura, who became a discipleof Pandita Gosvami and stayed at Jagannatha Puri as the priest of Tota-
gopinatha. Nilambara Cakravarti lived at Navadvipa in the neighborhoodof Belapukuriya. This fact is mentioned in the book prema-vilasa.Because he lived near the house of the Kazi, the Kazi was alsoconsidered one of the maternal uncles of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.TheKazi used to address Nilambara Cakravarti as kaka, or "uncle." Onecannot separate the residence of the Kazi from Vamanapukura because thetomb of the Kazi is still existing there. Formerly the place was knownas Belapukuriya, and now it is called Vamanapukura. This has beenascertained by archeological evidence.
                                   TEXT 61                     radhadese janmila thakura nityananda
                   gangadasa pandita, gupta murari, mukunda
                                 TRANSLATION     In Radhadesa, the part of Bengal where the Ganges is not visible,
Nityananda Prabhu, Gangacasa Pandita, Murari Gupta and Mukunda tookbirth.
                                   PURPORT     Here radhadese refers to the village of the name Ekacakra in the
district of Birbhum, next to Burdwan. After the Burdwan railway stationthere is another branch line, which is called the Loop Line of theeastern railway, and there is a railway station of the name Mallarapura.Eight miles east of this railway station Ekacakra Village is stillsituated. Ekacakra Village extends north and south for an area of abouteight miles. Other villages, namely Viracandra-pura and Virabhadrapura,are situated within the area of the village of Ekacakra. In honor of theholy name of Virabhadra Gosvami, these places are renowned asViracandra-pura and Virabhadra-pura.     In the Bengali year 1331 a thunderbolt struck the temple ofEkacakra-grama. Therefore the temple is now in a broken state. Beforethis, there were no such accidents in that quarter. Within the templethere is a Deity of Sri Krsna established by Sri Nityananda Prabhu. Thename of the Deity is Bankima Raya or Banka Raya. On the right side ofBankima Raya is a Deity of Jahnava, and on His left side is SrimatiRadharani. The priests of the temple describe that Lord NityanandaPrabhu entered within the body of Bankima Raya and that the Deity ofJahnava-mata was therefore later placed on the right side of BankimaRaya. Afterwards, many other Deities were installed within the temple.On another throne within the temple are Deities of Muralidhara andRadha-Madhava.On another throne are Deities of Manomohana, Vrndavana-candra and Gaura-Nitai. But Bankima Raya is the Deity originallyinstalled by Nityananda Prabhu.     On the eastern side of the temple is a ghata known as Kadamba-khandi on the bank of the Yamuna, and it is said that the Deity ofBankima Raya was floating in the water and Lord Nityananda Prabhu pickedHim up and then installed Him in the temple. Thereafter, in a placeknown as Bhaddapura in the village of Viracandrapura, about half a milewest, in a place underneath a nima tree, Srimati Radharani was found.For this reason, the Radharani of Bankima Raya was known as Bhaddapurera
Thakurani, the mistress of Bhaddapura. On another throne, on the rightside of Bankima Raya, is a Deity of Yogamaya.     Now the temple and temple corridor rest on a high plinth, and on aconcrete structure in front of the temple is a meeting hall. It is alsosaid that on the northern side of the temple there was a Deity of LordSiva named Bhandisvara and that the father of Nityananda Prabhu, HadaiPandita, used to worship that Deity. At present, however, theBhandisvara Deity is missing, and in his place a J agannatha Svami Deityhas been installed. Lord Nityananda Prabhu did not factually constructany temples. The temple was constructed at the time of VirabhadraPrabhu. In the Bengali year 1298, the temple being in a delapidatedcondition, a brahmacari of the name Sivananda Svami repaired it.     In this temple there is an arrangement to offer foodstuffs to theDeity on the basis of seventeen seers of rice and necessary vegetables.The present priestly order of the temple belongs to the family ofGopijana-vallabhananda, one of the branches of Nityananda Prabhu. Thereis a land settlement in the name of the temple, and income from thisland finances the expenditures for the temple. There are three partiesof priestly gosvamis who take charge of the temple management one afteranother. A few steps onward from the temple is a place known asVisramatala, where it is said that Nityananda Prabhu in His childhoodused to enjoy sporting in various pastimes of Vrndavana and the pastimeof rasa-lila with His boy friends.     Near the temple is a place named Amalitala, which is so namedbecause of a big tamarind tree there. According to a party named theNedadi-sampradaya,Virabhadra Prabhu, with the assistance of twelvehundred Nedas, dug a great lake of the name Svetaganga. Outside of thetemple are tombs of the Gosvamis, and there is a small river known asthe Maudesvara, which is called the water of Yamuna. Within half a milefrom this small river is the birthplace of Sri Nityananda Prabhu. Itappears that there was a big meeting hall in front of the temple, butlater it became dilapidated It is now covered by banyan trees. Later on,a temple was constructed within which Gaura-Nityananda Deities areexisting. The temple was constructed by the late PrasannakumaraKarapharma. A tablet was installed in his memory in the Bengali year1323 in the month of Vaisakha (April-May).      The place whereNityananda Prabhu appeared is called Garbhavasa. There is an allotmentof about forty-three bighas of land to continue the worship in a templethere. The Maharaja of Dinajapura donated twenty bighas of land in thisconnection. It is said that near the place known as Garbhavasa, HadaiPandita conducted a primary school. The priests of this place, listed ina genealogical table, were as follows: (1) Sri Raghavacandra, (2)jagadananda dasa, (3) Krsnadasa, (4) Nityananda dasa, (5) Ramadasa, (6)Vrajamohana dasa, (7) Kanai dasa, (8) Gauradasa, (9) Sivananda dasa and(10) Haridasa. Krsnadasa belonged to the Cidiya-kunja at Vrndavana. Thedate of his disappearance is Krsna-janmastami. Cidiya-kunja is a placenow managed by the gosvamis of Singara-ghata in Vrndavana. They are alsoknown as belonging to the Nityananda family, most probably on the basisof their relationship with Krsnadasa.     Near Garbhavasa is a place called Bakulatala, where Sri NityanandaPrabhu and His boy friends used to take part in sporting activitiesknown asjhala-jhapeta. There is a bakula tree there that is wonderfulbecause all its branches and sub-branches look like the hoods ofserpents. It has been suggested that by the desire of Sri Nityananda
Prabhu, Anantadeva manifested Himself in that way. The tree is very old.It is said that formerly it had two branches, but later on, when theplaymates of Nityananda Prabhu felt inconvenience in jumping from onebranch to another, Nityananda Prabhu, by His mercy, merged the twobranches into one.     Another place nearby is named Hantugada. It is said that LordNityananda Prabhu brought all the holy places there. Therefore thepeople in the surrounding villages go there instead of to the Ganges totake bath. It is named Hantugada because Srila Nityananda Prabhu used toperform the dadhi-cida festival of distributing chipped rice with yogurtprasda there and He took the prasda kneeling down. A sanctified lake inthis place is always full of water throughout the year. A great fair isheld there during Gosthastami, and there is another big fair on thebirthday of Sri Nityananda Prabhu. I n the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika it isdescribed that Halayudha, Baladeva, Visvarupa and Sankarsana appeared asNityananda Avadhuta.
                                   TEXT 62                      asankhya bhaktera karaila avatara
                     sese avatirna haila vrajendra-kumara
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna, Vrajendra-kumara, first caused countless devotees to
appear, and at last He appeared Himself.
                                   TEXT 63
                 prabhura avirbhava-purve yata vaisnava-gana
                    advaita-acaryera sthane karena gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Before the appearance of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all the devotees
of Navadvipa used to gather in the house of Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 64
                       gita-bhnavata kahe acarya-gosani
                   jnana-karma nindi' kare bhak tira badai
                                 TRANSLATION     In these meetings of the Vaisnavas, Advaita Acarya used to recite
Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, decrying the paths of philosophicalspeculation and fruitive activity and establishing the superexcellenceof devotional service.
                                   TEXT 65                  sarva-sastre kahe krsna-bhaktira vyakhyana
                    jnana, yoga, tapo-dharma nahi mane ana
                                 TRANSLATION     In all the revealed scriptures of Vedic culture, devotional service
to Lord Krsna is explained throughout. Therefore devotees of Lord Krsnado not recognize the processes of philosophical speculation, mysticyoga, unnecessary austerity and so-called religious rituals. They do notaccept any process but devotional service.
                                   PURPORT     Our Krsna consciousness movement follows this principle. We do not
recognize any method for spiritual realization other than Krsnaconsciousness, devotional service. Sometimes we are criticized by groupsfollowing jnana, yoga, tapas or dharma, but fortunately we are unable tomake any compromises with them. We simply stand on the platform ofdevotional service and preach the same principles all over the world.
                                   TEXT 66                   tanra sange ananda kare vaisna vera gana
                   krsna-katha, krsna-puja, nama-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the house of Advaita Acarya, all the Vaisnavas took pleasure in
always talking of Krsna, always worshiping Krsna and always chanting theHare Krsna maha-mantra.
                                   PURPORT     On these principles only does the Krsna consciousness movement go
on. We have no business other than to talk of Krsna, worship Krsna andchant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
                                   TEXT 67                   kmtu sarva-loka dekhi' krsna-bahirmukha
                    visaye nimagna loka dekhi' paya duhkha
                                 TRANSLATION     But Sri Advaita Acarya Prabhu felt pained to see all the people
without Krsna consciousness simply merging in material sense enjoyment.
                                   PURPORT     A bona fide devotee of Lord Krsna is always pained to see the
fallen condition of the whole world. Srila BhaktisiddhantaSarasvatiThakura used to say, "There is no scarcity of anything withinthis world. The only scarcity is of Krsna consciousness." That is thevision of all pure devotees. Because of this lack of Krsna consciousness
in human society, people are suffering terribly, being merged in anocean of nescience and sense gratification. A devotee onlooker is verymuch aggrieved to see such a situation in the world.
                                   TEXT 68                      lokera nistara-hetu karena cintana
                      kemate e saba lokera ha-ibe tarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the condition of the world, He began to think seriously of
how all these people could be delivered from the clutches of maya.
                                   TEXT 69
                    krsna avatari' karena bhaktira vistara
                    tabe ta' sakaia lokera ha-ibe nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Advaita Acarya Prabhu thought: "If Krsna Himself appears to
distribute the cult of devotional service, then only will liberation bepossible for all people."
                                   PURPORT     Just as a condemned person can be relieved by a special favor of
the chief executive head, the president or king, so the condemned peopleof this Kali-yuga can be delivered only by the Supreme Personality ofGodhead Himself or a person especially empowered for this purpose. SrilaAdvaita Acarya Prabhu desired that the Supreme Personality of Godheadadvent Himself to deliver the fallen souls of this age.
                                   TEXT 70                    krsna avatarite acarya pratijna kariya
                    krsna-puja kare tulasi-gangajala diya
                                 TRANSLATION     With this consideration, Advaita Acarya Prabhu, promising to cause
Lord Krsna to descend, began to worship the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna, with tulasi leaves and water of the Ganges.
                                   PURPORT     Tulasi leaves and Ganges water, with, if possible, a little pulp of
sandalwood, is sufficient paraphernalia to worship the SupremePersonality of Godhead. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita:     patram puspam phalam toyam     yo me bhaktya prayacchati     tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
     asnami prayatatmanah"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit orwater, I will accept it." (Bg. 9.26) Following this principle, AdvaitaPrabhu pleased the Supreme personality of Godhead with tulasi leaves andwater of the Ganges.
                                   TEXT 71                     krsnera ah vana kare saghana hunkara
                    hunkare akrsta haila vrajendra-kumara
                                 TRANSLATION     By loud cries He invited Krsna to appear, and this repeated
invitation attracted Lord Krsna to descend.
                                   TEXT 72
                     jagannatha misra-patni sacira udare
                  asta kanya krame haila, janmi' janmi' mare
                                 TRANSLATION     Before the birth of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, eight daughters took
birth one after another from the womb of Sacimata, the wife ofJagannatha Misra. But just after their birth, they all died.
                                   TEXT 73
                   apatya-virahe misrera duhkhi haila mana
                     putra lagi' aradhila visnura carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagannatha Misra was very unhappy at the death of his children one
after another. Therefore, desiring a son, he worshiped the lotus feet ofLord Visnu.
                                   TEXT 74
                     tabe putm janamila `visvarupa' nama
                    maha-guna van tenha--`balade va'-dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     After this, Jagannatha Misra got a son of the name Visvarupa, who
was most powerful and highly qualified because He was an incarnation ofBaladeva.
                                   PURPORT     Visvarupa was the elder brother of Gaurahari, Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. When arrangements were being made for His marriage, He tooksannyasa and left home. He took the sannyasa name of Sankararanya. In1431,Sakabda Era, He disappeared in Panderapura in the district ofSolapura. As an incarnation of Sankarsana, He is both the ingredient andimmediate cause of the creation of this material world. He isnondifferent from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as amsa and amsi, or the partand the whole, are not different. He belongs to the quadruplemanifestation of caturvyuha as an incarnation of Sankarsana. I n theGaura-candrodaya it is said that Visvarupa, after His so-called demise,remained mixed within Sri Nityananda Prabhu.
                                   TEXT 75                balade va-prakasa--parama-vyome `sankarsana `
                    tenha--vis vera upadana-nimitta-karana
                                 TRANSLATION     The expansion of Baladeva known as Sankarsana in the spiritual
world is the ingredient and immediate cause of this material cosmicmanifestation.
                                   TEXT 76
                    tanha ba-i visve kichu nahi dekhi ara
                     ataeva `visuarupa ' nama ye tanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     The gigantic universal form is called the Visvarupa incarnation of
Maha-Sankarsana. Thus we do not find anything within this cosmicmanifestation except the Lord Himself.
                                   TEXT 77
                naitac citram bhagavati hy anante jagad-isvare
               otam protam idam yasmin tantusv anga yatha patah
                                 TRANSLATION     "As the thread in a cloth spreads both lengthwise and breadthwise,
so everything we see within this cosmic manifestation is directly andindirectly existing in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is notvery wonderful for Him."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhnavatam (10.15.35).                                   TEXT 78                    atae va prabhu tanre bale, `bada bhai'
                     krsna, balarama dui--caitanya, nitai
                                 TRANSLATION     Because Maha-Sankarsana is the ingredient and efficient cause of
the cosmic manifestation, He is present in every detail of it. LordCaitanya therefore called Him His elder brother. The two brothers areknown as Krsna and Balarama in the spiritual world, but at the presentmoment they are Caitanya and Nitai. Therefore the conclusion is thatNityananda Prabhu is the original Sankarsana, Baladeva.
                                   TEXT 79
                    putra pana dampati haila anandita mana
                     visese se vana kare go vinda-carana
                                 TRANSLATION     The husband and wife [ J agannatha Misra and Sacimata], having
gotten Visvarupa as their son, were very pleased within their minds.Because of their pleasure, they specifically began to serve the lotusfeet of Govinda.
                                   PURPORT     There is a common saying in India that everyone goes to worship the
Supreme Personality of Godhead when he is in distress, but when a personis in an opulent position, he forgets God. In Bhagavad-gita (7.16) thisis also confirmed:     catur-vidha bhajante mam     janah sukrtino'rjuna     arto jijnasur artharthi     jnani ca bharatarsabha"if backed by pious activities in the past, four kinds of men--namely,those who are distressed, those in need of money, those searching afterknowledge and those who are inquisitive--become interested in devotionalservice." The husband and wife, jagannatha Misra and Sacimata, were veryunhappy because their eight daughters had passed away. Now, when theygot Visvarupa as their son, certainly they became extremely happy. Theyknew that it was by the grace of the Lord that they were endowed withsuch happiness and opulence. Therefore instead of forgetting theLord,they become more and more adherent in rendering service to thelotus feet of Govinda. When a common man becomes opulent, he forgetsGod; but the more opulent a devotee becomes by the grace of the Lord,themore he becomes attached to the service of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 80                    caudda-sata chaya sake sesa magha mase
                                   jaganna                                 TRANSLATION
     In the month of January in the year 1406 of the Saka Era, Lord
Krsna entered the bodies of both Jagannatha Misra and Saci.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu took His birth in the year 1407, Saka Era,
in the month of Phalguna. But here we see that He entered the bodies ofHis parents in the year 1406 in the month of Magha.Therefore,the Lordentered the bodies of His parents thirteen full months before His birth.Generally a common child remains within the womb of his mother for tenmonths, but here we see that the Lord remained within the body of Hismother for thirteen months.
                                   TEXT 81                   misra kahe saci-sthane,--dekhi ana rita
                   jyotirmaya deha, geha laksmi-adhisthita
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagannatha Misra said to Sacimata: "I see wonderful things! Your
body is effulgent, and it appears as if the goddess of fortune were nowstaying personally in my home.
                                   TEXT 82
                    yahan tahan sarva-loka karaye sammana
                   ghare pathaia deya dhana, vastra, dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Anywhere and everywhere I go, all people offer me respect. Even
without my asking, they voluntarily give me riches, clothing and paddy."
                                   PURPORT     A brahmana does not become anyone's servant. To render service to
someone else is the business of the sudras. A brahmana is alwaysindependent because he is a teacher, spiritual master and advisor tosociety. The members of society provide him with all the necessities forlife. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord has divided society i nto fou r d ivision s--brahmana, ksatria, vaisya an d sudra. A society cannot run smoothlywithout this scientific division. A brahmana should give good advice toall the members of the society, a ksatria should look after theadministration, law and order of the society, vaisyas should produce andtrade in all the needs of the society, whereas sudras should renderservice to the higher sections of society (the brahmanas, ksatrias an dvaisyas).     Jagannatha Misra was a brahmana. Therefore people would send himall bodily necessities--money, cloth, grain and so on. While LordCaitanya was in the womb of Sacimata, Jagannatha Misra received allthese necessities of life without asking for them. Because of the
presence of the Lord in his family, everyone offered him due respect asa brahmana. In other words, if a brahmana or Vaisnava sticks to hisposition as an eternal servant of the Lord and executes the will of theLord, there is no question of scarcity for his personal maintenance orthe needs of his family.
                                   TEXT 83                     saci kahe,--m uni dekhon akasa-upare
                     divya-mrti loka saba yena stuti kare
                                 TRANSLATION     Sacimata told her husband: "I also see wonderfully brilliant human
beings appearing in outer space, as if offering prayers."
                                   PURPORT     Jagannatha Misra was honored by everyone on the earth and was
supplied with all necessities. Similarly, mother Saci saw many demigodsin outer space offering prayers to her because of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu's presence in her womb.
                                   TEXT 84                  jagannatha misra kahe,--svapna ye dekhila
                     jyotirmaya-dhama mora hrdaye pasila
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagannatha Misra then replied:"ln a dream I saw the effulgent abode
of the Lord enter my heart.
                                   TEXT 85
                    amara hrdaya haite gela tomara hrdaye
                     hena bujhi, janmibena kona mahasaye
                                 TRANSLATION     "From my heart it entered your heart. I therefore understand that a
great personality will soon take birth."
                                   TEXT 86
                      eta bali' dunherahe harasita hana
                      salagrama se va kare visesa karia
                                 TRANSLATION     After this conversation, both husband and wife were very jubilant,
and together they rendered service to the household salagrama-sila.
                                   PURPORT     Especially in every brahmana's house there must be a salagrama-sila
to be worshiped by the brahmana family.This system is still current.People who are brahmana by caste, who are born in a brahmana family,must worship the salagrama-sila. Unfortunately, with the progress ofKali-yuga, the so-called brahmanas, although very proud of taking birthin brahmana families, no longer worship the salagrama-sila. But actuallyit has been a custom since time immemorial that a person born in abrahmana family must worship the salagrama-sila in all circumstances. Inour Krsna consciousness society, some of the members are very anxious tointroduce the saia- grama-sila, but we have purposely refrained fromintroducing it because most of the members of the Krsna consciousnessmovement do not originally come from families of the brahmana caste.After some time, when we find that they are actually situated strictlyin the line of brahminical behavior, this salagrama-sila will beintroduced.     In this age, the worship of the salagrama-siia is not as importantas the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. That is the injunction ofthe sastra. Harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam kalau nasty evanasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha. Srila Jiva Gosvami's opinion is thatby chanting the Holy name offenselessly one becomes completely perfect.Nevertheless,just to purify the situation of the mind, worship of theDeity in the temple is also necessary. Therefore when one is advanced inspiritual consciousness or is perfectly situated on a spiritual platformhe may take to the worsh ip of the salagrama-sila.     The transferring of the Lord from the heart of Jagannatha Misra tothe heart of Sacimata is explained by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura as follows: "It is to be concluded that Jagannatha Misra andSacimata are nitya-siddhas, ever purified associatcs of the Lord. Theirhearts are always uncontaminated, and therefore they never forget theSupreme Personality of Godhead. A common man in this material world hasa contaminated heart. He must therefore first purify his heart to cometo the transcendental position. But Jagannatha Misra and Sacimata werenot a common man and woman with contaminated hearts. When the heart isuncontaminated, it is said to be in the existential position ofvasudeva. Vasudeva can beget Vasudeva, or Krsna, who is transcendentallysituated."     It is to be understood that Sacidevi did not become pregnant as anordinary woman becomes pregnant because of sense indulgence. One shouldnot think the pregnancy of Sacimata to be that of an ordinary womanbecause that is an offense. One can understand the pregnancy of Sacimatawhen one is actually advanced in spiritual consciousness and fullyengaged in the devotional service of the Lord.     I n the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.2.16) it is stated:     bhagavan api visvatma     bhaktanam abhayankarah     avivesamsa-bhagena     mana anakadundubhehThis is a statement regarding the birth of Lord Krsna. The incarnationof the Lord entered the mind of Vasudeva and was then transferred to themind of Devaki. Srila Sridhara Svami gives the following annotation in
this connection: `mana avivesa' manasy avirbabhuva; jivanam iva nadhatu-sambandha ity arthah. There was no question of the seminaldischarge necessary for the birth of an ordinary human being. Srila RupaGosvami also comments in this connection that Lord Krsna first appearedin the mind of Anakadundubhi, Vasudeva, and was then transferred to themind of Devaki-devi.Thusthe spiritual bliss in the mind of Devaki-devigradually increased, just as the moon increases every night until itbecomes a full moon. At the time of His appearance, Lord Krsna came outof the mind of Devaki and appeared within the prison house of Kamsa bythe side of Devaki's bed. At that time, by the spell of yogamaya, Devakithought that her child had now been born. In this connection, even thedemigods from the celestial kingdom were also bewildered. As it isstated, muhyanti yat surayah (SB. 1.1.1). They came to offer theirprayers to Devaki, thinking that the Supreme Lord was within her womb.The demigods came to Mathura from their celestial kingdom. Thisindicates that Mathura is still more important than the celestialkingdom of the upper planetary system.     Lord Krsna, as the eternal son of Yasodamayi, is always present inVrndavana. The pastimes of Lord Krsna are continuously going on withinboth this material world and the spiritual world. In such pastimes, theLord always thinks Himself the eternal son of mother Yasoda and fatherNanda Maharaja. In the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, Chapter Six,verse 43, it is stated, "When magnanimous, broadhearted Nanda Maharajacame back from a tour, he immediately took his son Krsna on his lap andexperienced transcendental bliss by smelling His head." Similarly, inthe Tenth Canto, Ninth Chapter, verse 21, it is said, "This Personalityof Godhead, appearing as the son of a cowherd damsel, is easilyavailable and understandable to devotees, whereas those who are underthe concept of bodily life, even though they are very advanced inausterity and penance or even though they are great philosophers, areunable to understand Him."     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura next quotes SripadaBaladeva Vidyabhusana, who refers to the prayers offered by the demigodsto Lord Krsna in the womb of Devaki and summarizes the birth of Krsna asfollows: "As the rising moon manifests light in the east, so Devaki, whowas always situated on the transcendental platform, having beeninitiated in the Krsna mantra by Vasudeva, the son of Surasena, keptKrsna within her heart." From this statement of Srimad- Bhagavatam(10.2.18) it is understood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead,having been transferred from the heart of Anakadundubhi, or Vasudeva,manifested Himself in the heart of Devaki. According to Srila BaladevaVidyabhusana, the "heart of Devaki" means the womb of Devaki because inthe Srimad-Bhagavatam, Tenth Canto, Second Chapter, verse 41, thedemigods say, distyamba te kukss--gatah parah puman: "Mother Devaki, theLord is already within your womb." Therefore, that the Lord wastransferred from the heart of Vasudeva to the heart of Devaki means thatHe was transferred to the womb of Devaki.     Similarly, in regard to the appearance of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhuas described i n th e Caitanya-caritamrta, th e wo rd s visese se vanakare go vinda-carana, " th e y specifically began to worship the lotusfeet of Govinda," indicate that exactly as Krsna appeared in the heartof Devaki through the heart of Vasudeva, so Lord Caitanya appeared inthe heart of Sacidevi through the heart of Jagannatha Misra. This is themystery of the appearance of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Consequently, one
should not think of Lord Caitanya's appearance as that of a common manor iiving entity. This subject matter is a little difficult tounderstand, but for devotees of the Lord it will not at all be difficultto realize the statements given by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 87                   naite haite haila garbna trayodasa masa
                 tathapi bhumistha nahe,--misrera haila trasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way the pregnancy approached its thirteenth month, but
still there was no sign of the delivery of the child. Thus JagannathaMisra became greatly apprehensive.
                                   TEXT 88
                     nilambara cakravarti kanila gani va
                     ei mase putra habe subha-ksana pana
                                 TRANSLATION     Nilambara Cakravarti [the grandfather of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu]
then did an astrological calculation and said that in that month, takingadvantage of an auspicious moment, the child would take birth.
                                   TEXT 89
                    caudda-sata sata-sake masa ye phalguna
                 paurnamasira sandhya-kale haile subha-ksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus in the year 1407 of the Saka Era in the month of Phalguna
[March-April] on the evening of the full moon, the desired auspiciousmoment appeared.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura, in his Amrta-pravana-bhasya, has
presented the horoscope of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as follows:     dinam     The explanation of the horoscope given by Bhaktivinoda Thakura isthat at the time of the birth of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu theconstellations were situated as follows: Sukra (Venus) and theconstellation of the Asvini stars were in the Mesarasi (Aries); Ketu(the ninth planet) and Uttaraphalguni were in the Simha-rasi (Leo);Candra (the moon) was in Purvaphalguni (the eleventh lunar mansion);Sani (Saturn) and jyestha were in Vrscika (Scorpio); Brhaspati (jupiter)and Purvasadha were in Dhanu (Sagittarius); Mangala (Mars) and Sravanawere in Makara (Capricorn); Ravi (the sun) was in Kumbha-rasi
(Aquarius); Rahu was in Purvabhadrapada; and Budha (Mercury) andUttarabhadrapada were in Mina (Pisces). The day was simhalagna,
                                   TEXT 90                   simha-rasi, simha-lagna, ucca graha-gana
                    sad-varga, asta-varga, sarva sulaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     According to the Jyotir Veda, or Vedic astronomy, when the figure
of the lion appears both in the zodiac and the time of birth [lagna],this indicates a very high conjunction of planets, an area under theinfluence of sad-varga and asta-varga, which are all-auspicious moments.
                                   PURPORT     The divisions of the sad-varga area are technically called ksetra,
nora, drekkana, navamsa, dvadasamsa and trimsamsa. According to J yotir-vedic astroiogy, when it is calculated who rules the constellation ofsix areas, the auspicious moment is calculated. Srila BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Thakura, who was previously also a great astrologer, says thatin the book named Brnajjataka and other books there are directions forknowing the movements of the stars and planets. One who knows theprocess of drawing a straight line and thus understands the area ofasta-varga can explain the auspicious constellations. This science isknown especially by persons who are called nora-sastra-vit, or those whoknow the scripture of the name Hora. On the strength of astrologicalcalculations from the Hora scripture, Nilambara Cakravarti, thegrandfather of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, ascertained the auspiciousmoment in which the Lord would appear.
                                   TEXT 91                     a-kalanka gauracandra diia darasana
                     sa-kalanka candre ara kon prayojana
                                 TRANSLATION     When the spotless moon of Caitanya Mahaprabhu became visible, what
would be the need for a moon full of black marks on its body?
                                   TEXT 92
                   e ta jnni' rah u kaila candrera grahana
               `krsna' `krsna' `hari ` name bhase tri-bhu vana
                                 TRANSLATION     Considering this, Rahu, the black planet, covered the full moon,
and immediately vibrations of "Krsna! Krsna! Hari!" inundated the threeworlds.                                   PURPORT
     According to the jyotir Veda, the Rahu planet comes in front of the
full moon, and thus a lunar eclipse takes place. It is customary inIndia that all the followers of the Vedic scriptures take bath in theGanges or the sea as soon as there is a lunar or solar eciipse. Allstrict followers of Vedic religion stand up in the water throughout thewhole period of the eclipse and chant the Hare Krsna moha-mantra. At thetime of the birth of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu such a lunar eclipse tookplace, and naturally all the people standing in the water were chantingHare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
                                   TEXT 93                    jaya jaya dhvani haila sakala bhuvana
                     camatkara haiya loka bhave mane mana
                                 TRANSLATION     All people thus chanted the Hare Krsna maha-mantra during the lunar
eclipse, and their minds were struck with wonder.
                                   TEXT 94
                    jagat bhariya loka bale--`hari' `hari'
                      seiksane gaurakrsna bhume avatari
                                 TRANSLATION     When the whole world was thus chanting the holy name of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna in the form of Gaurahari advented Himselfon the earth.
                                   TEXT 95
                      prasanna na-ila saba jagatera mona
                  `hari ` bali' hinduke hasya karaye yavana
                                 TRANSLATION     The whole world was pleased. While the Hindus chanted the holy name
of the Lord, the non-Hindus, especially the Mohammedans, jokinglyimitated the words.
                                   PURPORT     Although the Mohammedans or non-Hindus have no interest in chanting
the holy name of the Lord, the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, while the Hindusin Navadvipa chanted during the lunar ecilpse the Mohammedans aisoimitated them. Thus the Hindus and Mohammedans joined together inchanting the holy name of the Lord when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu advented
Himself.
                                   TEXT 96                     `hari' bali' narigana dei hulah uli
                    svarge vadya-nrtya kare deva kutuhali
                                 TRANSLATION     While all the ladies vibrated the holy name of Hari on earth, in
the heavenly planets dancing and music were going on, for the demigodswere very curious.
                                   TEXT 97
                  prasanna haiia dasa dik, prasanna nadijalu
                    sthavara jangama naila anande vih vala
                                 TRANSLATION     In this atmosphere, all the ten directions became jubilant, as did
the waves of the rivers. Moreover, all beings, moving and non-moving,were overwhelmed with transcendental bliss.
                                   TEXT 98
                  nadiya-udayagiri, purna candra gaurahari,
                           krpa kari' na-ila udaya                 papa-tamah naila nasa, tri jagatera uliasa,                         jagabhari' nari-dh vani haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus by His causeless mercy the full moon, Gaurahari, rose in the
district of Nadia, which is compared to Udayagiri, where the sun firstbecomes visible. His rising in the sky dissipated the darkness of sinfullife, and thus the three worlds became joyful and chanted the holy nameof the Lord.
                                   TEXT 99
                   sei-kale nijalaya, uthiya advaita raya,
                           nrtya kare anandita-mane                  haridase lana sange, hunkara-kirtana-range                           kene nace, keha nahijane
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time Sri Advaita Acarya Prabhu, in His own house at
Santipura, was dancing in a pleasing mood. Taking Haridasa Thakura withHim, He danced and loudly chanted Hare Krsna. But why they were dancing,
no one could understand.
                                   PURPORT     It is understood that Advaita Prabhu, at that time, was in His own
paternal house at Santipura. Haridasa Thakura frequently used to meetHim. Coincidentally, therefore, he was also there,and upon the birth ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu both of them immediately began to dance. But noone in Santipura could understand why those two saintly persons weredancing.
                                   TEXT 100                 dekhi' uparaga hasi; sighra ganga-ghate asi'
                          anande karila ganga-snana                    pana uparaga-chale, apanara mano-bale,                          brahmanere dila nana dana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the lunar eclipse and laughing, both Advaita Acarya and
Haridasa Thakura immediately went to the bank of the Ganges and bathedin the Ganges in great jubilation. Taking advantage of the occasion ofthe lunar eclipse, Advaita Acarya, by His own mental strength,distributed various types of charity to the brahmanas.
                                   PURPORT     It is the custom of Hindus to give in charity to the poor as much
as possible during the time of a lunar or solar eclipse. Advaita Acarya,therefore, taking advantage of this eclipse, distributed many varietiesof charity to the brahmanas. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam there is astatement in the Tenth Canto, Third Chapter, verse 11, that when Krsnatook His birth, immediately Vasudeva, taking advantage of this moment,distributed ten thousand cows to the brahmanas. It is customary amongHindus that at the time a child is born, especially a male child, theparents distribute great charity in jubilation. Advaita Acarya wasactually interested in distributing charity because of Lord Caitanya'sbirth at the time of the lunar eclipse. People could not understand,however, why Advaita Acarya was giving such a great variety of things incharity. He did so not because of the lunar eclipse but because of theLord's taking birth at that moment. He distributed charity exactly asVasudeva did at the time of Lord Krsna's appearance.
                                   TEXT 101                  jagat anandamaya, dekhi' mane sa-vismaya,
                           tharethore kahe haridasa                  tomara aichana ranga, mora mana parasanna,                        dekhi--kichu karye ache bhasa
                                 TRANSLATION     When he saw that the whole world was jubilant, Haridasa Thakura,
his mind astonished, directly and indirectly expressed himself toAdvaita Acarya: "Your
dancing and distributing charity are very pleasing to me. I can
understand that there is some special purpose in these actions."
                                   TEXT 102
                 acaryaratna, srivasa, haila mane sukhollasa
                         yai' snana kaila ganga jale                  anande vih vala mana, kare hari-sankirtana                          nana dana kaila mano-bale
                                 TRANSLATION     Acaryaratna [Candrasekhara] and Srivasa Thakura were overwhelmed
with joy, and immediately they went to the bank of the Ganges to takebath in the water of the Ganges. Their minds full of happiness, theychanted the Hare Krsna mantra and gave charity by mental strength.
                                   TEXT 103
                 ei mata bhakto-tati, yanra yei dese sthiti,
                          tahan tahan pana mano-bale                 nace, kare sankirtana, anande vih vala mona,                          dana kore grahameru chale
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way all the devotees, wherever they were situated, in every
city and every country, danced, performed sankirtana, and gave charityby mental strength on the plea of the lunar eclipse, their mindsoverwhelmed with joy.
                                   TEXT 104
               brahmana-sajjana-nari, nana-dravye thali bhari'
                           aila sabe yautuka la-iya                yena kanca-sona-dyuti, dekhi' balakera murti,                           asirvada kare sukha pana
                                 TRANSLATION     All sorts of respectful brahmana gentlemen and ladies, carrying
plates filled with various gifts, came with their presentations. Seeingthe newborn child, whose form resembled natural glaring gold, all ofthem with happiness offered their blessings.
                                   TEXT 105              savitri, gauri sarasvati, saci, rambha, arundhati
                           ara yata de va-narigana              nana-dravye patra bhari', brahmanira vesa dhari',                           asi' sabe kare darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Dressing themselves as the wives of brahmanas, all the celestial
ladies, including the wives of Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Lord Nrsimhadeva,King Indra and Vasistha Rsi, and Rambha, a dancing girl of heaven, camethere with varieties of gifts.
                                   PURPORT     When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was a newly born baby, He was visited
by the neighboring ladies, most of whom were the wives of respectablebrahmanas. In the dress of brahmanas' wives, celestial ladies like thewives of Lord Brahma and Lord Siva also came to see the newly bornchild. Ordinary people saw them as neighborhood respectable brahmanaladies, but actually they were all celestial ladies dressed in that way.
                                   TEXT 106               antarikse de va-gana, gandharva, siddha, carana,
                         stuti-nrtya kare vadya-gita                 nartaka, vadaka, bhta, navadvipe yara nata,                          sabe asi' nace pana prita
                                 TRANSLATION     In outer space all the demigods, including the inhabitants of
Gandharvaloka, Siddhaloka and Caranaloka, offered their prayers anddanced with musical songs and the beating of drums. Similarly, inNavadvipa city all the professional dancers, musicians and blessersgathered together, dancing in great jubilation.
                                   PURPORT     As there are professional singers, dancers and reciters of prayers
in the heavenly planets, so in India still there are professionaldancers,givers of blessings and singers, ail of whom assemble togetherduring householder ceremonies, especially marriages and birthceremonies. These professional men earn their livelihood by takingcharity on such occasions from the homes of the Hindus. Eunuchs alsotake advantage of such ceremonies to receive charity. That is theirmeans of livelihood. Such men never become servants or engage themselvesin agriculture or business occupations; they simply take charity fromneighborhood friends to maintain themselves peacefully. The bhatas are aclass of brahmanas who go to such ceremonies to offer blessings bycomposing poems with references to the Vedic scriptures.
                                   TEXT 107                   keba ase keba yaya, keba nace keba gaya,
                          sambhalite nare kara bola                 khandileka duhkha-soka, pramoda-purita loka,                          misra haila anande vihvala
                                 TRANSLATION     No one could understand who was coming and who was going, who was
dancing and who was singing. Nor could they understand each other'slanguage. But in effect all unhappiness and lamentation were immediatelydissipated, and people became all-jubilant. Thus Jagannatha Misra wasalso overwhelmed with joy.
                                   TEXT 108
                 acaryaratna, srivasa, jagannatha-misra-pasa,
                          asi' tanre kare savadhana                  karaila jatakarma, ye achila vidhi-dharma,                          tabe misra kare nana dana
                                 TRANSLATION     Candrasekhara Acarya and Srivasa Thakura both came to Jagannatha
Misra and drew his attention in various ways. They performed theritualistic ceremonies prescribed at the time of birth according toreligious principles. Jagannatha Misra also gave varieties of charity.
                                   TEXT 109
                  yautuka paila yata, ghare va achila kata,
                          saba dhana vipre dila dana                  yata nartaka, gayana, bhta, akincana jana,                         dhana oiya kaila sabara mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Whatever riches Jagannatha Misra collected in the form of gifts and
presentations, and whatever he had in his house, he distributed amongthe brahmanas, professional singers, dancers, bhatas and the poor. Hehonored them all by giving them riches in charity.
                                   TEXT 110
                   srivasera brahmani, nama tanra `malini',
                          acaryaratnera patni-sange               sindura, haridra, taila, kha-i, kala, narikela,                           diya puie narigana range
                                 TRANSLATION     The wife of Srivasa Thakura, whose name was Malini, accompanied by
the wife of Candrasekhara [Acaryaratna] and other ladies, came there ingreat happiness to worship the baby with paraphernalia such asvermilion, turmeric, oil, fused rice, bananas and coconuts.
                                   PURPORT     Vermilion, kha-i (fused rice), bananas, coconuts and turmeric mixed
with oil are all auspicious gifts for such a ceremony. As there ispuffed rice, so there is another preparation of rice called kha-i, orfused rice, which, along with bananas, is taken as a very auspiciouspresentation. Also, turmeric mixed with oil and vermilion makes anauspicious ointment that is smeared over the body of a newly born babyor a person who is going to marry. These are all auspicious activitiesin family affairs. We see that five hundred years ago at the birth ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu all these ceremonies were performed rigidly,but at present such ritualistic performances hardly ever take place.Generally a pregnant mother is sent to the hospital, and as soon as herchild is born he is washed with an antiseptic, and this concludeseverything.
                                   TEXT 111                 advaita-acarya-bharya, jagat-pujita a-rya-,
                         nama tanra `sita thakurani'                    acaryera ajna pana, gela upahara lana,                           dekhite baiaka-siromani
                                 TRANSLATION     One day shortly after Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was born, Advaita
Acarya's wife Sitadevi, who is worshipable by the whole world, takingpermission of her husband, went to see that topmost child with all kindsof gifts and presentations
                                   PURPORT     It appears that Advaita Acarya had two different houses, one at
Santipura and one at Navadvipa. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was born,Advaita Acarya was residing not at His Navadvipa house but at HisSantipura house. Therefore, as formerly explained, "nijalaya," fromAdvaita's old paternal house in Santipura, Sita came to Navadvipa topresent gifts to the newly born child, Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 112                 su varnera kadi-ba-uli, raja tamudra-pasuli,
                          su varnera angada, kankana                 du-bahute divya sankha, rajatera malabanka,                         svarna-mudrara nana haragana
                                 TRANSLATION     She brought different kinds of golden ornaments, including bangles
for the hand, armlets, necklaces and anklets.
                                   TEXT 113
                vyaghra-nakha hema jadi, kati-pattasutra-dori
                          hasta-padera yata abharana                 citra-varna patta-sadi, buni photo pattapdi,                       s varna-raupya-mudra bahu-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     There were also tiger nails set in gold, waist decorations of silk
and lace, ornaments for the hands and legs, nicely printed silken sarisand a child's garment, also
made of silk. Many other riches, including gold and silver coins, were
also presented tothechild.
                                   PURPORT     From the gifts presented by Sita Thakurani, Advaita Acarya's wife,
it appears that Advaita Acarya was at that time a very rich man.Although brahmanas are not the rich men of society, Advaita Acarya,being the leader of the brahmanas in Santipura, was considerably well-to-do. Therefore He presented many ornaments to the baby, Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu. But Kamalakanta Visvasa's asking for three hundred rupeesfrom the King of Jagannatha Puri, Maharaja Prataparudra, on the pleathat Advaita Acarya was in debt for that amount, indicates that such arich man, who could present many valuable ornaments, saris, etc.,thought it difficult to repay three hundred rupees. Therefore the valueof a rupee at that time was many thousands of times greater than it isnow. At the present, no one feels difficulty over a debt of threehundred rupees, nor can an ordinary man accumulate such valuableornaments to present to a friend's son. Probably the value of threehundred rupees at that time was equal to the present value of thirtythousand rupees.
                                   TEXT 114             durva, dhanya, gorocana, haridra, kunkuma, candana,
                         mangala-dravya patra bhariya                vastra-gupta dola cadi ` sange iana dasi cedi,                        vastralankara petari bhari va
                                 TRANSLATION     Riding in a palanquin covered with cloth and accompanied by
maidservants, Sita Thakurani came to the house of J agannatha Misra,bringing with her many auspicious articles such as fresh grass, paddy,gorocana, turmeric, kunkuma and sandalwood. All these presentationsfilled a large basket.                                   PURPORT
     The words vastra-gupta dola are very significant in this verse.
Even fifty or sixty years ago in Calcutta, all respectable ladies wouldgo to a neighboring place riding on a palanquin carried by four men. Thepalanquin was covered with soft cotton, and in that way there was nochance to see a respectable lady traveling in public. Ladies, especiallythose coming from respectable families, could not be seen by ordinarymen. This system is still current in remote places. The Sanskrit wordasurya-pasya indicates that a respectable lady could not be seen even bythe sun. In the oriental culture this system was very much prevalent andwas strictly observed by respectable ladies, both Hindu and Moslem. Wehave actual experience in our childhood that our mother would not gonext door to her house to observe an invitation by walking; she would goin either a carriage or a palanquin carried by four men. This custom wasalso strictly followed five hundred years ago, and the wife of AdvaitaAcarya, being a very respectable lady, observed the customary rulescurrent in that social environment.
                                   TEXT 115              bhaksya, bhojya, upahara, sange la-ila bahu bhara,
                            sacigrhe haila upanita                  dekhiya balaka-thama, saksat gokuia-kana,                          varna-matra dekhi viparita
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sita Thakurani came to the house of Sacidevi, bringing with
her many kinds of eatables, dresses and other gifts, she was astonishedto see the newly born child, for she appreciated that except for adifference in color, the child was directly Krsna of Gokula Himself.
                                   PURPORT     A petari is a kind of big basket that is carried in pairs on the
ends of a rod balanced over the shoulders. The man who carries such aload is called a bhari. This system of carrying luggage and packages isstill current in India and other oriental countries, and we have seenthat the same system is still current even in Jakarta, Indonesia.
                                   TEXT 116               sarva anga--sunirinana, su varna-pratima-bhana,
                          sarva anga--sulaksanamaya               balakera div va jyoti, dekhi' paila bahu priti;                          vatsalyete dravila hrdaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the transcendental bodily effulgence of the child, each of
His nicely constructed limbs full of auspicious signs and resembling aform of gold, Sita Thakurani was very much pleased, and because of hermaternal affection, she felt as if her heart were melting.                                   TEXT 117
                 durva, dhanya, dila sirse, kaila bahu asise,
                            cirajivi hao dui bhai                  dakini-sankhini haite, sanka upajila cite,                           dare nama thuila`nimai'
                                 TRANSLATION     She blessed the newly born child by placing fresh grass and paddy
on His head and saying, "May You be blessed with a long duration oflife." But being afraid of ghosts and witches, she gave the child thename Nimai.
                                   PURPORT     Dakini and Sankhini are two companions of Lord Siva and his wife
who are supposed to be extremely inauspicious, having been born ofghostly life. It is believed that such inauspicious living creaturescannot go near a nima tree. At least medically it is accepted that nimawood is extremely antiseptic, and formerly it was customary to have anima tree in front of one's house. On very large roads in India,especially in Uttar Pradesh, there are hundreds and thousands of nimatrees. Nima wood is so antiseptic that the Ayurvedic science uses it tocure leprosy. Medical scientists have extracted the active principle ofthe nima tree, which is called margosic acid. Nima is used for manypurposes, especially to brush the teeth. In Indian villages ninetypercent of the people use nima twigs for this purpose. Because of allthe antiseptic effects of the nima tree and because Lord Caitanya wasborn beneath a nima tree, Sita Thakurani gave the Lord the name Nimai.Later in His youth He was celebrated as Nimai Pandita, and in theneighborhood villages He was called by that name, although His real namewas Visvambhara.
                                   TEXT 118                 putramata-snanadine, dila vastra vibhusane,
                         putra-saha misrere sammani,                 saci-misrera puja iana, manete harisa hana,                          ghare aiia sita thakurani
                                 TRANSLATION     On the day the mother and son took bath and left the maternity
home, Sita Thakurani gave them all kinds of ornaments and garments andthen also honored Jagannatha Misra. Then Sita Thakurani, being honoredby mother Sacidevi and Jagannatha Misra, was greatly happy within hermind, and thus she returned home.
                                   PURPORT     On the fifth day from the birth of a child, as also on the ninth
day, the mother takes bath either in the Ganges or in a sacred place.This is called niskramana, or the ceremony of coming out of thematernity home. Nowadays the maternity home is a hospital, but formerlyin every respectable house one room was set aside as a maternity homewhere children would take birth, and on the ninth day after the birth ofa child the mother would come into the regular rooms in the ceremonycalled niskramana. Of the ten purificatory processes, niskramana is one.Formerly, especially in Bengal, the higher castes observed four monthsafter the birth of a child as a quarantine. At the end of the fourthmonth, the mother first had to see the sun rise. Later the highercastes, namely, the brahmanas, ksatriyas and vaisyas, observed onlytwenty-one days as a quarantine, whereas the sudras had to observethirty days. For the sections of society known as kartabhaja and satima,the mother of the child was immediately purified after the quarantine bythe throwing of hari- nuta, small pieces of sweetmeat, insankirtana.Sacidevi and Jagannatha Misra, with the newly born child,were honored by Sita Thakurani. Similarly, while Sita Thakurani wasreturning home, she was also honored by Sacidevi and Jagannatha Misra.That was the system in respectable families of Bengal.
                                   TEXT 119                aiche sacijagannatha, putra pana laksminatha,
                         purna ha-ila sakaia vanchita                dhana-dhanye bhare ghara, lokamanya kale vara,                           dine dine haya anandita
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way mother Sacidevi and Jagannatha Misra, having obtained a
son who was the husband of the goddess of fortune, had all their desiresfulfilled. Their house was always filled with riches and grains. As theysaw the beloved body of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, day after day theirpleasure increased.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore everyone offered their respects to Him. Even the denizens ofheaven used to come in the dress of ordinary men to offer their respectto the Lord. His father and mother, Jagannatha Misra and Sacidevi,seeing the honor of their transcendental son, also became very muchpleased within their hearts.
                                   TEXT 120              misra--vaisna va, santa, alampata, suddha, danta,
                          dhana-bhoge nahi abhimana                putrera prabhave yata, dhana asi' mile, tata,                         visnu-prite dvije dena dana
                                 TRANSLATION     J agannatha Misra was an ideal Vaisnava. He was peaceful,
restrained in sense gratification, pure and controlled. Therefore he hadno desire to enjoy material opulence. Whatever money came because of theinfluence of his transcendental son, he gave it in charity to thebrahmanas for the satisfaction of Visnu.
                                   TEXT 121
                 lagna gani' harsamati, nilambara cakravarti,
                          gupte kichu kahila misrere                mahapurusera cihna, lagne ange bhinna bhinna,                          dekhi,--ei taribe samsare
                                 TRANSLATION     After calculating the birth moment of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Nilambara Cakravarti privately said to J agannatha Misra that he saw allthe different symptoms of a great personality in both the body and birthmoment of the child. Thus he understood that in the future this childwould deliver all the three worlds.
                                   TEXT 122
                aiche prabhu saci-ghare, krpaya kaila avatare,
                            yei iha karaye sravana
                 gaura-prabhu dayamaya, tanre hayena sadaya,
                           sei paya tanhara carana
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, out of His causeless mercy,
made His advent in the house of Sacidevi. Lord Caitanya is very mercifulto anyone who hears this narration of His birth, and thus such a personattains the lotus feet of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 123
                  paiya manusa janma, ye na sune gaura-guna,
                        hena janma tara vyartha haila                   pai va amrtadhuni, piye visa-garta-pani                          janmiya se kene nahi maila
                                 TRANSLATION     e who attains a human body but does not take to the cult of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu is baffled in his opportunity. Amrtadhuni is aflowing river of the nectar of devotional service. If after getting ahuman body one drinks the water in a poison pit of material happinessinstead of the water of such a river, it would be better for him not tohave lived, but to have died long ago.                                   PURPORT
     In this connection Srimat Prabodhananda Sarasvati has composed the
following verses in h is Caitanya-candramrta.`     acaitanyam idam visvam yadi caitanyam isvaram     na viduh sarva-sastm-jna hy api bhramyanti te janah"This material world is without Krsna consciousness. Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu is Krsna consciousness personified. Therefore if a verylearned scholar or scientist does not understand Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, certainly he is wandering uselessly in this world."     prasarita-mahaprema-piyusa-rasa-sagare     caitanyacandre prakate yo dino dina eva sah"A person who does not take advantage of the nectar of devotionalservice overflowing during the presence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'scult is certainly the poorest of the poor."     avatirne gauracandre vistirne prema-sagare     suprakasita-ratnaughe yo oino oina eva sah"The advent of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is just like an expanding oceanof nectar. One who does not collect the valuable jewels within thisocean is certainly the poorest of the poor."     Similarly, the Sn-mad-Bhagavatam (2.3.19,20,23) states:     sva-vid-varahostra-kharaih     samstutah purusah pasuh     na yat-karna-pathopeto     jntu nama gadagrajah     bile batorukrama-vikraman ye     na srnvatah karna-pute narasya     jih vasati dardurike va suta     na copagayaty urugaya-gathah     jivanchavo bhaga vatanghri-renum     najntu martyo'bhilabheta yas tu     sri-visnu-padya manu jas tulasyah     svasan chavo yas tu na veda gandham"A person who has no connection with Krsna consciousness may be a verygreat personality in so-called human society, but actually he is nobetter than a great animal. Such big animals are generally praised byother animals like dogs, hogs camels and asses. A person who does notlend his aural reception to hearing about the Supreme Personality ofGodhead must be considered to have earholes like holes in a field.Although that person has a tongue, it is like the tongue of a frog,which unnecessarily creates a disturbance by croaking, inviting thesnake of death. Similarly, a person who neither takes advantage of thedust of the lotus feet of great devotees nor smells the tulasi leavesoffered to the lotus feet of the Lord must be considered dead eventhough he is supposedly working."     Similarly, the Srimad-Bhagavatam, Tenth Canto, Chapter One, verse4, states:     nivrtta-tarsair upagiyamanad     bha vausadhacchrotra-mano 'bhiramat     ka uttama-sloka-gunanuvadat     puman virajyeta vina pasu-ghnat"Who but the animal-killer or the killer of the soul will not care tohear glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? Suchglorification is enjoyed by persons liberated from the contamination of
this material world."     Similarly, in the Third Canto, Chapter Twenty-three, verse 56, theBhagavatam says, na tirthapada-sevayaijivann api mrto hi sah: "Althougha person is apparently living, if he does not serve the lotus feet ofgreat devotees he is to be considered a dead body."
                                   TEXT 124                sri-caitanya-nityananda, acarya advaitacandra,
                         svarupa-rupa-raghunathadasa                inha-sabara sri-carana, sire vandi nija-dhana,                          janma-lila gaila krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Taking on my head as my own property the lotus feet of SriCaitanya
Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu, Acarya Advaitacandra, Svarupa Damodara,Rupa Gosvami and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, I, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami,have thus described the advent of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda, Advaita Prabhu, Svarupa
Damodara, Rupa Gosvami, Raghunatha dasa and their followers are allaccepted by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami. Anyone who follows in thefootsteps of Kaviraja Gosvami also accepts the lotus feet of the above-mentioned lords as his personal property. For a materialistic person,material wealth and opulence are only illusory. Actually they are notpossessions but entanglements because by enjoying the material world aconditioned soul becomes more and more entangled by incurring debts forhis present enjoyment. Unfortunately, a conditioned soul considersproperty for which he is in debt to be his own, and he is very busyacquiring such property. But a devotee considers such property not realproperty but simply an entanglement in the material world. If Lord Krsnais very much pleased with a devotee, He takes away his materialproperty, as stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.88.8), where L ord Krsna says, yasyaham anugrhnami harisye tad-dhanam sanaih.- ` `To sh o wspecial favor to a devotee, I take away all his material property."Similarly, Narottama dasa Thakura says:     dhana mora nityananda,     radhakrsna-sricarana     sei mora pranadhana"My real riches are Nityananda Prabhu and the lotus feet of Sri Radhaand Krsna." He further prays, "O Lord, kindly give me this opulence. Ido not want anything but Your lotus feet as my property." SrilaNarottama dasa Thakura has sung in many places that his real property isthe lotus feet of Radha and Krsna. Unfortunately we are interested inunreal property and are neglecting our real property (adhane yatanakari' dhana teyaginu).     Sometimes smartas consider Raghunatha dasa Gosvami a sudra. ButKrsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami here especially mentions svarupa-rupa-raghunathadasa. Therefore one who considers the lotus feet of Raghunathadasa to be transcendental to all divisions of the caste system enjoys
the riches of actual spiritual bliss.     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,Adi-lila-, Thirteenth Chapter, describing the advent of Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                               Chapter Fourteen
                      Lord Caitanya's Childhood Pastimes     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has given a summary of this chapter in
his Amrta- pravaha-bhasya: "I n this Fourteenth Chapter of the Caitanya-caritamrta there is a description of how Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhuenjoyed His childhood pastimes, crawling, crying and eating dirt, givingintelligence to His mother, favoring a brahmana guest, riding on theshoulders of two thieves and misleading them to His own house, and, onthe plea of being diseased, taking prasada in the house of Hiranya andJagadisa on the Ekadasi day. The chapter further describes how Hedisplayed Himself as a naughty boy, how when His mother faint d Hebrought a coconut to her on His head, how He joked with girls of thesame age on the banks of the Ganges, how He accepted worshipfulparaphernalia from Srimati Laksmi devi, how He sat down in a garbage pitwherefrom He instructed transcendental knowledge, how He left the pit onthe order of His mother, and how He dealt with His father with fullaffection."
                                    TEXT 1               kathancana smrte yasmin duskaram sukaram bhavet
               vismrte viparitam syat sri-caitanyam namami tam
                                 TRANSLATION     Things that are very difficult to do become easy to execute if one
somehow or other simply remembers Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. But if onedoes not remember Him, even easy things become very difficult. To thisLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu I offer my respectful obeisances.
                                   PURPORT     In his book Caitanya-candramrta Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvati says:
"One who receives a little favor from the Lord becomes so exalted thathe does not care evenfor liberation, which is sought after by many great scholars andphilosophers. Similarly, a devotee of Lord Caitanya considers residencein the heavenly planets a will-o'-the-wisp. He surpasses the perfectionof mystic yoga power because for him the senses are like snakes withbroken fangs. A snake is a very fearful and dangerous animal because ofhis poison fangs, but if these fangs are broken the appearance of asnake is no cause for fear. The yoga principles are meant to control thesenses, but there is no scope for the senses of one engaged in theservice of the Lord to be dangerous like snakes. These are the gifts of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu."     The Hari-bhakti-vilasa confirms that difficult things become easyto understand if one remembers Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and easy thingsbecome very difficult to understand if one forgets Him. We actually seethat even those who are very great scientists in the eyes of the generalpublic cannot understand the very simple idea that life comes from lifebecause they do not have the mercy of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. They defendthe false understanding that life comes from matter, although theycannot prove this is a fact. Modern civlization, therefore, progressingon the basis of this false scientific theory, is simply creatingproblems to be solved by the so-called scientists.     The author of Caitanya-caritamrta takes shelter of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu to describe the pastimes of His appearance as a child becauseone cannot write such transcendental literature by mental speculation.One who writes about the Supreme Personality of Godhead must beespecially favored by the Lord. Simply by academic qualifications it isnot possible to write such literature.
                                    TEXT 2                   jaya jaya sri-caitanya, jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaitacandra, jaya gaura-bhak ta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu, Advaita
Prabhu and all the devotees of Lord Caitanya.i
                                    TEXT 3
                      prabhura kahila ei janmalila-sutra
                    yasoda-nandana yaiche haila saci-putra
                                 TRANSLATION     I have thus described in codes the advent of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who appeared as the son of mother Saci, exactly as Krsnaappeared as the son of mother Yasoda.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Narottama dasa Thakura confirms this statement that now Lord
Krsna, the son of mother Yasoda, has appeared again as Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu, becoming the son of mother Saci (vrajendra-nandana yei,saci-suta haila sei). The son of Saci is none other than the son ofmother Yasoda and Nanda Maharaja, and Nityananda Prabhu is the sameBalarama (balarama ha-ila nitai).
                                    TEXT 4                      sanksepe kahila janmalila-anukrama
                      ebe kahi balyalila-sutrera ganana                                 TRANSLATION
     I have already briefly spoken about the pastimes of His birth in
chronological order. Now I shall enumerate the codes of His childhoodpastimes.
                                    TEXT 5
               vande caitanya-krsnasya balya-lilam mano-harain
                  laukikim api tam isa-cestaya valitantarain
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the childhood pastimes
of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is Lord Krsna Himself. Althoughsuch pastimes appear exactly like those of an ordinary child, theyshould be understood as various pastimes of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
                                   PURPORT     In Bhagavad-gita this statement is confirmed as follows:
     a vajanantj mam mudha manusim tanum asritam     param bhavam ajananto mama bhuta-mahesvaram"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know Mytranscendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be." (Bg.9.11) The Supreme Personality of Godhead appears on this planet orwithin this universe like an ordinary human being or human child toexecute His pastimes, yet He maintains His superiority as the SupremeLord. Lord Krsna appeared as a human child, but His uncommon activities,even in His childhood, like the killing of the demon Putana or liftingof Govardana Hill, were not the engagements of an ordinary child.Similarly, although the pastimes of Lord Caitanya, as they will bedescribed in this chapter, appear like the activities of a small boy,they are uncommon pastimes impossible for an ordinary human child toexecute.
                                    TEXT 6                   balya-lilaya age prabhura uttana sayana
                      pita-mataya dekhaila cihna carana
                                 TRANSLATION     In His first childhood pastimes the Lord turned upside down while
lying on His bed, and thus He showed His parents the marks of His lotusfeet.
                                   PURPORT     The word uttana is also used to mean "lying down on the bed face
upwards" or "lying down flat on the bed." In some readings the word isutthana, which means "standing up." In His childhood pastimes the Lord
tried to catch the wall and stand up, but as an ordinary child fallsdown, so the Lord also fell down and again took to lying on His bed.
                                    TEXT 7                     grhe dui jana dekhi laghupada-cihna
                tahe sobhe dhvaja, vajra, sankha, cakra, mina
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord tried to walk, in His small footprints the specific
marks of Lord Visnu were visible, namely, the flag, thunderbolt,conchshell, disc and fish.
                                    TEXT 8
                    dekhiya donhara citte janmila vismaya
                    kara pada-cihna ghare, na paya niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing all these marks, neither His father nor His mother could
understand whose footprints they were. Thus struck with wonder, theycould not understand how those marks could be possible in their home.
                                    TEXT 9
                   misra kahe,--balagopala ache sila-sange
                  tenho murti han\ ghare khele, jani, range
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagannatha Misra said: "Certainly child Krsna is with the
salagrama-sila. Taking His childhood form, He is playing within theroom.',
                                   PURPORT     When the salagrama-sila or form of the Lord is engraved in wood,
stone or any other element, it is to be understood that the SupremePersonality of Godhead is there. Even logically we can understand thatall material elements are expansions of the energy of the Lord. Sincethe energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is nondifferent fromHis personal body, the Lord is always present in His energy, and Hemanifests Himself on account of the ardent desire of a devotee. Sincethe Lord is supremely powerful, it is logical that He can manifestHimself in His energy.The Deity worship or worship of the salagrama-silais not idol worship. The Deity of the Lord in the house of a puredevotee can act exactly as He can in His original transcendentalpersonality.                                   TEXT 10
                    sei ksane jagi' nimai karaye krandana
                      anke lana saci tanre piyaila stana
                                 TRANSLATION     While mother Saci and Jagannatha Misra were talking, the child
Nimai woke up and began to cry, and mother Saci took Him on her lap andallowed Him to suck her breast.
                                   TEXT 11
                     stana piyaite putrera carana dekhila
                     sei cihna paye dekhi' misre bolaila
                                 TRANSLATION     While mother Saci was feeding the child from her breast, she saw on
His lotus feet all the marks that were visible on the floor of the room,and she called for Jagannatha Misra.
                                   TEXT 12
                     dekhiya misrera ha-ila anandita mati
                      gupte bolaila nilambara cakravarti
                                 TRANSLATION     When Jagannatha Misra saw the wonderful marks on the sole of his
son, he became very much joyful and privately called for NilambaraCakravarti.
                                   TEXT 13
                    cihna dekhi' cakra varti balena hasiya
                   lagna gani' purve ami rakhiyachi likhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     When Nilambara Cakravarti saw those marks, he smilingly said:
"Formerly I ascertained all this by astrological calculation and notedit in writing.
                                   TEXT 14
                      batrisa laksana mahapurusa-bhusana
                      ei sisu ange dekhi se saba laksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "There are thirty-two bodily marks that symptomize a great
personality, and I see all those marks on the body of this child.
                                   TEXT 15
             panca-oirghah panca-suksmah sapta-raktah sad-unnatah
              tri-hrasva-prthu-gambhiro dvatrimsal-laksano mahan
                                 TRANSLATION     "`There are thirty-two bodily symptoms of a great person: five of
his bodily parts are large, five fine, seven reddish, six raised, threesmall, three broad and three grave.'
                                   PURPORT     The five large parts are the nose, arms, chin, eyes and knees. The
five fine parts are the skin, fingertips, teeth, hair on the body andhair on the head. The seven reddish parts are the eyes, soles, palms,palate, nails, and upper and lower lips. The six raised parts are thechest, shoulders, nails, nose, waist and mouth. The three small partsare the neck, thighs and male organ. The three broad parts are thewaist, forehead and chest. The three grave parts are the navel, voiceand existence. Altogether these are the thirty-two symptoms of a greatpersonality. This is a quotation from the Samudrika.
                                   TEXT 16                  nara vanera cihna - vukta sri-hasta carana
                       ei sisu sarva loke karibe tarana
                                 TRANSLATION     "This baby has all the symptoms of Lord Narayana on His palms and
soles. He will be able to deliver all the three worlds.
                                   TEXT 17
                   ei ta' karibe vaisna va-dharmera pracara
                      iha haite habe dui kulera nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     "This child will preach the Vaisnava cult and deliver both His
maternal and paternal families.
                                   PURPORT     Without Narayana Himself or His bona fide representative one cannot
preach the cult of Vaisnavism, or devotional service. When a Vaisnava isborn, he delivers both his maternal and paternal families
simultaneously.
                                   TEXT 18                     mahotsava kara, saba bolaha brahmana
                     aji dina bhala,--kariba nama-karana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I propose to perform a name-giving ceremony. We should observe a
festival and call for the brahmanas because today is very auspicious.
                                   PURPORT     It is the Vedic principle to observe a festival in connection with
Narayana and brahmanas. Giving a child a particular name is among thepurificatory processes, which are known as dasa-vidha-samskara, and onthe day of such a ceremony one should observe a festival by worshipingNarayana and distributing prasada, chiefly among the brahmanas.     When Nilambara Cakravarti, Sacimata and Jagannatha Misra,recognizing the marks on the Lord's lotus feet, understood that thechild Nimai was not an ordinary child but an incarnation of Narayana, they decided that on thatvery same day, which was very auspicious, they should observe a festivalfor His name-giving ceremony. In this connection we can particularly seehow an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is ascertainedby His bodily symptoms, His activities and the prediction of thesastras. By factual evidence a person can be accepted as an incarnationof God, not whimsically or by the votes of rascals and fools. There havebeen many imitation incarnations in Bengal since the appearance of LordCaitanya, but any impartial devotee or learned man can understand thatLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was accepted as an incarnation of Krsna not onthe basis of popular votes but by evidence from the sastras and bonafide scholars. It was not ordinary men who accepted Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the beginning Hisidentity was ascertained by learned scholars like Nilambara Cakravarti,and later all His activities were confirmed by the six Gosvamis,especially Srila Jiva Gosvami and Srila Rupa Gosvami, and many otherlearned scholars, with evidence from the sastra. An incarnation of Godis such from the very beginning of His life. It is not that byperforming meditation one can become an incarnation of God all of asudden. Such false incarnations are meant for fools and rascals, notsane men.
                                   TEXT 19                   sarva-lokera karibe ihan dharana, posana
                   `vis vambhara' nama mara,--ei ta' karana
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the future this child will protect and maintain all the world.
For this reason He is to be called Visvambhara."                                   PURPORT
     The Caitanya-bhagavata also confirms that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
by His birth, has made the whole world peaceful, as in the past Narayanaprotected this earth in His incarnation as Varaha. Because of Hisprotecting and maintaining this world in the present Kali-yuga, LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu is Visvambhara, which refers to one who feeds theentire world.The movement inaugurated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu when Hewas present five hundred years ago is again being propagated all overthe world, and factually we are seeing its practical results. People arebeing saved, protected and maintained by this Hare Krsna movement.Thousands of followers, especially western youths, are taking part inthis Hare Krsna movement, and how safe and happy they feel can beunderstood from the expressions of gratitude in their hundreds andthousands of letters. The name Visvambhara is also me n ti on ed in th eAtharva-veda-samhita (visvambhara visvena ma bharasa pahi svaha).
                                   TEXT 20                    suni' saci-misrera mane ananda badila
                   brahmana-brahmani ani' maho tsa va kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing Nilambara Cakravarti's prediction, Sacimata and
Jagannatha Misra observed the name-giving festival in great joy,inviting all the brahmanas and their wives.
                                   PURPORT     It is the Vedic system to observe all kinds of festivals, including
birthday festivals, marriage festivals, name-giving festivals andfestivals marking the beginning of education, by especially invitingbrahmanas. In every festival the brahmanas are to be fed first, and whenthe brahmanas are pleased they bless the festival by chanting Vedicmantras or the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
                                   TEXT 21                   tabe kata dine prabhura janu-cankramana
                     nana camatkara tatha karaila darsana
                                 TRANSLATION     After some days the Lord began to crawl on His knees, and He caused
various wonderful things to be seen.
                                   PURPORT     The Caitanya-bhagavata describes that one day while the Lord was
crawling upon His knees, the bells on His waist ringing very sweetly, asnake came out to crawl in the yard of the Lord, who captured the snakelike a curious child. Immediately the snake coiled over Him. The Lord asa child then rested on the snake, and after some time the snake went
away, leaving aside the Lord.
                                   TEXT 22                      krandanera chale balaila hari-nama
                   nari saba `hari' bale,--hase gaura-dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord caused all the ladies to chant the holy names of the Hare
Krsna mahamantra on the plea of His crying, and while they chanted theLord would smile.
                                   PURPORT     In the Caitanya-bhnavata this pastime is described as follows: "The
Lord, with His beautiful eyes, would cry, but He would stop immediatelyupon hearing the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, When the ladies, understandingthe fun of the Lord, discovered that He would cry and then stop uponhearing the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra, they all took it as aclue to chant Hare Krsna as soon as the Lord cried. Thus it became aregular function. The Lord would cry, and the ladies would beginchanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, clapping with their hands. In thisway all the ladies of the neighboring houses would assemble in the homeof Sacimata to join in the sankirtana movement twenty-four hours a day.As long as the ladies continued to chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, theLord would not cry but very pleasingly smile upon them."
                                   TEXT 23                     tabe kata dme kaila pada-cankramana
                    sisu-gane mili' kaila vividha khelana
                                 TRANSLATION     After some days the Lord began to move His legs and walk. He mixed
with other children and exhibited varieties of sports.
                                   TEXT 24
                       ekadina saci kha-i-sandesa niya
                   bata bhari' diya bai1a,--khaota' basiya
                                 TRANSLATION     One day while the Lord was enjoying His playful sports with the
other little children, mother Saci brought a dish filled with fused riceand sweetmeats and asked the child to sit down and eat them.
                                   TEXT 25                     eta bali' gela sacigrhe karma karite
                       lukna Iagila sisu mrttika khaite
                                 TRANSLATION     But when she returned to her household duties, the child, hiding
from His mother, began to eat dirt.
                                   TEXT 26
                  dekhi' saci dhana aila kari ' `haya, haya'
                    mati kadi' lana kahe `mti kene khaya'
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing this, mother Saci hastily returned, exclaiming,"What is
this! What is this!" She snatched the dirtfrom the hands of the Lord andinquired why He was eating it
                                   TEXT 27
                     kandiya balena sisu,--kene kara rosa
                     tumi mti khaite dile, mora kiba dosa
                                 TRANSLATION     Crying, the child inquired from His mother, "Why are you angry? You
have already given Me dirt to eat. What is My fault?
                                   TEXT 28
                   kha-i-sandesa-anna yateka--matira vikara
                     eho mati, seha mti, ki bheda-vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Fused rice, sweetmeats or anything eatable is all but a
transformation of dirt. This is dirt, that is dirt. Please consider.What is the difference between them?
                                   TEXT 29
                  matl--deha, m\ti--bhaksya, dekhaha vicri'
                      avlcare deha dosa, ki balite pari
                                 TRANSLATION     "This body is a transformation of dirt, and the eatables are also a
transformation of dirt. Please reflect upon this. You are blaming Mewithout consideration. What can I say?"                                   PURPORT
     This is an explanation of the Mayavada philosophy, which takes
everything to be one. The necessities of the body, namely, eating,sleeping, mating and defending, are all unnecessary in spiritual life.When one is elevated to the spiritual platform there are no more bodilynecessities, and in activities pertaining to the bodily necessitiesthere are no spiritual considerations. In other words, the more we eat,sleep, have sex and try to defend ourselves,the more we engage inmaterial activities. Unfortunately, Mayavadi philosophers considerdevotional activities to be bodily activities. They cannot understandthe simple explanation in Bhagavad-gita.-     mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena bhakti-yogena sevate     sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhuyaya kalpate "Anyone who engagesin spiritual devotional service without motivation, rendering suchservice for the satisfaction of the Lord, is elevated immediately to thespiritual platform, and all his activities are spiritual." ( Bg. 14.26)Brahma-bhuyaya refers to Brahman (spiritual) activities. AlthoughMayavadi philosophers are very much eager to merge in the Brahmaneffulgence, they have no Brahman activities. To a certain extent theyrecommend Brahman activities, which for them mean engagement in studyingthe Vedanta and Sankhya philosophies, but their interpretations are butdry speculation. Lacking the varieties of spiritual activity, theycannot stay for long on that platform of simply studying Vedanta orSankhya philosophy.     Life is meant for varieties of enjoyment. The living entity is bynature full of an enjoying spirit, as stated in the Vedanta-sutra(1.1.12); anandamayo'bhyasat. In devotional service the activities arevariegated and full of enjoyment. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.2), alldevotional activities are easy to perform (susukham kartum), and theyare eternal and spiritual (avyayam). Since Mayavadi philosophers cannotunderstand this, they take it for granted that a devotee's activities (sravanam kirtanam visnoh smaranam pada-sevanam, etc.) are all materialand are therefore maya. They also consider Krsna's advent in thisuniverse and His activities to be maya. Therefore, because they considereverything maya, they are known as Mayavadis.     Actually, any activities performed favorably for the satisfactionof the Lord, under the direction of the spiritual master, are spiritual.But for a person to disregard the order of the spiritual master and actby concoction, accepting his nonsensical activities to be spiritual, ismaya. One must achieve the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godheadthrough the mercy of the spiritual master. Therefore one must firstplease the spiritual master, and if he is pleased, then we shouldunderstand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is also pleased. Butif the spiritual master is displeased by our actions, they are notspiritual. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura confirms this: yasyaprasadad bhagavat-prasado yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto 'pi. Activitiesthat please the spiritual master must be considered spiritual, and theyshould be accepted as satisfying to the Lord.     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, as the supreme spiritual master,instructed His mother about the Mayavada philosophy. By saying that thebody is dirt and eatables are also dirt, He implied that everything ismaya. This is Mayavada philosophy. The philosophy of the Mayavadis isdefective because it maintains that everything is maya but the nonsense
they speak. While saying that everything is maya, the Mayavadiphilosopher loses the opportunity of devotional service, and thereforehis life is doomed. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore advised, mnavadi-bhasya sunile haya sarva-nasa (Cc. Madhya 6.169). If one accepts theMayavada philosophy, his advancement is doomed forever.
                                   TEXT 30                      antare vismita saci balila tahare
                   "mati khaite jnana-yoga ke sikhala tore
                                 TRANSLATION     Astonished that the child was speaking Mayavada philosophy, mother
Saci replied: "Who has taught You this philosophical speculation thatjustifies eating dirt?"
                                   PURPORT     In the philosophical discourse between the mother and the son, when
the son said that everything is one, as impersonalists say, the motherreplied, "If everything is one, why do people in general not eat dirtbut eat the food grains produced from the dirt?"
                                   TEXT 31                  matira vikara anna khaile deha-pusji haya
                    mati khaile roga haya, deha yaya ksaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Replying to the Mayavada idea of the child philosopher, mother Saci
said: "My dear boy, if we eat earth transformed into grains, our body isnourished, and it becomes strong. But if we eat dirt in its crude state,the body becomes diseased instead of nourished, and thus it isdestroyed.
                                   TEXT 32
                     matira vikara ghate pani bhari' ani
                   mati-pinde dhari yabe, sosi' yaya pani"
                                 TRANSLATION     "In a water pot, which is a transformation of dirt, I can bring
water very easily. But if I poured water on a lump of dirt, the lumpwould soak up the water, and my labor would be useless."
                                   PURPORT     This simple philosophy propounded by Sacimata, even though she is a
woman, can defeat the Mayavadi philosophers who speculate on oneness.The defect of Mayavada philosophy is that it does not accept the variety
that is useful for practical purposes. Sacimata gave the example thatalthough both the lump of dirt and the earthen pot are basically one,for practical purposes the water pot is useful whereas the lump of dirtis useless. Sometimes scientists argue that matter and spirit are one,with no difference between them. Factually, in a higher sense,there isno difference between matter and spirit, but one should have practicalknowledge that matter, being an inferior state, is useless for ourspiritual blissful life, whereas spirit, being a finer state ofexistence, is full of bliss. In this connection the Bhagavatam gives theexample that dirt and fire are practically one and the same. From theearth grow trees, and from their wood come fire and smoke. Nevertheless,for heat we can utilize the fire but not the earth, smoke or wood.Therefore, for the ultimate realization of the goal of life, we areconcerned with the fire of the spirit, but not the dull wood or earth ofmatter.
                                   TEXT 33                      atma lukaite prabhu balila tanhare
                     "age kena iha, mata, na sikhale more
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord replied to His mother: "Why did you conceal self-
realization by not teaching Me this practical philosophy in thebeginning?
                                   PURPORT     If one is taught from the beginning of life the Vaisnava philosophy
of duality or variety, the monistic philosophy will not very much botherhim. In reality, everything is an emanation from the supreme source(janmady asya yatah). The original energy is exhibited in varieties,exactly like the sunshine, the original energy emanating from the sun,which acts as light and heat in variety. One cannot say that light isheat and heat is light, yet one cannot separate one from the other.Therefore Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's philosophy is acintya-bhedabheda,inconceivable nonseparation and distinction. Although there is anaffinity between the two physical manifestations light and heat, thereis a difference between them. Similarly, although the whole cosmicmanifestation is the Lord's energy, the energy is nevertheless exhibitedin varieties of manifestations.
                                   TEXT 34                      ebe se janilan, ara mati na khaiba
                  ksudha lage yabe, tabe tomara stana piba"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Now that I can understand this philosophy, no more shall I eat
dirt. Whenever I am hungry I shall suck your breast and drink yourbreast's milk."                                   TEXT 35
                       eta bali'jananira kolete cadi va
                      stana pana kare prabhu isat hasiya
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, the Lord, smiling slightly, climbed on the lap
of His mother and sucked her breast.
                                   TEXT 36
                      eimate nana-chale aisvarya dekhaya
                     balya-bhava prakatiya pascat luk\ya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus under various excuses the Lord exhibited His opulences as much
as possible in His childhood, and later, after exhibiting suchopulences, He hid Himself.
                                   TEXT 37
                     atithi-viprera anna khaila tina-bara
                     pache gupte sei vipre karila nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     On one occasion the Lord ate the foodstuffs of a brahmana guest
three times, and later, in confidence, the Lord delivered that brahmanafrom material engagement.
                                   PURPORT     The story of the deliverance of this brahmana is as follows. One
brahmana who was touring all over the country, traveling from one placeof pilgrimage to another, reached Navadvipa and became a guest in thehouse of J agannatha Misra. Jagannatha Misra gave him all ingredientsfor cooking, and the brahmana prepared his foodstuffs. When the brahmanawas offering the foodstuffs to Lord Visnu in meditation, the child Nimaicame before him and began to eat them, and because of this the brahmanathought the whole offering spoiled. Therefore by the request of Jagannatha Misra he cooked for a second time, but when he was meditating thechild again came before him and began to eat the foodstuffs, againspoiling the offering. By the request of Jagannatha Misra the brahmanacooked for a third time, but for a third time the Lord came before himand began to eat the foodstuffs, although the child had been lockedwithin a room and everyone was sleeping because it was late at night.Thus, thinking that on that day Lord Visnu was not willing to accept hisfoodstuffs and that he was therefore ordained to fast, the brahmanabecame greatly agitated and cried aloud, "haya haya" ("What has been
done! What has been done!"). When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw thebrahmana in that agitated state, He told him, "Formerly I was the son ofmother Yasoda. At that time you also became a guest in the house ofNanda Maharaja, and I disturbed you in this way. I am very much pleasedby your devotion. Therefore I am eating the foodstuffs you haveprepared." Understanding the favor offered to him by the Lord, thebrahmana was greatly pleased, and he was overwhelmed with love of Krsna.He was thankful to the Lord, for he felt himself greatly fortunate. Thenthe Lord asked the brahmana not to disclose the incident to anyone else.This is very elaborately explained in the Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-lila,Chapter Three.
                                   TEXT 38                     core lana gela prabhuke bahire paiya
                    tara skandhe cadi' aila tare bhulaiya
                                 TRANSLATION     In His childhood the Lord was taken away by two thieves outside His
home. The Lord, however, got up on the shoulders of the thieves, andwhile they were thinking they were safely carrying the child to rob Hisornaments,the Lord misled them, and thus instead of going to their ownhome, the thieves came back to the home of J agannatha Misra.
                                   PURPORT     In His childhood the Lord was profusely decorated with gold
ornaments. Once upon a time He was playing outside His house,and twothieves passing on the street saw the opportunity to rob the Lord andtherefore took Him on their shoulders, pleasing Him by offering Him somesweetmeats. The thieves thought they would carry the child to the forestand then kill Him and take away the ornaments. The Lord, however,expanded His illusory energy upon the thieves, so much so that insteadof carrying Him to the forest they came right back in front of the houseof the Lord. When they came before His house they became afraid becauseeveryone from the house of Jagannatha Misra and all the inhabitants ofthat quarter were busy searching for the child. Therefore the thieves,thinking it dangerous to remain, went away and left Him. The child wasbrought within the house of mother Saci, who was in great anxiety, andshe became satisfied. This incident is also very elaborately explainedin the Adi-lila of Caitanya-bhagavata, Third Chapter.
                                   TEXT 39                    vyadhi-chale jagadisa-hiran ya-sadane
                      visnu-naivedya khaila ekadasi-dine
                                 TRANSLATION     Pretending to be sick, the Lord asked some foodstuffs from the
house of Hiranya and Jagadisa on the day of Ekadasi.                                   PURPORT
     The Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-lila, Chapter Four, fully describes the
Lord's accepting visnu-prasada on the Ekadasi day at the house ofjagadisa and Hiranya. Regular prasada is offered to Lord Visnu onEkadasi because fasting is recommended for devotees on Ekadasi but notfor Lord Visnu. Once on Ekadasi in the house of J agadisa and HiranyaPandita there were arrangements to prepare special prasda for LordVisnu, and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked His father to go there to askfor the visnu-prasada because He was feeling sick. The house of Jagadisaand Hiranya Pandita was situated about two miles off from the house ofJagannatha Misra. Therefore when J agannatha Misra, on the request ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, came to ask Jagadisa and Hiranya for theprasada, they were a little astonished. How could the boy understandthat special prasada was being prepared for Lord Visnu? They immediatelyconcluded that the boy Nimai must have supernatural mystic power.Otherwise how could He understand that they were preparing specialprasada? Therefore they immediately sent the foodstuffs to Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu through His father, Jagannatha Misra. Nimai was feeling sick,but immediately after eating the visnu-prasada He was cured, and He alsodistributed the prasda among His playmates.
                                   TEXT 40                      sisu saba laye pada-padasira ghare
                    curi kari' dravya khaya mare balakere
                                 TRANSLATION     As usual for small children, He learned to play, and with His
playmates He went to the houses of neighboring friends, stealing theireatables and eating them. Sometimes the children fought amongthemselves.
                                   TEXT 41
                     sisu saba saci-sthane kaila nivedana
                      suni' saciputre kichu dila olahana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the children lodged complaints with Sacimata about the Lord's
fighting with them and stealing from the neighbors' houses. Thereforesometimes she used to chastise or rebuke her son.
                                   TEXT 42
                     "kene curi kara, kene maraha sisure
                    kene para-ghare yaha, kiba nahi ghare"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sacimata said: "Why do You steal others' things? Why do You beat
the other children? And why do You go inside others' houses? What do younot have in Your own house?"
                                   PURPORT     According to the Vedanta-sutra (janmady asya yatah), since
creation, maintenance and annihilation exist in the Supreme Absolute,whatever we find within this material world is already in the spiritualworld. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Krsna Himself. How is He stealing, and how is He fighting? It is not asa thief or an enemy, but as a friend in a loving condition. He steals asa child, not because He is in want, but as a natural instinct. In thismaterial world also, small children, without enmity or bad will,sometimes go to a neighboring house and steal, and sometimes they fight.Krsna also, like other children, did all these things in His childhood.Without the existence of the stealing propensity and fighting propensityin the spiritual world, they cannot exist here in this material world.The difference between the material and spiritual worlds is thatstealing in the spiritual world is done in friendship and love, whereasfighting and stealing within this material world are executed on thebasis of enmity and envy. Therefore we should understand that in thespiritual world all these activities exist, but there is no inebriety,whereas in the material world all activities are full of miserableconditions.
                                   TEXT 43                 suni' kruddha hana prabhu ghara-bhitara yana
                  ghare yata bhanda chila, phelila bhangiva
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus rebuked by His mother,the Lord would go in anger to a room and
break all the pots within it.
                                   TEXT 44
                     tabe saci kole kari' karaila santosa
                    lajj ita ha-ila prabhu jnni' nija-dosa
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Sacimata would take her son on her lap and pacify Him, and the
Lord would be very much ashamed, admitting His own faults.
                                   PURPORT     There is a nice description of the faults of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu in His childhood in the Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-lila, ChapterThree, where it is said that the child Lord used to steal all kinds ofeatablesfrom the houses of neighboring friends. In some houses He wouldsteal milk and drink it, and in others He would steal and eat preparedrice. Sometimes He would break cooking pots. If there were nothing to
eat but there were small babies, the Lord would tease the babies andmake them cry. Sometimes a neighbor would complain to Sacimata, "Mychild is very small. But your child puts water in the ears of my child,making the child cry."
                                   TEXT 45                     kabhu mrdu-haste kaila matake tadana
                   matake murcchita dekhi' karaye krandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Once the child, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, chastised His mother with His
soft hand, and His mother falsely fainted. Seeing this, the Lord beganto cry.
                                   TEXT 46
                     narigana kahe,--"narikela deha ani'
                     tabe sustha ha-ibena tomara janani,,
                                 TRANSLATION     The neighboring ladies told Him: "Dear child, please bring a
coconut from somewhere, and then Your mother will be cured."
                                   TEXT 47
                       bahire yana anilena dui narikela
                     dekhiya apurva haila vismita sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     He then immediately went outside the house and brought two
coconuts. All the ladies were astonished to see such wonderfulactivities.
                                   TEXT 48
                    kabhu sisu-sange snana karila gangate
                     kanyagana aila tahan de vata pujite
                                 TRANSLATION     Sometimes the Lord, with other children, would go to take bath in
the Ganges, and the neighboring girls would also come there to worshipvarious demigods.
                                   PURPORT     According to the Vedic system, small girls ten or twelve years old
would go to the bank of the Ganges to take their bath and wouldespecially worship Lord Siva with prayers to get good husbands in thefuture. They especially wanted to get a husband like Lord Siva becauseLord Siva is very peaceful and at the same time most powerful. Formerly,therefore, small girls in Hindu families would worship Lord Siva,especially in the month of Vaisakha (April-May). To take a bath in theGanges is a great pleasure for everyone, not only for adults but forchildren also.
                                   TEXT 49                     ganga-snna kari' pujn karite lagila
                     kanynana-madhye prabhu asiya basila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the girls, after bathing in the Ganges, engaged in worshiping
the different demigods, the young Lord would come there and sit downamong them.
                                   TEXT 50
                    kanyare kahe,--ama puja, ami diba vara
                   ganga-durga--dasi mora, mahesa--kinkara
                                 TRANSLATION     Addressing the girls, the Lord would say: "Worship Me, and I shall
give you good husbands or good benedictions. The Ganges and goddessDurga are My maidservants. Not to speak of other demigods, even LordSiva is My servant."
                                   PURPORT     There is a misconception about the Hindu religion among people who
profess other religions, such as Christians and Mohammedans, who saythat in the Hindu religion there are many Gods. Actually that is not afact. God is one, but there are many other powerful living entities whoare in charge of different departments of administration. They arecalled demigods. All the demigods are servants who carry out the ordersof the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead. Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu disclosed this fact in His childhood. Out of ignorance,sometimes people worship the demigods to receive some particular boon,but actually if one becomes a devotee and worshiper of the Supremepersonality of Godhead, he does not need to go to the demigods for anybenediction because he obtains everything by the grace of the SupremeLord. Bhagavad-gita therefore condemns such demigod worship:     kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah     prapadyante 'nya-devatah     tam tam niyamam asthaya     prakrtya niyatah svaya"Only persons whose intelligence is lost and who are mad with lusty
desires worship the demigods and follow the particular rules andregulations of worship according to their own natures." (Bg. 7.20)     yesam tv anta-gatam papam     jananam punya-karmanam     te dvandva-moha-nirmuk ta     bhajante mam drdha-vratah "But persons who are freed from allsinful activities and the duality of delusion engage themselves in theworship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with determination." (Bg.7.28) Only the less intelligent worship the demigods for their variouspurposes. The most intelligent worship only the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna.     Sometimes we, the members of the Krsna consciousness movement, areaccused of not approving of the worship of demigods. But how can weapprove of this when it is condemned by Lord Caitanya and Lord Krsna?How can we allow people to become foolish and hrta-jnana, bereft ofintelligence? Our propaganda is simply meant to enable intelligentpeople to understand the distinction between matter and spirit andunderstand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the wholespiritual identity. That is our mission. How could we mislead people toworship socalled gods in material bodics within this material world?     Our position of not allowing worship of the many hundreds ofdemigods is confirmed by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu even in His childhood.Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has sung in this connection:     anya devasraya ni     tomare kahinu bhai     ei bhakti parama-karana"To become a staunch, pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godheadwithout deviation [ananya-bhak], one should not divert his attention tothe worship of the demigods. Such control is a symptom of puredevotional service."
                                   TEXT 51                    \oani candana pari' parena phula-mala
                 naivedya kadiya kha'na--sandesa, cala, kala
                                 TRANSLATION     Without the permission of the girls, the Lord would take the
sandalwood pulp and smear it on His own body, put the flower garlands onHis neck, and snatch and eat all the offerings of sweetmeats, rice andbananas.
                                   PURPORT     According to the system of worship, when something is offered to
deities outside one's home, it is generally not cooked food, but rawrice, bananas and sweetmeats. Out of His causeless mercy, the Lord wouldsnatch the offerings from the girls and eat them, admonishing the girlsnot to worship the demigods but to worship Him. This worship of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu is recommended in the Srimad- Bhagavatam:     krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam-     sangopangastra-parsadam     yajnaih sankirtana-prayair
     yajanti hi sumedhasah"One should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead who appears inthis age of Kali with His associates as Panca-tattva: the Lord Himselfand His associates Nityananda Prabhu, Sri Advaita Prabhu, Sri GadadharaPrabhu and Srivasa Thakura. In this age, an intelligent person worshipsthe Panca-tattva by the method of chantworship in the western world. Itsmembers are going from village to village and town to town with Deitiesof Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, teaching people how to worship the Lord bychanting the Hare Krsna mantra, offering prasada and distributing it topeople in general.
                                   TEXT 52                    krodhe kanyagana kahe--suna, he nimani
                   grama-sambandhe hao tumi ama sabara bhai
                                 TRANSLATION     All the girls became very angry at the Lord for this behavior.
"Dear Nimai," they told Him, "You are just like our brother in ourvillage relationship.
                                   TEXT 53
                   ama sabakara pakse iha karite na yuyaya
                    na laha devata sajj a, na kara any\ya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore it does not behoove You to act like this. Don't take our
paraphernalia for worship of the demigods. Don't create a disturbance inthis way."
                                   TEXT 54
                   prabhu kahe,--"toma sabake dila ei vara
                    toma sabara bharta habe parama sundara
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord replied: "My dear sisters, I give you the benediction that
your husbands will be very handsome.
                                   TEXT 55
                   pandita, vidagdha, yuva, dhana-dhanyavan
                    sata sata putra habe--cirayu, matiman"
                                 TRANSLATION     "They will be learned, clever and young and possess abundant wealth
and rice. Not only that, but you will each have seven sons, who will alllive long lives and be very intelligent."
                                   PURPORT     Generally it is the ambition of a young girl to have a very
handsome husband who is learned, clever, young and rich. According tothe Vedic culture, one is rich if he possesses a large stock of foodgrains and a very large number of animals. Dhanyena dhanavan gavayadhanavan: one is rich if he possesses food grains, cows and bulls. Agirl also desires to have many children, especially sons (putra) who arevery intelligent and long living. Now there is propaganda to have one ortwo children and kill the rest by contraceptive methods because societyhas deteriorated. But the natural ambition of a girl is to possess notonly more than one child but at least half a dozen.     In exchange for the paraphernalia of worship He usurped forHimself, Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to bless the girls to fulfill alltheir ambitions and desires. One can easily become happy and obtain thematerial benefits of a good husband, wealth, food grains and a number ofnice children by worshiping Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Although SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa at an early age, it is notnecessary for His devotees to follow Him by also taking sannysa. One canstay a householder, but one must be a devotee of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu. Then one will be happy, with all the material opulences of agood home, good children, good mate, good wealth and everything hedesires. Therefore the sastras advise, yajnaih sankirtana-prayairyajanti hi sumedhasah (SB. 11.5.32). Eve ry hou seholder, therefore, whois actually intelligent should introduce the sankirtana movement home tohome and live peacefully in this life and go back to Godhead in thenext.
                                   TEXT 56                   vara suni' kanya-ganera antare san tosa
                   bahire bhartsana kare kari' mithya rosa
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this benediction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, all the girls
were inwardly very happy;but externally, as it is natural for girls,they rebuked the Lord under the pretense of anger.
                                   PURPORT     This double-dealing is natural for girls. When they are satisfied
within, they externally show dissatisfaction. Such feminine dealings arevery palatable to boys who try to make friendships with them.
                                   TEXT 57                      kona kanya palaila naivedya la-iya
                    tare daki' kahe prabhu sakrodha ha-iya                                 TRANSLATION
     When some of the girls fled, the Lord called them in anger and
advised them as follows:
                                   TEXT 58
                     yadi naivedya na deha ha-iya krpani
                    buda bharta habe, ara cari cari satini
                                 TRANSLATION     "If you are miserly and do not give Me the offerings, every one of
you will have an old husband with at least four co-wives."
                                   PURPORT     In India in those days and even until fifty years ago, polygamy was
freely allowed. Any man, especially of the higher castes--the brahmanas,the vaisyas and particularly the ksatriyas--could marry more than one wife. In the Mahabharata, orthe old history of India, we see that ksatriya kings especially used tomarry many wives. According to Vedic civilization there was norestriction against this, and even a man more than fifty years old couldmarry. But to be married to a man who had many wives was not a verypleasing situation because the husband's love would be divided among hismany wives. Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu apparently wanted to curse thegirls unwilling to offer Him the naivedya to be married to men who hadat least four wives.     The social structure allowing a man to marry more than one wife canbe supported in this way. Generally in every society the femalepopulation is greater in number than the male population. Therefore ifit is a principle in the society that all girls should be married,unless polygamy is allowed it will not be possible. If all the girls arenot married there is a good chance of adultery, and a society in whichadultery is allowed cannot be very peaceful or pure. In our Krsnaconsciousness society we have restricted illicit sex life. The practicaldifficulty is to find a husband for each and every girl. We aretherefore in favor of polygamy, provided, of course, that the husband isable to maintain more than one wife.
                                   TEXT 59                    iha suni' ta-sabara mane ha-ila bhaya
                     kona kichu jane, kiba devavista haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this supposed curse by Lord Caitanya, the girls,
considering that He might know something uncommon or be empowered bydemigods, were afraid that His curse might be effective.                                   TEXT 60
                     aniya naivedya tara sammukhe dharila
                     khaiya naivedya tare ista-vara dila
                                 TRANSLATION     The girls then brought the offerings before the Lord, who ate them
all and blessed the girls to their satisfaction.
                                   TEXT 61
                     ei mata capalya saba lokere dekh\ya
                    duhkha karo mane nahe, sabe sukha p\ya
                                 TRANSLATION     When this cunning behavior of the Lord with the girls became known
to the people in general, it did not create misunderstandings amongthem. Rather, they enjoyed happiness in these dealings.
                                   TEXT 62
                  eka-dina vallabhacarya-kanya `laksmi' nama
                     de vata puiite aila kari ganga-snana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day a girl of the name Laksmi, the daughter of Vallabhacarya,
came to the bank of the Ganges to take bath in the river and worship thedemigods.
                                   PURPORT     According to the Gaura-ganoddesa-oioika, Laksmi was formerly
Janaki, the wife of Lord Ramacandra, and Rukmini, the wife of Lord Krsnain Dvaraka. The same goddess of fortune descended as Laksmi to becomethe wife of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 63                 tanre dekhi' prabhura ha-ila sabhilasa mana
                  laksmi citte prita paila prabhura darsana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing Laksmidevi, the Lord became attached to her, and Laksmi,
upon seeing the Lord, felt great satisfaction within her mind.
                                   TEXT 64                     sahajika priti dunhara karila udaya
                   balya-bhavacchanna tabhu ha-ija niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Their natural love for one another awakened, and although it was
covered by childhood emotions, it became apparent that they weremutually attracted.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Laksmidevi are eternal husband and
wife. Therefore it was quite natural for their dormant love to awakenwhen they saw one another. Their natural feelings were immediatelyawakened by their meeting.
                                   TEXT 65                   dunha dekhi' dunhara citte ha-ila ullasa
                     deva-puja chale kaila dunhe parakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     They both enjoyed natural pleasure in seeing one another, and under
the pretext of demigod worship they manifested their feelings.
                                   TEXT 66
                    prabhu kahe, `ama' puja, ami mahesvara
                      amare pujile pabe abhiosita vara'
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord told Laksmi: "J ust worship Me, for I am the Supreme Lord.
If you worship Me, certainly you will get the benediction you desire."
                                   PURPORT     This is the same philosophy declared by Lord Krsna Himself:
     sarva-dharman parityajya     mam ekam saranam vraja     aham tvam sarva-papebhyo     moksayisyami ma sucah "Abandon all varieties of religion and justsurrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do notfear." (Bg. 18.66) People do not understand this. They are accustomed toflatter or worship many demigods, human beings, or even cats and dogs,but when requested to worship the Supreme Lord, they refuse. This iscalled illusion. Factually, if one worships the Supreme Lord there is noneed to worship anyone else. For example, in a village of a limited areaone may use different wells for different purposes, but when one goes toa river where there is water constantly flowing in waves,that water canserve all his purposes. When there is a river, one can take drinkingwater, wash his clothes, bathe and so on, for that water will serve allpurposes. Similarly, if one worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna,all his goals will be served. Kamais tais tair hrtajnanahprapadyante'nya-devatah: only men who have lost their intelligenceworship the various demigods to fulfill their desires ( Bg. 7.20).
                                   TEXT 67                     laksmi tanra ange dila puspa-candana
                      mallikara mala diya karila vandana
                                 TRANSLATION     On hearing the order of the Supreme Lord, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Laksmi immediately worshiped Him, offering sandalwood pulp and flowersfor His body, garlanding Him with mallika flowers, and offering prayersto the Lord.
                                   TEXT 68
                     prabhu tanra puja pana hasite lagila
                    sloka padi' tanra bhava angikara kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Being worshiped by Laksmi, the Lord began to smile. He recited a
verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam and thus accepted the emotion sheexpressed.
                                   PURPORT     The verse quoted in this connection is the twenty-fifth verse of
the Twentysecond Chapter, Tenth Canto, of Srimad-Bhagavatam. The gopisworshiped the goddess Durga, or Katyayani, but their inner desire was toget Lord Krsna as their husband. Krsna, as Paramatma, could realize theardent desire of the gopis, and therefore He enjoyed the pastime ofvastra-harana. When the gopis went to take bath in the River Yamuna,they left their garments on the land and dipped into the watercompletely naked. Taking this opportunity, Krsna stole all theirgarments and sat down in the top of a tree with them, desiring to seethe girls naked just to become their husband. The gopis desired to haveKrsna as their husband, and since it is only before her husband that awoman can be naked, to fulfill their desire Lord Krsna accepted theirprayers by this pastime of stealing their garments. When the gopisreceived their garments back from Krsna, Krsna recited this verse.
                                   TEXT 69                          sankalpo viditah sadh vyo
                            bhavatinam mad-arcanam                            mayanumoditah so 'sau                            satyo bhavitum arhati
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear gopis, I accept your desire to have Me as your husband and
thus worship Me. I wish your desire to be fulfilled because it deservesto be so."
                                   PURPORT     The gopis, the girl friends of Krsna, were almost of the same age
as He. Within their minds they desired that Krsna be their husband, butbecause of feminine bashfulness they could not express their desire.Therefore later on, after stealing their garments, Krsna informed them,"I immediately understood your desire and approved of it. Because I havenow stolen your garments, you have presented yourselves before Mecompletely naked, which means that I have accepted all of you as Mywives." Sometimes foolish rascals, not knowing the purpose of the Lordor the purpose of the gopis, unnecessarily criticize from their ownangle of vision, but the real purpose of vastm-harana is expressed bythe Lord in this verse.
                                   TEXT 70                     ei-mata lila kari' dunhe gela ghare
                    gambhira caitanya-Iila ke bujhite pare
                                 TRANSLATION     After thus expressing Their feelings to one another, Lord Caitanya
and Laksmi returned home. Who can understand the grave pastimes of LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu?
                                   TEXT 71
                   caitanya-capalya dekhi' preme sarva jana
                     saci-jagannathe dekhi' dena olahana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the naughty behavior of Lord Caitanya, the neighboring
people, out of love for Him, lodged complaints with Sacimata andJagannatha Misra.
                                   TEXT 72
                     ekadina saci-de vi putrere bhartsiya
                      dharibare gela, putra gela palaiya
                                 TRANSLATION     One day mother Saci, wanting to rebuke her son, went to catch Him,
but He fled from the spot.                                   TEXT 73
                     ucchista-garte tyakta-handira upara
                  basiyachena sukhe prabh u deva-visvambhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Although He is the maintainer of the entire universe, once the Lord
sat upon some rejected pots, in the pit where the remnants of foodstuffswere thrown, after they had been used for cooking.
                                   PURPORT     Formerly it was the custom of brahmanas to worship Lord Visnu daily
at home and cook food in new pots. This system is still going on inJagannatha Puri. The foodstuffs would be cooked in earthen pots, allfresh and new, and after cooking, the pots would be thrown away. By theside of the house there was generally a big pit where such pots werethrown. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu sat down on the pots very pleasingly,just to give His mother a lesson.
                                   TEXT 74                    saci asi' kahe,--k ene asuci ch unil\
                    ganga-snana kara yai'--apavitra ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     When mother Saci saw her boy sitting on the rejected pots, she
protested, "Why have You touched these untouchable pots? You have nowbecome impure. Go and take bath in the Ganges."
                                   TEXT 75
                     iha suni' matake kahila brahma jnana
                      vismita ha-iya mata karaila snana
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught His mother about
absolute knowledge. Although amazed by this, His mother forced Him totake bath.
                                   PURPORT     The absolute knowledge explained by the Lord to His mother is
described by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya asfollows: "The Lord said, `Mother, that this is pure and that is impureis surely a worldly sentiment with no basis in fact. You have cookedfoodstuffs for Lord Visnu within these pots and offered the foodstuffsto Him. How then can these pots be untouchable? Everything inrelationship with Visnu is to be considered an expansion of Visnu'senergy. Visnu, the Supersoul, is eternal and uncontaminated. How thenmay these pots be considered pure or impure?' Hearing this discourse on
absolute knowledge, His mother was very much astonished and forced Himto take bath."
                                   TEXT 76                     kabhu putra-sange saci karila sayana
                    dekhe, divyaloka asi' bharila bha vana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sometimes, taking her son with her, mother Saci would lie down on
her bed, and she would see that denizens of the celestial world had comethere, filling the entire house.
                                   TEXT 77
                    saci bale,--yaha, putra, bolaha b\pere
                     matr-ajna paiya prabhu calila bahire
                                 TRANSLATION     Once mother Saci told the Lord, "Please go call Your father."
Receiving this order from His mother, the Lord went out to call him.
                                   TEXT 78
                      calite carane nupura baje jhanjhan
                    suni' camakita haila pita-matara mana
                                 TRANSLATION     When the child was going out, there was a tinkling of ankle bells
from His lotus feet. Hearing this, His father and mother were struckwith wonder.
                                   TEXT 79
                     misra kahe,--ei bada adbhuta kahini
                    sisura sunya-pade kene nupurera dhvani
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagannatha Misra said: "This is a very wonderful incident. Why is
there a sound of ankle bells from the bare feet of my child?"
                                   TEXT 80
                      saci kahe,--ra eka adbhuta dekhila
                     divya divya loka asi' angana bharila                                 TRANSLATION
     Mother Saci said: "I also saw another wonder. People were coming
down from the celestial kingdom and crowding the entire courtyard.
                                   TEXT 81
                     kiba kelahala kare, bujhite na pari
                      khak e va stuti kare--anumana kari
                                 TRANSLATION     "They made noisy sounds I could not understand. I guess they were
offering prayers to someone."
                                   TEXT 82
                  misra bale,--kichu ha-uk, cinta kichu nai
                  visvambharera kusala ha-uk,--ei matra cai
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagannatha Misra replied: "Never mind what it is. There is no need
to worry. Let there always be good fortune for Visvambhara. This is allI want."
                                   TEXT 83
                    eka-dina misra putrera c\oalya dekhiya
                   dharma-siksa dila bahu bhartsana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     On another occasion, Jagannatha Misra, seeing the mischievous acts
of his son, gave Him lessons in morality after rebuking Him greatly.
                                   TEXT 84
                    ratre svapna dekhe,--eka asi' brahmana
                     misrere kahaye kichu sa-rosa vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     On that very night, Jagannatha Misra dreamt that a brahmana had
come before him speaking these words in great anger:
                                   TEXT 85                 "misra, tumi putrera tattva kichu-i na jana
                  bhartsana-tadana kara,--putra kari' mana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Misra, you do not know anything about your son. You think
Him your son, and therefore you rebuke and chastise Him."
                                   TEXT 86
                  misra kahe,--de va, siddha, muni kene naya
                     ye se bada ha-uk matra amara tanaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagannatha Misra replied: "This boy may be a demigod, a mystic
yogior a great saintly person. It doesn't matter what He is, for I thinkHe is only my son.
                                   TEXT 87
                   putrera lalana-siksa--pitara s va-dharma
                  ami na sikhale kaiche janibe dharma-marma
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is the duty of a father to educate his son in both religion and
morality. If I do not give Him this education, how will He know of it?"
                                   TEXT 88
                  vipra kahe,--putra yadi daiva-siddha haya
                 svatah-siddha-jnana, tabe siksa vyartha haya
                                 TRANSLATION     The brahmana replied: "If your son is a transcendental mystic boy
with selfeffulgent perfect knowledge, what is the use of youreducation?"
                                   PURPORT     The brahmana Jagannatha Misra saw in his dream told him that his
son was not an ordinary human being. If He were a transcendental person,He would have selfeffulgent knowledge, and thus there would be no needto educate Him.
                                   TEXT 89                    mism kahe,--"putra kene nahe narayana
                   tathapi pitara dharma--putrera siksana"                                 TRANSLATION
     Jagannatha Misra replied: "Even if my son is not a common man but
Narayana, still it is the duty of a father to instruct his son.',
                                   TEXT 90
                     ei-mate dunhe karena dharmera vicara
                   visuddha-vatsalya misrera, nahi jane ara
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Jagannatha Misra and the brahmana discussed the
principles of religion in the dream, yet J agannatha Misra was absorbedin unalloyed parental mellow and did not want to know anything else.
                                   PURPORT     I n the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.8.45) it is said: "Lord Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is worshiped with exalted hymns byall the Vedas and Upanisads and by great personalities through sankhya-yoga in the mode of goodness, was considered by mother Yasoda and Nandato be their own little son." Similarly, Jagannatha Misra also consideredLord Caitanya Mahaprahhu his beloved little boy, although He isworshiped with all veneration by learned brahmanas and saintly persons.
                                   TEXT 91                      eta suni' dvija gela hana anandita
                      misra jagiya ha-ila parama vismita
                                 TRANSLATION     Being very much pleased, the brahmana left after talking with
Jagannatha Misra, and when Jagannatha Misra awakened from his dream, hewas very much astonished.
                                   TEXT 92
                     bandhu-bandhava-sthane svapna kahila
                      suniya sakala loka vismita ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     He related the dream to his friends and relatives, and every one of
them was very much astonished to hear of it.
                                   TEXT 93
                      ei mata sisu-lila kare gauracandra                     dine dine pita-matara badaya ananda
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Gaurahari performed His childhood pastimes and day
after day increased the pleasure of His parents.
                                   TEXT 94
                   kata alne misra putrera hate khadi dila
                    alpa alne dvadasa-phala aksara sikhila
                                 TRANSLATION     After some days Jagannatha Misra inaugurated the primary education
of his son by performing the hate khadi ceremony. Within a very few daysthe Lord learned all the letters and combinations of letters.
                                   PURPORT     The twelve phala, or combinations of letters, are called repha,
murdhanya (cerebral) na, dntavya (dental) na, ma, ya, ra, la, va, r, r,l and \l, h'te khadi is th e primary educational beginning. At the ageof four or five years, on an auspicious day called vidyarambha markingthe beginning of primary education, there is a ceremony worshiping LordVisnu, and after that the teacher gives the child a long chalk pencil.Then, guiding the hand of the student, he instructs him how to write theletters of the alphabet (a, a, i, etc.) by writing big letters on thefloor. When the child is a little advanced in writing, he is given aslate for his primary education, which ends when he learns the two-letter combinations, which are called phala, as mentioned above.
                                   TEXT 95                      balyalila-sutra ei kaila anukrama
                      iha vistariyachena dasa-vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     This is a synopsis of the childhood pastimes of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, placed herewith in chronological order. Vrndavana dasaThakura has already elaborately explained these pastimes in his bookCaitanya-bhagavata.
                                   TEXT 96
                     ataeva ei-lil\ sanksepe sutra kaila
                     punarukti-bhaye vistarira na kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     I have therefore made only a brief summary. Being afraid of
repetition, I have not elaborated upon this subject matter.
                                   TEXT 97
                       sn-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of theSri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Adi-lila, Fourteenth Chapter, describing Lord Caitanya's childhoodpastimes.
                               Chapter Fifteen
                           The Lord's Pauganda-lila     A synopsis of the Fifteenth Chapter is as follows. The Lord took
lessons in grammar from Gangadasa Pandita and became very expert incommenting upon grammar. He forbade His mother to take grains on theEkadasiday. He narrated a story that Visvarupa, after accepting thesannyasa order, invited Him in a dream to accept sannyasa also, but theLord refused and was therefore sent back home. When jagannatha Misrapassed away, the Lord married the daughter of Vallabhacarya, whose namewas Laksmi. All these events are summarized in this chapter.
                                    TEXT 1                ku-manah su-manastvam hi yati yasya padabjayoh
               su-mano'rpana-matrena tam caitanya-prabhum bhaje
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Lord
Caitanya because simply by offering a sumanas flower at His lotus feeteven the most ardent materialist becomes a devotee.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaitacandra, jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord
Nityananda Prabhu! All glories to Advaita Acarya! And all glories to thedevotees of Lord Caitanya!
                                    TEXT 3
                     pauganda-lilara sutra kariye ganana
                  pauganda-vayase prabhura mukhya adhyayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me now enumerate the activities of the Lord between the ages of
five and ten. His chief occupation during this period was to engageHimself in study.
                                    TEXT 4
                  pauganda-lila caitanya-krsnasyatisuvistrta
                 vidyarambha-mukha pani-grahananta mano-hara
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of the Lord during His pauganda age were very
extensive. His education was His chief occupation, and after that Hisvery beautiful marriage took place.
                                    TEXT 5
                  gangadasa pandita-sthane padena vyakarana
                 sravana-matre kanthe kaila sutra-vrtti-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord was studying grammar at the place of Gangadasa
Pandita, He would immediately learn grammatical rules and definitions byheart simply by hearing them once.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura says that the Lord was given lessons by
a teacher named Visnu and another teacher named Sudarsana. Later on,when He was a little grown up, He was under the care of GangadasaPandita, who taught Him grammar of a higher standard. Anyone seriousabout studying the Sanskrit language should first learn grammar. It issaid that simply to finish studying Sanskrit grammar takes at leasttwelve years, but once one learns the grammatical rules and regulationsvery nicely, all other scriptures or subject matters in Sanskrit areextremely easy to understand, for Sanskrit grammar is the gateway toeducation.
                                    TEXT 6                     alpa-kale haila panji-tikate pravina
                    cira-kalera paduya jine ha-iya navina
                                 TRANSLATION     He soon became so expert in commenting on the Panji-tika that He
could win victory over all the other students, although He was aneophyte.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura says there was a commentary on grammar
named panji-tika that was later explained very lucidly by SriCaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 7                    adhyayana-lila prabhura dasa-vrndavana
                   `caitanya-mangale' kaila vistari varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     In his book Caitanya-mangala [which later became Caitanya-
bhagavata], Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura very elaborately described theLord's pastimes of study.
                                   PURPORT     The Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-lila, Chapters Four, Six, Seven, Eight,
Nine and Ten, are a good reference for the studious pastimes of LordSriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 8                     eka dina matara pade kariya pranama
                    prabhu kahe,--mata, more deha eka dana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fell down at the feet of His mother
and requested her to give Him one thing in charity.
                                    TEXT 9
                     mata bale,--tai diba, ya tumi magibe
                    prabhu kahe,--ekadasite anna na khaibe
                                 TRANSLATION     His mother replied, "My dear son, I will give You whatever You
ask." Then the Lord said, "My dear mother, please do not eat grains onthe Ekadasi day."                                   PURPORT
     From the very beginning of His childhood life Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu introduced the system of observing a fast on the Ekadasi day.In the Bhakti-sandarbha by Srila Jiva Gosvami there is a quotation fromthe Skanda purna admonishing that a person who eats grains onEkadasibecomes a murderer of his mother, father, brother and spiritualmaster, and even if he is elevated to a Vaikuntha planet, he falls down.On Ekadasi, everything is cooked for Visnu, including regular grains anddahi, but it is enjoined that a Vaisnava should not even take visnu-prasada on Ekadasi. It is said that a Vaisnava does not accept anythingeatable that is not offered to Lord Visnu, but on Ekadasi a Vaisnavashould not touch even maha- prasada offered to Visnu, although suchprasada may be kept for being eaten the next day. It is strictlyforbidden for one to accept any kind of grain on Ekadasi, even if it isoffered to Lord Visnu.
                                   TEXT 10                    saci kahe,--na khaiba, bhala-i kahila
                       sei haite ekadasi karite Iagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Mother Saci said: "You have spoken very nicely. I shall not eat
grains on Ekadasi." From that day, she began to observe fasting onEkadasi.
                                   PURPORT     It is a prejudice amongst smarta-brahmanas that a widow must
observe fasting on Ekadasi but a woman who has her husband should not.It appears that before the request of Lord Caitanya Sacimata was notobserving Ekadasibecause of her being sa-dhava, which means that herhusband was living. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, introduced thesystem that a woman, even if not a widow, must observe the Ekadasi dayand must not touch any kind of grains, even those offered to the Deityof Visnu.
                                   TEXT 11                   tabe misra visvarupera dekhiya yau vana
                    kanya cahi' vivaha dite karilena mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter, seeing Visvarupa a grown-up youth, Jagannatha Misra
wanted to find a girl and arrange a marriage ceremony for Him.
                                   TEXT 12
                     vis varupa suni' ghara chadi palaila                     sannyasa kariya tirtha karibare gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing of this, Visvarupa immediately left home and went away to
accept sannyasa and travel from one place of pilgrimage to another.
                                   TEXT 13
                    suni, saci-misrera duhkh i haila mana
                    tabe prabhu mata-pitara kaila asvasana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sacimata and Jagannatha Misra heard of the departure of their
elder son, Visvarupa, they were very unhappy, but Lord Caitanya tried toconsole them.
                                   TEXT 14
                   bhala haila,--visvarupa sannyasa karila
                     pitr-kuia, matr-kula,--dui uddharila
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear mother and father," the Lord said, "it is very good that
Visvarupa has accepted the sannyasa order, for thus He has deliveredboth His father's family and His mother's family."
                                   PURPORT     It is sometimes said that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not approve
of the acceptance of the sannyasa order in this Kali-yuga because in thesastra it is said:     asvamedham gavalambham sannyasam pala-paitrkam     devarena sutotpattim kalau panca vivarjayet"I n th is Kali-yuga the performance of the asvamedha-yajna or gomedha-yajna, sacrifices in wh ich a horse or cow is offered, should beavoided, as should the acceptance of sannyasa, the renou nced order of Iife." (Brahma-vaivarta Purana, Krsna janma-khanda 185.180)     Nevertheless we see that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself acceptedsannyasa and approved of the sannyasa of His elder brother, Visvarupa.It is clearly said here, bhala haila,--visvarupa sannyasa karila pitr-kula, matr-kula,--dui uddharila. T h e refore, should it be thought thatSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu made statements that are contradictory? No,actually He did not. It is recommended that one acceptsannyasa todedicate his life for the service of the Lord, and everyone must takethat kind of sannyasa, for by accepting such sannyasa one renders thebest service to both his paternal and maternal families. But one shouldnot accept the sannyasa order of the Mayavada school, which haspractically no meaning. We find many Mayavadi sannyasis simply loiteringin the street thinking themselves Brahman or Narayana and spending allday and night begging so they can fill their hungry bellies. Mayavadi
sannyasis have become so degraded that there is a section of them whoeat everything, just like hogs and dogs. It is such degraded sannyasathat is prohibited in this age. Actually, Srila Sankaracarya'sprinciples for the acceptance of sannyasa were very strict, but laterthe so-called Mayavadi sannyasis became degraded because of their falsephilosophy, which propounds that by accepting sannyasa one becomesNarayana. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu rejected that kind of sannyasa. Butthe acceptance of sannyasa is one of the items of the varnasrama-dharma. How then can it be rejected?
                                   TEXT 15                     ami ta' kariba toma' dunhara sevana
                    suniya santusta haila pita-matara mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu assured His parents that He would serve
them, and thus the minds of His father and mother were satisfied.
                                   TEXT 16
                       eka-dina naivedya-tambula khaiya
                      bhumite padila prabhu acetana hana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ate betel nuts offered to the
Deity, but they acted as an intoxicant, and He fell down on the groundunconscious.
                                   PURPORT     Betel nuts are an intoxicant, and therefore the regulative
principles prohibit eating them. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastime offainting after eating betel nuts is a solid instruction to all of usthat one should not touch betel nuts, even those offered to Visnu,justas one should not touch grains on the Ekadasi day. Of course, LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu's fainting had a particular purpose. As the SupremePersonality of Godhead, He can do whatever He likes and eat whatever Hewants, but we should not imitate His pastimes.
                                   TEXT 17                    aste-vyaste pita-mata mukhe dila pani
                    sustha hana kahe prabhu apurva kahini
                                 TRANSLATION     After His father and mother sprinkled water on His mouth with great
haste, the Lord revived and said something wonderful they had neverheard before.                                   TEXT 18
                     etha haite visvarupa more lana gela
                      sannyasa karaha tumi, amare kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord said: "Visvarupa took Me away from here, and He requested
Me to accept the sannyasa order.
                                   TEXT 19
                      ami kahi,--amara anatha pita-mata
                   ami balaka,--sannyasera kiba jani katha
                                 TRANSLATION     "I replied to Visvarupa: `I have My helpless father and mother, and
also I am but a child. What do I know about the sannyasa order of life?
                                   TEXT 20
                  grhastha ha-iya kariba pita-matara se vana
                     ihate-i tusta habena laksmi-nar\yana
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Later I shall become a householder and thus serve My parents, for
this action will very much satisfy Lord Narayana and His wife, thegoddess of fortune.'
                                   TEXT 21
                      tabe visvarupa ihan pathaila more
                       matake kahio koji koti namaskare
                                 TRANSLATION     "Then Visvarupa returned Me home and requested, `Offer thousands
and thousands of obeisances unto My mother, Sacidevi."'
                                   TEXT 22
                       ei mata nana Iila kare gaurahari
                     ki karane Iila,--iha bujhite na pari
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed various pastimes,
but why He did so I cannot understand.
                                   PURPORT     The Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotees who come to
this world are executing a mission, and therefore sometimes they act ina way that is very difficult to understand. It is said, therefore,vaisnavera kriya mudha vijne na bujhaya: even if one is a very learnedand intelligent scholar, he cannot understand the activities of aVaisnava. A Vaisnava accepts anythingfavorable for executing hismission. But foolish persons, not knowing the purpose of such exaltedVaisnavas, indulge in criticizing them. That is forbidden. Since no onecan understand what a Vaisnava does for the purpose of executing hismission, to criticize such a Vaisnava is the offense cal led sadhu-ninda.
                                   TEXT 23                     kata dina rahi' misra gela para-loka
                     mata-putra dunhara badila hrdi soka
                                 TRANSLATION     After some days, Jagannatha Misra passed away from this world to
the transcendental world, and both mother and son were very muchaggrieved in their hearts.
                                   TEXT 24
                    bandhu-bandha va asi' dunha prabodhila
                     pitr-kri,ya vidhi-mate isvara karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Friends and relatives came there to pacify both Lord Caitanya and
His mother. Then Lord Caitanya, even though He was the SupremePersonality of Godhead, executed the rituals for His dead fatheraccording to the Vedic system.
                                   TEXT 25
                    kata dine prabhu citte karila cintana
                   grhastha ha-ilama, ebe cahi grha-dharma
                                 TRANSLATION     After some days the Lord thought: "I did not take sannyasa, and
since I am remaining at home it is My duty to act as a grhastha.
                                   TEXT 26                   grhini vina grha-dharma na haya sobhana
                     eta cinti' vivaha karite haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Without a wife," Lord Caitanya considered, "there is no meaning to
householder life." Thus the Lord decided to marry.
                                   TEXT 27
                  na grham grham ity ahur grhinigrham ucyate
                 taya hi sahitah sarvan purusarthan samasnute
                                 TRANSLATION     Merely a houseis not a home,for it is a wife who gives a home its
meaning. If one lives at home with his wife, together they can fulfillall the interests of human life.
                                   TEXT 28
                      daive eka dina prabhu padiya asite
                   valiabhacaryera kanya dekhe ganga-pathe
                                 TRANSLATION     One day when the Lord was coming back from school He accidently saw
the daughter of Vallabhacarya on the way to the Ganges.
                                   TEXT 29
                   purva-siddha bhava dunhara udaya karila
                    daive vanamalighataka saci-sthane aila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord and Laksmidevi met, their relationship awakened,
having already been settled, and coincidently the marriage-makerVanamali came to see Sacimata.
                                   PURPORT     Vanamali Ghataka, a resident of Navadvipa and a brahmana by caste,
arranged the marriage of the Lord to Laksmidevi. He was formerlyVisvamitra, who negotiated the marriage of Lord Ramacandra, and later hewas the brahmana who negotiated the marriage of Lord Krsna with Rukmini.That same brahmana acted as the marriage-maker of the Lord in caitanya-Iila.
                                   TEXT 30                    sacira ingite sambandha karila ghatana
                     laksmike vivaha kaila sacira nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Following the indications of Sacidevi, Vanamali Ghataka arranged
the marriage, and thus in due course the Lord married Laksmidevi.
                                   TEXT 31
                    vistariya varnila taha vrndavana-dasa
                     ei ta' pauganda-Iilara sutra-prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Vrndavana dasa Thakura has elaborately described all these pastimes
of the Lord's early age. What I have given is but a condensedrepresentation of the same pastimes.
                                   TEXT 32
                     pauganda vayase Iiia bahuta prakara
                    vrndavana-dasa iha kariyachena vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord performed many varieties of pastimes in His early age, and
Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has described them elaborately.
                                   TEXT 33
                        ataeva dinmatra ihan dekhaila
                  `caitanya-mangale' sarva-loke khyata haila
                                 TRANSLATION     I have given but a single hint of these pastimes, for Vrndavana
dasa Thakura, in his book Caitanya-mangala [ now Caitanya-bhagavata],has described them all vividly.
                                   TEXT 34
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanyacaritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, l, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritam
rta, Ad i-Iila-, Fifteenth Chapter, describing the Lord's pauganda-Iila.
                               Chapter Sixteen
             The Pastimes of the Lord in His Childhood and Youth     This chapter fully describes Lord Caitanya's kaisora-Iila, or the
activities He performed just before attaining youth. During this time Hestudied deeply and was victorious overgreatly learned scholars. DuringHis kaisora-Iila the Lord also sported in the water. He went to EastBengal to secure financial assistance, cultivate knowledge and introducethe sankirtana movement, and there He met Tapana Misra, whom Heinstructed about spiritual advancement and ordered to go to Varanasi.While Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was touring East Bengal, His wife,Laksmidevi, was bitten by a serpent or by the serpent of separation, andthus she left this world. When the Lord returned home, He saw that Hismother was overwhelmed with grief because of Laksmidevi's death.Therefore at her request He later married His second wife, Visnupriya-devi. This chapter also describes the Lord's argument with KesavaKasmiri, the celebrated scholar, and the Lord's criticism of his prayerglorifying mother Ganges. In this prayer the Lord found five kinds ofliterary ornaments and five kinds of literary faults, thus defeating thepandita. Later the Kasmiri Pandita, who was known to have beenvictorious all over the country, submitted himself to the goddess oflearning, and by her order he met Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu on themorning of the next day and surrendered unto Him.
                                    TEXT 1                krpa-sudha-sarid yasya visvam aplavayanty api
               nicagaiva sada bhati tam caitanya-prabhum bhaje
                                 TRANSLATION     I worship Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, whose nectarean mercy flows
like a great river, inundating the entire universe. J ust as a riverflows downstream, Lord Caitanya especially extends Himself to thefallen.
                                   PURPORT     Narottama casa Thakura has sung, sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu daya
kara more. He prays for Lord Caitanya's mercy because He is the mercyincarnation, having appeared especially to claim the fallen souls. Themore fallen one is, the greater one's claim to the favor of Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. One must only be very sincere and serious. Despitebeing contaminated by all the bad qualities of this Kali-yuga, if onesurrenders unto the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord will
surely and certainly deliver him. The best example is Jagai and Madhai.In this age of Kali practically everyone is like Jagai and Madhai, butthe sankirtana movement inaugurated by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is stillflowing like a great river, inundating the entire world, and thus theInternational Society for Krishna Consciousness is successfully claimingall fallen souls to free them from contamination.
                                    TEXT 2                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                   jayadvaitacandra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord
Nityananda! All glories to Advaitacandra! And all glories to all thedevotees of the Lord!
                                    TEXT 3
                 jiyat kaisora-caitanyo murtimatya grhasramat
              laksmyarcito 'tha vagdevya disam jayi jaya-cchalat
                                 TRANSLATION     Long live Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu in His kaisora age! Both the
goddess of fortune and the goddess of learning worship Him. The goddessof learning, Sarasvati, worshiped Him in His victory over the scholarwho had conquered all the world, and the goddess of fortune, Laksmidevi,worshiped Him at home. Since He is therefore the husband or Lord of bothgoddesses, I offer my obeisances unto Him.
                                    TEXT 4
                    ei ta' kaisora-Iilara sutra-anubandha
                      sisya-gana padaite karila arambha
                                 TRANSLATION     At the age of eleven Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to teach
students. This marks the beginning of His kaisora age.
                                    TEXT 5
                     sata sata sisya sange sada adhy\oana
                   vyakhya suni sarva-lokera camakita mana
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as the Lord became a teacher, many, many students came to
Him, every one of them astonished to hear His mode of explanation.
                                    TEXT 6
                   sarva-sastre sarva pandita p\ya parajaya
                     vinaya-bhangite kro duhkha nahi haya
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord defeated all kinds of scholars in discourses about all the
scriptures, yet because of His gentle behavior, none of them wereunhappy.
                                    TEXT 7
                   vividha auddhatya kare sisya-gana-sange
                     jahnavite jala-keli kare nana range
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord, as a teacher, performed various kinds of pranks in His
sporting pastimes in the water of the Ganges.
                                    TEXT 8
                    kata dine kaila prabhu bangete gamana
                  yahan yaya, tahan laoyaya nama-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     After some days the Lord went to East Bengal, and wherever He went
He introduced the sankirtana movement.
                                   PURPORT     Although Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu and His devotees in disciplic
succession can defeat all kinds of learned scholars, scientists andphilosophers in arguments, thus establishing the supremacy of thePersonality of Godhead, their main business as preachers is to introducesankirtana everywhere. Simply to defeat scholars and philosophers is notthe occupation of a preacher. Preachers must simultaneously introducethe sankirtana movement, for that is the mission of the Caitanya cult.
                                    TEXT 9                    vidyara prabhava dekhi camatkara cite
                      sara sata paduya asi iagila padite
                                 TRANSLATION     Struck with wonder by the influence of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's
intellectual prowess, many hundreds of students came to Him and beganstudying under His direction.
                                   TEXT 10
                      sei dese vipra, nama--misra tapana
                      niscaya karite nare sadhya-sadhana
                                 TRANSLATION     In East Bengal there was a brahmana named Tapana Misra who could
not ascertain the objective of life nor how to attain it.
                                   PURPORT     One must first ascertain the object of life and then understand how
to attain it. The Krsna consciousness movement is pointing out toeveryone that the object of life is to understand Krsna, and to attainthat goal of life one must practice Krsna consciousness, following themethods prescribed by the Gosvamis with reference to the authoritativesastras and Vedas.
                                   TEXT 11                   bahu-sastre bahu-vakye citte bhrama haya
                    sadhya-sadhana srestha na haya niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     If one becomes a bookworm, reading many books and scriptures and
hearing many commentaries and the instructions of many men, this willproduce doubt within his heart. One cannot in this way ascertain thereal goal of life.
                                   PURPORT     I n Srimad-Bhaga vatam (7.13.8) i t i s sa id, granthan
naivabhyased bahun na vyakhyam upayunjita.- "One should not read manybooks, nor should one try to make a profession of reciting many books,especially if one is a devotee." One must give up the ambition to be alearned scholar and in this way earn a worldly reputation and financialfacilities. If one diverts his attention to studying many books, hecannot fix his mind in devotional service, nor can he understand manyscriptures, for they are full of grave statements and meanings. In thisconnection Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura gives his opinionthat those who are attracted to studying many kinds of literatureconcerning various subject matters, especially fruitive activities andphilosophical speculation, are deprived of unalloyed devotional servicebecause of their splayed attention.     Man has a general tendency toward fruitive activities, religiousritualistic ceremonies and philosophical speculation. A living entitythus bewildered since time immemorial does not understand the real goal
of life, and thus his activities in lifeare wasted. Innocent persons misled in this way are deprived ofunalloyed krsna- bhakti, devotional service to the Lord. Tapana Misra isa vivid example of such a person. He was a learned scholar, but he couldnot ascertain what the goal of life is. Therefore he was given a chanceto hear Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructing Sanatana Gosvami. LordCaitanya's instruction to Tapana Misra is especially significant forpersons who loiter here and there collecting books and reading none ofthem, thus becoming bewildered regarding the aim of life.
                                   TEXT 12                    svapne eka vipra kahe,--sunaha tapana
                      nimani-pandita pase karaha gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Tapana Misra, being thus bewildered, was directed by a brahmana in
a dream to go to Nimai Pandita [Caitanya Mahaprabhu].
                                   TEXT 13
                  tenho tomara sadhya-sadhana karibe niscaya
                    saksat is vara tenho,--nahika samsaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because He is the Lord [isvara]," the brahmana told
him,"undoubtedly He can give you proper direction."
                                   TEXT 14
                   svapna dekhi' misra asi' prabhura carane
                    svapnera vrttanta saba kaila nivedane
                                 TRANSLATION     After seeing the dream, Tapana Misra came to the shelter of Lord
Caitanya's lotus feet, and he described all the details of the dream tothe Lord.
                                   TEXT 15
                   prabhu tusta hana sadhya-sadhana kahila
                     nama-sankirtana kara,--upadesa kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord, being satisfied, instructed him about the object of life
and the process to attain it. He instructed him that the basic principleof success is to chant the holy name of the Lord [the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra].
                                   PURPORT     The Krsna consciousness movement is based upon this instruction of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu that one must chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantraregularly and according to the prescribed principles. We simply ask ourwestern students to chant at least sixteen rounds a day, but sometimeswe find that they fail to chant even these sixteen rounds, and insteadthey bring many austere books and a worshiping method that diverts theirattention in so many ways. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu's cult is based uponthe chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra. Lord Caitanya first advisedTapana Misra to fix his mind in this chanting. We, the members of theKrsna consciousness movement, must strictly follow this advice ofCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 16                  tanra iccha,--prabhu-sange navadvioe vasi
                     prabhu ajna di1a,--tumi yao varanasi
                                 TRANSLATION     Tapana Misra's desire was to live with the Lord in Navadvipa, but
the Lord asked him to go to Varanasi [Benares].
                                   TEXT 17
                     tahan ama-sange tomara habe darasana
                     ajna pana misra kaila kasite gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord assured Tapana Misra that they would meet again in
Varanasi. Receiving this order, Tapana Misra went there.
                                   TEXT 18
                    prabhura atarkya-lila bujhite na pari
                   sva-sanga chadana kene pathaya kasipuri
                                 TRANSLATION     I cannot understand the inconceivable pastimes of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, for although Tapana Misra wanted to live with Him inNavadvipa, the Lord advised him to go to Varanasi.
                                   PURPORT     When Tapana Misra met Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Lord Caitanya was living
in household life, and there was no indication that in the future Hewould accept the sannyasa order. But by asking Tapana Misra to go to
Varanasi He indicated that in the future He would accept sannyasa andthat when He would teach Sanatana Gosvami, Tapana Misra would takeadvantage of the opportunity to learn the object of life and the realprocess of attaining it.
                                   TEXT 19                    ei mata bangera lokera kaila maha hita
                  `na-ma' ai ya bhakta kaila, padana pandita
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu contributed the greatest
benefit to the people of East Bengal by initiating them into hari-narna,the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, and making them learnedscholars by educating them.
                                   PURPORT     Following in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Krsna
consciousness movement is distributing the Hare Krsna maha-mantra andinducing people all over the world to chant. We are giving people animmense treasury of transcendental literature, translated into all theimportant languages of the world, and by the grace of Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu this literature is selling profusely, and people are chantingthe Hare Krsna maha-mantra with great delight. This is the preachingprocess of the Caitanya cult. Since the Lord wanted this cult preachedall over the world,the International Society of Krishna Consciousness isacting in a humble way so that the vision of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu maybe fulfilled all over the world, especially in the western countries.
                                   TEXT 20                     ei mata bange prabhu kare nana iila
                  etha navadvioe laksmi virahe duhkhi haila
                                 TRANSLATION     Because the Lord was engaged in various ways in preaching work in
East Bengal, His wife, Laksmidevi, was very unhappy at home inseparation from her husband.
                                   TEXT 21
                    prabhura viraha-sarpa laksmire damsila
                    viraha-sarpa-vise tanra paraloka haila
                                 TRANSLATION     The snake of separation bit Laksmidevi, and its poison caused her
death. Thus she passed to the next world. She went back home, back toGodhead.                                   PURPORT
     As stated i n Bhagavad-gita (8.6), yam yam vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram:- one's practice in thinking throughout hisentire life determines the quality of his thoughts at death, and thus atdeath one obtains a suitable body. According to this principle,Laksmidevi, the goddess of fortune from Vaikuntha, who was absorbed inthought of the Lord in separation from Him, certainly went back home toVaikunthaloka after death.
                                   TEXT 22                    antare janila prabhu, yate an taryami
                     desere aila prabhu saci-duhkha jani'
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya knew about the disappearance of Laksmidevi because He
is the Supersoul Himself. Thus He returned home to solace His mother,Sacidevi, who was greatly unhappy about the death of her daughter-in-law.
                                   TEXT 23
                    ghare aiia prabhu bahu lana dhana jana
                  tattva jnane kaiia sacira duhkha vimocana
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord returned home, bringing with Him great wealth and
many followers, He spoke to Sacidevi about transcendental knowledge torelieve her of the grief she was suffering.
                                   PURPORT     It is stated in Bhagavad-gita:
     dehino'smin yatha dehe     kaumaram yau vanam jara     tatha dehan tara-praptir     dhiras tatra na muhyati"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood toyouth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death.The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13)Such verses from Bhagavad-gita or any other Vedic literature givevaluable instructions on the occasion of someone's passing away. By discussing such in structions from Bhagavad-gita or Srimad- Bhagavatam asober man can certainly understand that the soul never dies;it passesfrom one body to another. This is called transmigration of the soul. Asoul comes into this material world and creates bodily relationshipswith a father, a mother, sisters, brothers, a wife and children, but allthese relationships pertain to the body, not the soul. Therefore, asdescribed in Bhagavad-gita, dhiras tatra na muhyati: one who is sober isnot disturbed by such phenomenal changes within this material world.
Such instructions are called tattva-katha, or real truth.
                                   TEXT 24                     sisya-gana lan\ punah vidyara vilasa
                   vidya-bale saba jini' auddhatya prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     After coming back from East Bengal, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again
began educating others. By the strength of His education He conqueredeveryone, and thus He was greatly proud.
                                   TEXT 25
                     tabe visnupriya-thakuranira parinaya
                     tabe ta' karila prabhu digvijayijaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Lord Caitanya married Visnupriya, the goddess of fortune, and
thereafter He conquered a champion of learning named Kesava Kasmiri.
                                   PURPORT     As in the modern day there are many champions in sports, so in
bygone days there were many learned scholars in I ndia who werechampions in learning. One such person was Kesava Kasmiri, who came fromthe state of Kashmir. He traveled all over India and at last came toNavadvipa to challenge the learned scholars there. Unfortunately hecould not conquer the learned scholars in Navadvipa, for he was defeatedby the boy scholar Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Later he understood thatCaitanya Mahaprabhu is none other than the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Thus he surrendered unto Him and later became a pure Vaisnavain the sampraoaya of Nimbarka. He wrote Kaustubha-prabha, a commentaryon the Vedanta commentary of the Nimbarka-sampradaya, which is known asthe Parijata-bhasya.     The Bhakti-ratnakara mentions Kesava Kasmiri and lists hispredecessors in the disciplic succession of the Nimbarka-sam pradaya:(1) Srinivasa Acarya, (2) Visva Acarya, (3) Purusottama, (4) Vilasa, (5)Svarupa, (6) Madhava, (7) Balabhadra, (8) Padma, (9) Syama, (10) Gopala,( 1 1) Krpa, (1 2) Deva Acarya, (1 3) Sundara Bhatta, (1 4) Pad manabha,( 1 5) Upend ra, ( 1 6) Ramacand ra, (1 7) Vamana, (1 8) Krsna, (19)Padmakara, (20) Sravana, (21) Bhuri, (22) Madhava, (23) Syama, (24)Gopala,     , (25) Balabhadra, (26) Gopinatha, (27) Kesava, (28) Gokula and(29) Kesava Kasmiri. It is stated in the Bhakti-ratnakara that KesavaKasmiri was a favorite devotee of mother Sarasvati, the goddess oflearning. By her grace he was an extremely influential scholar, and hewas the greatest champion among all the scholars in the four corners ofthe country. Therefore he got the title oigvijayi, which means "one whohas conquered everyone in all directions." He belonged to a veryrespectable brahmana family of Kashmir. Later, by the order of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he gave up the profession of winning championshipsand became a great devotee. He joined the Nimbarka-sampradaya, one ofthe Vaisnava communities of the Vedic culture.
                                   TEXT 26                    vrndavana-dasa iha kariyachena vistara
                     sphuta nahi kare dosa-gunera vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     Vrndavana dasa Thakura has previously elaborately described this.
That which is clear need not be scrutinized for qualities and faults.
                                   TEXT 27
                     sei amsa kahi, tanre kari' namaskara
                  ya' suni' dig vijayi kaila \oana dhik-kara
                                 TRANSLATION     Offering my obeisances to Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura, I shall try
to describe that portion of the Lord's analysis which, when he heard it,made the Digvijayi feel himself condemned.
                                   TEXT 28
                 jyotsnavati ratri, prabh u sisya-gana sange
                    vasiyachena gangatire vidyara prasange
                                 TRANSLATION     On one full moon night the Lord was sitting on the bank of the
Ganges with His many disciples and discussing literary topics.
                                   TEXT 29
                       hena-kale digvijayi tahani aiia
                    gangare vandana kari' prabhure milila
                                 TRANSLATION     Coincidently Kesava Kasmiri Pandita also came there. While offering
his prayers to mother Ganges, he met Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 30
                      vasaiia tare prabhu adara kari va
                      digvijayi kahe mane avajna kari va                                 TRANSLATION
     The Lord received him with adoration, but because Kesava Kasmiri
was very proud, he talked to the Lord very inconsiderately.
                                   TEXT 31
                 vyakarana padaha, nimani pandita tomara nama
                   balya-sastre loke tomara kahe guna-grama
                                 TRANSLATION     "I understand that You are a teacher of grammar," he said, "and
that Your name is Nimai Pandita. People speak very highly of Yourteaching of beginners' grammar.
                                   PURPORT     Formerly Sanskrit schools first taught grammar very thoroughly, and
this system continues even now. A student was supposed to study grammarcarefully for twelve years in the beginning of his life, because if oneis expert in the grammar of the Sanskrit language, all the sastras areopen to him. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was famous for teaching grammar tostudents, and therefore Kesava Kasmiri first referred to His position asa teacher of grammar. He was very proud of his literary career; he wasfar above the first lessons of grammar, and so he thought the positionof Nimai Pandita not at all comparable to his own.
                                   TEXT 32                    vyakarana-madhye, jani, padaha kaiapa
                   sunilun phankite tomara sisyera samlapa
                                 TRANSLATION     "I understand that You teach Kalapa-vyakarana. I have heard that
Your students are very expert in the word jugglery of this grammar."
                                   PURPORT     There are many schools of grammar in the Sanskrit language, the
most famous of which are the systems of Panini and the Kalapa andKaumudi grammars. There were different branches of grammaticalknowledge, and a student of grammar was supposed to study them all intwelve years. Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who was famous as Nimai Pandita,taught grammar to His students, who became expert in dealing with theword jugglery of complicated grammar. Almost anyone expert in studyinggrammar interprets the sastras in many ways by changing the rootmeanings of their words. A student of grammar can sometimes completelychange the meaning of a sentence by juggling grammatical rules. KesavaKasmiri indirectly taunted Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu by implyingthatalthough He was a great teacher of grammar, such grammatical jugglery ofroot meanings did not require great expertise. This was a challenge to
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Because it was prearranged that Kesava Kasmiriwould have to discuss the sastras with Nimai Pandita, from the verybeginning he wanted to bluff the Lord. Thus the Lord replied as follows.
                                   TEXT 33                 prabhu kahe, vyakarana padai--abhimana kari
                     sisyete na bujhe, ami bujhaite nari
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord said: "Yes, I am known as a teacher of grammar, but
factually I cannot impress my students with grammatical knowledge, norcan they understand Me very well.
                                   PURPORT     Since Kesava Kasmiri was a little puffed-up, the Lord increased his
artificial pride by presenting Himself as subordinate to him. Thus Heflattered him as follows.
                                   TEXT 34                   kahan tumi sarva-sastre kavitve pravina
                      kahan ami sabe sisu--paduya navina
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, whereas you are a very learned scholar in all sorts
of scriptures and are very experienced in composing poetry, I am only aboy, a new student and nothing more.
                                   TEXT 35
                    tomara kavitva kichu sunite haya mana
                     krpa kari' kara yadi gangara varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore I desire to hear your skill in composing poetry. We
could hear this if you would mercifully describe the glory of motherGanges."
                                   TEXT 36
                     suniya brahmana garve varnite Iagila
                     ghati eke sata sloka gangara varnila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the brahmana, Kesava Kasmiri, heard this, he became still more
puffed-up, and within one hour he composed one hundred verses describingmother Ganges.
                                   TEXT 37
                     suni va karila prabhu bahuta satkara
                      toma sama prthivite kavi nahi ara
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord praised him, saying: "Sir, there is no greater poet than
you in the entire world.
                                   TEXT 38
                    tomara kavita sloka bujhite kara sakti
                    tumi bhda jana artha kim va sarasvati
                                 TRANSLATION     "Your poetry is so difficult that no one can understand it but you
and mother Sarasvati, the goddess of learning.
                                   PURPORT     Replying to Kesava Kasmiri sarcastically, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
indirectly minimized the value of his poetry by saying, "Yes, yourcompositions are so nice that no one but you and your worshipablemother, the goddess of learning, can understand them." Kesava Kasmiriwas a favorite devotee of mother Sarasvati, the goddess of learning, butCaitanya Mahaprabhu, as the master of the goddess of learning, has theright to speak sarcastically of her devotees. In other words, althoughKesava Kasmiri was proud of being favored by the goddess of learning, hedid not know that she is controlled by Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himselfbecause He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 39                    eka slokera artha yadi kara nija-mukhe
                    suni' saba loka tabe paiba bada-sukhe
                                 TRANSLATION     "But if you explain the meaning of one verse, we can all hear it
from your own mouth and thus be very happy."
                                   TEXT 40
                    tabe digvijayi vyakhyara sloka puchila
                   sata slokera eka sloka prabhu ta' padila                                 TRANSLATION
     The Digvijayi, Kesava Kasmiri, inquired which verse He wanted
explained. The Lord then recited one of the one hundred verses KesavaKasmiri had composed.
                                   TEXT 41
                mahattvam gangayah satatam idam abhati nitaram
                yad esa sri-visnos carana-kamalotpatti-subhaga
               dvitiya-sri-laksmir iva sura-narair arcya-carana
              bhavani-bhartur ya sirasi vibha vaty adbhuta-guna
                                 TRANSLATION     "The greatness of mother Ganges always brilliantly exists. She is
the most fortunate because she emanated from the lotus feet of SriVisnu, the Personality of Godhead. She is the second goddess of fortune,and therefore she is always worshiped both by demigods and by humanity.Endowed with all wonderful qualities, she flourishes on the head of LordSiva."
                                   TEXT 42
                  `ei slokera artha kara'--prabhu yadi baila
                   vismita hana oigvijayi prabhure puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked him to explain the meaning of
this verse, the champion, very much astonished, inquired from Him asfollows.
                                   TEXT 43
                      jhanjhavata-praya ami sloka padila
                  tara madhye sloka tumi kaiche kanthe kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     "I recited all the verses like the blowing wind. How could You
completely learn by heart even one among those verses?,,
                                   TEXT 44
                  prabhu kahe, devera vare tumi--`kavi-vara,
                   aiche devera vare keho haya `srutidhara'                                 TRANSLATION
     The Lord replied: "By the grace of the Lord someone may become a
great poet, and similarly by His grace someone else may become a greatsrutidhara who can memorize anything immediately."
                                   PURPORT     In this connection, srutidhara is a very important word. Sruti
means "hearing" and dhara means "one who can capture." Formerly, beforethe beginning of Kaliyuga, almost everyone, especially among theintelligent men, the brahmanas, was a srutidhara. As soon as a studentheard any of the Vedic wisdom from his master, he would remember itforever. There was no need to refer to books, and therefore there wereno written books in those days. The spiritual master delivered the Vedichymns and their explanations to the student, who would then rememberthem forever, without consulting books.     To become a srutidhara, one who can remember simply by hearing, isa great achievement for a student. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says:     yad yad vibhutimat sattvam     srimad urjitam eva va      tat tad e vavagaccha tvam.     mama tejo 'msa-sambhavam"Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from buta spark of My splendor." (Bg. 10.41)     As soon as we find anything extraordinary, we should understandthat such an extraordinary manifestation is the special grace of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhureplied to the champion, Kesava Kasmiri, that just as he was greatlyproud of being a favorite devotee of mother Sarasvati, so someone else,like He Himself, being favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,could become a srutidhara and thus memorize anything immediately simplyby hearing it.
                                   TEXT 45                   slokera artha kaila viora paiya santosa
                   prabhu kahe--kaha slokera kiba guna-dosa
                                 TRANSLATION     Satisfied by the statement of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the
brahmana [ Kesava Kasmiri] explained the quoted verse. Then the Lordsaid: "Now kindly explain the special qualities and faults in theverse."
                                   PURPORT     Not only did SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu pick out this one among the one
hundred verses and remember it although the brahmana had recited themlike the blowing wind, but He also analyzed its qualities and faults.Not only did He hear the verse, but He immediately made a critical studyof it.
                                   TEXT 46                     vipra kahe sloke nahi dosera abhasa
                      upamalankara guna, kichu anuprasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The brahmana replied: "There is not a tinge of fault in that verse.
Rather, it has the good qualities of similes and alliteration."
                                   PURPORT     In the last line of the verse quoted by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, the
letter bha is repeated many times, as in the words bhavani, bhartur,vibhavati and adbhuta. Such repetition is called anuprasa, oralliteration. The words laksmir iva and visnos carana- kamalotpatti areinstances of upama-alankara, for they exhibit metaphorical beauty. TheGanges is water, and Laksmi isthe goddess of fortune. Since water and aperson are not actually similar, the comparison is metaphorical.
                                   TEXT 47                  prabhu kahena,--kahi, yadi na karaha rosa
                     kaha tomara ei sloke kiba ache dosa
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord said: "My dear sir, I may say something to you if you will
not become angry. Can you explain the faults in this verse?
                                   TEXT 48
                   pratibhara kavya tomara de vata santose
                      bhala-mate vicarile jani guna-dose
                                 TRANSLATION     "There is no doubt that your poetry is full of ingenuity, and
certainly it has satisfied the Supreme Lord. Yet if we scrutinizinglyconsider it we can find both good qualities and faults."
                                   TEXT 49
                     tate bhala kari' sloka karaha vicara
                     kavi kahe,--ye kahile sei veda-sara
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord concluded: "Now, therefore, let us carefully scrutinize
this verse." The poet replied: "Yes, the verse You have recited isperfectly correct.                                   TEXT 50
                     vyakaraniya tumi nahi pada alankara
                      tumi ki janibe ei ka vltvera sara
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are an ordinary student of grammar. What do You know about
literary embellishments? You cannot review this poetry because You donot know anything about it."
                                   PURPORT     Kesava Kasmiri first wanted to bluff Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by
saying that since He was not an advanced student in literary style, Hecould not review a verse full of metaphors and literary ornaments. Thisargument has some basis in fact. Unless one is a medical man one cannotcriticize a medical man, and unless one is a lawyer he cannot criticizea lawyer. Therefore Kesava Kasmirifirst depreciated the Lord's position.Because Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was to the champion a student ofgrammar, how could He dare criticize a great poet like him? LordCaitanya, therefore, criticized the poet in a different way. He saidthat although He was certainly not advanced in a literary career, He hadheard from others how to criticize such poetry, and as a srutidhara,possessing a complete memory, He could understand the process for such areview.
                                   TEXT 51                     prabhu kahena--ataeva puchiye tomare
                       vicariya guna-dosa bujhaha amare
                                 TRANSLATION     Taking a humble position, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said: "Because I
am not of your level, I have asked you to teach Me by explaining thefaults and qualities in your poetry.
                                   TEXT 52
                    nahi padi alankara, kariyachi sravana
                      tate ei sloke dekhi bahu dosa-guna
                                 TRANSLATION     "Certainly I have not studied the art of literary embellishments.
But I have heard about it from higher circles, and thus I can reviewthis verse and find in it many faults and many good qualities."
                                   PURPORT     The statement kariyachi sravana ("I have heard it") is very
important in the sense that hearing is more important than directlystudying or perceiving. If one is expert in hearing and hears from the
right source, his knowledge is immediately perfect. This process iscalled srauta-pantha, or the acquirement of knowledge by hearing fromauthorities. All Vedic knowledge is based on the principle that one mustapproach a bona fide spiritual master and hear from the authoritativestatements of the Vedas. It is not necessary for one to be a highlypolished literary man to receive knowledge; to receive perfect knowledgefrom a perfect person, one must be expert in hearing. This is called thedescending process of deductive knowledge, or avaroha- pantha.
                                   TEXT 53                    kavi kahe,--kaha dekhi, kon guna-dosa
                  prabhu kahena,--kahi, suna, na kariha rosa
                                 TRANSLATION     The poet said: "All right, let me see what qualities and faults You
have found." The Lord replied: "Let Me speak, and please hear Me withoutbecoming angry.
                                   TEXT 54
                      panca dosa ei sloke panca alankara
                     krame ami kahi, suna, karaha vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, in this verse there are five faults and five literary
ornaments. I shall state them one after another. Kindly hear Me and thengive your judgment.
                                   PURPORT     In the verse beginning with mahattvam gangayah there are five
literary ornaments and five examples of faulty composition. There aretwo examples of the fault called avimrsta-vidheyamsa and one exampleeach of the faults viruddha-mati, punar-ukti and bhagna-krama.     Vlmrsta means,,clean," and vidheyamsa means "predicate." It is ageneral rule of composition to establish a subject first and then giveits predicate. For example, according to Sanskrit grammar if one says,"This man is learned," his composition is in order. But if one says,"Learned is this man," the composition is not in order. Such a flaw iscalled avimrsta-vidhey\msa-dosa, or the fault of unclean composition.The subject matter to be known of the verse is the glorification of theGanges, and therefore the word idam ("this") or what is known shouldhave been placed before instead of after the glorification. The subjectmatter already known should be placed before the unknown so that itsmeaning will not be misconstrued.     The second i nstance of avimrsta-vidheyamsa-dosa occu rs i n thewords dvitiya- srilaksmir iva. In this composition the word dvitiya("second") is vidheya, or unknown. Placing the unknown first to make thecompound word dvitiya-srilaksmir is another fault. The words dvitiya-srilaksmir iva were intended to compare the Ganges to the goddess of
fortune, but because of this fault the meaning of the compound word wasbewildering.     The third fault is that of viruddha-mati, or contradictoryconception, in the words bhavani-bhartuh. The word bhavani refers to thewife of Bhava, Lord Siva. But since Bhavani is already known as the wifeof Lord Siva, to add the word bharta, "husband," thus forming a compoundmeaning "the husband of the wife of Lord Siva," is contradictory, forthus it appears as if the wife of Lord Siva had another husband.     The fourth fault is punar-ukti, or redundancy, which occurs whenthe verb vibhavati ("flourishes"), which should have ended thecomposition, is further qualified by the unnecessary adjective adbhuta-guna ("endowed with wonderful qualities"). The fifth fault is bhagna-krama, which means "broken order." I n the first, third and fourth linesthere is anuprasa, or alliteration, created by the sounds ta, ra andbha, but in the second line there is no such anuprasa, and therefore theorder is broken.
                                   TEXT 55                   `a vimrsta-vidheyamsa'--dui thani cihna
          `viruddha-mati;, `bhagna-krama', 'punar-atta;,--dosa tina
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this verse the fault of avimrsta-vidheyamsa occurs twice, and
the faults of viruddha-mati, bhagna-krama and punar-atta occur onceeach.
                                   TEXT 56
                  `gan-gara mahattva'--sloke mula `vidheya'
                     idam sabde `anuvada'--pache avidheya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The glorification of the Ganges [mahattvam gangayah] is the
principal unknown subject matter in this verse, and the known subjectmatter is indicated by the word idam, which has been placed after theunknown.
                                   TEXT 57
                  `vidheya' ne kahi' pache kahile `anuvada'
                    ei Iagi' slokera artha kariyache badha
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because you have placed the known subject at the end and that
which is unknown at the beginning, the composition is faulty, and themeaning of the words has become doubtful.                                   TEXT 58
                   anuvadam anuktvaiva na vidheyam udirayet
              na hy alabdhaspadam kincit kutracit pratitisthati
                                 TRANSLATION     "Without first mentioning what is known, one should not introduce
the unknown, for that which has no solid basis can never be establishedanywhere.
                                   TEXT 59
               `dvitiya sri-laksmi'--ihan `dvitiyatva' vidheya
                   samase gauna haila, sabdartha gela ksaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the word dvitiya-srilaksmir [the second all-opulent goddess of
fortune], the quality of being a second Laksmi is the unknown. In makingthis compound word, the meaning became secondary and the originallyintended meaning was lost.
                                   TEXT 60
                 `dviti va' sabda--vidheya taha padila samase
                    `laksmira samata' artha karija vinase
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because the word dvitiya [second] is the unknown, in its
combination in this compound word the intended meaning of equality withLaksmi is lost.
                                   TEXT 61
                    `avimrsta-vidheyamsa'--ei dosera nama
                      ara eka dosa ache, suna savadhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Not only is there the fault avimrsta-vidheyamsa, but there is also
another fault, which I shall point out to you. Kindly hear Me with greatattention.
                                   TEXT 62
                  `bha vani-bhartr'-sabda dile paiya santosa
                    `viruddha-mati-krt' nama ei maha dosa                                 TRANSLATION
     "Here is another great fault. You have arranged the word bhavani-
bhartr to your great satisfaction, but this betrays the fault ofcontradiction.
                                   TEXT 63
                     bhavani-sabde kahe mahadevera grhini
                   tanra bharta kahile dvitiya bharta jani
                                 TRANSLATION     "The word bhavani means `the wife of Lord Siva.' But when we
mention her husband, one might conclude that she has another husband.
                                   TEXT 64
                  `si va-patnira bharta' iha sunite viruddha
                 'viruddha-mati-krt' sabda sastre nahe suddha
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is contradictory to hear that Lord Siva's wife has another
husband. The use of such words in literature creates the fault calledviruddha-mati-krt.
                                   TEXT 65
                 `brahmana-patnira bhartara haste deha dana'
                   sabda sunitei haya dvitiya-bharta jnana
                                 TRANSLATION     "If someone says, `Place this charity in the hand of the husband of
the wife of the brahmana,' when we hear these contradictory words weimmediately understand that the brahmana's wife has another husband.
                                   TEXT 66
               `vibha vati' kriyna vakya--sanga, punah visesana
                     `adbhuta-guna'--ei punar-atta dusana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The statement by the word vibhavati [flourishes] is complete.
Qualifying it with the adJective adbhuta-guna [wonderful qualities]creates the fault of redundancy.                                   TEXT 67
                       tina pade anuprasa dekhi anupama
                    eka pade nahi, ei dosa `bhagna-krama'
                                 TRANSLATION     "There is extraordinary alliteration in three lines of the verse,
but in one line there is no such alliteration. This is the fault ofdeviation.
                                   TEXT 68
                     yadyapi ei sloke ache panca alankara
                     ei panca-dose sloka kaila charakhara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although there are five literary ornaments decorating this verse,
the entire verse has been spoiled by these five most faultypresentations.
                                   TEXT 69
                      dasa alankare yadi eka sloka haya
                      eka dose saba alankara haya ksaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "If there are ten literary ornaments in a verse but even one faulty
expression, the entire verse is nullified.
                                   TEXT 70
                    sundara sarira yaiche bhusane bhusita
                    eka sveta-kusthe yaiche karaye vigita
                                 TRANSLATION     `One s beautiful body may be decorated with jewels, but one spot of
white leprosy makes the entire body abominable.
                                   PURPORT     The great sage Bharata Muni, an authority on poetic metaphor, has
given his opinion in this connection as follows.
                                   TEXT 71                rasalankaravat kavyam dosa-yuk ced vibhusitam               syad vapuh sundaram api svitrenaikena durbhagam
                                 TRANSLATION     "`As one's body, although well-decorated with ornaments, is made
unfortunate by even one spot of white leprosy, so an entire poem is madeuseless by a fault, despite alliteration, similes and metaphors.'
                                   TEXT 72
                      panca alankarera ebe sunaha vicara
                    dui sabdalankara, tina artha-alankara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Now hear the description of the five literary embellishments.
There are two ornaments of sound and three ornaments of meaning.
                                   TEXT 73
                    sabdalankara--tina-pade ache anuprasa
                  `sri-laksmi' sabde `punar-ukta vad-abhasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     "There is a sound ornament of alliteration in three lines. And in
the combination of words sri and laksmi there is the ornament of a tingeof redundancy.
                                   TEXT 74
                   prathama-carane panca `ta'-karera panti
                   trtiya-carane haya panca `repha'-sthiti
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the arrangement of the first line the letter ta occurs five
times, and the arrangement of the third line repeats the letter ra fivetimes.
                                   TEXT 75
                    caturtha-carane cari bha'-kara-prakasa
                        atae va sabdalankara anuprasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the fourth line the letter bha occurs four times. This
arrangement of alliteration is a pleasing ornamental use of sounds.                                   TEXT 76
                  `sri-sabde, `laksmi'-sabde--eka vastu ukta
                   punar-ukta-pr\ya bhase, nahe punar-ukta
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although the words sri and laksmi convey the same meaning and are
therefore almost redundant, they are nevertheless not redundant.
                                   TEXT 77
                   `sri-yukta laksmi' arthe arthera vlbheda
                   punar-uktavad-abhasa, sabdalankara-bheda
                                 TRANSLATION     "Describing Laksmi as possessed of sri [opulence] offers a
difference in meaning with a tinge of repetition. This is the secondornamental use of words.
                                   TEXT 78
                  `laksmir iva' arthalankara--upama-prakasa
                 ara arthalankara ache, nama--`virodhabhasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     "The use of laksmir iva [like Laksmi] manifests the ornament of
meaning called upama [analogy]. There is also the further ornament ofmeaning called virodhaabhasa, or a contradictory indication.
                                   TEXT 79
                    `gangate kamala janme'--sabara subodha
                   `kamale gangara janma'--atyanta virodha
                                 TRANSLATION     "Everyone knows that lotus flowers grow in the water of the Ganges.
But to say that the Ganges takes birth from a lotus flower seemsextremely contradictory.
                                   TEXT 80
                   `ihan visnu-pada-padme gangara utpatti'
                      virodhalankara iha maha-camatkrti
                                 TRANSLATION     "The existence of mother Ganges begins from the lotus feet of the
Lord. Although this statement that water comes from a lotus flower is acontradiction, in connection with Lord Visnu it is a great wonder.
                                   TEXT 81
                    isvara-acintya-saktye gangara prakasa
                      ihate virodha nahi, virodha-abhasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this birth of the Ganges, by the inconceivable potency of the
Lord, there is no contradiction although it appears contradictory.
                                   PURPORT     The central point of all Vaisnava philosophy is to accept the
inconceivable potency of Lord Visnu. What sometimes appearscontradictory from a material viewpoint is understandable in connectionwith the Supreme Personality of Godhead because He can performcontradictory activities by dint of His inconceivable potencies. Modernscientists are puzzled. They cannot even explain how such a largequantity of chemicals has formed the atmosphere. Scientists explain thatwater is a combination of hydrogen and oxygen, but when asked where sucha large quantity of hydrogen and oxygen came from and how they combinedto manufacture the great oceans and seas, they cannot answer becausethey are atheists who will not accept that everything comes from life.Their thesis is that life comes from matter.     Where do all these chemicals come from? The answer is that they areproduced by the inconceivable energy of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Living entities are part of the Supreme Godhead, and from theirbodies come many chemicals. For example,the lemon tree is a livingentity that produces many lemons, and within each lemon is a great dealof citric acid. Therefore, if even an insignificant living entity who isbut a part of the Supreme Lord can produce so much of a chemical, howmuch potency there must be in the body of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.     Scientists cannot perfectly explain where the chemicals of theworld are manufactured, but one can explain this perfectly by acceptingthe inconceivable energy of the Supreme Lord. There is no reason fordenying this argument. Since there are potencies in the living entitieswho are samples of the Personality of Godhead, how much potency theremust be in the Supreme Godhead Himself. As described in the Vedas, nityonityanam cetanas cetananam: "He is the chief eternal of all eternals andthe chief living entity among all living entities." (Katha Upanisad,Unfortunately, atheistic science will not accept that matter comes fromlife. Scientists insist upon their most illogical and foolish theorythat life comes from matter, although this is quite impossible. Theycannot prove in their laboratories that matter can produce life, yetthere are thousands and thousands of examples ill ustrati ng that matter com es f ro m life. T h e refore i n Sri Caitanya-caritamrta KrsnadasaKaviraja Gosvami says that as soon as one accepts the inconceivablepotency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, no great philosopher or
scientist can put forward any thesis to contradict the Lord's power.This is expressed in the following Sanskrit verse.
                                   TEXT 82                          ambujam ambuni jtam kvacid
                          api na jatam ambujad ambu                          mura-bhidi tad-vi,oaritam                          padambh ojan maha-nadijata
                                 TRANSLATION     "Everyone knows that lotus flowers grow in the water but water
never grows from a lotus. All such contradictions, however, arewonderfully possible in Krsna. The great River Ganges has grown from Hislotus feet.
                                   TEXT 83
                   gangara mahattva--sadhya, sadhana tahara
                     visnu-padotpatti--`anumana' alankara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The real glory of mother Ganges is that she has grown from the
lotus feet of Lord Visnu. Such a hypothesis is another ornament calledanumana.
                                   TEXT 84
                     sthula ei panca dosa, panca alankara
                      suksma vicariye yadi achaye apara
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have simply discussed the five gross faults and five literary
embellishments of this verse, but if we consider it in fine detail wewill find unlimited faults.
                                   TEXT 85
                   pratibha, kavitva tomara devata-prasade
                     avicara kavye avasya pade dosa-vadhe
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have achieved poetic imagination and ingenuity by the grace of
your worshipable demigod. But poetry not well reviewed is certainlysubject to criticism.                                   TEXT 86
                     vicari' kavitva kaile haya sunirmala
                     salankara haile artha kare jnalamala
                                 TRANSLATION     "Poetic skill used with due consideration is very pure, and with
metaphors and analogies it is dazzling."
                                   TEXT 87
                  suniya prabhura vyakhya oi gvijayi vismita
                  mukhe na nihsare vakya, pratibha stambhita
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing the explanation of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the
champion poet, struck with wonder, his cleverness stunned, could not sayanything.
                                   TEXT 88
                     kahite cahaye kichu, na aise uttara
                     tabe vicaraye mane ha-iya phanphara
                                 TRANSLATION     He wanted to say something, but no reply could come from his mouth.
He then began to consider this puzzle within his mind.
                                   TEXT 89
                     paduya balaka kaila mora buddhi lopa
                    jani--sarasvati more kariyachena kopa
                                 TRANSLATION     "This mere boy has blocked my intelligence. I can therefore
understand that mother Sarasvati has become angry with me.
                                   PURPORT     In Bhagavad-gita it is clearly said that all intelligence comes
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in everyone'sheart as Paramatma. The Paramatma gave the pandita the intelligence tounderstand that because he was proud of his learning and wanted todefeat even the Supreme Lord, by the will of the Lord and through theagency of mother Sarasvati he had been defeated. One should not,therefore, be too proud of one's position. Even if one is a greatlylearned scholar, if he commits an offense to the lotus feet of the Lord
he will not be able to speak properly, in spite of his learning. Inevery respect, we are controlled. Our only duty, therefore, is tosurrender always to the lotus feet of the Lord and not be falsely proud.Mother Sarasvaticreated this situation to favor the champion pandita sothat he might surrender unto Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 90                  ye vyakhya karila, se manusyera nahe sakti
                   nimani-mukhe rahi' bale apane sarasvati
                                 TRANSLATION     "The wonderful explanation the boy has given could not have been
possible for a human being. Therefore mother Sarasvati must have spokenpersonally through His mouth."
                                   TEXT 91
                    eta bhavi' kahe--suna, nimani pandita
                    tava vyakhya suni' ami ha-ijan vismita
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking thus, the pandita said: "My dear Nimai Pandita, please
hear me. Hearing Your explanation, I am simply struck with wonder.
                                   TEXT 92
                    alankara nahi pada, nahi sastrabhyasa
                      kemane e saba artha karile prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am surprised. You are not a literary student and do not have
long experience in studying the sastras. How have You been able toexplain all these critical points?"
                                   TEXT 93
                      iha suni' mahaprabhu ati bada rang
                    tanhara hrdaya jani' kahe kari' bhangi
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this and understanding the pandita's heart, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu replied in a humorous way.
                                   TEXT 94                     sastrera vicara bhala-manda nahijani
                      sarasvatiye bal\ya, sei bali vani
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, I do not know what is good composition and what is
bad. But whatever I have spoken must be understood to have been spokenby mother Sarasvati."
                                   TEXT 95
                      iha suni' digvijayi karila niscaya
                     slsu-dvare devi more kaila parajaya
                                 TRANSLATION     When he heard this judgment from Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the
pandita sorrowfully wondered why mother Sarasvati wanted to defeat himthrough a small boy.
                                   TEXT 96
                    aji tanre nivediba, kari' japa-dhyana
                      sisu-dvare kaila more eta apamana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I shall offer prayers and meditation to the goddess of learning,"
the champion concluded, "and ask her why she has insulted me so greatlythrough this boy."
                                   TEXT 97
                   vastutah sarasvati asuddha sloka karaila
                     vicara-samaya tanra buddhi acchadila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sarasvati had in fact induced the champion to compose his verse in
an impure way. Furthermore, when it was discussed she covered hisintelligence, and thus the Lord's intelligence was triumphant.
                                   TEXT 98
                      tabe sisya-gana saba hasite Iagila
                    ta'-saba nisedhi' prabhu kavire kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the poetic champion was thus defeated, all the Lord's
disciples sitting there began to laugh loudly. But Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu asked them not to do so, and He addressed the poet asfollows.
                                   TEXT 99
                     tumi bada pandita, mahakavi-siromani
                    yanra mukhe bahiraya aiche kavya-vani
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are the most learned scholar and the topmost of all great
poets, for otherwise how could such fine poetry come from your mouth?
                                   TEXT 100
                    tomara ka vitva yena ganga jala-dhara
                     toma-sama kavi kotha nahi dekhi ara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Your poetic skill is like the constantflow of the waters of the
Ganges. I find no one in the world who can compete with you.
                                   TEXT 101
                     bha vabhuti, jayade va, ara kalidasa
                    tan-sabara kavitve ache dosera prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "Even in the poetic compositions of such great poets as Bhavabhuti,
Jayadeva and Kalidasa there are many examples of faults.
                                   TEXT 102
                     dosa-guna-vicara--ei alpa kari' mani
                    kavitva-karane sakti, tanha se vakhani
                                 TRANSLATION     "Such mistakes should be considered negligible. One should see only
how such poets have displayed their poetic power.
                                   PURPORT     I n Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said:
     tad-vag-visargo janatagha-viola vo     yasmin prati-slokam abaddhavaty api     namany anantasya yaso 'nkitani yat
     srn vanti gayanti grnanti sadhavah"In explaining the glories of the Lord, inexperienced men may composepoetry with many faults, but because it contains glorification of theLord, great personalities read it, hear it and chant it." (SB. 1.5.11)Despite its minute literary discrepancies, one must study poetry on themerit of its subject matter. According to Vaisnava philosophy, anyliterature that glorifies the Lord, whether properly written or not, isfirst class. There need be no other considerations. The poeticcompositions of Bhavabhuti, or Sri Kantha, i nclude Malati-madhava,Uttara-carita, Vira-carita and many other similar Sanskrit dramas. Thisgreat poet was born during the time of Bhojaraja as the son ofNilakantha, a brahmana. Kalidasa flourished during the time of MaharajaVikramaditya, and he became the state poet. He composed some thirty orforty Sanskrit dramas, including Kumara-sambhava, A bhijnana-sakuntalaand Megha-duta. His drama Raghu-vamsa is especially famous. We havealready described Jayadeva in Chapter Thirteen of this Adi-Iila.
                                   TEXT 103                     saisava-capalya kichu na labe amara
                      sisyera samana muni na han tomara
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am not even fit to be your disciple. Therefore kindly do not
take seriously whatever childish impudence I have shown.
                                   TEXT 104
                      aji vasa' yaha, kaji miliba abara
                     suniba tomara mukhe sastrera vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please go back home, and tomorrow we may meet again so that I may
hear discourses on the sastras from your mouth."
                                   TEXT 105
                       ei-mate nija ghare gela dui jana
                     kavi ratre kaila sarasvati-aradhana
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way both the poet and Caitanya Mahaprabhu went back to
their homes, and at night the poet worshiped mother Sarasvati.
                                   TEXT 106
                     sarasvati svapne tanre upadesa kaila                     saksat isvara kari' prabhuke janila
                                 TRANSLATION     In a dream the goddessinformed him of the Lord's position,and the
poetic champion could understand that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is theSupreme Personality of Godhead Himself.
                                   TEXT 107
                     prate asi' prabhu-pade la-ila sarana
                  prabhu krpa kaila, tanra khandila bandhana
                                 TRANSLATION     On the next morning the poet came to Lord Caitanya and surrendered
unto His lotus feet. The Lord bestowed His mercy upon him and cut offall his bondage to material attachment.
                                   PURPORT     The same process advocated by Lord Sri Krsna in His teachings of
Bhagavad-gita as it is--"Surrender unto Me in all instances"--wasadvocated by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The champion surrendered unto theLord, and the Lord favored him. One who is favored by the Lord is freedfrom material bondage, as stated in Bhagavad-gita (tyaktva deham punarjanma naiti mam etl so 'rjuna).
                                   TEXT 108                     bhagyavanta digvijayi saphala-jivana
                     vidya-bale paila mah\orabhura carana
                                 TRANSLATION     The poetic champion was certainly most fortunate. His life was
successful by dint of his vast learning and erudite scholarship, andthus he attained the shelter of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Narottama dasa Thakura has sung that the best qualification for
taking shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya is to be the mostfallen because the Lord came specifically to deliver the fallen souls.In this age there are very few scholars. Almost everyone is a fallenmeat-eater, drunkard, woman-hunter or gambler. Such persons are neverconsidered learned scholars, even if they pose as such. Because thesesocalled scholars superficially see that Caitanya Mahaprabhu associateswith the fallen souls, they think that He is meant for a lower class ofmen but that they do not need Him. Thus such scholars do not take to theKrsna consciousness movement. To be puffed-up with false learning,therefore, is a disqualification for accepting the Krsna consciousnessmovement. But here is a special example, for although the poeticchampion was a greatly learned scholar, the Lord also favored him
because of his humble submission.
                                   TEXT 109                   e-saba lila varniyachena vrndavana-dasa
                     ye kichu visesa ihan karila prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has described all these incidents
elaborately. I have only presented the specific incidents he has notdescribed.
                                   TEXT 110
                    caitanya-gosanira lila--amrtera dhara
                    sarvendriya trpta haya sravane yahara
                                 TRANSLATION     The nectarean drops of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes can
satisfy the senses of everyone who hears them.
                                   TEXT 111
                       srirupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sri Caitanya-caritam
rta, Ad i-Iila, Sixteenth Chapter, describing the pastlmes of the Lordin His childhood and youth.
                              Chapter Seventeen
            The Pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu in His Youth     This Seventeenth Chapter, as summarized by Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya, describes Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu's pastimes from His sixteenth year until the time He acceptedthe renounced order of life. Siila Vrndavana dasa Thaku ra has alreadyvividly described these pastimes in the Caitanya-bhnavata. Th erefore Krsn ad asa Kavi raja Gosvami desc ri bes th e m on ly briefly. Vividdescriptions of some portions of His pastimes are seen in this chapter,however, because Vrndavana dasa Thakura has not elaborately described
them.     In this chapter we shall find descriptions of the mangodistribution festival and Lord Caitanya's discourses with Chand Kazi.Finally, the chapter shows that the same son of mother Yasoda, LordKrsna, tasted four transcendental mellows of devotional service in Hisform of Sacinandana, the son of mother Saci. To understand SrimatiRadharani's ecstatic love for Him, Lord Sri Krsna assumed the form ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The attitude of Srimati Radharani isconsidered the superexcellent devotional mentality. As CaitanyaMahaprabhu, Krsna Himself assumed the position of Srimati Radharani totaste Her ecstatic situation. No one else could do this.     When Sri Krsna assumed the form of the four-armed Narayana, thegopis showed their respect, but they were not very much interested inHim. In the ecstatic love of the gopis, all worshipable forms but Krsnaare rejected. Among all the gopis, SrimatiRadharani has the highestecstatic love. When Krsna in His form of Narayana saw Radharani, Hecould not keep His position as Narayana, and again He assumed the formof Krsna.     The King of Vrajabhumi is Nanda Maharaja, and the same person inNavadvipa is Jagannatha Misra, the father of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Similarly, mother Yasoda is the Queen of Vrajabhumi, and in the pastimesof Lord Caitanya she is Sacimata. Therefore the son of Saciis the son ofYasoda. Sri Nityananda occupies an ecstatic position of parental love inservitude and fraternal attraction. Sri Advaita Prabhu exhibits theecstasy of both fraternity and servitude. All the Lord's otherassociates, situated in their original love, engage in the service ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.     The same Absolute Truth who enjoys as Krsna, Syamasundara, whoplays His flute and dances with the gopis, sometimes takes birth in abrahmana family and plays the part of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, acceptingthe renounced order of life. It appears contradictory that the sameKrsna accepted the ecstasy of the gopis, and of course this is verydifficult for an ordinary person to understand. But if we accept theinconceivable energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we canunderstand that everything is possible. There is no need of mundanearguments in this connection because mundane arguments are meaninglessarguments in regard to inconceivable potency.     I n the end of this Seventeenth Chapter Srila Krsnadasa KavirajaGosvami, following in the footsteps of Srila Vyasadeva, has analyzed allthe Adi-lila pastimes separately.
                                    TEXT 1                          vande svairadbhuteham tam
                           caitanyam yat-prasadatah                             yavanah sumanayante                            krsna-nama-prajalpakah
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
by whose mercy even unclean yavanas become perfectly well-bred gentlemenby chanting the holy name of the Lord. Such is the power of Lord
SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     There is a persistent misunderstanding between caste brahmanas and
advanced Vaisnavas or gosvamis because caste brahmanas, or smartas, areof the opinion that one cannot become a brahmana unless he changes hisbody. As we have discussed several times, it is to be understood that bythe supremely powerful potency of the Lord, as described by KrsnadasaKaviraja Gosvami, everything is possible. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is asfully independent as Krsna. Therefore no one can interfere with Hisactivities. If He wants, by His mercy He can convert even ayavana, anunclean follower of non-Vedic principles, into a perfectly well-behavedgentleman. This is actually happening in our propagation of the Krsnaconsciousness movement. The members of the present Krsna consciousnessmovement were not born in India, nor do they belong to the Vedicculture, but within the short time of four or five years they havebecome such wonderful devotees, simply by chanting the Hare Krsnamantra, that even in India they are well received as perfectly well-behaved Vaisnavas wherever they go.     Although less intelligent men cannot understand it, this is thespecial power of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Actually, the body of a Krsnaconscious personchanges in many ways. Even in the United States, when our devotees chanton the street, American ladies and gentlemen inquire from them whetherthey are actually Americans because no one could expect Americans tobecome such nice devotees all of a sudden. Even Christian priests aregreatly surprised that all these boys from Jewish and Christian familieshave joined this Krsna consciousness movement; before joining, theynever regarded any principles of religion seriously, but now they havebecome sincere devotees of the Lord. Everywhere people express thisastonishment, and we take great pride in the transcendental behavior ofour students. Such wonders are possible, however, only by the mercy ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. They are not ordinary or mundane.
                                    TEXT 2                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                   jayadvaitacandra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord
Nityananda Prabhu! All glories to Advaita Acarya! And all glories to thedevotees of Lord Caitanya!
                                    TEXT 3
                      kaisora-lilara sutra karila ganana
                      yauvana-lilara sutra kari anukrama
                                 TRANSLATION     I have already given a synopsis of the kaisora-lila of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Now let me enumerate His youthful pastimes in chronologicalorder.
                                    TEXT 4
                           vidya-saundarya-sadvesa-
                           sambhoga-nrtya-kirtanaih                           prema-nama-pradanais ca                            gauro divyati yau vane
                                 TRANSLATION     Exhibiting His scholarship, beauty and fine dress, Lord Caitanya
danced, chanted and distributed the holy name of the Lord to awakendormant love of Krsna. Thus Lord Sri Gaurasundara shone in His youthfulpastimes.
                                    TEXT 5
                    yauvana-pravese angera anga vibhusana
                   divya vastra, divya vesa, malya-candana
                                 TRANSLATION     As He entered His youth, the Lord decorated Himself with ornaments,
dressed Himself in fine cloth, garlanded Himself with flowers andsmeared Himself with sandalwood.
                                    TEXT 6
                    vidyara auddhatye kahon na kare ganana
                     sakala pandita jini' kare adhyapana
                                 TRANSLATION     By dint of pride in His education, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, not
caring for anyone else, defeated all kinds of learned scholars whileexecuting His studies.
                                    TEXT 7
                   v\yu-vyadhi-cchale kaila prema parakasa
                    bhakta-gana lana kaila vividha vilasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In His youth, the Lord, on the plea of disturbances of the bodily
airs, exhibited His ecstatic love of Krsna. Accompanied by Hisconfidential devotees, He enjoyed various pastimes in this way.
                                   PURPORT     According to Ayur-vedic treatment, the entire physiological system
is conducted by three elements, namely, vayu, pitta and kapha (air, bileand mucus). Secretions within the body transform into other secretionslike blood, urine and stool, but if there are disturbances in themetabolism, the secretions turn into kapha (mucus) by the influence ofthe air within the body. According to the Ayur-vedic system, when thesecretion of bile and formation of mucus disturb the air circulatingwithin the body, fifty-nine varieties of disease may occur. One of suchdiseases is craziness.     On the plea of disturbance of the bodily air and metabolism, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu acted as if crazy. Thus in His school He began toexplain the grammar of verbs through Krsna consciousness. Explainingeverything in grammar in relationship to Krsna, the Lord induced Hisstudents to refrain from worldly education, for it is better to becomeKrsna conscious and in this way attain the highest perfectional platformof education. On these grounds, Sri J iva Gosvami late r com p iled th egram m ar en titled Hari-namamrta-vyakarana. People i n gen e ralconsider such explanations crazy. Therefore the Lord's purpose in Hisattitude of craziness was to explain nothing within our experience butKrsna consciousness, for everything may be dovetailed with Krsnaconsciousness. These pastimes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu have been veryvividly described in the Caitanya-bhagavata,     Adi-khanda, Chapter Twelve.
                                    TEXT 8                      tabeta karila prabhu gayate gamana
                      isvara-purira sange tathai milana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter the Lord went to Gaya. There He met Srila Isvara Puri.                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Gaya to offer respectful oblations
to His forefathers. This process is called pinda-dana. In Vedic society,after the death of a relative, especially one's father or mother, onemust go to Gaya and there offer oblations to the lotus feet of LordVisnu. Therefore hundreds and thousands of men gather in Gaya daily tooffer such oblations, or sraddha. Following th is principle, LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu also went there to offer pinda to His dead father.Fortunately He met Isvara Purithere.
                                    TEXT 9                    oiksa-anantare haila, premera prakasa
                      dese agamana punah premera vilasa                                 TRANSLATION
     In Gaya, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was initiated by Isvara Puri, and
immediately afterwards He exhibited signs of love of Godhead. He againdisplayed such symptoms after returning home.
                                   PURPORT     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Gaya, accompanied by many of
His disciples, He became sick on the way. He had such a high fever thatHe asked His students to bring water that had washed the feet ofbrahmanas, and when they brought it the Lord drank it and was cured.Therefore everyone should respect the position of a brahmana, asindicated by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. Neither the Lord nor His followersdisplayed any disrespect to brahmanas.     The followers of the Lord must be prepared to offer brahmanas alldue respect. But preachers of Lord Caitanya's cult object if someonepresents himself as a brahmana without having the necessaryqualifications. The followers of Lord Caitanya cannot blindly acceptthat everyone born in a brahmana family is a brahmana. Therefore oneshould not indiscriminately follow the Lord's example of showing respectto brahmanas by drin king water that has washed their feet. Graduallythe brahmana families have become degraded because of the contaminationof Kali-yuga. Thus they misguide people by exploiting their sentiments.
                                   TEXT 10                    sacike prema-dana, tabe advaita-milana
                       advaita paila visvarupa-darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter the Lord delivered love of Krsna to His mother,
Sacidevi, nullifying her offense at the feet of Advaita Acarya. Thusthere was a meeting with Advaita Acarya, who later had a vision of theLord's universal form.
                                   PURPORT     One day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was sitting on the throne of Visnu
in the house of Srivasa Prabhu, and in a mood of His own, He said, "Mymother has offended the lotus feet of Advaita Acarya. Unless shenullifies this offense at the lotus feet of a Vaisnava, it will not bepossible for her to achieve love of Krsna." Hearing this, all thedevotees went to bring Advaita Acarya there. While coming to see theLord, Advaita Acarya was glorifying the characteristics of motherSacidevi, and thus upon arriving He fell down on the ground in ecstasy.Then, under the instruction of Lord Caitanya, Sacidevi took advantage ofthis situation to touch Advaita Acarya's lotus feet. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu was very much pleased by His mother's action, and He said,"Now My mother's offense at the lotus feet of Advaita Acarya has beenrectified, and she may have love of Krsna without difficulty." By thisexample Lord Caitanya taught everyone that although one may be very muchadvanced in Krsna consciousness, if one offends the lotus feet of a
Vaisnava his advancement will not bear fruit. We should therefore bevery much con scious not to offend a Vaisnava. Caitanya-caritamrta hasdescribed such an offense as follows:     yadi vaisnava-aparadha uthe hati mata     upade va chinde, tara sukhi' yaya pata     (Cc. Madhya 19.156)As a mad elephant may trample all the plants in a garden, so bycommitting one offense at the lotus feet of a Vaisnava one may spoil allthe devotional service he has accumulated in his life.     After this incident, one day Advaita Acarya Prabhu requestedCaitanya Mahaprabhu to display the universal form He had very kindlyshown Arjuna. Lord Caitanya agreed to this proposal, and Advaita Prabhuwas fortunate enough to see the universal form of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 11                    prabhura abhiseka tabe karila srivasa
                  khate vasi' prabhu kaila aisvarya prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srivasa Thakura then worshiped Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu by the
process of abhiseka. Sitting on a cot, the Lord exhibited transcendentalopulence.
                                   PURPORT     Abhiseka is a special function for the installation of the Deity.
In this ceremony the Deity is bathed with milk and water and thenworshiped and given a change ofdress. This abhiseka function was especially observed at the house ofSrivasa. All the devotees, according to their means, worshiped the Lordwith all kinds of paraphernalia, and the Lord gave benedictions to eachdevotee according to his desire.
                                   TEXT 12                      tabe nityananda-svarupera agamana
                   prabhuke miliya paila sad-bhuja-darsana
                                 TRANSLATION     After this function at the house of Srivasa Thakura, Nityananda
Prabhu appeared, and when He met with Lord Caitanya He got theopportunity to see Him in His sixarmed form.
                                   PURPORT     The form of sad-bhuja, the six-armed Lord Gaurasundara, is a
representation of three incarnations. The form of Sri Ramacandra issymbolized by a bow and arrow, the form of Lord Sri Krsna is symbolizedby a stick and flute like those generally held by a cowherd boy, andLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is symbolized by a sannyasa-danda and
kamandalu, or water pot.     Srila Nityananda Prabhu was born in the village of Ekacakra in thedistrict of Birbhum as the son of Padmavati and Hadai Pandita. In Hischildhood He played like Balarama. When He was growing up, a sannyasicame to the house of Hadai Pandita, begging to have the pandita's son ashis brahmacari assistant. Hadai Pandita immediately agreed and deliveredhis son to him, although the separation was greatly shocking, so much sothat Hadai lost his life after the separation. Nityananda Prabhutraveled on many pilgrimages with the sannyasi. It is said that for manydays He lived at Mathura with him, and at that time He heard about LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes in Navadvipa. Therefore He came down toBengal to see the Lord. When Lord Nityananda came to Navadvipa, He was aguest at the house of Nandana Acarya. Understanding that NityanandaPrabhu had arrived, Lord Caitanya sent His devotees to Him, and thusthere was a meeting between Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and NityanandaPrabhu.
                                   TEXT 13                   prathame sad-bhuja tanre dekhaila isvara
                  sankha-cakra-gada-padma-sarnga-venu-dhara
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited to Lord Nityananda
Prabhu a sixarmed form bearing a conchshell, disc, club, lotus flower,bow and flute.
                                   TEXT 14
                    tabe catur-bhuja haila, tma anga vakra
                   dui haste venu bajaya, duye sankha-cakra
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter the Lord showed Him His four-armed form, standing in a
three-curved posture. With two hands He played upon a flute, and in theother two He carried a conchshell and disc.
                                   TEXT 15
                    tabe ta' dvl-bhuja kevala vamsi-vadana
                   syama-anga pita-vastra vrajendra-aandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Finally the Lord showed Nityananda Prabhu His two-armed form of
Krsna, the son of Maharaja Nanda, simply playing on His flute, Hisbluish body dressed in yellow garments.
                                   PURPORT     Caitanya-mangala vividly elaborates upon this description.
                                   TEXT 16                    tabe nityananda-gosanira vyasa-pujana
                     nityanandavese kaila musala dharana
                                 TRANSLATION     Nityananda Prabhu then arranged to offer Vyasa-puja, or worship of
the spiritual master, to Lord Sri Gaurasundara. But Lord Caitanyacarried the plough-like weapon called musala in the ecstasy of beingNityananda Prabhu.
                                   PURPORT     By the order of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu arranged
for Vyasapuja of the Lord on the night of the full moon. He arranged forthe Vyasa-puja, or guru-puja, through the agency of Vyasadeva. SinceVyasadeva is the original guru (spiritual master) of all who follow theVedic principles, worship of the spiritual master is called Vyasa-puja.Nityananda Prabhu arranged for the Vyasa-puja, and sankirtana was goingon, but when He tried to put a garland on the shoulder of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, He saw Himself in Lord Caitanya. There is no differencebetween the spiritual positions of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu andNityananda Prabhu, or Krsna and Balarama. All of them are but differentmanifestations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. During thisspecial ceremony, all the devotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu couldunderstand that there is no difference between Lord Caitanya andNityananda Prabhu.
                                   TEXT 17                   tabe saci dekhila, rama-krsna--dui bhai
                      tabe nistarila prabhu jagai-madhai
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter mother Sacidevi saw the brothers Krsna and Balarama in
Their manifestation of Lord Caitanya and Nityananda. Then the Lorddelivered the two brothers Jagai and Madhai.
                                   PURPORT     One night Sacidevi dreamt that the Deities in her house, Krsna and
Balarama, had taken the forms of Caitanya and Nityananda and werefighting one another, as children do, to eat the naivedya, or offeringto the Deities. On the next day, by the will of Lord Caitanya, Sacideviinvited Nityananda to take prasada at her house. Thus Visvambhara (LordCaitanya) and Nityananda were eating together, and Sacidevi realizedthat They were none other than Krsna and Balarama. Seeing this, shefainted.     Jagai and Madhai were two brothers born in Navadvipa in a
respectable brahmana family who later became addicted to all kinds ofsinful activities. By the order of Lord Caitanya, both Nityananda Prabhuand Haridasa Thakura used to preach the cult of Krsna consciousness doorto door. In the course of such preaching they found Jagai and Madhai,two maddened drunken brothers, who, upon seeing them, began to chasethem. On the next day, Madhai struck Nityananda Prabhu on the head witha piece of earthen pot, thus drawing blood. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuheard of this, He immediately came to the spot, ready to punish bothbrothers, but when the all-merciful Lord Gauranga saw Jagai's repentantbehavior, He immediately embraced him. By seeing the Supreme Personalityof Godhead face to face and embracing Him, both the sinful brothers wereat once cleansed. Thus they received initiation into the chanting of theHare Krsna maha-mantra from the Lord and were delivered.
                                   TEXT 18                  tabe sapta-prahara chila prabhu bhavavese
                    yatha tatha bhakta-gana dekhila visese
                                 TRANSLATION     After this incident, the Lord remained in an ecstatic position for
twenty-one hours, and all the devotees saw His sPecific pastimes.
                                   PURPORT     In the Deity's room there must be a bed for the Deity behind the
Deity's throne. (This system should immediately be introduced in all ourcenters. It does not matter whetherthe bed is big orsmall;itshould be ofa size the Deity room can conveniently accommodate, but there must be atleast a small bed.) One day in the house of Srivasa Thakura, LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu sat down on the bed of Visnu, and all the devoteesworshiped Him with the Vedic mantras of the purusa-sukta, begi n n i n gw ith sahasra-sirsa purusah sahasraksah sahasra-pat. T h is veda-stutishould also be introduced, if possible, for installations of Deities.While bathing the Deity, all the priests and devotees must chant thisPurusa-sukta and offer the appropriate paraphernalia for worshiping theDeity, such as flowers, fruits, incense, aratrika paraphernalia,naivedya, vastra and ornaments. All the devotees worshiped Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu in this way, and the Lord remained in ecstasy for sevenpraharas, or twenty-one hours. He took this opportunity to show thedevotees that He is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,who is the sou rce of all other i ncarn ations, as co nfi rmed inBhagavad-gita (aham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate). All thedifferent forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, or visnu-tattva,emanate from the body of Lord Krsna. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu exposedall the private desires of the devotees, and thus all of them becamefully confident that Lord Caitanya is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.     Some devotees call this exhibition of ecstasy by the Lord sata-prahariya bhava, or "the ecstasy of twenty-one hours," and others callit mahabhava-prakasa or maha- prakasa. There are other descriptions ofthis sata-prahariya bhava in the Caitanya- bhavagata, Chapter Nine,which mentions that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu blessed a maidservant named
Duhkhi with the name Sukhi. He called for Sridhara, whose name wasKholaveca Sridhara, and showed him His maha-prakasa. Then He called forMurari Gupta and showed him His feature as Lord Ramacandra. He offeredHis blessings to Haridasa Thakura, and at this time He also askedAdvaita Prabhu to explain Bhagavad-gita as it is (gitara satya-patha)and showed special favor to M ukunda.
                                   TEXT 19                      varaha-avesa haila murari-bhavane
                   tnra skandhe cadi' prabh u n\cila angane
                                 TRANSLATION     One day SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu felt the ecstasy of the boar
incarnation and got up on the shoulders of Murari Gupta. Thus they bothdanced in Murari Gupta's courtyard.
                                   PURPORT     One day Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to cry out, "Sukara! Sukara!"
Thus crying out for the boar incarnation of the Lord, He assumed Hisform as the boar incarnation and got up on the shoulders of MurariGupta. He carried a smallgadu, a small waterpot with a nozzle, and thusHe symbolically picked up the earth from the depths of the ocean, forthis is the pastime of Lord Varaha.
                                   TEXT 20                   tabe suklambarera kaila tandula-bhaksana
                  `harer nama' slokera kaila artha vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     After this incident the Lord ate raw rice given by Suklambara
Brahmacari and explained very elaborately the import of the "harer nama"sloka mentioned in the Brhan-naradiya Purana:
                                   PURPORT     Suklambara Brahmacari resided in Navadvipa on the bank of the
Ganges. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was dancing in ecstasy, heapproached the Lord with a begging bag containing rice. The Lord was sopleased with His devotee that immediately He snatched the bag and beganto eat the raw rice. No one forbade Him, and thus He finished the entiresupply of rice.
                                   TEXT 21                 harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam
              kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this age of Kali there is no other means, no other means, no
other means for self-realization than chanting the holy name, chantingthe holy name, chanting the holy name of Lord Hari."
                                   TEXT 22
                      kali-kale nama-rupe krsna-avatara
                     nama haite haya sarva jagat-nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     In this age of Kali, the holy name of the Lord, the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra, is the incarnation of Lord Krsna. Simply by chanting theholy name, one associates with the Lord directly. Anyone who does thisis certainly delivered.
                                   TEXT 23
                  dardhya Iagi' `harer nama'-ukti tina-vara
                     jada loka bujnaite punah `eva'-kara
                                 TRANSLATION     This verse repeats the word eva [certainly] three times for
emphasis, and it also three times repeats harer nama [the holy name ofthe Lord] just to make common people understand.
                                   PURPORT     To emphasize something to an ordinary person, one may repeat it
three times, just as one might say, "You must do this! You must do this!You must do this!" Thus the Brhan-naradi va Purana repeatedly emphasizesthe chanting of the holy name so that people may take itseriously andthus free themselves from the clutches of m\ya It is our practicalexperience in the Krsna consciousness movement all over the world thatmany millions of people are factually coming to the spiritual stage oflife simply by chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra regularly, accordingto the prescribed principles. Therefore our request to all our studentsis that they daily chant at least sixteen rounds of this harer namamaha-mantra offenselessly, following the regulative principles. Thustheir success will be assured without a doubt.
                                   TEXT 24                   `ke vala'-sabde punarapi niscaya-karana
                      jnana-yoga-tapa-karma-adi nivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     The use of the word kevala [only] prohibits all other processes,
such as cultivation of knowledge, practice of mystic yoga, andperformance of austerities and fruitive activities.
                                   PURPORT     Our Krsna consciousness movement stresses the chanting of the Hare
Krsna mantra only, whereas those who do not know the secret of successfor this age of Kali unnecessarily indulge in the cultivation ofknowledge, the practice of mystic yoga or the performance of fruitiveactivities or useless austerities. They are simply wasting their timeand misleading their followers. When we point this out very plainly toan audience, members of opposing groups become angry at us. Butaccording to the injunctions of the sastras, we cannot make compromiseswith these socalledjnanis, yogis, karmis and tapasvis. When they saythey are as good as we are, we must say that only we are good and thatthey are not good. This is not our obstinacy; it is the injunction ofthe sastras. We must not deviate from the injunctions of the sastras.This is confirmed in the next verse of Caitanya-carltamrta.
                                   TEXT 25                     anyatha ye mane, tara nahika nistara
                     nahi, nahi, nahi--e tina `eva'-kara
                                 TRANSLATION     This verse clearly states that anyone who accepts any other path
cannot be delivered. This is the reason for the triple repetition"nothing else, nothing else, nothing else," which emphasizes the realprocess of self-realization.
                                   TEXT 26
                     trna haite nica hana sada labe nama
                       \oani nirabhimani, anye dibemana
                                 TRANSLATION     To chant the holy name always, one should be humbler than the grass
in the street and devoid of all desire for personal honor, but oneshould offer others all respectful obeisances.
                                   TEXT 27
                     taru-sama sahisnuta vaisnava karibe
                    bhartsana-tadane kake kichu na balibe
                                 TRANSLATION     A devotee engaged in chanting the holy name of the Lord should
practice forbearance like that of a tree. Even if rebuked or chastised,he should not say anything to others to retaliate.
                                   TEXT 28
                      katileha taru yena kichu na bolaya
                      sukaiya mare, tabu jala na magaya
                                 TRANSLATION     For even if one cuts a tree, it never protests, nor even if it is
drying up and dying does it ask anyone for water.
                                   PURPORT     This practice of forbearance (trnad apisunicena) is very difficult,
but when one actually engages in chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, thequality of forbearance automatically develops. A person advanced inspiritual consciousness through the chant-ing of the Hare Krsna mantra need not practice to develop it separately,for a devotee develops all good qualities simply by chanting the HareKrsna mantra regularly.
                                   TEXT 29                    ei-mata vaisnava kare kichu na magiba
                    ayacita-vrtti, kimva saka-phala khaiba
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus a Vaisnava should not ask anything from anyone else. If
someone gives him something without being asked, he should accept it,but if nothing comes, a Vaisnava should be satisfied to eat whatevervegetables and fruits are easily available.
                                   TEXT 30
                   sada nama la-iba, yatha-Iabhete santosa
                      eita acara kare bhakti-dharma-posa
                                 TRANSLATION     One should strictly follow the principle of always chanting the
holy name, and one should be satisfied with whatever he gets easily.Such devotional behavior solidly maintains one's devotional service.
                                   TEXT 31
                    trnad api sunicena taror iva sahisnuna
                   amanina manadena kirtani yah sada harih                                 TRANSLATION
     "One who thinks himself lower than the grass, who is more tolerant
than a tree, and who does not expect personal honor yet is alwaysprepared to give all respect to others, can very easily always chant theholy name of the Lord."
                                   PURPORT     The grass is specifically mentioned in this verse because everyone
tramples upon it yet the grass never protests. This example indicatesthat a spiritual master or leader should not be proud of his position;being always humbler than an ordinary common man, he should go onpreaching the cult of Caitanya Mahaprabhu by chanting the Hare Krsnamantra.
                                   TEXT 32                  urdh va-bahu kari' kahon, suna, sarva-loka
                   nama-sutre ganthi' para kanthe ei sloka
                                 TRANSLATION     Raising my hands, I declare, "Everyone please hear me! String this
verse on the thread of the holy name and wear it on your neck forcontinuous remembrance."
                                   PURPORT     When chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, in the beginning one may
commit many offenses, which are called namabhasa and nama-aparadha. I nthis stage there is no possibility of achieving perfect love of Krsna bychanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Therefore one must chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra according tothe principles of the above verse, trnad api sunicena taror ivasahisnuna. One should note in this connection that chanting involves theactivities of the upper and lower lips as well as the tongue. All threemust be engaged in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. The words "HareKrsna" should be very distinctly pronounced and heard. Sometimes onemechanically produces a hissing sound instead of chanting with theproper pronunciation with the help of the lips and tongue. Chanting isvery simple, but one must practice it seriously. Therefore the author ofCaitanya- caritamrta, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, advises everyone tokeep this verse always strung about his neck.
                                   TEXT 33                     prabhu-ajn\ya kara ei sloka acarana
                      avasya paibe tabe sri-krsna-carana
                                 TRANSLATION     One must strictly follow the principles given by Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu in this verse. If one simply follows in the footsteps of LordCaitanya and the Gosvamis, certainly he will achieve the ultimate goalof life, the lotus feet of Sri Krsna.
                                   TEXT 34
                    tabe prabh u srivasera grhe niran tara
                    ratre sankirtana kaila eka samvatsara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu regularly led congregational chanting of
the Hare Krsna maha-mantra in the house of Srivasa Thakura every nightfor one full year.
                                   TEXT 35
                     kapta diya kirtana kare parama avese
                     psandi hasite aise, na paya pravese
                                 TRANSLATION     This ecstatic chanting was performed with the doors closed so that
nonbelievers who came to make fun could not gain entrance.
                                   PURPORT     Chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra is open to everyone, but
sometimes nonbelievers come to disturb the ceremony of chanting. It isindicated herein that under such circumstances the temple doors shouldbe closed. Only bona fide chanters should be admitted; others shouldnot. But when there is large-scale congregational chanting of the HareKrsna maha-mantra, we keep our temples for everyone to join, and by thegrace of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu this policy has given good results.
                                   TEXT 36                 kirtana suni' bahire tara jvali' pudi' mare
                    srivasere duhkha dite nana yukti kare
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the nonbelievers almost burned to ashes and died in envy. To
retaliate, they planned various ways to give trouble to Srivasa Thakura.
                                  TEXT 37-38
                    eka-dina vipra, nama--`gopala capala'
                    pasandi-pradhana sei durmukha, vacala                      bha vani-pujara saba samagri lana
                     ratre srivasera dvare sthana lepana
                                 TRANSLATION     One night while kirtana was going on inside Srivasa Thakura's
house, a brahmana named Gopala Capala, the chief of the nonbelievers,who was talkative and very rough in his speech, placed all theparaphernalia for worshiping the goddess Durga outside Srivasa Thakura'sdoor.
                                   PURPORT     This brahmana, Gopala Capala, wanted to defame Srivasa Thakura by
proving that he was actually a sakta, or a worshiper of Bhavani, thegoddess Durga, but was externally posing as a Vaisnava. In Bengal thereis perpetual competition between the devotees of goddess Kali and thedevotees of Lord Krsna. Generally Bengalis, especially those who aremeat-eaters and drun kards, are very much attached to worshiping thegoddesses Durga, Kali, Sitala and Candi. Such devotees, who are known assaktas, or worshipers of the sakti-tattva, are always envious ofVaisnavas. Since Srivasa Thakura was a well-known and respected Vaisnavain Navadvipa, Gopala Capala wanted to reduce his prestige by bringinghim down to the platform of the saktas. Therefore outside SrivasaThakura's door he placed various paraphernalia for worshiping Bhavani,the wife of Lord Siva, such as a red flower, a plantain leaf, a pot ofwine, and reddish sandalwood paste. In the morning, when Srivasa Thakurasaw all this paraphernalia in front of his door, he called for therespectable gentlemen of the neighborhood and showed them that at nighthe was worshiping Bhavani. Very much sorry,these gentlemen called for asweeper to cleanse the place and purify it by sprinkling water and cowdung there. This incident concerning Gopala Capala is not mentioned inthe Caitanya-bhagavata.
                                   TEXT 39                      kalara pata upare thuila oda-phula
                 haridra, sindura ara rakta-candana, tandula
                                 TRANSLATION     On the upper Portion of a plantain leaf he placed such
paraphernalia for worship as oda-phula, turmeric, vermillion, redsandalwood and rice.
                                   TEXT 40
                   madya-bhanda-pase dhari' nija-ghare gela
                     pratah-kale srivasa taha ta' dekhila
                                 TRANSLATION     He placed a pot of wine beside all this, and in the morning when
Srivasa Thakura opened his door he saw this paraphernalia.
                                   TEXT 41
                      bada bada loka saba anila bolaiya
                      sabare kahe srivasa hasiya hasiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Srivasa Thakura called for all the respectable gentlemen of the
neighborhood and smilingly addressed them as follows.
                                   TEXT 42
                     nitya ratre kari ami bhavani-pujana
                     amara mahima dekha, brahmana-sajjana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Gentlemen, every night I worship the goddess Bhavani. Since the
paraphernalia for the worship is present here, now all you respectablebrahmanas and members of the higher castes can understand my position."
                                   PURPORT     According to the Vedic system there are four castes--the brahmanas,
katrtyas, vaisyas and sudras--and below them are the pancamas, who arelower than the sudras. The higher castes--the brahmanas, the ksatriyasand even the vaisyas--were known as brahmana-sajjana. The brahmanasespecially were known as sajiana, or respectable gentlemen who guidedthe entire society. If there were disputes in the village, people wouldapproach these respectable brhmanas to settle them. Now it is verydifficult to find such brahmanas and sajjanas, and thus every villageand town is so disrupted that there is no peace and happiness anywhere.To revive a fully cultured civilization, the scientific division ofsociety into brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras must be introducedall over the world. Unless some people are trained as brahmanas, therecannot be peace in human society.
                                   TEXT 43                      tabe saba sista-loka kare hahakara
                     aiche karma hetha kaija kon duracara
                                 TRANSLATION     Then all the assembled gentlemen exclaimed: "What is this? What is
this? Who has performed such mischievous activities? Who is that sinfulman?"                                   TEXT 44
                        hadike aniya saba dura karaila
                     jala-gomaya oi ya sei sthana lepaila
                                 TRANSLATION     They called for a sweeper [hadi], who threw all the items of
worship far away and cleansed the place by mopping it with a mixture ofwater and cow dung.
                                   PURPORT     The men in Vedic society who engage in public sanitary activities
like picking up stool and sweeping the street are called hadis.Sometimes they are untouchable,especially when engaged in their profession, yet such hadis also havethe right to become devotees. This is established by SriBhagavad-gitawhere the Lord declares:     mam hi partha vyapasritya     ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayah     striyo vaisyas tatha sudras     te 'pi yanti param gatim"O son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lowerbirth--women, vaisyas [ merchants], as well as sudras [workers]--canapproach the supreme destination." (Bg. 9.32)     There are many untouchables of the lower caste in India, butaccording to Vaisnava principles everyone is welcome to accept thisKrsna consciousness movement on the spiritual platform of life and thusbe freed from trouble. Equality or fraternity on the material platformis impossible.     When Lord Caitanya declares, trnadapi sunicena taror iva sahisnuna,He indicates that one must be above the material conception of life.When one thoroughly understands that he is not the material body but aspiritual soul, he is even humbler than a man of the lower castes, forhe is spiritually elevated. Such humility, in which one thinks himselflower than the grass, is called sunicatva, and being more tolerant thana tree is called sahisnutva, forbearance. Being situated in devotionalservice, not caring for the material conception of life, is calledamanitva, indifference to material respect; yet a devotee thus situatedis called manada, for he is prepared to give honor to others withouthesitation.     Mahatma Gandhi started the harijana movement to purify theuntouchables, but he was a failure because he thought that one couldbecome aharijana, a personal associate of the Lord, through some kind ofmaterial adjustment. That is not possible. Unless one fully realizesthat he is not the body but a spiritual soul, there is no question ofhis becoming a harijana. Those who do not follow in the footsteps ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His disciplic succession cannot distinguishbetween matter and spirit, and therefore all their ideas are but amixed-up hodgepodge of problems. They are virtually lost in thebewildering network of Mayadevi.
                                   TEXT 45                      tina dina rahi' sei gopala-capala
                   sarvange ha-ila kustha, vahe rakta-dhara
                                 TRANSLATION     After three days, leprosy attacked Gopala Capala, and blood oozed
from sores all over his body.
                                   TEXT 46
                     sarvanga bedila kite, kte nirantara
                     asahya vedana, duhkhe jvalaye antara
                                 TRANSLATION     Incessantly covered with germs and insects biting him all over his
body, Gopala Capala felt unbearable pain. His entire body burned indistress.
                                   TEXT 47
                    ganga-ghte vrksa-tale rahe ta' vasiya
                     eka dina bale kichu prabhuke dekhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Since leprosy is an infectious disease, Gopala Capala left the
village to sit down on the bank of the Ganges underneath a tree. Oneday, however, he saw Caitanya Mahaprabhu passing by and spoke to Him asfollows.
                                   TEXT 48
                      grama-sambandhe ami tomara matula
                 bhnina, mui kustha-vyadhite hanachi vyakula
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear nephew, I am Your maternal uncle in our village
relationship. Please see how greatly this attack of leprosy hasafflicted me.
                                   TEXT 49
                      loka saba uddharite tomara avatara
                     muni bada dukhi, more karaha uddhara
                                 TRANSLATION     "As an incarnation of God, You are delivering so many fallen souls.
I am also a greatly unhappy fallen soul. Kindly deliver me by Yourmercy."
                                   PURPORT     It appears that although Gopala Capala was sinful, talkative and
insulting, he nevertheless had the qualification of simplicity. Thus hebelieved Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be the incarnation of the SupremePersonality of Godhead who had come to deliver all fallen souls, and heappealed for his own deliverance, seeking the mercy of the Lord. He didnot know, however, that the deliverance of the fallen does not consistof curing their bodily diseases, although it is also a fact that when aman is delivered from the material clutches his material bodily diseasesare automatically cured. Gopala Capala simply wanted to be deliveredfrom the bodily sufferings of leprosy, but Sri Caitanya, althoughaccepting his sincere appeal, wanted to inform him of the real cause ofsuffering.
                                   TEXT 50                  eta suni' mahaprabhura ha-ila kruddha mana
                     krodhavese bale tare tarjana-vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared greatly angry, and in
that angry mood He spoke some words chastising him.
                                   TEXT 51
                  are papi, bhakta-dvesi, tore na uddharimu
                      kojijanma ei mate kidna khaoyaimu
                                 TRANSLATION     "O sinful person, envious of pure devotees, I shall not deliver
you! Rather, I shall have you bitten by these germs for many millions ofyears.
                                   PURPORT     We should note herein that all our sufferings in this material
world, especially from disease, are due to our past sinful activities.And of all sinful activities, actions directed against a pure devoteeout of sheer envy are considered extremely severe. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu wanted Gopala Capala to understand the cause of hissuffering. Any person who disturbs a pure devotee engaged inbroadcasting the holy name of the Lord is certainly punished like GopalaCapala. This is the instruction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. As we shallsee, one who offends a pure devoteecan never satisfy Caitanya Mahaprabhu unless and until he sincerelyregrets his offense and thus rectifies it.                                   TEXT 52
                      srivase karaili tui bhavani-pujana
                      kotijanma habe tora raurave patana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have made Srivasa Thakura appear to have been worshiping the
goddess Bhavani. Simply for this offense, you will have to fall downinto hellish life for ten million births.
                                   PURPORT     There are many tantric followers who practice the black art of
worshiping the goddess Bhavani in a crematorium, wishing to eat meat anddrink wine. Such fools also consider this bhavani-puja as good asworship of Lord Krsna in devotional service. Such abominable tantricactivities as performed by so-called svamis and yogis are hereincondemned, however, by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He declares that suchbhavani-puja for drinking wine and eating meat quickly plunges one intohellish life. The method of worship itself is already hellish, and itsresults must also be hellish and nothing more.     Many rascals say that whatever way one accepts, one will ultimatelyreach Brahman. Yet we can see from this verse how such persons reachBrahman. Brahman spreads everywhere, but appreciation of Brahman indifferent objects leads to different results. I n Bhagavad-gita the Lordsays, ye yatha mam prapadyante tams tathaiva bhajnmy aham: "I rewardeveryone according to his surrender unto Me." (Bg. 4.11) Mayavadiscertainly realize Brahman in certain aspects, but realization of Brahmanin the aspects of wine, women and meat is not the same realization ofBrahman that devotees achieve by chanting, dancing and eating prasada.Mayavadi philosophers, being educated in paltry knowledge, think allsorts of Brahman realization one and the same and do not considervarieties. But although Krsna is everywhere, by His inconceivablepotency He is simultaneously not everywhere. Thus the Brahmanrealization of the tantric cult is not the same Brahman realization asthat of pure devotees. Unless one reaches the highest point of Brahmanrealization, Krsna consciousness, he is punishable. All people exceptKrsna conscious devotees are to some proportion psandis, or demons, andthus they are punishable by the Supreme Lord, the Personality ofGodhead, as stated below.
                                   TEXT 53                       psandi samharite mora ei avatara
                    psandi samhari' bhakti karimu pracara
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have appeared in this incarnation to kill the demons [pasandis]
and, after killing them, to preach the cult of devotional service."
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya's mission is the same as that of Lord Krsna, as
stated in Bhagavad- gita.-     yada yada hi dharmasya     glanir bhavati bharata     abhyutthanam adharmasya     tadatmanam srjamy aham     paritranaya sadhunam     vinasna ca duskrtam     dharma-samsthapanarthna     sambhavami yuge yuge"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, Odescendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at thattime I descend Myself. In order to deliver the pious and to annihilatethe miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, Iadvent Myself millennium after millennium" (Bg. 4.8)     As explained here, the real purpose of an incarnation of Godhead isto kill the atheists and maintain the devotees. He does not say,like somany rascal incarnations, that both atheists and devotees are on thesame platform. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu or Lord Sri Krsna, the realPersonality of Godhead, does not advocate such an idea. Atheists arepunishable, whereas devotees are to be protected. To maintain thisprinciple is the mission of all avataras, or incarnations. One musttherefore identify an incarnation by His activities, not by popularvotes or mental concoctions. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave protection todevotees and killed many demons in the course of His preaching work. Hespecifically mentioned that the Mayavadi philosophers are the greatestdemons. Therefore He warned all others not to hear the M ayavada p hiloso p h y. M\yavadi-bhasya sunile haya sarva-aasa.- si m pl y byhearing the Mayavada interpretation of the sastras, one is doomed (Cc.Madhya 6.169).
                                   TEXT 54                   eta bali' gela prabhu karite ganga-snana
                     sei p\oi duhkha bhoge, na yna parana
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, the Lord left to take His bath in the Ganges,
and that sinful man did not give up his life but continued to suffer.
                                   PURPORT     It appears that an offender to a Vaisnava continues to suffer and
does not give up his life. We have actually seen that a great vaisnava-aparadhi is continuously suffering so much that it is difficult for himto move, and yet he does not die.
                                  TEXT 55-56                  sannyasa kariya yabe prabhu nilacale gela
                      tatha haite yabe kuliya grame aila                     tabe sei papi prabhura la-ila sarana
                      hita upadesa kaila ha-i va karuna
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya, after accepting the renounced order of life,
went to J agannatha Puri and then came back to the village of Kuliya,upon His return that sinful man took shelter at the Lord's lotus feet.The Lord, being merciful to him, gave him instructions for his benefit.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, in his Anubhasya, has
given the following note in connection with the village Kuliya. Thevillage originally known as Kuliya has developed into what is now thecity of Navadvipa. In various authorized books I i k e Bhakti-ratnakara,Caitanya-carita-mahakavya, Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka a n d Caitanya-bhagavata it is mentioned that the village Kuliya is on the western sideof the Ganges. Even now, within the area known as Koladvipa, there is aplace known as kuliara ganja and a place called kuliara daha, bothwithin the jurisdiction of the present municipality of Navadvipa. In thetime of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu there were two villages named Kuliyaand Pahadapura on the western side of the Ganges, both belonging to thejurisdiction of Bahiradvipa. At that time the place on the eastern sideof the Ganges now known as Antardvipa was known as Navadvipa. At SriMayapur that place is still known as Dvipera Matha. There is anotherplace of the name Kuliya near Kancadapada, but it is not the same Kuliyamentioned here. It cannot be accepted as aparadha-bhanjanera pta, or theplace where the offense was excused, for that occurred in the above-mentioned Kuliya on the western side of the Ganges. For business reasonsmany envious persons oppose excavation of the real place, and sometimesthey advertise unauthorized places as the authorized one.
                                  TEXT 57-58                    srivasa panditera sthane ache aparadha
                    tatha yaha, tenho yadi karena prasada
                       tabe tora habe ei papa-vimocana
                      yadi punah aiche nahi kara acarana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have committed an offense at the lotus feet of Srivasa
Thakura," the Lord said. "First you must go there and beg for his mercy,and then if he gives you his blessings and you do not commit such sinsagain, you will be freed from these reactions."
                                   TEXT 59
                     tabe vipra la-ila asi srivasa sarana
                      tanhara krpaya haila papa-vimocana                                 TRANSLATION
     Then the brahmana, Gopala Capala, went to Srivasa Thakura and took
shelter of his lotus feet, and by Srivasa Thakura's mercy he was freedfrom all sinful reactions.
                                   TEXT 60
                      ara eka vipra aila kirtana dekhite
                     dvare kapta,--na paila bhitare yaite
                                 TRANSLATION     Another brahmana also came to see the kirtana performance, but the
door was closed, and he could not enter the hall.
                                   TEXT 61
                   phiri' gela viora ghare mane duhkha pana
                   ara dina prabhuke kahe gang\ya Ina pana
                                 TRANSLATION     He returned home with an unhappy mind, but on the next day he met
Lord Caitanya on the bank of the Ganges and spoke to Him.
                                   TEXT 62
                   sapiba tomare muni, panachi mano-duhkha
                    paita chindiya sape pracanda durmukha
                                 TRANSLATION     That brahmana was expert in talking harshly and cursing others.
Thus he broke his sacred thread and declared, "I shall now curse You,for Your behavior has greatly aggrieved me."
                                   TEXT 63
                      samsara-sukha tomara ha-uka vinasa
                   sapa suni' prabhura citte ha-ila ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The brahmana cursed the Lord, "You shall be bereft of all material
happiness!', When the Lord heard this, He felt great jubilation withinHimself.
                                   TEXT 64                   prabhura sapa-varta yei sune sraddhavan
                    brahma-sapa haite tara haya paritrana
                                 TRANSLATION     Any faithful person who hears of this brahmana's cursing Lord
Caitanya is delivered from all brahminical curses.
                                   PURPORT     One should know with firm conviction that the Lord, being
transcendental, is never subject to any curse or benediction. Onlyordinary living entities are subjected to curses and the punishments ofYamaraja. As the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuis beyond such punishments and benedictions.When one understands thisfact with faith and love, he personally becomes free from all cursesuttered by brahmanas or anyone else. This incident is not mentioned inthe Caitanya-bhagavata.
                                   TEXT 65                     mukunda-dattere kaila danda-parasada
                     khandila tahara cittera saba avasada
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu blessed Mukunda Datta with punishment
and in that way vanquished all his mental depression.
                                   PURPORT     Mukunda Datta was once forbidden to enter the association of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu because of his mixing with the Mayavadiimpersonalists. When Lord Caitanya manifested His maha-prakasa, Hecalled all the devotees one after another and blessed them, whileMukunda Datta stood outside the door. The devotees informed the Lordthat Mukunda Datta was waiting outside, but the Lord replied, "I shallnot soon be pleased with Mukunda Datta, for he explains devotionalservice among devotees, but then he goes to Mayavadis to hear from themthe Yoga- vasistha-ramayana, which is full of Mayavada philosophy. Forthis I am greatly displeased with him." Hearing the Lord speak in thatway, Mukunda Datta, standing outside, was exceedingly glad that the Lordwould at some time be pleased with him, although He was not pleased atthat moment. But when the Lord understood that Mukunda Datta was goingto give up the association of the Mayavadis for good, He was pleased,and He at once called to see Mu kunda. Thus He delivered him from theassociation of the Mayavadis and gave him the association of puredevotees
                                   TEXT 66                   acarya-gosanire prabhu kare guru-bhakti
                     tahate acarya bada haya duhkha-mati                                 TRANSLATION
     Lord Caitanya respected Advaita Acarya as His spiritual master, but
Advaita Acarya Prabhu was greatly aggrieved by such behavior.
                                   TEXT 67
                  bhangi kari' jnana-marga karila vyakhyana
                    krodhavese prabhu tare kaija avajnana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus He whimsically began to explain the path of philosophical
speculation, and the Lord, in His anger, seemingly disrespected Him.
                                   TEXT 68
                      tabe acarya-gosanira ananda ha-ila
                     lajjita ha-iya prabhu prasada karila
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time Advaita Acarya was greatly pleased. The Lord
understood this, and He was somewhat ashamed, but He offered AdvaitaAcarya His benediction.
                                   PURPORT     Advaita Acarya was a disciple of Madhavendra Puri, Isvara Puri's
spiritual master. Therefore Isvara Puri, the spiritual master of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, was Advaita Acarya's Godbrother. As such, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu treated Advaita Acarya as His spiritual master, butSri Advaita Acarya did not like this behavior of Lord Caitanya, for Hewanted to be treated as His eternal servant. Advaita Prabhu's aspirationwas to be a servant of the Lord, not His spiritual master. He thereforedevised a plan to antagonize the Lord. He began to explain the path ofphilosophical speculation in the midst of some unfortunate Mayavadis,and when Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard about this, He immediately wentthere and in a very angry mood began to beat Advaita Acarya. At thattime, Advaita Acarya, greatly pleased, began to dance, saying, "Just seehow My desire has now been fulfilled! Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu used totreat Me honorably for so long, but now He is treating Me neglectfully.This is My reward. His affection for Me is so great that He wanted tosave Me from the hands of the Mayavadis." Hearing this statement, LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu was somewhat ashamed, but He was very much pleasedwith Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 69                   murari-gupta-mukhe suni' rama-guna-grama
                     lalte likhila tanra `ramadasa' nama                                 TRANSLATION
     Murari Gupta was a great devotee of Lord Ramacandra. When Lord
Caitanya heard Lord Ramacandra's glories from his mouth, He immediatelywrote on his forehead "ramadasa" [the eternal servant of LordRamacandra].
                                   TEXT 70
                    sridharera lauha-patre kaila jala-pana
                     samasta bhaktere dila ista vara-dna
                                 TRANSLATION     Once Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the house of Sridhara after
kirtana and drank water from his damaged iron pot. Then He bestowed Hisbenediction upon all the devotees according to their desires.
                                   PURPORT     After the mass nagara-sankirtana in protest against the magistrate
Chand Kazi, the Kazi was converted to a devotee. Then Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu returned with His sankirtana party to the house of Sridhara,and Chand Kazi followed Him. All the devotees rested there for some timeand drank water from Sridhara's damaged iron pot. The Lord accepted thewater because the pot belonged to a devotee. Chand Kazi then returnedhome. The place where they rested is still situated on the northeasternside of Mayapur, and it is known as kirtana-visrama-sthana, "the restingplace of the kirtana party."
                                   TEXT 71                      haridasa thakurere karlla prasada
                   acarya-sthane matara khandaila aparadha
                                 TRANSLATION     After this incident the Lord blessed Haridasa Thakura and
vanquished the offense of His mother at the home of Advaita Acarya.
                                   PURPORT     On the maha-prakasa day, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced Haridasa
Thakura and informed him that he was none other than an incarnation ofPrahlada Maharaja. When Visvarupa took sannysa, Sacimata thought thatAdvaita Acarya had persuaded Him to do so. Therefore she accused Him ofthis, which was an offense at Advaita Acarya's lotus feet. Later LordCaitanya induced His mother to take the dust of Advaita Acarya's lotusfeet, and thus her vaisnava-aparadha was nullified.
                                   TEXT 72                    bhakta-gane prabhu nama-mahima kahila
                     suniya paduya tahan artha-vada kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Once the Lord explained the glories of the holy name to the
devotees, but some ordinary students who heard Him fashioned their owninterpretation.
                                   TEXT 73
                 name stuti-vada suni' prabhura haila duhkha
                   sabare nisedhila,--ihara na dekhma mukha
                                 TRANSLATION     When a student interpreted the glories of the holy name as a prayer
of exaggeration, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, greatly unhappy, immediatelywarned everyone not to see the students's face henceforward.
                                   PURPORT     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu explained the glories of the
transcendental potency of the Lord's holy name, the Hare Krsna mah-mantra, one unfortunate student said thatsuch glorification of the holyname was an exaggeration in the sastras to induce people to take to it.In this way the student interpreted the glories of the holy name. Thisis called artha-vada, and it is one of the ten offenses at the lotusfeet of the holy name of the Lord. There are many kinds of offenses, butthe offense known as nama-aparadha, an offense at the lotus feet of theholy name, is extremely dangerous. The Lord therefore warned everyonenot to see the face of the offender. He immediately took a bath in theGanges with all His clothes to teach everyone to avoid such a nama-aparadha. The holy name is identical with the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. There is no difference between the person God and His holyname. This is the absolute position of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Therefore one who distinguishes between the Lord and His nameis called a pasandi, or nonbeliever, an atheistic demon. Glorificationof the holy name is glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.One should never attempt to distinguish between the Lord and His name orinterpret the glories of the holy name as mere exaggerations.
                                   TEXT 74                     sagane sacele giya kaila ganga-snana
                    bhaktira mahima tahan karila vyakhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     Without even changing His garments, Lord Caitanya, with His
companions, took bath in the Ganges. There He explained the glories ofdevotional service.                                   TEXT 75
                   jnana-karma-yoga-dharme nahe krsna vasa
                    krsna-vasa-hetu eka--prema-bhakti-rasa
                                 TRANSLATION     By following the Paths of speculative philosophical knowledge,
fruitive activity or mystic yoga to control the senses, one cannotsatisfy Krsna, the Supreme Lord. Unalloyed devotional love for Krsna isthe only cause for the Lord's satisfaction.
                                   TEXT 76
               na sadhayati mam yogo na sankhyam dharma uddhava
              na svadhyayas tapas tyago yatha bhaktir mamoijita
                                 TRANSLATION     [The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, said: ] "My dear
Uddhava, neither through astanga-yoga [the mystic yoga system to controlthe senses], nor through impersonal monism or an analytical study of theAbsolute Truth, nor through study of the Vedas, nor through practice ofausterities, nor through charity, nor through acceptance of sannyasa canone satisfy Me as much as one can by developing unalloyed devotionalservice unto Me."
                                   PURPORT     Karmis, jnanis, yogis, tapasvis and students of Vedic literature
who do not have Krsna consciousness simply beat around the bush and donot get any final profit because they have no clear knowledge of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Nor do they have faith in approachingHim by discharging devotional service, although everywhere such serviceis repeatedly emphasized, as it is in this verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam(11.14.20). Bhagavad-gita also d ec I a res, bhaktya mam abhijanatiyavan yas casmi tattvatah.- "One can understand the Supreme Personalityas He is only by devotional service." (Bg. 18.55) If one wants tounderstand the Supreme Personality factually, he must take to the pathof devotional service and not waste time in profitless philosophicalspeculation, fruitive activity, mystic yogic practiceor severe austerity and penance. Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita (12.5) theLord confirms kleso 'dhikataras tesam avyaktasakta-cetasam: " For thosewhose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal feature of theSupreme, advancement is very troublesome." People who are attached tothe impersonal feature of the Lord are obliged to take great trouble,yet nevertheless they cannot understand the Absolute T ru th. As ex plai ned in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11), brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan itisabdyate. Unless one understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, theoriginal source of both Brahman and Paramatma, one is still in darknessabout the AbsoluteTruth.                                   TEXT 77
                     murarike kahe tumi krsna vasa kaila
                      suniya murari sloka kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya then praised Murari Gupta, saying, "You have
satisfied Lord Krsna." Hearing this, Murari Gupta quoted a verse fromSrimad-Bhagavatam:
                                   TEXT 78
               kvaham daridrah p\oiyan kva krsnah sri-niketanah
              brahma-bandhur iti smaham bahubhyam parirambhitah
                                 TRANSLATION     "Since I am but a poor, sinful brahma-bandhu, not brahminically
qualified although born in a brahmana family, and You, Lord Krsna, arethe shelter of the
goddess of fortune, it is simply wonderful my dear Lord Krsna, that You
have embraced me with Your arms."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.81.16) spoken by Sudama
Vipra in the presence of Lord Sri Krsna. This and the previous versequoted from Srimad- Bhagavatam clearly indicate that although Krsna isso great that it is not possible for anyone to satisfy Him, He exhibitsHis greatness by being personally satisfied even with one who isdisqualified from so many angles of vision. Sudama Vipra was born in afamily of brahmanas, and he was a learned scholar and a class friend ofKrsna's, yet he considered himself unfit to be strictly called abrahmana. He called h imself a brahma-bandhu, mean ing "one born i n abrahmana fam ily but not brahminically qualified." Because of His greatrespect for brahmanas, however, Krsna embraced Sudama Vipra, although hewas not a regular brahmana but a brahma-bandhu, or friend of a brahmanafamily. Murari Gupta could not be called even a brahma-bandhu because hewas born of a vaidya family and according to the social structure wastherefore considered a sudra. But Krsna bestowed special mercy uponMurari Gupta because he was a beloved devotee of the Lord, as stated bySri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The purport of Sri Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura's elaborate discussion of this subject is that no qualificationin this material world can satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Krsna, yet everything becomes successful simply through development ofdevotional service to the Lord.     The members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousnesscannot even call themselves brahma-bandhus Therefore our only means forsatisfying Krsna is to pursue the injunctions of Lord SriCaitanyaMahaprabhu, who says:     yare dekha, tare kaha `krsna'-upadesa     amara ajnaya guru hana tara' ei desa
"Whomever you meet, instruct him on the teachings of Krsna. In this way,on My order, become a spiritual master and deliver the people of thiscountry." (Cc. Madhya the people of the world about Bhagavad-gita As ItIs. This will make us qualified to satisfy the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna.
                                   TEXT 79                    eka-dina prabhu saba bhakta-gana lana
                   sankirtana kari' vaise srama-yukta hana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day the Lord performed sankirtana with all His devotees, and
when they were greatly fatigued they sat down.
                                   TEXT 80
                      eka amra-bija prabhu angane ropila
                    tat-ksane janmila vrksa badite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord then sowed a mango seed in the yard, and immediately the
seed fructified into a tree and began to grow.
                                   TEXT 81
                     dekhite dekhite vrksa ha-ila phalita
                      pakila aneka phala, sabei vismita
                                 TRANSLATION     As people looked on, the tree became fully grown, with fruits that
fully ripened. Thus everyone was struck with wonder.
                                   TEXT 82
                     sata dui phala prabhu sighra padaila
                     praksalana kari' krsne bhoga Iagaila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord immediately picked about two hundred fruits, and after
washing them He offered them to Krsna to eat.
                                   TEXT 83
                    rakta-pita-varna,--nahi asthi-valkala                    eka janera peta bhare khaile eka phala
                                 TRANSLATION     The fruits were all red and yellow, with no seed inside and no skin
outside, and eating one fruit would immediately fill a man's belly.
                                   PURPORT     In India a mango is considered best when it is red and yellow, its
seed is very small, its skin is very thin, and it is so palatable thatif a person eats one fruit he will be satisfied. The mango is consideredthe king of all fruits.
                                   TEXT 84                    dekhiya santusta haila sacira nandana
                     sabake khaoyala age kariya bhaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the quality of the mangos, the Lord was greatly satisfied,
and thus after eating first, He fed all the other devotees.
                                   TEXT 85
                     asthi-valkala nahi,--amrta-rasamaya
                      eka phala khaile rase udara puraya
                                 TRANSLATION     The fruits had no seeds or skins. They were full of nectarean juice
and were so sweet that a man would be fully satisfied by eating onlyone.
                                   TEXT 86
                      ei-mata pratidina phale bara masa
                   vaisnava khayena phala,--prabhura ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, fruits grew on the tree every day throughout the
twelve months of the year, and the Vaisnavas used to eat them, to theLord's great satisfaction.
                                   TEXT 87
                       ei saba lila kare sacira nandana
                     anya loka nahi jane vina bhakta-gana                                 TRANSLATION
     These are confidential Pastimes of the son of Saci. Other than
devotees, no one knows of this incident.
                                   PURPORT     Nondevotees cannot believe this incident, yet the place where the
tree grew still exists in Mayapur. It is called Amra-ghatta or Amra-ghata.
                                   TEXT 88                      ei mata bara-masa kirtana-avasane
                     amra-mahotsava prabhu kare dine dine
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way the Lord Performed sankirtana every day, and at the end
of sankirtana there was a mango-eating festival every day for twelvemonths.
                                   PURPORT     On principle, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu would distribute prasda at
the end of kirtana performances. Similarly, the members of the Krsnaconsciousness movement must distribute some prasda to the audience afterperforming kirtana.
                                   TEXT 89                    kirtana karite prabhu aila megha-gana
                     apana-icchaya kaila megha ni varana
                                 TRANSLATION     Once while Caitanya Mahaprabhu was performing kirtana, clouds
assembled in the sky, and the Lord, by His own will, immediately stoppedthem from pouring rain.
                                   PURPORT     In this connection Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura says that once when
Lord Caitanya was performing sankirtana a short way from the village,some clouds appeared overhead. By the supreme will of the Lord, theclouds were asked to disperse, and they did. Because of this incident,that place is still known as meghera cara. Since the course of theGanges has now changed, the village of the name Belapukhuriya, whichwasformerly situated in a different place, called Taranavasa, has nowbecome known as the meghera cara. The Madhya-khanda of the Caitanya-mangala also relates that once at the end of the day, when eveningclouds assembled overhead and thundered threateningly, all the Vaisnavaswere very much afraid. But the Lord took His karatalas in His hands andpersonally began chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, looking up towards thesky as if to direct the demigods in the higher planets. Thus all the
assembled clouds dispersed, and as the sky became clear, with the moonrising, the Lord began dancing very happily with His jubilant andsatisfied devotees.
                                   TEXT 90                     eka-dina prabhu srivasere ajna dila
                 `brhat sahasra-nama' pada, sunite mana haila
                                 TRANSLATION     One day the Lord ordered Srivasa Thakura to read the Brhat-sahasra-
nama [the thousand names of Lord Visnu], for He wanted to hear them atthat time.
                                   TEXT 91
                       padite aila stave nrsimhera nama
                    suniya avista halla prabhu gauradhama
                                 TRANSLATION     As he read the thousand names of the Lord, in due course the holy
name of Lord Nrsimha appeared. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard the holyname of Lord Nrsimha, He became fully absorbed in thought.
                                   PURPORT     The Caitanyamangala, Madhya-khanda, describes this incident as
follows. Srivasa Pandita was performing the sraddha ceremony of hisfather, and, as is customary, he was hearing the thousand names of LordVisnu. At that time Gaurahari ( Lord Caitanya) appeared on the scene,and He also began to hear the thousand names of Visnu with fullsatisfaction. When He thus heard the holy name of Lord Nrsimha, LordCaitanya became absorbed in thought, and He became angry like NrsimhaPrabhu in His angry mood. His eyes became red, His hairs stood on end,all the parts of His body trembled, and He made a thundering sound. Allof a sudden He took up a club, and people became greatly afraid,thinking, "We do not know what kind of offense we have now committed!"But then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu adjusted His thoughts and sat down onHis seat.
                                   TEXT 92                     nrsimha-avese prabhu hate gada lana
                      pasandi marite y\ya nagare dhaiya
                                 TRANSLATION     In the mood of Lord Nrsimhadeva, Lord Caitanya ran through the city
streets, club in hand, ready to kill all the atheists.                                   TEXT 93
                      nrsimha-avesa dekhi' maha-tejomaya
                   patha chadi' bhage loka pana bada bhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing Him appearing very fierce in the ecstasy of Lord Nrsimha,
people ran from the street and fled here and there, afraid of His anger.
                                   TEXT 94
                   loka-bhaya dekhi' prabhura bahya ha-ila
                      srivasa-grhete giya gada phelaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the People so afraid, the Lord came to His external senses
and thus returned to the house of Srivasa Thakura and threw away theclub.
                                   TEXT 95
                     srivase kahena prabhu kariya visada
                     loka bhaya paya,--mora haya aparadha
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord became morose and said to Srivasa Thakura, "When I adopted
the mood of Lord Nrsimhadeva, people were greatly afraid. Therefore Istopped, since causing fear among people is an offense."
                                   TEXT 96
                     srivasa ba1ena,--ye tomara nama laya
                      tara koti aparadha saba haya ksaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Srivasa Thakura replied, "Anyone who takes Your holy name
vanquishes ten million of his offenses immediately.
                                   TEXT 97
                     aparadha nahi, kaile lokera nistara
                    ye toma' dekhila, tara chujila samsara
                                 TRANSLATION     "There was no offense in Your appearing as Nrsimhadeva. Rather, any
man who saw You in that mood was immediately liberated from the bondageof material existence."
                                   TEXT 98
                       eta bali' srivasa karila se vana
                     tusta hana prabhu aila apana-bhavana
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Srivasa Thakura worshiped the Lord, who was then
greatly satisfied and returned to His own home.
                                   TEXT 99
                     ara dina siva-bhakta siva-guna gaya
                     prabhura angane nace, damaru bajaya
                                 TRANSLATION     On another day a great devotee of Lord Siva, chanting of Lord
Siva's qualities, came to Lord Caitanya's house, where he began dancingin the courtyard and playing his damaru [a musical instrument].
                                   TEXT 100
                      mahesa-avesa haila sacira nandana
                   tara skandhe cadi nrtya kaila bahu-ksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Lord Caitanya adopting the mood of Lord Siva, got on the man's
shoulders, and thus they danced together for a long time.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu adopted the mood of Lord Siva, for He is
Siva also. According to the philosophy of acintya-bhedabheda-tattva,Lord Siva is not different from Lord Visnu, but still Lord Siva is notLord Visnu, just as yogurt is nothing but milk and yet is not milknevertheless. One cannot get the benefit of milk by drinking yogurt.Similarly, one cannot get salvation by worshiping Lord Siva. If onewants salvation, one must worship Lord Visnu. This is confirmed inBhagavad-gita (9.4). Mat-sthani sarva-bhutani na caham tesv avasthitah:everyth ing is resting on the Lord, for everything is His potentialenergy, yet He is not everywhere. Lord Caitanya's adopting the mood ofLord Siva is not extraordinary, but one should not therefore think thatby worshiping Lord Siva he is worshiping Lord Caitanya. That would be amistake.                                   TEXT 101
                      ara dina eka bhiksuka aila magite
                   prabhura nrtya dekhi nrtya Iagila karite
                                 TRANSLATION     On another day a mendicant came to beg alms from the Lord's house,
but when he saw the Lord dancing, he also began to dance.
                                   TEXT 102
                    prabhu-sange nrtya kare parama ullase
                   prabhu tare prema dila, prema-rase bhase
                                 TRANSLATION     He danced with the Lord because he was favored by love of Krsna.
Thus he flowed in the mellowness of love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 103
                     ara dine jyotisa sarva jna eka aila
                   tahare sammana kari' prabhu prasna kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     On another day an astrologer came who was supposed to know
everything--past, present and future. Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhureceived him with all honor and put this question before him.
                                   PURPORT     Brahmanas generally used to become astrologers, Ayur-vedic
physicians, teachers and priests. Although highly learned andrespectable, such brahmanas went from door to door to distribute theirknowledge. A brahmana would first go to a householder's home to giveinformation about the functions to be performed on a particulartithi, ordate, but if there were sickness in the family, the family members wouldconsult the brahmana as a physician, and the brahmana would giveinstruction and some medicine. Often, since the brahmanas were expert inastrology, people would also be greatly inquisitive about their past,present and future.     Although the brahmana appeared at Lord Caitanya's house as abeggar, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu received him with great respect becausehe was a qualified brahmana who knew the astrological science perfectly.Although brahmanas would go door to door just like beggars, they werehonored as very respectable guests. This was the system in Hindu societyfive hundred years ago, during the time of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thissystem was current even one hundred years ago; even fifty or sixty yearsago, when we were children, such brahmanas would visit householders likehumble beggars, and people would derive great benefit from the mercy ofsuch brahmanas. The greatest benefit was that a householder could save a
great deal of money from being spent on doctor bills because thebrahmanas, aside from explaining the past, present and future, couldordinarily cure all kinds of diseases simply by giving instructions andsome medicine. Thus no one was bereft of the benefit of a first-classphysician, astrologer and priest. The important members of IS KCONshould give careful attention to our Dallas school, where children arebeing taught Sanskrit and English to become perfect brahmanas. If theyare actually trained as perfect brahmanas, they can save society fromrogues and ruffians; indeed, people can live happily under theprotection of qualified brahmanas. Therefore Bhagavad- gita (4.1 3)gives special stress to the division of society (catur-varnyam mayasrstam- guna-karma-vibhagasah). U nfortu nately some people are n owclaim i ng to be brahmanas simply by birthright, with no qualifications.Therefore the entire society is in chaos.
                                   TEXT 104                    ke achilun ami purva janme kaha gani'
                  ganite lagila sarva-jna prabhu-vakya suni'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please tell Me who I was in My previous birth," the Lord said.
"Please tell Me by your astrological computations." Hearing the words ofthe Lord, the astrologer immediately began to calculate.
                                   PURPORT     Through astrology one can know past, present and future. Modern
western astronomers have no knowledge of the past or future, nor canthey perfectly say anything about the present. Herein we find, however,that after hearing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's order, the astrologerimmediately began his calculations. This was not a facade; he actuallyknew how to ascertain one's past life through astrology. A stillexisting treatise called the Bhrgu-samhita describes a system by whichanyone can immediately getinformation about what he was in the past andwhat he is going to be in the future. The brahmanas who went door todoor as if beggars had perfect command of such vast knowledge. Thus thehighest knowledge was easily available even to the poorest man insociety. The poorest man could inquire from an astrologer about hispast, present and future, with no need for business agreements orexorbitant payments. The brahmana would give him all the benefit of hisknowledge without asking remuneration, and the poor man, in return,would offer a handful of rice, or anything he had in his possession, tosatisfy the brahmana. In a perfect human society, perfect knowledge inany science--medical, astrological, ecclesiastical and so on--isavailable even to the poorest man, with no anxiety over payment. In thepresent day, however, no one can get justice, medical treatment,astrological help or ecclesiastical enlightenment without money, andsince people are generally poor, they are bereft of the benefits of allthese great sciences.
                                   TEXT 105                gani' dhyane dekhe sarva jna,--maha jyotirmaya
                  ananta vaikuntha-brahmanda--sabara asraya
                                 TRANSLATION     Through calculation and meditation, the all-knowing astrologer saw
the greatly effulgent body of the Lord, which is the resting place ofall the unlimited Vaikuntha Planets.
                                   PURPORT     Here we get some information of the Vaikuntha world or spiritual
world. Vaikuntha means "without anxiety." In the material world,everyone is full of anxiety, but another world, where there is noanxiety, is described in Bhagavad-gita:     paras tasmat tu bhavo nyo     'vyakto 'vyaktat sanatanah     yah sa sarvesu bhutesu     nasyatsu na vinasyati"Yet there is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental tothis manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is neverannihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains asit is." (Bg. 8.20)     As there are many planets within the material world, there are manymillions of planets, called Vaikunthalokas, in the spiritual world. Allthese Vaikunthalokas, or superior planets, rest on the effulgence of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. As stated i n th e Brahma-samhita (yasyaprabha prabhavato jagadanda-koti), the Brahman effulgence emanating fromthe body of the Supreme Lord creates innumerable planets in both thespiritual and material worlds; thus these planets are creations of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. The astrologer saw Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu to be the very same Personality of Godhead. We can justimagine how learned he was, yet he was traveling door to door, just likean ordinary beggar, for the highest benefit of human society.
                                   TEXT 106                  parama-tattva, para-brahma, parama-isvara
               dekhi' prabhura murti sarva-jna ha-ila phanphara
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be the same Absolute Truth, the
Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead, the astrologer wasconfused.
                                   PURPORT     Herein it is clearly indicated that the Absolute Truth, the Supreme
Brahman, is, in the ultimate issue, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Therefore a person is the begi n n i ng of all th ings. As confi rmed in Bhagavad-gita ( 10.8), mattah sarvam pravartate: everything beginsfrom the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord is the supremeliving entity. Therefore whatever exists, whether matter or spirit, is
all but an emanation from the Supreme Person or supreme life. The modernscientists' theory that life begins from matter is nonsense. Both matterand life begin from life. Unfortunately the scientists do not know thisscientific fact; they are drifting in the darkness of their so-calledknowledge.
                                   TEXT 107                      balite na pare kichu, mauna ha-ila
                   prabhu punah prasna kaila, kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Struck with wonder, the astrologer remained silent, unable to
speak. But when the Lord again put the question before him, he repliedas follows.
                                   TEXT 108
                     purva janme chila tumi jagat-asraya
                     paripurna bhagavan--sarvaisvaryamaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, in Your previous birth You were the shelter of all
creation, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full of all opulences.
                                   TEXT 109
                    purve yaiche chila tumi ebeha se-rupa
                    durvijneya nityananda--tomara svaruoa
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are now the same Personality of Godhead that You were in Your
previous birth. Your identity is inconceivable eternal happiness.',
                                   PURPORT     By the power of astrological science one can even ascertain the
position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everything is to beidentified by its symptoms. The Supreme Personality of Godhead isidentified by the symptoms mentioned in the sastras. It is not thatanyone and everyone can become God without proof from sastras.
                                   TEXT 110                  prabhu hasi' kaila,--tumi kichu na janila
                       purve ami achilan jatite goyala
                                 TRANSLATION     When the astrologer was speaking so highly of Him, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu stopped him and began to smile. "My dear sir," He said, "Ithink you do not know very clearly what I was, for I know that in MyPrevious birth I was a cowherd boy.
                                   TEXT 111
                    gopa-grhe janma chila, gabhira rakhala
                    sei punye hallan ebe brahmana-chaoyala
                                 TRANSLATION     "In My last birth I was born in the family of cowherd men, and I
gave protection to the calves and cows. Because of such piousactivities, I have now become the son of a brahmana."
                                   PURPORT     The words of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the greatest authority,
herein clearly indicate that one becomes pious simply by keeping cowsand protecting them. Unfortunately, people have become such rascals thatthey do not even care about the words of an authority. People generallyconsider cowherd men lowly members of society, but herein CaitanyaMahaprabhu confirms that they are so pious that in their next lives theyare going to be brahmanas. The caste system has a specific purpose. Ifthis scientific system is followed, human society will get the greatestbenefit. Heeding this instruction by the Lord, people should serve cowsand calves and in return get ample quantities of milk. There is no lossin serving the cows and calves, but modern human society has become sodegraded that instead of giving protection to the cows and serving them,people are killing them. How can they expect peace and prosperity inhuman society while committing such sinful activities? It is impossible.
                                   TEXT 112                   sarva jna kahe ami taha dhyane dekhilan
                   tahate aisvarya dekhi' phanphara ha-ilan
                                 TRANSLATION     The astrologer said, "What I saw in meditation was full of
opulence, and therefore I was confused.
                                   PURPORT     It appears that the astrologer not only was a knower of past,
present and future through astrological calculation, but was a greatmeditator as well. Therefore he was a great devotee and could see LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu to be the same personality as Krsna. He was puzzled,however, about whether Krsna and SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu were actuallythe same person.                                   TEXT 113
                        sei-rupe ei-rupe dekhi ekakara
                     kabhu bheda dekhi, ei mayaya tomara
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am certain that Your form and the form I saw in my meditation
are one and the same. If I see any difference, this is an act of Yourillusory energy."
                                   PURPORT     Sri-krsna-caitanya radha-krsna nahe anya: in the vision of a
perfect devotee, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is a combination of Radha andKrsna. One who sees Lord Caitanya to be different from Krsna is underthe illusory energy of the Lord. It appears that the astrologer wasalready an advanced devotee, and when he came into the presence of theSupreme Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he became perfectly self-realizedand could see that the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna and SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu are one and the same Supreme Person.
                                   TEXT 114                    ye hao, se hao tumi, tomake namaskara
                    prabhu tare prema diya kaila puraskara
                                 TRANSLATION     The all-knowing astrologer concluded: "Whatever You may be or
whoever You may be, I offer my respecfful obeiances unto You!" By Hiscauseless mercy, the Lord then gave him love of Godhead, thus rewardinghim for his service.
                                   PURPORT     The incident of Lord Caitanya's meeting the all-knowing astrologer
is not mentioned in the Caitanya-bhagavata, but we cannot therefore saythat it did not take place. On the contrary, we must accept thestatement of Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami that whatever the Caitanya-bhagavata did not mention he has especially mentioned in Caitanya-caritamrta.
                                   TEXT 115                     eka dina prabhu visnu-mandape vasiya
                    `madhu ana', `madhu ana' balena dakiya
                                 TRANSLATION     One day the Lord sat down in the corridor of a Visnu temple and
began calling very loudly, "Bring some honey! Bring some honey!"                                   TEXT 116
                   nityananda-gosani prabhura avesa janila
                    ganga jala-patra ani' sammukhe dharila
                                 TRANSLATION     Nityananda Prabhu Gosani, understanding the ecstatic mood of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, brought a pot of Ganges water as a token and put itbefore Him.
                                   TEXT 117
                      jala pana kariya nace hana vihvala
                      yamunakarsana-Iila dekhaye sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     After drinking the water, Lord Caitanya became so ecstatic that He
began to dance. Thus everyone saw the pastime of attracting the RiverYamuna.
                                   PURPORT     Yamunakarsana-lila is the pastime of attracting Yamuna. One day,
Sri Baladeva wanted the Yamuna River to come before Him,and when theRiver Yamuna refused, He took His plow, wanting to dig a canal so thatYamuna would be obliged to come there. Since Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu isthe original form of Baladeva, in His ecstasy He asked everyone to bringhoney. In this way, all the devotees standing there saw theyamunakarsana-lila. In this Iila, Baladeva was accompanied by His girlfriends. After drinking a honey beverage called Varuni, He wanted tojump in the Yamuna and swim with the girls. It is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.65.25-30,33) that Lord Baladeva asked Yamuna to comenear, and when the river disobeyed the     , order of the Lord, He became angry and thus wanted to snatch hernear to Him with His plow. Yamuna, however, very much afraid of LordBalarama's anger, immediately came and surrendered unto Him, praying tothe Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and admitting her fault.She was then excused. This is the sum and substance of theyamunakarsana-iila. The incident is also described in the prayer ofJayadeva Gosvami concerning the ten incarnations:     vahasi vapusi visade vasanam jaladabham-     halahati-bhiti-milita-yamunabham     kesava dhrta-haladhara-rupa jaya jagadisa hare
                                   TEXT 118                      mada-matta-gati balade va-anukara
                     acarya sekhara tanre dekhe ramakara
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord, in His ecstasy of Baladeva, was moving as if
intoxicated by the beverage, Advaita Acarya, the chief of the acaryas[acarya sekhara], saw Him in the form of Balarama.
                                   TEXT 119
                     vanamali acarya dekhe sonara Iangala
                     sabe mili' nrtya kare avese vihvala
                                 TRANSLATION     Vanamali Acarya saw a golden plow in the hand of Balarama, and the
devotees all assembled together and danced, overwhelmed by ecstasy.
                                   TEXT 120
                      ei-mata nrtya ha-ila cari prahara
                 sandhyaya ganga-snana karl' sabe geia ghara
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way they danced continuously for twelve hours, and in the
evening they all took bath in the Ganges and then returned to theirhomes.
                                   TEXT 121
                     nagarlya loke prabhu yabe ajna dila
                     ghare ghare sankirtana karite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord ordered all the citizens of Navadvipa to chant the Hare
Krsna mantra, and in each and every home they began performingsankirtana regularly.
                                   TEXT 122
                     `haraye namah, krsna yadavaya namah
                    gopala go vinda rama sri-madhusudana '
                                 TRANSLATION     [All the devotees sang this Popular song along with the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra.] "Haraye namah, krsna yadavaya namah/ gopala govinda ramasri-madhusudana."
                                   TEXT 123                    mrdanga-karatala sankirtana-mahadhvani
                  `hari' `hari'--dh vani vina anya nahi suni
                                 TRANSLATION     When the sankirtana movement thus started, no one in Navadvipa
could hear any other sound than the words "Hari! Hari!" and the beatingof the mrdanga and clashing of hand bells.
                                   PURPORT     The International Society for Krishna Consciousness now has its
world center in Navadvipa, Mayapur. The managers of this center shouldsee that twenty-four hours a day there is chanting of the holy names ofthe Hare Krsna maha-mantra, with the addition of haraye namah, krsnayadav\ya namah, for this song was a favorite of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.But all such sankirtana must be preceded by the chanting of the holynames of the five tattvas--sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu nityananda sri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda. We a re al ready accustomed to c ha n t th ese two mantras--sri-krsna-caitanya prabhunitynanda sri-advaita gadadhara srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda and HareKrsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare. Now, after these, the other two lines--na mely, harayenamah, krsna yadavaya namah/ gopala govinda rama sri- madhusudana--should be added, especially in Mayapur. Chanting of these six linesshould go on so perfectly well that no one there hears any othervibration than the chanting of the holy names of the Lord. That willmake the center spiritually allperfect.
                                   TEXT 124                    sunijya ye kruddha haila sakala yavana
                      kaji-pase asi' sabe kaila nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing the resounding vibration of the Hare Krsna mantra, the
local Mohammedans, greatly angry, submitted a complaint to the Kazi.
                                   PURPORT     The phaujadara, or city magistrate, was called the kali (Kazi). The
jamidaras (Zamindars), or landholders (mandaleras), levied taxes on theland, but keeping law and order and punishing criminals wasthe dutyentrusted to the Kazi. Both the Kazi and the landholders were under thecontrol of the governor of Bengal, which at that time was known as Suba-bangala. The districts of Nadia, Islampura and Bagoyana were all underthe Zamindar named Hari Hoda or his descendant known as Krsnadasa Hoda.It is said that Chand Kazi was the spiritual master of Nawab HussainShah. According to one opinion his name was Maulana Sirajuddina, andaccording to another his name was Habibara Rahamana. Descendants ofChand Kazi are still living in the vicinity of Mayapur. People still gosee the tomb of Chand Kazi, which is underneath a campaka tree and isknown as Chand Kazi's samadhi.                                   TEXT 125
                   krodhe sandhya-kale kaji eka ghare aila
                     mrdanga bhangiya loke kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Chand Kazi angrily came to one home in the evening, and when he saw
kirtana going on, he broke a mrdanga and spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 126
                      eta-kala keha nahi kaila hmduyani
                     ebe ye udyama calao kara bala jani'
                                 TRANSLATION     "For so long you did not follow the regulative principles of the
Hindu religion, but now you are following them with great enthusiasm.May I know by whose strength you are doing so?
                                   PURPORT     It appears that from the aggression of Vaktiyara Khiliji in Bengal
until the time of Chand Kazi, Hindus, or the followers of the Vedicprinciples, were greatly suppressed. Like the Hindus in present-dayPakistan, practically no one could execute the Hindu religiousprinciples freely. Chand Kazi referred to this condition of Hindusociety. Formerly the Hindus had not been straightforward in executingtheir Hindu principles, but now they were freely chanting the Hare Krsnamah-mantra. Therefore it must have been by the strength of someone elsethat they were so daring.     Actually, that was the fact. Although the members of the so-calledHindu society had followed the social customs and formulas, they hadpractically forgotten to execute their religious principles strictly.But with the presence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu they actually beganfollowing the regulative principles according to His order. That orderis still existing, and anywhere and everywhere, in all parts of theworld, one can execute it. That order is to become a spiritual masterunder the direction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by following theregulative principles, chanting daily at least sixteen rounds of theHare Krsna maha-mantra, and preaching the cult of Krsna consciousnessall over the world. If we adhere to the order of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, we shall get spiritual strength without a doubt, and weshall be free to preach this cult of the Hare Krsna movement and not behampered by anyone.
                                   TEXT 127                     keha kirtana na karma sakala nagare
                      aji mi ksama kari' yaitechon ghare                                 TRANSLATION
     "No one should perform sankirtana on the streets of the city. Today
I am excusing the offense and returning home.
                                   PURPORT     Such orders stopping sankirtana in the streets of the world's great
cities have been imposed upon members of the Hare Krsna movement. Wehave hundreds of centers all over the world, and we have beenspecifically persecuted in Australia. In most cities of the westernworld we have been arrested many times by the police, but we arenevertheless executing the order of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu by chantingon the streets of all the important cities, like New York, London,Chicago, Sydney, Melbourne, Paris and Hamburg. We must remember thatsuch incidents took place in the past,five hundred years ago, and thefact that they are still going on indicates that our sankirtana movementis really authorized, for if sankirtana were an insignificant materialaffair, demons would not object to it. The demons of the time tried toobstruct the sankirtana movement started by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Similar demons are trying to obstruct the sankirtana movement we areexecuting all over the world, and this proves that our sankirtanamovement is still pure and genuine, following in the footsteps of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 128                      ara yadi kirtana karite laga paimu
                     sarvasva dandiya tara jatl ye la-imu
                                 TRANSLATION     "The next time I see someone performing such sankirtana, certainly
I shall chastise him by not only confiscating all his property but alsoconverting him into a Mohammedan."
                                   PURPORT     To convert a Hindu into a Mohammedan was an easy affair in those
days. If a Mohammedan simply sprinkled water on the body of a Hindu, itwas supposed that the Hindu had already become a Mohammedan. During thetransition of the British in Bangladesh during the last Hindu-Muslimriots, many Hindus were converted into Mohammedans by having cows' fleshforcibly pushed into their mouths. Hindu society was so rigid at thetime of Lord Caitanya that if a Hindu were converted into a Mohammedan,there was no chance of his being reformed. In this way the Mohammedanpopulation in India increased. None of the Mohammedans came fromoutside; social customs somehow or other forced Hindus to becomeMohammedans, with no chance of returning to Hindu society. EmperorAuranzeb also inaugurated a tax that Hindus had to pay because of theirbeing Hindus. Thus all the poor Hindus of the lower class voluntarilybecame Mohammedans to avoid the tax. In this way the Mohammedanpopulation in India increased. Chand Kazi threatened to convert thepeople into Mohammedans by the simple process of sprinkling water on
their bodies.
                                   TEXT 129                     eta bali' kaji gela,--nagariya loka
                    prabhu-sthane nivedila pana bada soka
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, the Kazi returned home, and the devotees,
greatly shocked that they were forbidden to chant Hare Krsna, submittedtheir grief to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 130
                    prabhu ajna dila--yaha karaha kirtana
                       muni samharimu aji sakala yavana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitafnya ordered, "Go Peform sankirtana! Today I shall kill
all the Mohammedans!"
                                   PURPORT     Gandhi is known for having started the movement of nonviolent civil
disobedience in India, but about five hundred years before him,SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu started His movement of nonviolent civildisobedience to the order of Chand Kazi. It is not necessary to commitviolence to stop the opposition from hindering a movement, for one cankill their demoniac behavior with reason and argument. Following in thefootsteps of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, whenever there are obstacles theHare Krsna movement should kill the opposition with reason and argumentand thus stop their demoniac behavior. If we became violent in everycase, it would be difficult for us to manage our affairs. We shouldtherefore follow in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, whodisobeyed the order of Chand Kazi but subdued him with reason andargument.
                                   TEXT 131                     ghare giya saba loka karaye kirtana
                 kalira bhaye svacchanda nahe, camakita mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Returning home, all the citizens began performing sankirtana, but
because of the order of the Kazi, they were not carefree but always fullof anxiety.
                                   TEXT 132                   ta-sabhara antare bhaya prabhu mane jani
                     kahite lagila loke sighra daki' ani'
                                 TRANSLATION     Understanding the anxiety within the people's minds, the Lord
called them together and spoke to them as follows.
                                   TEXT 133
                       nagare nagare aji karimu kirtana
                    sandhya-kale kara sabhe nagara-mandana
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the evening I shall perform sankirtana in each and every town.
Therefore you should all decorate the city in the evening.
                                   PURPORT     At that time, Navadvipa was composed of nine small cities, so the
words nagare nagare are significant. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted toperform kirtana in each of these neighboring towns. He ordered the citydecorated for the function.
                                   TEXT 134                    sandhyate deuti sabe jvala ghare ghare
                     dekha, kona kaji asi' more mana kare
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the evening, burn torchlights in every home. I shall give
protection to everyone. Let us see what kind of Kazi comes to stop ourkirtana."
                                   TEXT 135
                    eta kahi' sandhya-kale cale gauraraya
                    kirtanera kaila prabhu tlna sampradaya
                                 TRANSLATION     In the evening Lord Gaurasundara went out and formed three parties
to perform kirtana.
                                   PURPORT     This is a scheme for performing kirtana in a procession. During Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's time, one party was composed of twenty-one men:four people playing mrdangas, one leading the chanting, and sixteenothers striking karatalas, responding to the leading chanter. If many
men join the sankirtana movement, they may follow in the footsteps ofSriCaitanya Mahaprabhu and form different parties according to the timeand the number of men available.
                                   TEXT 136                      age sampradaye nrtya kare haridasa
                   madhye nace acarya-gosani parama ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In the front pady danced Thakura Haridasa, and in the middle Party
danced Advaita Acarya with great Jubilition.
                                   TEXT 137
                   pache sampradaye nrtya kare gauracandra
                   tanra sange naci' bule prabhu nityananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Gaurasundara Himself danced in the rear party, and Sri
Nityananda Prabhu moved with Lord Caitanya's dancing.
                                   TEXT 138
                    vrndavana-dasa iha `caitanya-mangale'
                   vistari' varniyachena, prabhu-krpa-bale
                                 TRANSLATION     By the grace of the Lord, Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has
elaborately described this incident in his Caitanya-mangala.
                                   TEXT 139
                    ei mata kirtana kari' nagare bhramila
                   bhramite bhramite sabhe kaji-dvare gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Peforming kirtana in this way, circumambulating through every nook
and corner of the city, they finilly reached the door of the Kazi.
                                   TEXT 140
                     tarja-garja kare loka, kare kolahala
                    gauracandra-bale loka prasraya-pagala                                 TRANSLATION
     Murmuring in anger and making a roaring sound, the people, under
the protection of Lord Caitanya, became mad through such indulgence.
                                   PURPORT     The Kazi had issued an order not to perform kirtana, congregational
chanting of the holy name of the Lord. But when this was brought up toLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He ordered civil disobedience to the Kazi'sorder. Lord Caitanya and all His devotees, naturally enthusiasticalthough agitated, must have made a great noise with their loud cries.
                                   TEXT 141                    kirtanera dh vanite kaji lukaila ghare
                     tarjana garjana suni' na haya bahire
                                 TRANSLATION     The loud sound of the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra certainly
made the Kazi very much afraid, and he hid himself within his room.Hearing the people thus protesting, murmuring in great anger, the Kaziwould not come out of his home.
                                   PURPORT     The Kazi's order not to perform sankirtana could stand only as long
as there was no civil disobedience. Under the leadership of the SupremeLord, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the chanters, increasing in number,disobeyed the order of the Kazi. Thousands assembled together and formedparties, chanting the Hare Krsna maha- mantra and making a tumultuoussound of protest. Thus the Kazi was very much afraid, as naturally oneshould be under such circumstances.     In the present day also, people all over the world may jointogether in the Krsna consciousness movement and protest against thepresent degraded governments of the world's godless societies, which arebased on all kinds of sinful activities. The Srimad-Bhagavatam statesthat in the age of Kali, thieves, rogues and fourth-class people whohave neither education nor culture capture the seats of governments toexploit the citizens. This is a symptom of Kali-yuga that has alreadyappeared. People cannot feel secure about their lives and property, yetthe so-called governments continue, and its ministers get fat salaries,although they are unable to do anything good for society. The onlyremedy for such conditions is to enhance the sankirtana movement underthe banner of Krsna consciousness and protest against the sinfulactivities of all the world's governments.     The Krsna consciousness movement is not a sentimental religiousmovement; it is a movement for the reformation of all the anomalies ofhuman society. If people take to it seriously, discharging this dutyscientifically, as ordered by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, the world will seepeace and prosperity instead of being confused and hopeless underuseless governments. There are always rogues and thieves in humansociety, and as soon as a weak government is unable to execute itsduties, these rogues and thieves come out to do their business. Thus the
entire society becomes a hell unfit for gentlemen to live in. There isan immediate need for a good government--a government by the people,with Krsna consciousness. Unless the masses of people become Krsnaconscious, they cannot be good men. The Krsna consciousness movementthat Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu started by chanting the Hare Krsna maha--mantra still has its potency. Therefore people should understand itseriously and scientifically and spread it all over the world.     The sankirtana movement started by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu isdescribed in the Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya-khanda, Twenty-th irdChapter, beginning with verse ing Lord Caitanya's chanting, all thedevotees reproduced the same sound He chanted. In this way the Lordproceeded, leading the entire party on the strand roads by the bank ofthe Ganges. When the Lord came to His own ghata, or bathing place, Hedanced more and more. Then He proceeded to Madhai'sghata. In this waySri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Lord, who was known as Visvambhara,danced all over the banks of the Ganges.Then He proceeded to Barakona-ghata,the Nagariya-ghata, and, traveling through Ganganagara, reachedSimuliya, a quarter at one end of the town. All these places surroundSri Mayapur. After reaching Simuliya, the Lord proceeded towards theKazi's house, and in this way He reached the door of Chand Kazi.
                                   TEXT 142                  uddhata loka bhange kajira ghara-puspavana
                     vistari' varnila iha dasa-vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     Naturally some of the people who were very much agitated began to
retaliate the Kazi's actions by wrecking his house and flower garden.Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has elaborately described this incident.
                                   TEXT 143
                     tabe mahaprabhu tara dvarete vasila
                     bhavya-loka pathaiya kajire bolaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu reached the Kazi's house,
He sat down by the doorway and sent some respectable persons to call forthe Kazi.
                                   TEXT 144
                     dura ha-ite aila kaji matha noyaiya
                     kajire vasaila prabhu sammana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Kazi came, his head bowed down, the Lord gave him proper
respect and a seat.
                                   PURPORT     Some of the men in SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu's civil disobedience
movement were agitated because they could not control their minds. Butthe Lord was thoroughly peaceful, sober and unagitated. Therefore whenthe Kazi came down to see Him, the Lord offered him proper respect and aseat because he was a respectable government officer. Thus the Lordtaught us by His personal behavior. In pushing on our sankirtanamovement of Krsna consciousness, we might have to face difficult days,but we should always follow in the footsteps of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuand do the needful according to the time and circumstances.
                                   TEXT 145                 prabhu balena,--ami tomara ailama abhyagata
                     ami dekhi' lukaila,--e-dharma kemata
                                 TRANSLATION     In a friendly way, the Lord said, "Sir, I have come to your house
as your guest, but upon seeing Me you hid yourself in your room. Whatkind of etiquette is this?"
                                   TEXT 146
                      kaji kahe-tumi aisa kruddha ha-iya
                      toma santa karaite rahinu lukaiya
                                 TRANSLATION     The Kazi replied: "You have come to my house in a very angry mood.
To pacify You, I did not come before You immediately but kept myselfhidden.
                                   TEXT 147
                      ebe tumi santo halle, asi, mililan
                    bhagya mora,--toma hena atithi pallan
                                 TRANSLATION     "Now that You have become pacified, I have come to You. It is my
good fortune to receive a guest like Your Honor.
                                   TEXT 148
                 grama-sambandhe `cakravarti' haya mora caca
               deha-sambandhe haite haya grama-sambandha sanca                                 TRANSLATION
     "In our villige relationship, Nilambara Cakravarti Thakura was my
uncle. Such a relationship is stronger than a bodily relationship.
                                   PURPORT     In India, even in the interior villages, all the Hindu and Muslim
communities used to live very peacefully by establishing a relationshipbetween them. The young men called the elderly members of the village bythe name caca or kaka, "uncle," and men of the same age called eachother dada, "brother." The relationship was very friendly. There wereeven invitations from Mohammedan houses to Hindu houses and from Hinduhouses to Mohammedan houses. Both the Hindus and the Mohammedansaccepted the invitations to go to each other's houses to attendceremonial functions. Even until fifty or sixty years ago, therelationship between Hindus and Muslims was very friendly, and therewere no disturbances. We do not find any Hindu-Muslim riots in thehistory of India, even during the days of the Mohammedans' rule over thecountry. Conflict between Hindus and Muslims was created by pollutedpoliticians, especially foreign rulers, and thus the situation graduallybecame so degraded that India was divided into Hindustan and Pakistan.Fortunately, the remedy to unite not only the Hindus and Muslims but allcommunities and all nations can still be implemented by the Hare Krsnamovement on the strong basic platform of love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 149                    nilambara cakravarti haya tomara nana
                     se-sambandhe hao tumi amara bhagina
                                 TRANSLATION     "Nilambara Cakravarti is Your maternal grandfather, and by this
relationship You are thus my nephew.
                                   TEXT 150
                     bhaginara krodha mama avasya sahaya
                      matulera aparadha bhagina na laya
                                 TRANSLATION     "When a nephew is very angry, his maternal uncle is tolerant, and
when the maternal uncle commits an offense, the nephew does not take itvery seriously."
                                   TEXT 151
                    ei mata dunhara katha haya thare-thore
                     bhitarera artha keha bujhite na pare                                 TRANSLATION
     In this way the Kazi and the Lord talked with one another with
different indications, but no outsider could understand the innermeaning of their conversation.
                                   TEXT 152
               prabhu kahe,--prasna lagi' ailama tomara sthane
                    kaji kahe,--ajna kara, ye tomara mane
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord said, "My dear uncle, I have come to your home just to ask
you some questions."     "Yes," the Kazi replied, "You are welcome. Just tell me what is inYour mind."
                                   TEXT 153
               prabhu kahe,--go-dugdha khao, gabhi tomara mata
                      vrsa anna upajaya, tate tenho pita
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord said: "You drink cows' milk; therefore the cow is your
mother. And the bull produces grains for your maintenance; therefore heis your father.
                                   TEXT 154
                     pita-mata mari' khao--eba kon dharma
                      kon bale kara tumi e-mata vikarma
                                 TRANSLATION     "Since the bull and cow are your father and mother, how can you
kill and eat them? What kind of religious principle is this? On whatstrength are you so daring that you commit such sinful activities?"
                                   PURPORT     Everyone can understand that we drink the milk of cows and take the
help of bulls in producing agricultural products. Therefore, since ourreal father gives us food grains and our mother gives us milk with whichto live, the cow and bull are considered our father and mother.According to Vedic civilization, there are seven mothers, of which thecow is one. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu challenged the MohammedanKazi, "What kind of religious principle do you follow by killing yourfather and mother to eat them?" In any civilized human society, no onewould dare kill his father and mother for the purpose of eating them.
Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu challenged the system of Mohammedanreligion as patricide and matricide. In the Christian religion also, aprincipal commandment is "Thou shalt not kill." Nevertheless, Christiansviolate this rule; they are very expert in killing and in openingslaughterhouses. In our Krsna consciousness movement, our firstprovision is that no one should be allowed to eat any kind of flesh. Itdoes not matter whether it is cows' flesh or goats' flesh, but weespecially stress the prohibition against cows' flesh because accordingto sastra the cow is our mother. Thus the Mohammedans' cow killing waschallenged by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 155                    kali kahe,--tomara yaiche veda-purana
                    taiche amara sastra--ketava `kora-na'
                                 TRANSLATION     The Kazi replied: "As You have Your scriptures called the Vedas and
Puranas, we have our scripture, known as the holy Koran.
                                   PURPORT     Chand Kazi agreed to talk with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu on the
strength of the scriptures. According to the Vedic scripture, if one cansupport his position by quoting from the Vedas, his argument is perfect.Similarly, when the Mohammedans support their position with quotationsfrom the Koran, their arguments are also authorized. When Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu raised the question of the Mohammedans' cow killingand bull killing, Chand Kazi came to the standard of understanding fromhis scriptures.
                                   TEXT 156                sei sastre kahe,--pravrtti-nivrtti-marga-bheda
                   nivrtti-marge jiva-matra-vadhera nisedha
                                 TRANSLATION     "According to the Koran, there are two ways of advancement--through
increasing the propensity to enjoy and decreasing the propensity toenjoy. On the pith of decreasing attachment [ nivrtti-marga], thekilling of animals is prohibited.
                                   TEXT 157
                  pravrtti-marge go-vadha karite vidhi haya
                   sastra jnaya vadha kaile nahi papa-bhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     On the path of material activities, there is regulation for killing
cows. If such killing is done under the guidance of scripture, there isno sin.
                                   PURPORT     The word sastra is derived from the dhatu, or verbal root, sas.
Sas-dhatu pertains to controlling or ruling. A government's rulingthrough force or weapons is called sastra. Thus whenever there isruling, either by weapons or by injunctions, the sas- dhatu is the basicprinciple. Between sastra (ruling through weapons) and sastra (rulingthrough the injunctions of the scriptures), the better is sastra. OurVedic scriptures are not ordinary law books of human common sense; theyare the statements of factually liberated persons unaffected by theimperfectness of the senses.     Sastra must be correct always, not sometimes correct and sometimesincorrect. In the Vedic scriptures, the cow is described as a mother.Therefore she is a mother for all time; it is not,as some rascals say,that in the Vedic age she was a mother but she is not in this age. Ifsastra is an authority, the cow is a mother always; she was a mother inthe Vedic age, and she is a mother in this age also.     If one acts according to the injunctions of sastra, he is freedfrom the reactions of sinful activity. For example, the propensities foreating flesh, drinking wine and enjoying sex life are all natural to theconditioned soul.The path of such enjoyment is called pravrtti-marga.The sastra says,pravrttir esam bhutanam nivrttis tu maha--pha1am.- oneshould not be carried away by the propensities of defective conditionedlife; one should be guided by the principles of the sastras. A child'spropensity is to play all day long, but it is the injunction of thesastras that the parents should take care to educate him. The sastrasare there just to guide the activities of human society. But becausepeople do not refer to the instructions of sastras, which are free fromdefects and imperfections, they are therefore misguided by so-callededucated teachers and leaders who are full of the deficiencies ofconditioned life.
                                   TEXT 158                      tomara vedete ache go-vadhera vani
                     ataeva go-vadha kare bada bada muni
                                 TRANSLATION     As a learned scholar, the Kazi challenged Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "In
Your Vedic scriptures there is an injunction for killing a cow. On thestrength of this injunction, great ages peformed sacrifices involvingcow killing."
                                   TEXT 159
                   prabhu kahe,--vede kahe go-vadha nisedha
                     ataeva hindu-matra na kare go-vadha                                 TRANSLATION
     Refuting the Kazi's statement, the Lord immediately replied, "The
Vedas clearly enjoin that cows should not be killed. Therefore anyHindu, whoever he may be, does not indulge in cow killing.
                                   PURPORT     In the Vedic scriptures there are concessions for meat-eaters. It
is said that if one wants to eat meat, he should kill a goat before thegoddess Kali and then eat its meat. Meat-eaters are not allowed topurchase meat or flesh from a market or slaughterhouse. There are nosanctions for maintaining regular slaughterhouses to satisfy the tonguesof meat-eaters. As far as cow killing is concerned, it is completelyforbidden. Since the cow is considered a mother, how could the Vedasallow cow killing? Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu pointed out that the Kazi'sstatement was faulty. I n Bhagavad-gita there is a clear injunction thatcows should be protected. Krsi- goraksya-vanijyam vaisya-karma svabhavajam.- "The duty of vaisyas is to produce agricultural products, tradeand give protection to cows." (Bg. 1 8.44) Therefore it is a falsestatement that the Vedic scriptures contain injunctions permitting cowkilling.
                                   TEXT 160                      jiyaite pare yadi, tabe mare prani
                       veda-purane ache hena ajna-vani
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the Vedas and Puranas there are injunctions declaring that if
one can revive a living being, be can kill it for experimental Purposes.
                                   TEXT 161
                      atae va jarad-gava mare muni-gana
                    veda-mantre siddha kare tahara jivana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore the great sages sometimes killed old animals, and by
chanting Vedic hymns they again brought them to life for perfection.
                                   TEXT 162
                      jarad-gava hana yuva haya ara-vara
                      tate tara vadha nahe, haya upakara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The killing and rejuvenation of such old and invalid animals was
not truly killing but an act of great benefit.                                   TEXT 163
                    kali-kale taiche sakti nahika brahmane
                     ataeva go-vadha keha na kare ekhane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Formerly there were Powerful brahmanas who could make such
experiments using Vedic hymns, but now, because of Kali-yuga, brahmanasare not so powerful. Therefore the killing of cows and bulls forrejuvenation is forbidden.
                                   TEXT 164
                asvamedham gavalambham sannyasam pala-paitrkam
                 devarena sutotpattim kalau panca vivarjayet
                                 TRANSLATION     " `In this age of Kali, five acts are forbidden: the offering of a
horse in sacrifice, the offering of a cow in sacrifice, the acceptanceof the order of sannyasa, the offering of oblations of flesh to theforefathers, and a man's begetting children in his brother's wife.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from the Brahma-vaivarta Purana.                                   TEXT 165                   tomara ji yaite nara,--vadha-matra sara
                     naraka ha-ite tomara nahika nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Since you Mohammedans cannot bring killed animals back to life,
you are responsible for killing them. Therefore you are going to hell;there is no way for your deliverance.
                                   TEXT 166
                   go-ange yata loma, tata sahasra vatsara
                   go-vadhi raura va-madhye pace nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Cow killers are condemned to rot in hellish life for as many
thousands of years as there are hairs on the body of the cow.                                   TEXT 167
                 toma-sabara sastra-karta--seha bhrnta haila
                   na jani' sastrera marma aiche ajna dila
                                 TRANSLATION     "There are many mistakes and illusions in your scriptures. Their
compilers, not knowing the essence of knowledge, gave orders that wereagainst reason and argument."
                                   TEXT 168
                  suni' stabdha haila kali, nahi sphure vani
                      vicariya kahe kajiparabhava ma-ni'
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing these statements by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the
Kazi, his arguments stunned, could not put forward any more words. Thus,after due consideration, the Kazi accepted defeat and spoke as follows.
                                   PURPORT     In our practical preaching work we meet many Christians who talk
about statements of the Bible. When we question whether God is limitedor unlimited, Christian priests say that God is unlimited. But when wequestion why the unlimited God should have only one son and notunlimited sons, they are unable to answer. Similarly, from a scientificpoint of view, the answers of the Old Testament, New Testament and Koranto many questions have changed. But a sastra cannot change at a person'swhim. All sastras must be free from the four defects of human nature.The statements of sastras must be correct for all time.
                                   TEXT 169                   tumi ye kahile, pandita, sei satya haya
                   adhunika amara sastra, vicara-saha naya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Nimai Pandita, what You have said is all true. Our
scriptures have developed only recently, and they are certainly notlogical and philosophical.
                                   PURPORT     The sastras of the yavanas, or meat-eaters, are not eternal
scriptures. They have been fashioned recently, and sometimes theycontradict one another. The scriptures of the yavanas are three: the OldTestament, the New Testament and the Koran. Their compilation has ahistory; they are not eternal like the Vedic knowledge. Thereforealthough they have their arguments and reasonings, they are not verysound and transcendental. As such, modern people advanced in science and
philosophy deem these scriptures unacceptable.     Sometimes Christian priests come to us inquiring,"Why are ourfollowers neglecting our scriptures and accepting yours?" But when weask them, "Your Bible says, `Do not kill.' Why then are you killing somany animals daily?" they cannot answer. Some of them imperfectly answerthat the animals have no souls. But then we ask them, "How do you knowthat animals have no souls? Animals and children are of the same nature.Does this mean that the children of human society also have no souls?"According to the Vedic scriptures, within the body is the owner of thebody, the soul. I n Bhagavad-gita it is said:     dehino 'smin yath\ dehe     kaumaram yauvanam jara     tatha dehantara-praptir     dhiras tatra na muhyati"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood toyouth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death.The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13)     Because the soul is within the body, the body changes through somany forms. There is a soul within the body of every living entity,whether animal, tree, bird or human being, and the soul istransmigrating from one type of body to another. When the scriptures ofthe yavanas--namely, the Old Testament, New Testament and Koran--cannotproperly answer inquisitive followers, naturally those advanced inscientific knowledge and philosophy lose faith in such scriptures. TheKazi admitted this while talking with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Kaziwas a very intelligent person. He had full knowledge of his position, asstated in the following verse.
                                   TEXT 170                     kalpita amara sastra,--ami saba jani
                      jati-anurodhe tabu sei sastra mani
                                 TRANSLATION     "I know that our scriptures are full of imagination and mistaken
ideas, yet because I am a Mohammedan I accept them for the sake of mycommunity, despite their insufficient support.
                                   TEXT 171
                      sahaje yavana-sastre adrdha vicara
                    hasi' tahe mahaprabhu puchena ara-vara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The reasoning and arguments in the scriptures of the meat-eaters
are not very sound," the Kazi concluded. Upon hearing this statement,Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu smiled and inquired from him as follows.
                                   TEXT 172                     ara eka prasna kari, suna, tumi mama
                  yathartha kahibe, chale na vanchibe a-ma-'
                                 TRANSLATION     . Do not try to cheat Me with tricks.
                                   TEXT 173
                      tomara nagare haya sada sankirtana
                    vadya-gita-koiahala, sangita, nartana
                                 TRANSLATION     "In your city there is always congregational chanting of the holy
name. A tumultuous uproar of music, singing and dancing is always goingon.
                                   TEXT 174
                   tumi kaji--hindu-dharma-virodhe adhikari
                     ebe ye na kara mana bujhite na pari
                                 TRANSLATION     "As a Mohammedan magistrate, you have the right to oppose the
performance of Hindu ceremonies, but now you do not forbid them. Icannot understand the reason why."
                                   TEXT 175
                   kaji bale--sabhe tomaya bale `gaurhari'
                     sei name ami tomaya sambodhana kari
                                 TRANSLATION     The Kazi said, "Everyone calls You Gaurhari. Please let me address
You by that name.
                                   TEXT 176
                     suna, gaurahari, ei prasnera karana
                     nibhrta hao yadi, tabe kari nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Kindly listen, O Gaurahari! If You come to a private place, I
shall then explain the reason."                                   TEXT 177
                  prabhu bale,--e loka amara antaranga haya
                   sphuta kari' kaha tumi, na kariha bhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord replied: "All these men are My confidential associates.
You may speak frankly. There is no reason to be afraid of them."
                                 TEXT 178-179
                    kali kahe,--yabe ami hmdura ghare giya
                    kirtana karilun mana mrdanga bhangiya
                     sei ratre eka simha maha-bhayankara
                   nara-deha, simha-mukha, garjaye vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     The Kazi said: "When I went to the Hindu's house, broke the drum,
and forbade the performance of congregational chanting, in my dreamsthat very night I saw a greatly fearful lion, roaring very loudly, Hisbody like a human being's and His face like a lion's.
                                   TEXT 180
                     sayane amara upara Iapha diya cadi'
                     atta atta hase, kare danta-kadamadi
                                 TRANSLATION     "While I was asleep, the lion jumped on my chest, laughing fiercely
and gnashing His teeth.
                                   TEXT 181
                    mora buke nakha diya ghora-svare bale
                      phadimu tomara buka mrdanga badale
                                 TRANSLATION     "Placing its nails on my chest, the lion said in a grave voice: `I
shall immediately bifurcate your chest as you broke the mrdanga drum!
                                   TEXT 182
                  mora kirtana mana karis, karimu tora ksaya
                    ankhi mudi' kanpi ami pana bada bhaya                                 TRANSLATION
     " `You have forbidden the performance of My congregational
chanting. Therefore I must destroy you!' Being very much afraid of Him,I closed my eyes and trembled.
                                   TEXT 183
                    bhita dekhi ' simha bale ha-iya sadaya
                     tore siksa dite kailu tora parajaya
                                 TRANSLATION
     "Seeing me so afraid, the lion said, `I have defeated you just toteach you a lesson, but I must be merciful to you.
                                   TEXT 184
                       se dina bahuta nahi kaili utpata
                    teni ksama kari' na karinu pranaghata
                                 TRANSLATION     " `On that day, you did not create a very great disturbance.
Therefore I have excused you and not taken your life.
                                   TEXT 185
                    aiche yadi punah kara, tabe na sahimu
                      savamse tomare mari yavana nasimu
                                 TRANSLATION     "`But if you perform such activities again, I shall not be
tolerant. At that time I shall kill you, your entire family and all themeat-eaters.'
                                   TEXT 186
                   eta kahi' simha gela, amara haila bhaya
                      ei dekha, nakha-cihna amora hrdaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "After saying this, the lion left, but I was very much afraid of
Him. Just see the marks of His nails on my heart!"
                                   TEXT 187                      eta bali' kaji nija-buka dekhaila
                    suni' dekhi' sarva-loka ascarya manila
                                 TRANSLATION     After this description, the Kazi showed his chest. Having heard him
and seen the marks, all the people there accepted the wonderfulincident.
                                   TEXT 188
                      kaji kahe,--iha ami kare na kahila
                        sei dina amara eka piyada aila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Kazi continued: "I did not speak to anyone about this incident,
but on that very day one of my orderlies came to see me.
                                   TEXT 189
                   asi' kahe,--gelun muni kirtana nisedhite
                      agni ulka mora mukhe iage acambite
                                 TRANSLATION     "After coming to me, the orderly said, `When I went to stop the
congregational chanting, suddenly flames struck my face.
                                   TEXT 190
                    pudila sakala dadi, mukhe haila vrana
                      yei peyaoa yaya, tara ei vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My beard was burned, and there were blisters on my cheeks.'
Every orderly who went gave the same description.
                                   TEXT 191
                    taha dekhi' rahmu muni maha-bhaya pana
                 kirtana na varjiha, ghare rahon ta' vasi va
                                 TRANSLATION     "After seeing this, I was very much afraid. I asked them not to
stop the congregational chanting but to go sit down at home.                                   TEXT 192
                  tabe ta' nagare ha-ibe svacchande kirtana
                    suni' saba mleccha asi' kaila nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Then all the meat-eaters came to submit a petition, complaining,
`After this order, there will always be unrestricted congregationalchanting in the city.
                                   TEXT 193
                      nagare hindura dharma badila apara
                   `hari' `hari' dh vani ba-i nahi suni ara
                                 TRANSLATION     " `In this way the religion of the Hindus will increase
unlimitedly. There are always vibrations of "Hari! Hari!" We do not hearanything but this.'
                                   TEXT 194
                 ara mleccha kahe,--hindu `krsna krsna' bali'
                   hase, kande, nace, gaya, gadi yaya dhuli
                                 TRANSLATION     "One meat-eater said, `The Hindus say, "Krsna, Krsna," and they
smile, cry, dance, chant and fall on the ground, smearing their bodieswith dirt.
                                   TEXT 195
                   `hari' `hari' kari' hindu kare kolahala
                    patasaha sunile tomara karibeka phala
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Vibrating "Hari, Hari," the Hindus make a tumultuous sound. If
the king [ patasaha] hears it, certainly he will punish you.'
                                   PURPORT     Ptasha refers to the king. Nawab Hussain Shah, whose full name was
Ala Uddina Saiyada Husena Sa, was at that time (1498-1511) theindependent King of Bengal. Formerly he was the servant of the cruelNawab of the Habsi dynasty named Mujahphara Khan, but somehow or otherhe assassinated his master and became the King. After gaining the throneof Bengal (technically called Masnada), he declared himself SaiyadaHusena Ala Uddina Seripha Mukka. There is a book called Riyaja Us-
salatina, whose author, Golama Husena, says that Nawab Hussain Shahbelonged to the family of Mukka Seripha. To keep his family's glory, hetook the name Seripha Mukka. Generally, however, he is known as NawabHussain Shah. After his death, his eldest son, Nasaratsa, became King ofBengal (1521-1533). This King also was very cruel. He committed manyatrocities against the Vaisnavas. As a result of his sinful activities,one of his servants from the Khoja group killed him while he was prayingin the mosque.
                                   TEXT 196                      tabe sei yavanere ami ta' puchila
                    hmdu `hari' bale, tara svabhava janila
                                 TRANSLATION     "I then inquired from these yavanas, `I know that these Hindus by
nature chant "Hari, Hari."
                                   TEXT 197
                       tumita yavana hana kene anuksana
                     hindura devatara nama laha ki karana
                                 TRANSLATION     "`The Hindus chant the name Hari because that is the name of their
God. But you are Mohammedan meat-eaters. Why do you chant the name ofthe Hindus' God?'
                                   TEXT 198
                   mleccha kahe,--hindure ami kari parihasa
                     keha keha--krsnadasa, keha--ramadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "The meat-eater replied, `Sometimes I joke with the Hindus. Some of
them are called Krsnadasa, and some are called Ramadasa.
                                   TEXT 199
                   keha--haridasa, sada bale `hari' `hari'
                     jani kara ghare dhana karibeka curi
                                 TRANSLATION     ,` `Some of them are called Haridasa. They always chant "Hari,
Hari," and thus I thought they would steal the riches from someone'shouse.                                   PURPORT
     Another meaning of "Hari, Hari" is "I am stealing. I am stealing.,,                                   TEXT 200                   sei haite jih va mora bale `hari' `hari'
                    iccha nahi, tabu bale,--ki upaya kari
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Since that time, my tongue also always vibrates the sound "Hari,
Hari." I have no desire to say it, but still my tongue says it. I do notknow what to do.'
                                   PURPORT     Sometimes demoniac nonbelievers, not understanding the potency of
the holy name, make fun of the Vaisnavas when the Vaisnavas chant theHare Krsna maha-mantra. This joking is also beneficial for such persons.Srimad-Bhagavatam, Sixth Canto, Second Chapter, verse 14, indicates thatthe chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, even in joking, in thecourse of ordinary discussion, in indicating something extraneous, or innegligence, is called namabhasa, which is chanting that is almost on thetranscendental stage. This namabhasa stage is better than nama-aparadha. Namabhasa awakens the supreme remembrance of Lord Visnu. Whenone remembers Lord Visnu, he becomes free from material enjoyment. Thushe gradually comes forward toward the transcendental service of the Lordand becomes eligible to chant the holy name of the Lord in thetranscendental position.
                                 TEXT 201-202                   ara mleccha kahe, suna--ami ta' ei-mate
                    hinduke parihasa kainu se dina ha-ite
                    jihva krsna-nama kare, na mane varjana
                   na jani, ki mantrausadhi jane hindu-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Another meat-eater said, `Sir, please hear me. Since the day I
joked with some Hindus in this way, my tongue chants the Hare Krsna hymnand cannot give it up. I do not know what mystic hymns and herbalpotions these Hindus know.'
                                   TEXT 203
                     eta suni' ta'-sabhare ghare pthaila
                   hena-kale pasandi hindu panca-sata aila
                                 TRANSLATION     "After hearing all this, I sent all the mlecchas back to their
homes. Five or seven nonbeliving Hindus then approached me.
                                   PURPORT     The word pasandi refers to nonbelievers engaged in fruitive
activities and idolatrous worshipers of many demigods. Pasandis do notbelieve in one God, the Supreme Personality, Lord Visnu; they think thatall the demigods have the same potency as Him. The definition of apasandiis given in the tantra-sastra.-     yas tu narayanam devam brahma-rudradi-daivataih     samatvenaiva vikseta sa pasandi bhaved dhruvam"A psandiis one who considers the great demigods such as Lord Brahma andLord Siva equal to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana." (Hari-bhakti- vijasa, 1. 73)     The Supreme Personality of Godhead is asamaurdhva; in other words,no one can be equal to or greater than Him. Butpasandis do not believethis. They worship any kind of demigod, thinking it all right to acceptwhomever they please as the Supreme Lord. The pasandis were against theHare Krsna movement of Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and now wesee practically that they also do not like our humble attempts to spreadKrsna consciousness all over the world. On the contrary, these pasandissay that we are spoiling the Hindu religion because people all over theworld are accepting Lord Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godheadaccording to the version of Bhagavad-gita As It Is. The psandis condemnthis movement, and sometimes they accuse Vaisnavas from foreigncountries of being not bona fide. Even so-called Vaisnavas or followersof the Vaisnava cult do not agree with our activities in makingVaisnavas in the western countries. Such pasandis existed even duringthe time of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and they still continue toexist. Despite all the activities of these psandis, however, theprediction of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu will triumph: prthivite ache yatanagaradi grama/ sarvatra pracara haibe mora nama. "I n every town andvillage, the chanting of My name will be heard." No one can check thespread of the Krsna consciousness movement because upon this movement isthe benediction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 204                  asi' kahe,--hindura dharma bhangila nimai
                    ye kirtana pravartaila, kabhu suni nai
                                 TRANSLATION     "Coming to me, the Hindus complained: `Nimai Pandita has broken the
Hindu religious principles. He has introduced the sankirtana system,which we never heard from any scripture.
                                   TEXT 205
                     mangalacandi visahari kari' jnarana                   ta'te vadya, nrtya, gita,--yogya acarana
                                 TRANSLATION     "`When we keep a nightlong vigil to observe religious performances
for the worship of Mangalacandi and Visahari, playing on musicalinstruments, dancing and chanting are certainly fitting customs.
                                   TEXT 206
                      purve bhala chila ei nimai pandita
                       gaya haite asiya cal\ya viparita
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Nimai Pandita was previously a very good boy, but since He has
returned from Gaya He conducts Himself differently.
                                   TEXT 207
                      ucca kari' gna gita, deya karatali
                    mrdanga-karatala-sabde karne Iage tali
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Now He loudly sings all kinds of songs, clapping, playing drums
and hand bells, and making a tumultuous sound that deafens our ears.
                                   TEXT 208
                   na jani,--ki khana matta hana nace, gaya
                    hase, kande, pade, uthe, gadagadi yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "`We do not know what He eats that makes Him become mad, dancing,
singing, sometimes laughing, crying, falling down, jumping up androlling on the ground.
                                   TEXT 209
                   nagariyake pagala kaila sada sankirtana
                     ratre nidra nahi yai, kari jagarana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `He has made all the people practically mad by always performing
congregational chanting. At night we cannot get any sleep; we are alwayskept awake.                                   TEXT 210
                 `nimani' nama chadi' ebe bolaya `gaurahari'
                  hindura dharma nasta kaila psanda sancari'
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Now He has given up His own name Nimai and introduced Himself
bythe name Gaurahari. He has spoiled the Hindu religious principles andintroduced the irreligion of nonbelievers.
                                   TEXT 211
                     krsnera kirtana kare nica bada bada
                        ei pape navadvipa ha-ibe ujada
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Now the lower classes are chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra
again and again. For this sinful activity, the entire city of Navadvipawill be deserted.
                                   TEXT 212
                 hindu-sastre isvara' nama--maha-man tra jani
                  sarva-loka sunile mantrera virya haya hani
                                 TRANSLATION     "`According to Hindu scripture, God's name is supposed to be the
most powerful hymn. If everyone hears the chanting of the name, thepotency of the hymn will be lost.
                                   PURPORT     In the list of offenses in the chanting of the holy name of the
Lord, it is said, dharma-vrata-tyaga-hutaoi-sarva-subha-kriya-samyam apipramadah: to consider the chanting of the holy name of the Lord equal tothe execution of some auspicious religious ceremony is an offense.According to the materialistic point of view, observing a religiousceremony invokes an auspicious atmosphere for the material benefit ofthe entire world. Materialists therefore manufacture religiousprinciples to live comfortably and without disturbance in executingtheir material activities. Since they do not believe in the existence ofGod, they have manufactured the idea that God is impersonal and that tohave some conception of God one may imagine any form. Thus they respectthe many forms of the demigods as different representations ormanifestations of the Lord. They are called bahv-isvara-vadis, orfollowers of thousands and thousands of gods. They consider the chantingof the names of the demigods an auspicious activity. Great so-calledsvamis have written books saying that one may chant any name--Durga,Kali, Siva, Krsna, Rama, and so on--because any name is all right to
invoke an auspicious atmosphere in society. Thus they are calledpasandis--unbelievers or faithless demons.     Such pasandis do not know the actual value of the chanting of theholy name of Lord Krsna. Foolishly proud of their material birth asbrahmanas and their consequently higher position in the social order,they think of the other classes--namely, the ksatriyas, the vaisyas andsudras--as lower classes. According to them, no one but the brahmanascan chant the holy name of Krsna, for if others chanted the holy name,its potency would be reduced.They are unaware of the potency of LordKrsna's name. The Brhan-naradiya Purana recommends:     harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam     kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha"For spiritual progress in this age of Kali, there is no alternative, noalternative, no alternative to the holy name, the holy name, the holyname of the Lord." The pasandis do not accept that the potency of theholy name of Krsna is so great that one can be delivered simply bychanting the holy name, although this is confirmed i n Srimad-Bhagavatam(12.3.51). Kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangah param vrajet.-any man fromany part of the world who practices chanting of the holy name of Krsnacan be liberated and after death go back home, back to Godhead. Therascal pasandis think that if anyone but a brahmana chants the holyname, the potency of the holy name is vanquished. According to theirjudgment, instead of delivering the fallen souls, the potency of theholy name is reduced. Believing in the existence of many gods andconsidering the chanting of the holy name of Krsna no better than otherhymns, these pasandis do not believe in the words of the sastra (harernama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam). But Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuconfirms in His Siksastaka, kirtaniyah sada harih: one must chant theholy name of the Lord always, twenty-four hours a day. The psandis,however, are so fallen and falsely proud of having taken birth inbrahmana families that they think that instead of delivering all thefallen souls, the holy name becomes impotent when constantly chanted bylower-class men.     Significant in verse 211 are the words nica bada bada becauseanyone can join in the sankirtana move me nt, as m e nti oned i nSrimad-Bhagavatam (2.4.18): kirata- hunandhra-pulinda-pulkasa abhira-sumbha yavanah khasadayah. This is a list of the names of candalas. Thepsandis say that when these lower-class men are allowed to chant, theirinfluence is enhanced. They do not like the idea that others should alsodevelop spiritual qualities because this would curb their false pride inhaving taken birth in families of the elevated brahmana caste, with amonopoly on spiritual activities. But despite all protests from so-called Hindus and members of the brahmana caste, we are propagating theKrsna consciousness movement all over the world, according to theinjunctions of thesastras and the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thuswe are sure that we are delivering many fallen souls, making them bonafide candidates for going back home, back to Godhead.
                                   TEXT 213                    gramera thakura tumi, saba tomara jana
                      nimai bolaiya tare karaha varjana                                 TRANSLATION
     "`Sir, you are the ruler of this town. Whether Hindu or Moslem,
everyone is under your protection. Therefore please call Nimai Panditaand make Him leave the town.'
                                   PURPORT     The word thakura has two meanings. One meaning is "God" or "a godly
person," and another meaning is "ksatriya." Here the psandibrahmanasaddress the Kazi as thakura, considering him the ruler of the town.There are different names by which to add ress the members of differentcastes. The brahmanas are add ressed as maharaja, the ksatriyas asthakura, the vaisyas as setha or mahajana, and the sudras as caudhuri.This etiquette is still followed in Northern India, where the ksatrijyasare addressed as Thakura Sahab. The pasandis went so far as to requestthe Magistrate, or Kazi, to have Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu expelled fromthe town because of His introducing harl-nama-sankirtana. Fortunatelyour Hare Krsna movement all over the world, especially in the civilizedworld of Europe and America, has become very popular. Generally no onecomplains against us to have us removed from a city. Although such anattempt was indeed made in Melbourne, Australia, the attempt failed.Thus we are now introducing this Hare Krsna movement in great cities ofthe world like New York, London, Paris, Tokyo, Sydney, Melbourne andAukland, and by the grace of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu everything isgoing on nicely. People are happy to accept the principle of chantingthe Hare Krsna mantra, and the result is most satisfactory.
                                   TEXT 214                      tabe ami priti-vakya kahila sabare
                     sabe ghare yaha, ami nisedhiba tare
                                 TRANSLATION     "After hearing their complaints, in sweet words I told them,
`Please go back home. I shall certainly prohibit Nimai Pandita fromcontinuing His Hare Krsna movement.'
                                   TEXT 215
                       hindura isvara bada yei narnana
                      sei tumi hao,--hena laya mora mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I know that Narayana is the Supreme God of the Hindus, and I think
that You are the same Narayana. This I feel within my mind."
                                   TEXT 216
                      eta suni' mahaprabhu hasiya hasiya                      kahite Iagiia kichu kajire chuniya
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing the Kazi speak so nicely, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
touched him and smilingly spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 217
                   tomara mukhe ktsna-nama,--e bada vicitra
                    papa-ksaya gela, haila parama pavitra
                                 TRANSLATION     "The chanting of the holy name of Krsna from your mouth has
performed a wonder--it has nullified the reactions of all your sinfulactivities. Now you have become supremely pure.
                                   PURPORT     Confirming the potency of the sankirtana movement, these words from
the very mouth of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu express how people can bepurified simply by chanting the holy name of Lord Krsna. The Kazi was aMohammedan mleccha, or meat-eater, but because he several times utteredthe holy name of Lord Krsna,automatically the reactions of his sinfullife were vanquished, and he was fully purified of all materialcontamination. We do not know why the pasandis of the present dayprotest that we are deteriorating the Hindu religion by spreading Krsnaconsciousness all over the world and claiming all classes of men to thehighest standard of Vaisnavism. But these rascals disagree with us sovehemently that some of them do not allow European and AmericanVaisnavas to enter into the temples of Visnu. Thinking religion to bemeant for material benefit, these so-called Hindus have actually becomevicious by worshiping the numerous forms of the demigods. In the nextverse Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu confirms the Kazi's purification.
                                   TEXT 218                  `hari' `krsna' `nar\yana'--laile tina nama
                      bada bhnyavan tumi, bada punyavan
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because you have chanted three holy names of the Lord--Hari, Krsna
and Narayana--you are undoubtedly the most fortunate and pious."
                                   PURPORT     Here the Supreme Lord, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, confirms that
anyone who chants the holy names Hari, Krsna and Narayana withoutoffense is certainly extremely fortunate, and whether Indian or non-Indian, Hindu or non-Hindu, he immediately comes to the level of themost pious personality. We therefore do not care about the statements ofpasandis who protest against our movement's making the members of other
cities or countries into Vaisnavas. We have to follow in the footstepsof Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, executing our mission peacefully, or, ifnecessary, kicking the heads of such protestors.
                                   TEXT 219                     eta suni' kaiira dui cakse pade pani
                    prabhura carana chuni' bale priya-vani
                                 TRANSLATION     After the Kazi heard this, tears ilowed down from his eyes. He
immediately touched the lotus feet of the Lord and spoke the followingsweet words.
                                   TEXT 220
                      tomara prasade mora ghucila kumati
                    ei krpa kara,--yena tomate rahu bhakti
                                 TRANSLATION     "Only by Your mercy have my bad intentions vanished. Kindly favor
me so that my devotion may always be fixed upon You."
                                   TEXT 221
                     prabhu kahe,--eka dana magiye tomaya
                     sankirtana vda yaiche nahe naoiyaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord said, "I wish to beg you for one favor in charity. You
must pledge that this sankirtana movement will not be checked, at leastin the district of Nadia."
                                   TEXT 222
                     kaji kahe,--mora vamse yata upajibe
                  tahake `talaka' diba,--kirtana na badhibe
                                 TRANSLATION     The Kazi said: "To as many descendants as take birth in my dynasty
in the future, I give this grave admonition: no one should check thesankirtana movement."
                                   PURPORT     As a resultof this grave injunction by the Kazi, even at present
the descendants of the Kazi's family do not oppose the sankirtanamovement under any circumstances. Even during the great Hindu-Muslimriots in neighboring places, the descendants of the Kazi honestlypreserved the assurance given by their forefather.
                                   TEXT 223                    suni' prabhu `hari' bali' uthila apani
                   uthila vaisnava saba kari' hari-dh vani
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, the Lord got up, chanting "Hari! Hari!" Following
Him, all the other Vaisnavas also got up, chanting the vibration of theholy name.
                                   TEXT 224
                     kirtana karite prabhu karila gamana
                     sange cali' aise kaji ullasita mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went back to perform kirtana, and the Kazi,
his mind jubilant, went with Him.
                                   TEXT 225
                      kaiire vidaya dija sacira nandana
                       nacite nacite aila apana bhavana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord asked the Kazi to go back home. Then the son of mother
Saci came back to His own home, dancing and dancing.
                                   TEXT 226
                     ei mate kajire prabhu karila prasada
                      iha yei sune tara khande aparadha
                                 TRANSLATION     This is the incidentconcerningthe Kazi and the Lord's mercy upon
him. Anyone who hears this is also freed from all offenses.
                                   TEXT 227
                      eka dina srivasera mandire gosani                     nityananda-sange nrtya kare dui bhai
                                 TRANSLATION     One day the two brothers Lord Nityananda Prabhu and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu were dancing in the holy house of Srivasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 228
                     srivasa-putrera tahan haila paraloka
                     tabu srivasera citte na janmila soka
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time a calamity took place--Srivasa Thakura's son died. Yet
Srivasa Thakura was not at all sorry.
                                   TEXT 229
                    mrta-putra-mukhe kaila jnanera kathana
                     apane dui bhai haila srivasa-nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu caused the dead son to speak about
knowledge, and then the two brothers personally became the sons ofSrivasa Thakura.
                                   PURPORT     This incident is described as follows by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura
in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. One night while Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wasdancing with His devotees at the house of Srivasa Thakura, one ofSrivasa Thakura's sons, who was suffering from some disease, died.Srivasa Thakura was so patient, however, that he did not allow anyone toexpress sorrow by crying, for he did not want the kirtana going on athis house to be disturbed. Thus kirtana continued without a sound oflamentation. But when the kirtana was over, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, whocould understand the incident, declared, "There must have been somecalamity in this house." When He was then informed about the death ofSrivasa Thakura's son, He expressed His regret, saying, "Why was thisnews not given to Me before?" He went to the place where the son waslying dead and asked him, "My dear boy, why are you leaving the house ofSrivasa Thakura?" The dead son immediately replied, "I was living inthis house as long as I was destined to live here. Now that the time isover, I am going elsewhere, according to Your direction. I am Youreternal servant, a dependent living being. I must act only according toYour desire. Beyond Your desire, I cannot do anything. I have no suchpower." Hearing these words of the dead son, all the members of SrivasaThakura's family received transcendental knowledge. Thus there was nocause for lamentation. This transcendental knowledge is described inBhagavad-gita (2.13). Tatha dehantara-praptir dhiras tatra na muhyati.-when someone dies, he accepts another body; therefore sober persons do
not lament. Afterthe discourse between the dead boy and SriCaitanyaMahaprabhu, funeral ceremonies were performed, and Lord Caitanya assuredSrivasa Thakura, "You have lost one son, but Nityananda Prabhu and I areyour eternal sons. We shall never be able to give up your company."Thisis an instance of a transcendental relationship with Krsna. We haveeternal transcendental relationships with Krsna as His servants,friends, fathers, sons or conjugal lovers. When the same relationshipsare pervertedly reflected in this material world, we have relationshipsas the sons, fathers, friends, lovers, masters or servants of others,but all these relationships are subject to termination within a definiteperiod. If we revive our relationship with Krsna, however, by the graceof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, our eternal relationship will never break tocause our lamentation.
                                   TEXT 230                    tabe ta' karila saba bhakte vara dana
                   ucchista diya narayanira karila sammana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter the Lord charitably bestowed His benediction upon all
His devotees. He gave the remnants of His food to Narayani, showing herspecial respect.
                                   PURPORT     Narayani was a niece of Srivasa Thakura, and later she became the
mother of Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura. In this connection the sahaiiyascite a malicious story that after eating the remnants of Lord Caitanya'sfoodstuff Narayani became pregnant and gave birth to Vrndavana dasaThakura. The rascal sahajiyas may manufacture such false statements, butno one should believe them because they are motivated by enmity againstthe Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 231                     srivasera vastra sinye darajiyavana
                    prabhu tare nija-rupa karaila darsana
                                 TRANSLATION     There was a tailor who was a meat-eater but was sewing garments for
Srivasa Thakura. The Lord, being merciful to him, showed him His ownform.
                                   TEXT 232
                   `dekhinu' `dekhinu' bali' ha-ila pagala
                    preme nrtya kare, haila vaisnava agala
                                 TRANSLATION     Saying, "I have seen! I have seen!" and dancing in ecstatic love as
though mad, he became a first-class Vaisnava.
                                   PURPORT     There was a Mohammedan tailor near the house of Srivasa Thakura who
used to sew the garments of the family. One day he was very much pleasedwith the dancing of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; indeed, he was enchanted.The Lord, understanding his attitude, showed him His original form asKrsna. The tailor then began to dance, saying, "I have seen! I haveseen!" He became absorbed in ecstatic love and began to dance with LordCaitanya. Thus he became one of the foremost Vaisnava adherents of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 233                   avesete srivase prabhu vamsi ta' magija
                 srivasa kahe,--vamsi tomara gopi hari' nila
                                 TRANSLATION     In ecstasy the Lord asked Srivasa Thakura to deliver His flute, but
Srivasa Thakura replied, "Your flute has been stolen away by the gopis."
                                   TEXT 234
                   suni' prabhu `bala' `bala' balena avese
                     srivasa varnena vrndavana-Iila-rase
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this reply, the Lord said in ecstasy, "Go on talking! Go on
talking!" Thus Srivasa described the transcendental mellow pastimes ofSri Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 235
                    prathame te vrndavana-madhurya varnila
                     suniya prabhura citte ananda badila
                                 TRANSLATION     In the beginning Srivasa Thakura described the transcendental
sweetness of Vrndavana's pastimes. Hearing this, the Lord felt great andincreasing jubilation in His heart.
                                   TEXT 236
                   tabe `bala' `bala' prabhu bale vara-vara
                   punah punah kahe srivasa kari va vistara                                 TRANSLATION
     Thereafter the Lord again and again asked him, "Speak on! Speak
on!" Thus Srivasa again and again described the pastimes of Vrndavana,vividly expanding them.
                                   TEXT 237
                    vamsi-vadye gopi-ganera vane akarsana
                     tan-sabara sange yaiche vana-vmarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srivasa Thakura extensively explained how the gopis were attracted
to the forests of Vrndavana by the vibration of Krsna's flute and howthey wandered together in the forest.
                                   TEXT 238
                     tahi madhye chaya-rtu Iilara varnana
                   madhu-pana, rasotsava, jala-keli kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srivasa Pandita narrated all the pastimes enacted during the six
changing seasons. He described the drinking of honey, the celebration ofthe rasa dance, the swimming in the Yamuna, and other such incidents.
                                   TEXT 239
                   `bala' `bala' bale prabhu sunite ullasa
                    srivasa kahena tabe rasa rasera vilasa
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord, hearing with great pleasure, said, "Go on speaking!
Go on speaking!" Srivasa Thakura described the rasa-lila, thetranscendental mellow dancing.
                                   TEXT 240
                    kahite, sunite aiche pratah-kala haila
                    prabhu srivasere tosi' alingana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     As thus the Lord requested and Srivasa Thakura spoke, the morning
appeared, and the Lord embraced Srivasa Thakura and satisfied him.                                   TEXT 241
                     tabe acaryera ghare kaila krsna-Iila
                     rukmini-svarupa prabhu apane ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter a dramatization of Krsna's pastimes was performed in the
house of Advaita Acarya. The Lord personally took the part of Rukmini,the foremost of Krsna's queens.
                                   TEXT 242
                kabhu durga, laksmi haya, kabhu va cic-chakti
                  khate vasi' bhak ta-gane dila prema-bhakti
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord sometimes took the part of goddess Durga, Laksmi [the
goddess of fortune] or the chief potency, Yogamaya. Sitting on a cot, Hedelivered love of Godhead to all the devotees present.
                                   TEXT 243
                     eka-dina mahaprabhura nrtya-avasane
                       eka brahmani asi' dharila carane
                                 TRANSLATION     One day when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had finished His dancing, a
woman, the wife of a brahmana, came there and caught hold of His lotusfeet.
                                   TEXT 244
                      caranera dhuli sei laya vara vara
                     dekhiya prabhura duhkha ha-ila apara
                                 TRANSLATION     As she took the dust of His lotus feet again and again, the Lord
became unlimitedly unhappy.
                                   PURPORT     This holding of a great personality's lotus feet is certainly very
good for the person who takes the dust, but this example of SriCaitanyaMahaprabhu's unhappiness indicates that a Vaisnava should not allowanyone to take dust from his feet. One who takes the dust of a greatpersonality's lotus feet transfers his sinful activities to that greatpersonality. Unless one is very strong, he must suffer the sinful
activities of the person who takes the dust. Therefore ordinarily itshould not be allowed. Sometimes in big meetings people come to take thesame advantage by touching our feet. On account of this, sometimes wehave to suffer from some disease. As far as possible, no outsider shouldbe allowed to touch one's feet to take dust from them. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu personally showed this by His example, as explained in thenext verse.
                                   TEXT 245                    sei-ksane dhana prabhu gangate padila
                      nityananda-haridasa dhari' uthaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Immediately He ran to the River Ganges and jumped in to counteract
the sinful activities of that woman. Lord Nityananda and HaridasaThakura caught Him and raised Him from the river.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is God Himself, but He was playing the part
of a preacher. Every preacher should know that being allowed to touch aVaisnava's feet and take dust may be good for the person who takes it,but it is not good for the person who allows it to be taken. As far aspossible, this practice should ordinarilv be avoided. Only initiateddisciples should be allowed to take this advantage, not others. Thosewho are full of sinful activities should generally be avoided.
                                   TEXT 246                    vijaya acaryera ghare se ratre rahila
                   pratah-kale bhakta sabe ghare lana gela
                                 TRANSLATION     That night the Lord stayed at the house of Vijaya Acarya. In the
morning the Lord took all His devotees and returned home.
                                   TEXT 247
                      eka-dina gopi-bhave grhete vasiya
                    `gopi' `gopi' naina laya visanna hana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day the Lord, in the ecstasy of the gopis, was sitting in His
house. Very morose in separation, He was calling, "Gopi! Gopi!"
                                   TEXT 248                       eka paduya aila prabhuke dekhite
                    `gopi' `gopi' nama suni' iagila balite
                                 TRANSLATION     A student who came to see the Lord was astonished that the Lord was
chanting "Gopi! Gopi!" Thus he spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 249
                  krsna-nama na lao kene, krsna-nama--dhanya
                   `gopi' `gopi' balile va kiba haya punya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Why are You chanting the names `Gopi Gopi' instead of the holy
name of Lord Krsna, which is so glorious? What pious result will Youachieve by such chanting?
                                   PURPORT     It is said, vaisnavera kriya mudha vijne na bujhaya: no one can
understand the activities of a pure devotee. A student or neophytedevotee could not possibly understand why Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu waschanting the name of the gopis, nor should the student have asked theLord about the potency of chanting "gopi, gopi." The neophyte studentwas certainlv convinced of the piety in the chanting of Krsna's holyname, but this sort of attitude is also offensive. Dharma-vrata- tyaga-hutadi-sarva-subha-kriya-samyam api pramadah: to chant the holy name ofKrsna in exchange for the achievement of piety is an offense. This, ofcourse, was unknown to the student. Thus he innocently asked, "Whatpiety is there in the chanting of the name gopi?" He did not know thatthere is no question of piety or impiety. The chanting of the holy nameof Krsna or the holy name gopiis on the transcendental platform ofloving affairs. Since he was not expert in understanding suchtranscendental activities, his question was merely impudent. Thus SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, apparently greatly angry at him, reacted asfollows.
                                   TEXT 250                  suni' prabhu krodhe kaila krsne dosodgara
                  thenga lana uthiia prabhu paduya maribara
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing the foolish student, the Lord, greatly angry, rebuked Lord
Krsna in various ways. Taking up a stick, He rose to strike the student.
                                   PURPORT     It is mentioned in Srimad-Bhagavatam that when Uddhava came from
Lord Krsna with a message for the gopis, all the gopis, especiallySrimati Radharani, denounced Krsna in various ways. Such denunciations,
however, reflect an exuberant loving attitude that an ordinary mancannot understand. When the foolish student questioned Lord SriCaitanyaMahaprabhu, Lord Caitanya similarly rebuked Lord Krsna in lovingexuberance. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was in the mood of the gopisand the student advocated the cause of Sri Krsna, Lord Caitanya wasgreatly angry. Seeing His anger, the foolish student, who was anordinary atheistic smarta-brahmana, foolishly misjudged Him. Thus he anda party of students were ready to strike the Lord in retaliation. Afterthis incident, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu decided to take sannyasa so thatpeople would not commit offenses against Him, considering Him anordinary householder, for in India even now a sannyasi is naturallyoffered respect.
                                   TEXT 251                bhaye pal\ya paduya, prabhu pache pache dh\ya
                   aste vyaste bhakta-gana prabhure rah\ya
                                 TRANSLATION     The student ran away in fear, and the Lord followed him. But
somehow or other the devotees checked the Lord.
                                   TEXT 252
                    prabhure santa kari' anila nija ghare
                      paduya pal\ya gela paduya-sabhare
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees pacified the Lord and brought Him home, and the
student ran away to an assembly of other students.
                                   TEXT 253
                     paduya sahasra yahan pade eka-thani
                    prabhura vrttanta dvija kahe tahan yai
                                 TRANSLATION     The brahmana student ran to a place where a thousand students were
studying together. There he described the incident to them.
                                   PURPORT     In this verse we find the word dvija, indicating that the student
was a brahmana. Actually, in those days, only members of the brahmanaclass became students of Vedic literature. Schooling is meant especiallyfor brahmanas; previously there was no question of schooling forksatriyas, vaisyas or sudras. Ksatriyas used to learn the technology ofwarfare, and vaisyas learned business from their fathers or otherbusinessmen; they were not meant to study the Vedas. At the present,
however, everyone goes to school,and everyone is given the same type ofeducation, although no one knows what the result will be. The result,however, is most unsatisfactory, as we have seen in the westerncountries especially. The United States has vast educationalinstitutions where everyone is allowed to receive an education, but theresult is that most students become like hippies.     Higher education is not meant for everyone. Only selectedindividuals trained in brahminical culture should be allowed to pursue ahigher education. Educational institutions should not aim to teachtechnology, for a technologist cannot properly be called educated. Atechnologist is a sudra; only one who studies the Vedas may properly becalled a learned man (pandita). The duty of a brahmana is to becomelearned in the Vedic literature and teach the Vedic knowledge to otherbrahmanas. In our Krsna consciousness movement we are simply teachingour students to become fit brahmanas and Vaisnavas. In our school atDallas, the students are learning English and Sanskrit, and throughthese two languages they are studying all our books, such as Srimad-Bhnavatam, Bhagavad-gita and Nectar of Devotion. It is a mistake toeducate every student as a technologist. There must be a group ofstudents who become brahmanas. Without brahmanas who study the Vedicliteratu re, human society will be entirely chaotic.
                                   TEXT 254                    suni' krodha kaila saba paduyara gana
                    sabe meli' kare tabe prabhura nindana
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing of the incident, all the students, greatly angry, joined
together in criticizing the Lord.
                                   TEXT 255
                     saba desa bhrosta kaila ekaia nimani
                    brahmana marite cahe, dharma-bhaya nai
                                 TRANSLATION     "Nimai Pandita alone has spoiled the entire country," they accused.
"He wants to strike a caste brahmana. He has no fear of religiousprinciples.
                                   PURPORT     In those days also, the caste brahmanas were very much proud. They
were not prepared to accept chastisement even from a teacher orspiritual master.
                                   TEXT 256                     punah yadi aiche kare mariba tahare                      kon va manusa haya, ki karite pare
                                 TRANSLATION     "If He again performs such an atrocious act, certainly we shall
retaliate and strike Him in turn. Who is He--an important person--thatHe can check us in this way)."
                                   TEXT 257
                   prabhura nindna sabara buddhi haila nasa
                    supathita vidya karao na haya prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     When all the students thus resolved, criticizing Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, their intelligence was spoiled. Thus although they werelearned scholars, because of this offense the essence of knowledge wasnot manifest in them.
                                   PURPORT     I n Bhagavad-gita it is said, m\yayapahrta-jnana asuram bhavam
asritah: w he n, one becomes inimical to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, adopting an atheistic attitude (asuram bhavam), even if one isa learned scholar the essence of knowledge does not become manifest inhim; in other words, the essence of his knowledge is stolen by theillusory energy of the Lord. In this connection Sri BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Thakura quotes a mantra from the Svetasvatara Upanisad.-     yasya de ve para bhaktir     yatha deve tatha gurau     tasyaite kathita hy arthah     prakasante mahatmanahThe purport of this verse is that one who is unflinchingly devoted tothe Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, and similarly devoted to thespiritual master, with no ulterior motive, becomes a master of allknowledge. In the heart of such a devotee, the real essence of the Vedicknowledge becomes manifest. This essence is nothing but surrender untothe Supreme Personality of Godhead (vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah).Only unto one who fully surrenders to the spiritual master and theSupreme Lord does the essence of Vedic knowledge become manifest, not toanyone else. This same principle is emphasized by Sri Prahlada Maharajai n Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.5.24):     iti pumsarpita visnau     bhaktis cen nava-laksana     kriyate bhagavaty addha     tan manye'dhitam uttamam"A person who directly applies these nine principles [hearing, chanting,remembering, etc.] in the service of the Lord is to be understood as agreatly learned man who has assimilated the Vedic literatures very well,for the goal of studying the Vedic literature is to understand thesupremacy of Lord Sri Krsna." Sridhara Svami confirms in his commentarythat first one must surrender to the spiritual master; then the processof devotional service will develop. It is not a fact that only one who
diligently pursues an academic career can become a devotee. Even with noacademic career, if one has full faith in the spiritual master and theSupreme Personality of Godhead, he develops in spiritual life and realknowledge of the Vedas. The example of Maharaja Khatvanga confirms this.One who surrenders is understood to have learned the subject matter ofthe Vedas very nicely. One who adopts this Vedic process of surrenderlearns devotional service and is certainly successful. One who is verymuch proud, however, is unable to surrender either to the spiritualmaster or to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he cannotunderstand the essence of any Vedic literature. Srimad-Bhagavatamdeclares:     sabda-brahmani nisnato     na nisnayat pare yadi     sramas tasya srama-phalo     hy adhenum iva raksatah"If one is learned in Vedic literature but is not a devotee of LordVisnu, his work is a useless waste of labor, just like the keeping of acow that does not give milk." (Bhn. 11.11.18)     Anyone who does not follow the surrendering process but is simplyinterested in an academic career cannot make any advancement. His profitis only his labor for nothing. If one is expert in the study of theVedas but does not surrender to a spiritual master or Visnu, all hiscultivation of knowledge is but a waste of time and labor.
                                   TEXT 258                   tathapi dambhika paduya namra nahi haya
                  yahan tahan prabhura ninda hasi' se karaya
                                 TRANSLATION     But the proud student community did not become submissive. On the
contrary, the students spoke of the incident anywhere and everywhere. Ina laughing manner they criticized the Lord.
                                   TEXT 259
                    sarva-jna gosani jani' sabara durgati
                    ghare vasi' cinte ta'-sabara avyahati
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, being omniscient, could understand
the degradation of these students. Thus He sat at home, contemplatinghow to rescue them.
                                   TEXT 260
                     yata adhyapaka, ara tanra sisya-gana
                 dharmi, karmi, tapo-nistha, nindaka, durjana                                 TRANSLATION
     "All the so-called professors and scientists and their students
generally follow the regulative principles of religion, fruitiveactivities and austerities," the Lord thought, "yet at the same timethey are blasphemers and rogues.
                                   PURPORT     Here is a depiction of materialists who have no knowledge of
devotional service. They may be very religious and may work verysystematically or perform austerities and penances but if they blasphemethe Supreme Personality of Godhead they are nothing but rogues. This isconfirmed in the hari-bhakti-sudhod\ya (3.1 1):     bhaga vad-bhakti-hinasya     jatih sastram japas tapah     apranasyaiva dehasya     mandanam loka-ranjanamWithout knowledge of devotional service to the Lord, great nationalism,fruitive, political or social work, science or philosophy are all simplylike costly garments decorating a dead body. The only offense of personsadhering to these principles is that they are not devotees; they arealways blasphemous toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead and Hisdevotees.
                                   TEXT 261                      ei saba mora ninda-aparadha haite
                    ami na laoyaile bhakti, na pare la-ite
                                 TRANSLATION     "If I do not induce them to take to devotional service, because of
committing the offense of blasphemy none of these people will be able totake to it.
                                   TEXT 262
                    nistarite ailama aini, haila viparita
                    e-saba durjanera kaiche ha-ibeka hita
                                 TRANSLATION     -"I have come to deliver all the fallen souls, but now just the
opposite has happened. How can these rogues be delivered? How may theybe benefited?
                                   TEXT 263
                     amake pranati kare, haya papa-ksaya
                      tabe se ihare bhakti laoyaile laya                                 TRANSLATION
     "If these rogues offer Me obeisances, the reactions of their sinful
activities will be nullified. Then, if I induce them, they will take todevotional service.
                                   TEXT 264
                    more ninda kare ye, na kare namaskara
                     e-saba jivere avasya kariba uddhara
                                 TRANSLATION     "I must certainly deliver all these fallen souls who blaspheme Me
and do not offer Me obeisances.
                                   TEXT 265
                     atae va a vasya ami sannyasa kariba
                     sannyasi-buddhye more pranata ha-iba
                                 TRANSLATION     "I should accept the sannyasa order of life, for thus people will
offer Me their obeisances, thinking of Me as a member of the renouncedorder.
                                   PURPORT     Among the members of the varnasrama institution's social orders
(brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and sudra), the brahmana is considered theforemost, for he is the teacher and spiritual master of all the othervarnas. Similarly, among the spiritual ord ers (brahmacarya, grhastha,vanaprastha a nd sannyasa), the sannysa order is the most elevated.Therefore a sannysi is the spiritual master of all the varnas andasramas, and a brahmana is also expected to offer obeisances to asannyasi. Unfortunately, however, caste brahmanas do not offerobeisances to a Vaisnava sannyasi. They are so proud that they do notoffer obeisances even to Indian sannyasis, not to speak of European andAmerican sannyasis. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, expected that eventhe caste brahmanas would offer respectful obeisances to a sannyasibecause five hundred years ago the social custom was to offer obeisancesimmediately to any sannyasi, known or unknown.     The sannyasis of the Krsna consciousness movement are bona fide.All the students of the Krsna consciousness movement have undergone theregular process of initiation. As enjoined in the hari-bhakti-vilasa bySanatana Gosvami, tatha diksa-vidhanena dvijatvam jnyate nrnam: by theregular process of initiation, any man can become a brahmana. Thus inthe beginning the students of our Krsna consciousness movement agree tolive with devotees, and gradually, having given up four prohibitedactivities--illicit sex, gambling, meat-eating and intoxication--theybecome advanced in the activities of spiritual life. When one is foundto be regularly following these principles, he is given the first
initiation (hari-nama),and he regularly chants at least sixteen rounds aday. Then, after six months or a year, he is initiated for the secondtime and given the sacred thread with the regular sacrifice and rituals.After some time, when he advances still further and is willing to giveup this material world, he is given the sannyasa order. At that time hereceives the title svami or gosvami, both of which mean "master of thesenses." Unfortunately, debauched so-called brahmanas in India neitheroffer them respect nor accept them as bona fide sannyasis. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu expected the so-called brahmanas to offer respect to suchVaisnava sannyasis. Nevertheless, it does not matter whether they offerrespect, nor whether they accept these sannyasis as bona fide, for thesastra describes punishment for such disobedient so-called brahmanas.The sastric injuction declares:     de vata-pratimam drstva     yatim caiva tridandinam     namaskaram na kuryad yah     prnascittiyate narah"One who does not offer respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,to His Deity in the temple or to a tridandisannyasi must undergoprayascitta [atonement]." If one does not offer obeisances to such asannyasi, the prescribed prayascitta is to fast for one day.
                                   TEXT 266                     pranatite ha'be ihara aparadha ksaya
                     nirmala hrdaye bhakti karaiba udaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Offering obeisances will relieve them of all the reactions to
their offenses. Then, by My grace, devotional service [bhakti] willawaken in their pure hearts.
                                   PURPORT     According to Vedic injunctions, only a brahmana may be offered
sannyasa. The Sa n k a ra-sa m p rad ay a (ekadanda-sannyasa-sampradaya)a wa rd s the sannyasa o rd e r only to caste brahmanas, or bornbrahmanas, but in the Vaisnava system even one not born in a brahmanafamily may be made a brahmana according to the direction of the Hari-bhakti-vilasa (tatha diksa-vidhanena dvijatvam jayate nrnam). A n y perso n from any part of the world may be made a brahmana by the regularprocess of initiation, and when he follows brahminical behavior,observing the principle of abstaining from intoxication, illicit sex,meat-eating and gambling, he may be offered sannyasa. All the sannyasisin the Krsna consciousness movement, who are preaching all over theworld, are regular brahmana-sannyasis. Thus the so-called castebrahmanas should not object to offering them respectful obeisances. Byoffering such obeisances, as recommended by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,they will diminish their offenses and automatically awaken to theirnatural position of devotional se rvice. As it is said, nitya-siddhakrsna-prema sadhya kabhu naya: krsna- prema can be awakened in apurified heart. The more we offer obeisances to sannyasis, especiallyVaisnava sannyasis, the more we diminish our offenses and purify our
hearts. Only in a purified heart can krsna-prema awaken. This is theprocess of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's cult, the Krsna consciousnessmovement.
                                   TEXT 267                     e-saba pasandira tabe ha-ibe nistara
                      ara kona upaya nahi, ei yukti sara
                                 TRANSLATION     "All the unfaithful rogues of this world can be delivered by this
process. There is no alternative. This is the essence of the argument."
                                   TEXT 268
                    ei drdha yukti kari' prabhu ache ghare
                      kesa va bharati ail\ nadiya-nagare
                                 TRANSLATION     After coming to this firm conclusion, the Lord continued to stay at
home. In the meantime Kesava Bharaticame to the town of Nadia.
                                   TEXT 269
                   prabhu tanre namaskari' kaila nimantrana
                     bhiksa karaiya tanre kaila nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord offered him respectful obeisances and invited him to His
house. After feeding him sumptuously, He submitted to him His petition.
                                   PURPORT     According to the system of Vedic society, whenever an unknown
sannyasi comes to a village or town,someone mustinvite him to takeprasada in his home. Sannyasis generally take prasada in the house of abrahmana because the brahmana worships the Lord Narayana sila, orsalagrama-siia, and therefore there is prasada that the sannyasi maytake. Kesava Bharati accepted the invitation of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Thus the Lord had a good opportunity to explain His desire to takesannyasa from him.
                                   TEXT 270                    tumi ta' isvara bata,--saksat narayana
                     krpa kari' kara mora samsara mocana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sir, you are directly Narayana. Therefore please be merciful unto
Me. Deliver Me from this material bondage."
                                   TEXT 271
                   bharati kahena,--tumi isvara, antaryami
                  ye karaha, se kariba,--svatantra nahi ami
                                 TRANSLATION     Kesava Bharati replied to the Lord: "You are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul. I must do whatever You cause meto do. I am not independent of You."
                                   TEXT 272
                    eta bali' bharati gosani katoyate gela
                     mahaprabhu taha yai' sannyasa karila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Kesava Bharati, the spiritual master, went back
to his village, Katwa. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu went there and acceptedthe renounced order of life [sannyasa].
                                   PURPORT     At the end of His twenty-fourth year, at the end of the fortnight
of the waxing moon, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu left Navadvipa and crossedthe River Ganges at a place known as Nidayara-ghata. Then He reachedKantaka-nagara, or Katoya (Katwa), where He accepted ekadanda-sannyasaaccording to the Sankarite system. Since Kesava Bharati belonged to theSankarite sect, he could not award the Vaisnava sannyasa order, whosemembers carry the tridanda.     Candrasekhara Acarya assisted in the routine ceremonial work of theLord's acceptance of sannysa. By the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,kirtana was performed for the entire day, and at the end of the day theLord shaved off His hair. On the next day He became a regular sannyasi,with one rod (ekadanda). From that day on, His name was Sri KrsnaCaitanya. Before that, He was known as Nimai Pandita. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, in the sannyasa order, traveled all over the Radhadesa, theregion where the Ganges River cannot be seen. Kesava Bharati accompaniedHim for some distance.
                                   TEXT 273                    sange nityananda, candrasekhara acarya
                  mukunda-datta,--ei tina kaila sarva karya
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa, three personalities
were with Him to perform all the necessary activities. They wereNityananda Prabhu, Candrasekhara Acarya and Mukunda Datta.
                                   TEXT 274
                       ei adi-Iilara kaila sutra ganana
                      vistari varnila iha dasa vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have summarized the incidents of the Adi-lila. Srila
Vrndavana dasa Thakura has described them elaborately [in his Caitanya-bhagavata].
                                   TEXT 275
                     yasoda-nandana haila sacira nandana
                    catur-vidha bhakta-bhava kare asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     The same Supreme Personality of Godhead who appeared as the son of
mother Yasoda has now appeared as the son of mother Saci, relishing fourkinds of devotional activities.
                                   PURPORT     Servitude, friendship, paternal affection and conjugal love for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are the basis of the four kinds ofdevotional activities. In santa, the marginal stage of devotionalservice, there is no activity. But above the santa humor are servitude,friendship, paternal affection and conjugal love, which represent thegradual growth of devotional service to higher and higher platforms.
                                   TEXT 276                    sva-madhurya radha-prema-rasa asvadite
                    radha-bhava angi kariyache bhala-mate
                                 TRANSLATION     To taste the mellow quality of Srimati Radharani's loving affairs
in Her relationship with Krna, and to understand the reservoir ofpleasure in Krsna, Krsna Himself, as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, acceptedthe mood of Radharani.
                                   PURPORT     In this connection Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura writes
in his Anubhasya, "Sri Gaurasu ndara is Krsna Himself with the attitudeof Srimati Radharani. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu never gave up the attitudeof the gopis. He remained everlastingly predominated by Krsna and never
accepted the part of the predominator by imitating conjugal love with anordinary woman, as sahajiyas generally do. He never placed Himself inthe position of a debauchee. Lusty materialists like the members of thesahajiya-samprad\ya han ker after women, even others' wives. But whenthey try to ascribe the responsibility for their lusty activities to SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu,they become offenders to Svarupa Damodara and SrilaVrndavana dasa Thakura. In Sri Caitanya-bhagavata, Adi-khanda, ChapterFifteen, it is said:     sabe para-strira prati nahi parihasa     stri dekhi' dure prabhu hayena eka-pasa`Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu never even joked with others' wives. As soon asHe saw a woman coming, He would immediately give her ample room to passwithouttalking.' He was extremely strict regarding the association ofwomen. The sahajiys, however, pose as followers of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, although they indulge in lusty affairs with women. In Hisyouth Lord Caitanya was very humorous with everyone, but He never jokedwith any woman, nor in this incarnation did He talk about women. Thegauranga-nagari party is not approved by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu orVrndavana dasa Thakura. Even though one may offer all kinds of prayersto Caitanya Mahaprabhu, one should strictly avoid worshiping Him as theGauranga Nagara. The personal behavior of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu andthe verses written by Sri Vrndavana dasa Thakura have completelyrepudiated the lusty desires of the gauranga-nagaris."
                                   TEXT 277                   gopi-bhava yate prabhu dhariyache ekanta
                     vrajendra-aandane mane apanara kanta
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted the mood of the gopis, who accept
Vrajendranandana, Sri Krsna, as their lover.
                                   TEXT 278
                      gopika-bhavera ei sudrdha niscaya
                    vrajendra-nandana vina anyatra na haya
                                 TRANSLATION     It is firmly ascertained that the ecstatic mood of the gopis is
possible only before Krsna, and no one else.
                                   TEXT 279
                  syamasundara, sikhipiccha-gunjn-vibhusana
                    gopa-vesa, tri-bhangima, murali-vadana
                                 TRANSLATION     He has a bluish complexion, a peacock feather on His head, a gunja
garland and the decorations of a cowherd boy. His body is curved inthree places, and He has a flute in His mouth.
                                   TEXT 280
                     iha chadi' krsna yadi haya anyakara
                    gopikara bhava nahi yaya nikata tahara
                                 TRANSLATION     If Lord Krsna gives up this original form and assumes another Visnu
form, nearness to Him cannot invoke the ecstatic mood of the gopis.
                                   TEXT 281
            gopinam pasupendra-nandana juso bhavasya kas tam krti
             vijnatum ksamate duruha-padavi-sancarinah prakriyam           aviskurvati vaisnavim api tanum tasmin bhujair jisnubhir            yasam hanta caturbhir adbhuta-rucim ragodayah kuncati
                                 TRANSLATION     "Once Lord Sri Krsna, with a playful motive, manifested Himself as
Narayana, with four victorious hands and a very beautiful form. Seeingthis exalted form, however, crippled the ecstatic feelings of the gopis.A learned scholar, therefore, cannot understand the gopis' ecstaticfeelings, which are firmly fixed upon the original form of Lord Krsna asthe son of Nanda Maharaja. The wonderful feelings of the gopis inecstatic parama-rasa with Krsna are the greatest mystery in spiritual Iife."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Lalita-madhava (6.14) by Srila Rupa
Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 282                   vasanta-kale rasa-Iila kare go vardhane
                  antardhana kaila sanketa kari' radha-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     During the season of springtime, when the rasa dance was going on,
suddenly Krsna disappeared from the scene, indicating that He wanted tobe alone with Srimati Rad harani.
                                   TEXT 283
                   nibhrta-nikunje vasi' dekhe radhara bata                      anvesite aila tahan gopikara thata
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna was sitting in a solitary bush, waiting for Srimati Radharani
to pass by. But while He was searching, the gopis arrived there, like aphalanx of soldiers.
                                   TEXT 284
                    dura haite krsne dekhi' bale gopi-gana
                 "ei dekha kunjera bhitara vrajendra-nandana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Here within a bush is Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja."
                                   TEXT 285
                  gopi-gana dekhi' krsnera ha-ila sadh vasa
                      lukaite narila, bhaye haila bibasa
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as Krsna saw all the gopis, He was struck with emotion.
Thus He could not hide Himself, and out of fear He became motionless.
                                   TEXT 286
                    catur-bhuja murti dhari' achena vasiya
                     krsna dekhi' gopi kahe nikate asiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna assumed His four-armed Narayana form and sat there. When all
the gopis came, seeing Him they spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 287
                    ihon krsna nahe, ihon narayana murti'
                    eta bali' tanre sabhe kare nati-stuti
                                 TRANSLATION     "He is not Krsna! He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Narayana." After saying this, they offered obeisances and the followingrespectful prayers.
                                   TEXT 288                     "namo narayana, de va karaha prasada
                    krsna-sanga deha' mora ghucaha visada"
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Lord Narayana, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
Kindly be merciful to us. Give usthe association of Krsna andthusvanquish our lamentation."
                                   PURPORT     The gopis were not made happy even by seeing the four-armed form of
Narayana. Yet they offered their respects to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead and begged from Him the benediction of achieving the associationof Krsna. Such is the ecstatic feeling of the gopis.
                                   TEXT 289                      eta bali namaskari' gela gopi-gana
                      hena-kale radha asi' dila darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this and offering obeisances, all the gopis dispersed.
Then Srimati Radharani came and appeared before Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 290
                    radha dekhi' krsna tanre hasya karite
                     sei catur-bhuja murti cahena rakhite
                                 TRANSLATION     When Lord Krsna saw Radharani, He wanted to maintain the four-armed
form to joke with Her.
                                   TEXT 291
                       lukaila dui bhuja radhara agrete
                    bahu yatna kaila krsna, narila rakhite
                                 TRANSLATION     In front of Srimati Radharani, Sri Krsna tried to hide the two
extra arms. He tried His best to keep four arms before Her, but He wascompletely unable to do so.
                                   TEXT 292
                  radhara visuddha-bhavera acintya prabha va                    ye krsnere karaila dvi-bhuja-svabhava
                                 TRANSLATION     The influence of Radharani's pure ecstasy is so inconceivably great
that it forced Krsna to come to His original two-armed form.
                                   TEXT 293
             rasarambha-vidhau niliya vasata kunje mrgaksi-ganair
          drstam gopayitum svam uddhura-dhiy\ y\ susth u sandarsita            radhayah pranayasya hanta mahima yasya sriya raksitum             sa sakya prabha- visnunapi harina nasic catur-bahuta
                                 TRANSLATION     "Prior to the rasa dance, Lord Krsna hid Himself in a grove just to
have fun. When the gopis came, their eyes resembling those of deer, byHis sharp intelligence He exhibited His beautiful four-armed form tohide Himself. But when Srimati Radharani came there, Krsna could notmaintain His four arms in Her presence. This is the wonderful glory ofHer love."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Ujjvala-ailamani by Srila Rupa Gosvami.                                   TEXT 294                    sei vrajes vara--ihan jagannatha pita
                     sei vrajes vari--ihan sacide vi mata
                                 TRANSLATION     Father Nanda, the King of Vrajabhumi, is now Jagannatha Misra, the
father of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. And mother Yasoda, the Queen ofVrajabhumi, is now Sacidevi, Lord Caitanya's mother.
                                   TEXT 295
                     sei nanda-suta--ihan caitanya.gosani
                     sei balade va--ihan nityananda bhai
                                 TRANSLATION     The former son of Nanda Maharaja is now Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
and the former Baladeva, Krsna's brother, is now Nityananda Prabhu, thebrother of Lord Caitanya.
                                   TEXT 296                   vatsalya, dasya, sakhya--tina bhavamaya
                    sei nityananda--krsna-caitanya-sahaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Nityananda Prabhu always feels the ecstatic emotions of
paternity, servitude and friendship. He always assists Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu in that way.
                                   TEXT 297
                   prema-bhakti diya tenho bhasa'la jagate
                      tanra caritra loke na pare bujhite
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Nityananda Prabhu overflooded the entire world by distributing
transcendental loving service. No one can understand His character andactivities.
                                   TEXT 298
                    advaita-acarya-gosani bhakta-a vatara
                    krsna avatariya kaila bhaktira pracara
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Advaita Acarya Prabhu appeared as an incarnation of a
devotee. He is in the category of Krsna, but He descended to this earthto propagate devotional service.
                                   TEXT 299
                   sakhya, dasya,--dui bhava sahaja tanhara
                   kabhu prabhu karena tanre guru-vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     His natural emotions were always on the platform of fraternity and
servitude, but the Lord sometimes treated Him as His spiritual master.
                                   TEXT 300
                   srivasadi yata mahaprabhura bhak ta-gana
                    nija nija bhave karena caitanya-sevana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, headed by Srivasa
Thakura, have their own emotional humors in which they render serviceunto Him.
                                   TEXT 301
                      pandita-gosani adi yanra yei rasa
                     sei sei rase prabhu hana tanra vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Personal associates like Gadadhara, Svarupa Damodara, Ramananda
Raya, and the six Gosvamis headed by Rupa Gosvami are all situated intheir respective transcendental humors. Thus the Lord submits to varioustranscendentally mellow positions.
                                   PURPORT     In verses 296 through 301 the emotional devoted service of Sri
Nityananda and Sri Advaita Prabhu has been fully described. Describingsuch individual service, the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verses 11 through16, declares that although Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared as adevotee, He is none other than the son of Nanda Maharaja. Similarly,although Sri Nityananda Prabhu appeared as Lord Caitanya's assistant, Heis none other than Baladeva, the carrier of the plow. Advaita Acarya isthe incarnation of Sadasiva from the spiritual world. All the devoteesheaded by Srivasa Thakura are His marginal energy, whereas the devoteesheaded by Gadadhara Pandita are manifestations of His internal potency.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Advaita Prabhu and Nityananda Prabhu allbelong to the visnu-tattva category. Because Lord Caitanya is an oceanof mercy, He is addressed as mahaprabhu, whereas Nityananda and Advaita,being two great personalities who assist Lord Caitanya, are addressed asprabhu. Thus there are two prabhus and one mahaprabhu. Gadadhara Gosvamiis a representative of a perfect brahmana spiritual master. SrivasaThakura represents a perfect brahmana devotee. These five are known asthe Panca-tattva.
                                   TEXT 302                    tihan syama,--vamsi-mukha, gopa-vilasi
                 ihan gaura--kabhu dvija, kabhu ta' sannyasi
                                 TRANSLATION     In krsna-lila the Lord's complexion is blackish. A flute in His
mouth, He enjoys as a cowherd boy. Now the selfsame person has appearedwith a fair complexion, sometimes acting as a brahmana and sometimesaccepting the renounced order of life.
                                   TEXT 303
                    atae va apane prabhu gopi-bhava dhari'                 vrajendra-nandane kahe `prana-natha ' kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore the Lord Himself, accepting the emotional ecstasy of the
gopis, now addresses the son of Nanda Maharaja, "O master of My life! OMy dear husband!"
                                   TEXT 304
                     sei krsna, sei gopi,--parama virodha
                   acintya caritra prabhura ati sudurbodha
                                 TRANSLATION     He is Krsna, yet He has accepted the mood of the gopis. How is it
so? It is the inconceivable character of the Lord, which is verydifficult to understand.
                                   PURPORT     Krsna's accepting the part of the gopis is certainly contradictory
according to any mundane calculations, but the Lord, by Hisinconceivable character, may act like the gopis and feel separation fromKrsna, although He is Krsna Himself. Such a contradiction can bereconciled only in the Supreme Personality of Godhead because He hasenergy that is inconceivable (acintya), which can make possible thatwhich is impossible to do (agatan gatan patiyasi). Such contradictionsare very difficult to understand unless a devotee strictly follows theVaisnava philosophy under the direction of the Gosvamis. ThereforeKrsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami ends every chapter with this verse;     sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa     caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa"Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, alwaysdesiring their mercy, l, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps."     In a song by Narottama dasa Thakura it is stated:     rupa-raghunatha-pade ha-ibe akuti     kabe hama bujhaba se yugala-piritiThe conjugal love between Radha and Krsna, which is called yugala-piriti, is not understandable by mundane scholars, artists or poets. Itis simply to be understood by devotees who strictly follow in thefootsteps of the six Gosvamis. Sometimes so-called artists and poets tryto understand the love affairs of Radha and Krsna, and they publishcheap books of poetry and pictures on the subject. Unfortunately,however, they do not understand the transcendental affairs of Radha andKrsna even to the smallest degree. They are simply meddling in a matterin which they are not fit even to enter.
                                   TEXT 305                    ithe tarka kari' keha na kara samsaya
                      krsnera acintya-sakti ei mata haya                                 TRANSLATION
     One cannot understand the contradictions in Lord Caitanya's
character by putting forward mundane logic and arguments. Consequentlyone should not maintain doubts in this connection. One should simply tryto understand the inconceivable energy of Krsna; otherwise one cannotunderstand how such contradictions are possible.
                                   TEXT 306
                    acintya, adbhuta krsna-caitanya-vihara
                   citra bhna, citra guna, citra vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu are inconceivable and
wonderful. His ecstasy is wonderful, His qualities are wonderful, andHis behavior is wonderful.
                                   TEXT 307
                       tarke iha nahi mane yei duracara
                     kumbhioake pace, tara nahika nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     If one simply adheres to mundane arguments and therefore does not
accept this, he will boil in the hell of Kumbhipaka. For him there is nodeliverance.
                                   PURPORT     Kumbhipaka, a type of hellish condition, is described in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (5.26.13), wherein it is said that a person who cooks livingbirds and beasts to satisfy his tongue is brought before Yamaraja afterdeath and punished in the Kumbhipaka hell. There he is put into boilingoil called kumbhi-paka, from which there is no deliverance. Kumbhipakais meant for persons who are unnecessarily envious. Those who areenvious of the activities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are punished inthat hellish condition.
                                   TEXT 308                acintyah khalu ye bhna na tams tarkena yojayet
               prakrtibhyah param yac ca tad acmtyasya laksanam
                                 TRANSLATION     "Anything transcendental to material nature is called
inconceivable, whereas arguments are all mundane. Since mundanearguments cannot touch transcendentalsubject matters, one should not try to understand transcendental
subjects through mundane arguments."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quote from the Bhakti-rasainrta-sindhu (2.5.93) by Srila
Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 309                    adbhuta caitanya-lil\ya yahara visvasa
                      sei jana y\ya caitanyera pada pasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Only a person who has firm faith in the wonderful pastimes of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu can approach His lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 310
                     prasange kahila ei siddhantera sara
                    iha yei sune, suddha-bhakti haya tara
                                 TRANSLATION     In this discourse I have explained the essence of the devotional
conclusion. Anyone who hears this develops unalloyed devotional serviceto the Lord.
                                   TEXT 311
                     likhita granthera yadi kari anuvada
                     tabe se granthera artha paiye asvada
                                 TRANSLATION     If I repeat what is already written, I may thus relish the purpose
of this scripture.
                                   TEXT 312
                    dekhi granthe bhaga vate vyasera acara
                      katha kahi' anuvada kare vara vara
                                 TRANSLATION     We can see in the scripture Srimad-Bhagavatam the conduct of its
author, Sri Vyasadeva. After speaking the narration, he repeats it againand again.                                   PURPORT
     At the end of Srimad-Bhagavatam, in the Twelfth Canto, the Twelfth
Chapter has fifty-two verses in which Sri Krsna-dvaipayana Vedavyasarecapitulates Srimad- Bhagavatam's entire subject matter. Sri KrsnadasaKaviraja Gosvami wants to follow in the footsteps of Sri Vyasadeva byrecapitulating the seventeen chapters of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta's Adi-lila.
                                   TEXT 313                    tate adi-iiiara kari pariccheda ganana
                 prathama paricchede kailun `mangaiacarana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore I shall enumerate the chapters of the Adi-Iila. In the
First Chapter I offer obeisances to the spiritual master, for this isthe beginning of auspicious writing.
                                   TEXT 314
                dvitiya paricchede `caitanyo-tattva-nirupana `
                    svayam bhaga van yei vrajendra-nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Second Chapter explains the truth of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna, the son ofMaharaja Nanda.
                                   TEXT 315
                   tenho ta' caitanya-krsna--sacira nandana
                  trtiya paricchede janmera `samanya' karana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is Krsna Himself, has now
appeared as the son of mother Saci. The Third Chapter describes thegeneral cause of His appearance.
                                   TEXT 316
                   tahin madhye prema-dana--`visesa' karana
                   yuga-dharma--krsna-nama-prema-pracarana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Third Chapter specifically describes the distribution of love
of Godhead. It also describes the religion of the age, which is simplyto distribute the holy name of Lord Krsna and propagate the process of
loving Him.
                                   TEXT 317
                  caturthe kahilun janmera `mula' prayojana
                    sva-madhurya-premananda-rasa-as vadana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Fourth Chapter describes the main reason for His appearance,
which is to taste the mellow quality of His own transcendental lovingservice and His own sweetness.
                                   TEXT 318
                   pancame `sri-nityananda'-tattva nirupana
                     nityananda haila rama rohini-nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Fifth Chapter describes the truth of Lord Nityananda Prabhu,
who is none other than Balarama, the son of Rohini.
                                   TEXT 319
                 sastha paricchede `advaita-tattve'ra vicara
                     advaita-acarya--maha-visnu-a vatara
                                 TRANSLATION     The Sixth Chapter considers the truth of Advaita Acarya. He is an
incarnation of Maha-Visnu.
                                   TEXT 320
                 saptama paricchede `panca-tattve'ra akhyana
                  panca-tattva mili' yaiche kaiia prema-dana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Seventh Chapter describes the Panca-tattva--Sri Caitanya,
Prabhu Nityananda, Sri Advaita, Gadadhara and Srivasa. They all combinedtogether to distribute love of Godhead everywhere.
                                   TEXT 321
                    astame `caitanya-Iila-varnana'-karana
                     eka krsna-namera maha-mahima-kathana                                 TRANSLATION
     The Eighth Chapter gives the reason for describing Lord Caitanya's
pastimes. It also describes the greatness of Lord Krsna's holy name.
                                   TEXT 322
                   navamete `bhakti-kalpa-vrksera varnana'
                    sri-caitanya-mali kaila vrksa aropana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Ninth Chapter describes the desire tree of devotional service.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself is the gardener who planted it.
                                   TEXT 323
                   dasamete mula-skandhera `sakhadi-ganana,
                  sarva-sakha-ganera yaich e phala- vitarana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Tenth Chapter describes the branches and sub-branches of the
main trunk, and the distribution of their fruits.
                                   TEXT 324
                     ekadase `nityananda-sakha-vivarana'
                  dvadase `advaita-skandha sakhara varnana,
                                 TRANSLATION     The Eleventh Chapter describes the branch called Sri Nityananda
Prabhu. The Twelfth Chapter describes the branch called Sri AdvaitaPrabhu.
                                   TEXT 325
                   trayodase mahaprabhura `janma-vivarana'
                    krsna-nama-saha yaiche prabhura janama
                                 TRANSLATION     The Thirteenth Chapter describes the birth of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, which took place with the chanting of the holy name ofKrsna.
                                   TEXT 326                   caturdase `balya-lijara' kichu vivarana
                 pancadase `pauganda-Iilara' sanksepe kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Fourteenth Chapter gives some description of the Lord's
childhood pastimes. The Fifteenth briefly, describes the Lord's boyhoodpastimes.
                                   TEXT 327
                  sodasa paricchede `kaisora-Iila' ra uddesa
                   saptadase `yauvana-Iila' kahilun visesa
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Sixteenth Chapter I have indicated the pastimes of the
kaisora age [the age prior to youth ]. In the Seventeenth Chapter I havespecifically described His youthful pastimes.
                                   TEXT 328
                  ei saptadasa prakara adi-Iilara prabandha
                 dvadasa prabandha tate gran tha-m ukhabandha
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus there are seventeen varieties of subjects in the First Canto,
which is known as the Adi-Iila. Twelve of these constitute the prefaceof this scripture.
                                   TEXT 329
                     panca-prabandhe panca-rasera carita
                   sanksepe kahilun ati,--na kailun vistrta
                                 TRANSLATION     After the chapters of the preface, I have described five
transcendental mellows in five chapters. I have described them verybriefly rather than expansively.
                                   TEXT 330
                    vrndavana-dasa iha `caitanya-mangale'
                    vistari' varnila nityananda-ajna-bale
                                 TRANSLATION     By the order and strength of Sri Nityananda Prabhu, Srila Vrndavana
dasa Thakura has elaborately described in his Caitanya-mangala all thatI have not.
                                   TEXT 331
                  sri-krsna-caitanya-Iila--adbhuta, anan ta
                    brahma-siva-sesa yanra nahi paya anta
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu are wonderful and
unlimited. Even personalities like Lord Brahma, Lord Siva and Sesanagacannot find their end.
                                   TEXT 332
                     ye yei ams'a kahe, s-une sei dhanya
                     acire milibe tare sri-krsna-caitanya
                                 TRANSLATION     Anyone who describes or hears any part of this elaborate subject
will very soon receive the causeless mercy of Sri Krsna CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 333
                   sri-krsna-caitanya, advaita, nityananda
                    srivasa-gadadharadi yata bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     [ Herein the author again describes the Panca-tattva.] Sri Krsna
Caitanya, Prabhu Nityananda, Sri Advaita, Gadadhara, Srivasa and all thedevotees of Lord Caitanya.
                                   TEXT 334
                    yata yata bhakta-gana vaise vrndavane
                     namra hana sire dharon sabara carane
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances to all the residents of Vrndavana.
I wish to place their lotus feet on my head in great humbleness.
                                 TEXT 335-336                      sri-s varupa-sri-rupa-sri-sanatana
                   sri-raghunatha-dasa, ara srijiva-carana
                   sire dhari vandon, nitya karon tanra asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     I wish to place the lotus feet of the Gosvamis on my head. Their
names are Sri Svarupa Damodara, Sri Rupa Gosvami, Sri Sanatana Gosvami,Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami and Sri J iva Gosvami. Placing their lotusfeet on my head, always hoping to serve them, I, Krsnadasa, narrate SriCaitanya-caritamrta, following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Adi-lila, Seventeenth Chapter, describing the pastimes of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu in His youth.
“Caitanya-caritamrita – Adi Lila ” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Summary: Caitanya-caritamrita is the biography of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
written by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami in the 16
th century, now published
with elaborate translations and commentaries in English by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami. The multi-volume Caitanya-caritamrita is dividedinto three sections, Adi Lila, Madhya Lila, and Antya Lila, representingthe beginning, middle, and concluding pastimes of Lord ChaitanyaMahaprabhu. This file comprises the text of the several volumes thatmake up the Adi Lila section.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluationcopy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyrightinformation intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Caitanya Caritamrita” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1974-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .