“Caitanya-caritamrita – Antya Lila ” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Summary: Caitanya-caritamrita is the biography of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
written by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami in the 16th century, now published
with elaborate translations and commentaries in English by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami. The multi-volume Caitanya-caritamrita is dividedinto three sections, Adi Lila, Madhya Lila, and Antya Lila, representingthe beginning, middle, and concluding pastimes of Lord ChaitanyaMahaprabhu. This file comprises the text of the several volumes thatmake up the Antya Lila section.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluationcopy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyrightinformation intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Caitanya Caritamrita” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1975-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .
                                 Chapter One
              Srila Rupa Gosvami's Second Meeting With the Lord     A summary of the First Chapter is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya as follows. When Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu returned to Jagannatha Puri from Vrndavana, all His devoteesfrom other parts of India, upon receiving the auspicious news, came topurusottama-ksetra, or Jagannatha Puri. Sivananda Sena took a dog withhim and even paid fees for it to cross the river. One night, however,the dog could not get any food and therefore went directly to SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri. The next day, when Sivananda andhis party reached Jagannatha Puri, Sivananda saw the dog eating somecoconut pulp offered to it by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. After thisincident, the dog was liberated and went back home, back to Godhead.     Meanwhile, S rila Rupa Gosvami reached Bengal, after retu rning
from Vrndavana. Although he could not follow the Bengali devotees, aftersome time he then came to Jagannatha Puri, where he stayed with HaridasaThakura. Srila Rupa Gosvami composed an important verse, beginning withthe words priyah so 'yam, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu relished it verymuch. One day when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Ramananda Raya andSarvabhauma Bhattacarya went to see Haridasa Thakura, the Lord saw theverse Rupa Gosvami had composed as an introduction to his books Lalita-madhava and Vidagdha-madhava. After examining the manuscripts of thesetwo books, Ramananda Raya approved and appreciated them very much. Afterthe period of Caturmasya, all the devotees who had come from Bengalreturned to their homes. Srila Rupa Gosvami, however, remained atJagannatha Puri for some time.
                                    TEXT 1                           pangum langhayate sailam
                           mukam avartayec chrutim                           yat-krpa tam aham vande                           krsna-caitanyam isvaram
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisaces to Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
by whose mercy even a lame man ca cross over a mountain ad a dumb manrecite Vedic literature.
                                    TEXT 2
                           durgame pathi me'ndhasya
                           skhalat-pada-gater muhuh                            sva-krpa- yasti-danena                           santah santv avalambanam
                                 TRANSLATION     My path is very difficult. I am blind, and my feet are slipping
again and again. Therefore, may the saints help me by granting me thestick of their mercy as my support.
                                   TEXT 3-4
                     sri-rupa, sanatana bhatta-raghunatha
                   sri-jiva, gopala-bhatta, dasa-raghunatha
                     ei chaya gurura karon carana vandana
                    yaha haite vighna-nasa, abhista-purana
                                 TRANSLATION     I pray to the lotus feet of the six Gosvamis--Sri Rupa, Sanatana,
Bhatta Raghunatha, Srt Jiva, Gopala Bhatta and Dasa Raghunatha--so thatall impediments to my writing this literature will be anihilated ad my
real desire will be fulfilled.
                                   PURPORT     If one wants to benefit the entire world, he will certainly find
persons like hogs and pigs who will put forward many impediments. Thatis natural. But if a devotee seeks shelter at the lotus feet of the sixGosvamis, the merciful Gosvamis will certainly give the Lord's servitorall protection. It is not astonishing that impediments are placed beforethose who are spreading the Krsna consciousness movement all over theworld. Nevertheless, if we adhere to the lotus feet of the six Gosvamisand pray for their mercy, all impediments will be annihilated, and thetranscendental devotional desire to serve the Supreme Lord will befulfilled.
                                    TEXT 5                            jayatam suratau pangor
                            mama manda-mater gati                          mat-sarvas va-padambhojau                            radha-madana-moha nau
                                 TRANSLATION     Glory to the all-merciful Radha ad Madaa-mohana! I am lame and
illadvised, yet They are my directors, and Their lotus feet areeverything to me.
                                    TEXT 6
                     divyad- vrndaranya-kalpa-drumadhah-
                       srimad-ratnagara-simhasana-sthau                      srimad-radha-srila-govinda-de vau                       presthalibhih sevyamanau smarami
                                 TRANSLATION     In a temple of jewels in Vrndavana, underneath a desire tree, Sri
Sri RadhaGovinda, served by Their most confidential associates, sit uponan effulgent throne. I offer my humble obeisances unto Them.
                                    TEXT 7
                           sriman-rasa-rasarambh i
                           vamsiva ta- tata-sthitah                          karsan venu-svanair gopir                          gopi-nathah sriye'stu nah
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Srila Gopinatha, who originated the transcendental mellow of
the rasa dance, stands on the shore at Vamsivata and attracts theattention of the cowherd damsels with the sound of His celebrated flute.May they all confer upon us their benediction.
                                    TEXT 8
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord
Nityananda! All glories to Advalta Acarya! All glories to the devoteesof Lord Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu!
                                    TEXT 9
                    madhya-lila sanksepete karilun varnana
                  antya-lila-varnana kichu suna, bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have briefly described the pastimes of Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu in
the Madhya-lila. Now I shall attempt to describe something about Hislast pastimes, which are known as the Antya-lila.
                                   TEXT 10
                   madhya-lila-madhye antya-lila-sutra-gana
                  purva-granthe sanksepete kariyachi varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have briefly described the Antya-lila in codes within the Madhya-
lila.
                                   TEXT 11
                    ami jara-grasta, nikate janiya marana
                    antya kono kono lila kariyachi varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     I am now aImost an invalid because of old age, and I know that at
any moment I may die. Therefore I have already described some portionsof the Antya-lila.
                                   PURPORT     Following in the footsteps of Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, I
am trying to translate the Bhagavata literatures as quickly as possible.However, knowing myself to be an old man and almost an invalid becauseof rheumatism, I have already translated the essence of all literatures,the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as a summary study in English. Istarted the Krsna consciousness movement at the age of seventy. Now I amseventy-eight, and so my death is imminent. I am trying to finish thetranslation of Srimad-Bhagavatam as soon as possible, but beforefinishing it, I have given my readers the book Krsna, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, so that if I die before finishing the wholetask, they may enjoy this book, which is the essence of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
                                   TEXT 12                     purva-likhita grantha-sutra-anusare
                     yei nahi likhi, taha likhiye vistare
                                 TRANSLATION     In accordance with the codes previously written, I shall describe
in detall whatever I have not mentioned.
                                   TEXT 13
                     vrndavana haite prabhu nilacale aila
                     svarupa-gosani gaude varta pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to Jagannatha Puri from
Vrndavana, Svarupa Damodara Gosani immediately sent news of the Lord'sarrival to the devotees in Bengal.
                                   TEXT 14
                    suni' saci anandita, saba bhakta-gana
                      sabe mili` nilacale karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Upon hearing this news, mother Saci and all the other devotees of
Navadvipa were very joyful, and they all departed together for Nilacala[Jagannatha Puri].
                                   TEXT 15
                   kulina-grami bhakta ara yata khanda-vasi
                    acarya sivananda sane milila sabe asi'
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus all the devotees of Kulina-grama and Sri Khanda, as well as
Advaita Acarya, came together to meet Sivananda Sena.
                                   TEXT 16
                    sivananda kare sabara ghati samadhana
                     sabare palana kare, deya vasa-sthana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena arranged for the journey. He maintained everyone and
provided residential quarters.
                                   TEXT 17
                       eka kukkura cale sivananda-sane
                     bhaksya diya lanacale kariya palane
                                 TRANSLATION     While going to Jagannatha Puri, Sivananda Sena allowed a dog to go
with him. He supplied it food to eat and maintained it.
                                   TEXT 18
                     eka-dina eka-sthane nadi para haite
                    udiya navika kukkura na cadaya naukate
                                 TRANSLATION     One day, when they needed to cross a river, an Orissan boatman
would not allow the dog to get in the boat.
                                   TEXT 19
                   kukkura rahila,--sivananda duhkhi haila
                    dasa pana kadi diya kukkure para kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena, unhappy that the dog had to stay behind, paid the
boatman ten pana of conchshells to take the dog across the river.
                                   PURPORT     One pana is eighty kadis, or small conchshells. Formerly, even
fifty or sixty years ago, there was no paper currency in India. Coinswere generally made not of base metal but of gold, silver and copper. Inother words, the medium of exchange was really something valuable. Fourpieces of kadi made one ganda-, and twenty such gandas equaled one pana.
This kadi was also used as a medium of exchange; therefore SivanandaSena paid for the dog with dasa pana, or eighty times ten pieces ofkadi. In those days one paisa was also subdivided into smallconchshells, but at the present moment the prices for commodities havegone so high that there is nothing one can get in exchange for only onepaisa. With one paisa in those days, however, one could purchasesufficient vegetables to provide for a whole family. Even thirty yearsago, vegetables were occasionally so inexpensive that one paisa's worthcould provide for a whole family for a day.
                                   TEXT 20                     eka-dina sivanande ghatiyale rakhila
                     kukkurake bhata dite sevaka pasarila
                                 TRANSLATION     One day while Sivananda was detained by a tollman, his servant
forgot to give the dog its cooked rice.
                                   TEXT 21
                      ratre asi sivananda bholanera kale
                   `kukkura panache bhata?'--sevake puchile
                                 TRANSLATION     At night, when Sivananda Sena returned and was taking his meal, he
inquired from the servant whether the dog had gotten its meals.
                                   TEXT 22
                  kukkura nahi paya bhata suni' duhkhi haila
                     kukkura cahite dasa-manusya pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When he learned that the dog had not been supplied food in his
absence, he was very unhappy. He then immediately sent ten men to findthe dog.
                                   TEXT 23
                   cahiya na paila kukkura, loka saba aila
                     duhkhi hana sivananda upavasa kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the men returned without success, Sivananda Sena became very
unhappy and fasted for the night.                                   TEXT 24
                    prabhate kukkura cahi' kanha na paila
                    sakala vaisnavera mane camatkara haila
                                 TRANSLATION     In the morning they looked for the dog, but it could not be found
anywhere. All the Vaisnavas were astonished.
                                   PURPORT     Sivananda Sena's attachment to the dog was a great boon for that
animal. The dog appears to have been a street dog. Since it naturallybegan to follow Sivananda Sena while he was going to Jagannatha Puriwith his party, he accepted it into his party and maintained it the sameway he was maintaining the other devotees. It appears that although onone occasion the dog was not allowed aboard a boat, Sivananda did notleave the dog behind but paid more money just to induce the boatman totake the dog across the river. Then when the servant forgot to feed thedog and the dog disappeared, Sivananda, being very anxious, sent ten mento find it. When they could not find it, Sivananda observed a fast. Thusit appears that somehow or other Sivananda had become attached to thedog.     As will be evident from the following verses, the dog got the mercyof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and was immediately promoted to Vaikuntha tobecome an eternal devotee. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has thereforesung, tumi ta' thakura, tomara kukkura, baliya janaha more (Saranagati19). He thus offers to become the dog of a Vaisnava. There are manyother instances in which the pet animal of a Vaisnava was delivered backhome to Vaikunthaloka, back to Godhead. Such is the benefit of somehowor other becoming the favorite of a Vaisnava. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakurahas also sung, kita-janma ha-u yatha tuya dasa (Saranagati 11). There isno harm in taking birth again and again. Our only desire should be totake birth under the care of a Vaisnava. Fortunately we had theopportunity to be born of a Vaisnava father who took care of us verynicely. He prayed to Srimati Radharani that in the future we wouldbecome a servant of the eternal consort of Sri Krsna. Thus somehow orother we are now engaged in that service. We may conclude that even asdogs we must take shelter of a Vaisnava. The benefit will be the same asthat which accrues to an advanced devotee under a Vaisnava's care.
                                   TEXT 25                     utkanthaya cali' sabe aila nilacale
                      purvavat mahaprabhu milila sakale
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus in great anxiety they all walked to Jagannatha Purt, where Srt
Caitanya Mahaprabhu met them as usual.                                   TEXT 26
                     saba lana kaila jagannatha darasana
                     saba lana mahaprabhu karena bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went with them to see the Lord in the
temple, and on that day He also took lunch in the company of all thosedevotees.
                                   TEXT 27
                 purvavat sabare prabhu pathaila vasa-sthane
                    prabhu-thani pratah-kale aila ara dine
                                 TRANSLATION     As previously, the Lord provided them all with residential
quarters. And the next morning all the devotees came to see the Lord.
                                   TEXT 28
                      asiya dekhila sabe sei ta kukkure
                    prabhu-pase vasiyache kichu alpa-dure
                                 TRANSLATION     When all the devotees came to the place of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
they saw that the same dog was sitting a little apart from the Lord.
                                   TEXT 29
                     prasada narikela-sasya dena phelana
                  `rama' `krsna' `hari' kaha'--balena hasiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Furthermore, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was throwing remnants of green
coconut pulp to the dog. Smiling in His own way, He was saying to thedog, "Chant the holy names Rama, Krsna, and Hari."
                                   TEXT 30
                 sasya khaya kukkura, `krsna' kahe bara bara
                     dekhiya lokera mane haila camatkara
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the dog eating the green coconut pulp and chanting "Krsna,
Krsna" again and again, all the devotees present were very muchsurprised.
                                   TEXT 31
                   sivananda kukkura dekhi' dandavat kaila
                     dainya kari' nija aparadha ksamaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When he saw the dog sitting in that way and chanting the name of
Krsna, Sivananda, because of his natural humility, immediately offeredhis obeisances to the dog just to counteract his offenses to it.
                                   TEXT 32
                      ara dina keha tara dekha na paila
                  siddha-deha pana kukkura vaikunthete gela
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, no one saw that dog, for it had obtained its
spiritual body and departed for Vaikuntha, the spiritual kingdom.
                                   PURPORT     This is the result of sadhu-sanga, consequent association with Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and promotion back home, back to Godhead. Thisresult is possible even for a dog, by the mercy of the Vaisnava.Therefore, everyone in the human form of life should be induced toassociate with devotees. By rendering a little service, even by eatingprasada, not to speak of chanting and dancing, everyone could bepromoted to Vaikunthaloka. It is therefore requested that all ourdevotees in the ISKCON community become pure Vaisnavas, so that by theirmercy all the people of the world will be transferred to Vaikunthaloka,even without their knowledge. Everyone should be given a chance to takeprasada and thus be induced to chant the holy names Hare Krsna and alsodance in ecstasy. By these three processes, although performed withoutknowledge or education, even an animal went back to Godhead.
                                   TEXT 33                     aiche divya-lila kare sacira nandana
                     kukkurake krsna kahana karila mocana
                                 TRANSLATION     Such are the transcendental pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
the son of mother Saci. He even delivered a dog simply by inducing it tochant the maha-mantra, Hare Krsna.                                   TEXT 34
                    etha prabhu-ajnaya rupa aila vrndavana
                     krsna-lila-nataka karite haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Meanwhile, following the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Srila
Rupa Gosvami returned to Vrndavana. He desired to write dramasconcerning the pastimes of Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 35
                      vrndavane natakera arambha karila
                  mangalacarana `nandi-sloka' tathai likhila
                                 TRANSLATION     In Vrndavana, Rupa Gosvami began to write a drama. In particuIar,
he composed the introductory verses to invoke good fortune.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura quotes his notes from the
Nataka-candrika, wherein he has written:      prastavanayas tu mukhe     nandi karyasubhavaha     asir- namas kriya- vastu-     nirdesan yatamanvita     astabhir dasabhir yukta     kimva dvadasabhih padaih     candranamankita pra yo     mangalartha-padojjvala     mangalam cakra-kamala-     cakora-kumudadikamSimilarly, in the Sixth Chapter of the Sahitya-darpana, text 282, he hassaid:     asir- vacana-sam yukta     stutir yasmat prayujyate     deva-dvija- nr-padinam     tasman nanditi samjnitaThe introductory portion of a drama, which is written to invoke goodfortune, is called nandi-sloka.
                                   TEXT 36                  pathe cali' aise natakera ghatana bhavite
                      kadaca kariya kichu lagila likhite
                                 TRANSLATION     On his way to Gauda-desa, Rupa Gosvami had been thinking of how to
write the action of the drama. Thus he had made some notes and begun towrite.
                                   TEXT 37
                       ei-mate dui bhai gauda-dese aila
                   gaude asi' anupamera ganga-prapti haila
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way the two brothers ROpa and Anupama reached Bengal, but
when they arrived there Anupama died.
                                   PURPORT     Formerly when a person died it was commonly said that he had
attained the shelter of mother Ganges, even if he did not die on thebank of the Ganges. it is customary among Hindus to carry a dying personto a nearby bank of the Ganges, for if one dies on the bank of theGanges, his soul is considered to reach the lotus feet of Lord Visnu,wherefrom the Ganges flows.
                                   TEXT 38                    rupa-gosani prabhu-pase karila gamana
                    prabhure dekhite tanra utkanthita mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Rupa Gosvami then departed to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for he
was very eager to see Him.
                                   TEXT 39
                  anupamera lagi' tanra kichu vilamba ha-ila
                     bhakta-gana-pasa aila, lag na paila
                                 TRANSLATION     There was some delay because of the death of Anupama, and therefore
when Rupa Gosvami went to Bengal to see the devotees there, he could notget in touch with them because they had already left.
                                   TEXT 40
                   udiya-dese `satyabhama-pura'-name grama
                      eka ratri sei grame karila visrama
                                 TRANSLATION     In the province of Orissa there is a place known as Satyabhama-
pura. Srila Rupa Gosvami rested for a night in that village on his wayto Jagannatha Puri.
                                   PURPORT     There is a place known as Satyabhama-pura in the district of Kataka
(Cuttak) in Orissa. It is near the village known as Jankadei-pura.
                                   TEXT 41                   ratre svapne dekhe,--eka divya-rupa nari
                   sammukhe asiya ajna dila bahu kroa kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     While resting in Satyabhama-pura, he dreamed that a celestiaIly
beautiful woman had come before him and very mercifuIly gave him thefolIowing order.
                                   TEXT 42
                      "amara nataka prthak karaha racana
                     amara krpate nataka haibe vilaksana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Write a separate drama about me," she said. "By my mercy, it will
be extraordinarily beautiful."
                                   TEXT 43
                   svapna dekhi' rupa-gosani karila vicara
                  satya-bhamara ajna--prthak nataka karibara
                                 TRANSLATION     After having that dream, Srila Rupa Gosvami considered,"It is the
order of Satyabhama that I write a separate drama for her.
                                   TEXT 44
                   vraja-pura-lila ekatra kariyachi ghatana
                      dui bhaga kari' ebe karimu racana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have brought together in one work all the pastimes performed by
Lord Krsna in Vrndavana and in Dvaraka. Now I shall have to divide theminto two dramas."                                   TEXT 45
                     bhavite bhavite sighra aila nilacale
                      asi' uttarila haridasa-vasa-sthale
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus absorbed in thought, he quickly reached Jagannatha Puri. When
he arrived, he approached the hut of Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 46
                    haridasa-thakura tanre bahu-krpa kaila
                     `tumi asibe,--more prabhu ye kahila'
                                 TRANSLATION     Out of affectionate love and mercy, Haridasa Thakura told Srila
Rupa Gosvami, "Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has already informed me that youwould come here."
                                   TEXT 47
                   `upala-bhoga' dekhi' haridasere dekhite
                    pratidina aisena, prabhu aila acambite
                                 TRANSLATION     After seeing the upala-bhoga ceremony at the Jagannatha temple,
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would regularly come to see Haridasa everyday. Thus He suddenly arrived there.
                                   TEXT 48
                    `rupa dandavat kare',--haridasa kahila
                     haridase mili' prabhu rupe alingila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord arrived, Rupa Gosvami immediately offered his
obeisances. Haridasa informed the Lord, "This is Rupa Gosvami offeringYou obeisances"' and the Lord embraced him.
                                   TEXT 49
                 haridasa-rupe lana prabhu vasila eka-sthane
                 kusala-prasna, ista-gosthi kaila kata-ksane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then sat down with Haridasa and Rupa
Gosvami. They inquired from one another about auspicious news, and thencontinued to talk together for some time.
                                   TEXT 50
                     sanatanera varta yabe gosani puchila
                   rupa kahe,--`ta-ra sange dekha na ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired about Sanatana Gosvami, ROpa
Gosvami replied,"I did not meet him.
                                   TEXT 51
                   ami ganga-pathe ailana, tinho raja-pathe
                    ataeva amara dekha nahila tanra sathe
                                 TRANSLATION     "I came by the path on the bank of the Ganges, whereas Sanatana
Gosvami came by the public road. Therefore we did not meet.
                                   TEXT 52
                    prayage sunilun,--tenho gela vrndavane
                    anupamera ganga-prapti kaila nivedane"
                                 TRANSLATION     "In Prayaga I heard that he had already gone to Vrndavana" Rupa
Gosvami next informed the Lord about the death of Anupama.
                                   TEXT 53
                      rupe tahan vasa diya gosani calila
                     gosanira sangi bhakta rupere milila
                                 TRANSLATION     After allotting residential quarters there to ROpa Gosvami, Srt
Caitanya Mahaprabhu left. Then all of the Lord's personal associates metSrila Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 54
                     ara dina mahaprabhu saba bhakta lana                     rupe milaila sabaya krpa ta' kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     On the next day, Caitanya Mahaprabhu again met Rupa Gosvami, and
with great mercy the Lord introduced him to all the devotees.
                                   TEXT 55
                      sabara carana rupa karila vandana
                     krpa kari' rupe sabe kaila alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srtla Rupa Gosvami offered his respectful obeisances unto the lotus
feet of them all, and all the devotees, by their mercy, embraced him.
                                   TEXT 56
                     `advaita nityananda, tomara dui-jane
                    prabhu kahe--rupe krpa kara kaya-mane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Advalta Acarya and Nityananda
Prabhu,"You should both show Your mercy wholeheartedly to Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 57
                 toma-dunhara kroate inhara ha-u taiche sakti
                    yate vivarite parena krsna-rasa-bhakti
                                 TRANSLATION     "May Rupa Gosvami, by Your mercy, become so powerful that he will
be able to describe the transcendental mellows of devotional service."
                                   TEXT 58
                  gaudiya, udiya, yata prabhura bhakta-gana
                      sabara ha-ila rupa snehera bhajana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Rupa Gosvami became the object of love and affection for all
the devotees of the Lord, including those who came from Bengal and thosewho resided in Orissa.
                                   TEXT 59                      pratidina asi' rupe karena milane
                    mandire ye prasada pana, dena dui jane
                                 TRANSLATION     Every day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would go to see Rupa Gosvami, and
whatever prasada He received from the temple He would deliver to RupaGosvami and Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 60
                   ista-gosthi dunha sane kari' kata-ksana
                    madhyahna karite prabhu karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     He would talk for some time with them both and then leave to
perform His noontime duties.
                                   TEXT 61
                     ei-mata pratidina prabhura vyavahara
                     prabhu-krpa pana rupera ananda apara
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu's dealings with them continued
every day. Thus receiving the transcendental favor of the Lord, SrilaRupa Gosvami felt unlimited pleasure.
                                   TEXT 62
                    bhakta-gana lana kaila gundica marjana
                       aitota asi' kaila vanya-bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     After Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, taking all His devotees with Him,
performed the Gundica-marjana [washing and cleansing the templeGundica], He went to the garden known as Aitota and accepted prasada ata picnic within thegarden.
                                   TEXT 63
                 prasada khaya, `hari' bale sarva-bhakta-jana
                     dekhi' haridasa-rupera harasita mana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Haridasa Thakura and Rupa Gosvami saw that all the devotees
were accepting prasada and chanting the holy name of Hari, they bothwere greatly pleased.
                                   TEXT 64
                  govinda-dvara prabhura sesa-prasada paila
                      preme matta dui-jana nacite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     When they received the remnants of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's
prasada through Govinda, they respected it, and then they both began todance in ecstasy.
                                   TEXT 65
                      ara dina prabhu rupe miliya vasila
                    sarvajna-siromani prabhu kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     On the next day, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to see Srila
ROpa Gosvami, the omniscient Lord spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 66
                   "krsnere bahira nahi kariha vraja haite
                   vraja chadi' krsna kabhu na yana kahante
                                 TRANSLATION     "Do not try to take Krsna out of Vrndavana, for He does not go
anywhere else at any time.
                                   TEXT 67
                           krsno'nyo yadu-sambhuto
                         yah purnah so'sty atah parah                            vrndavanam parityajya                           sa kvacin naiva gacchati
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The Krsna known as Yadukumara is Vasudeva Krsna. He is different
from the Krsna who is the son of Nanda Maharaja. Yadukumara Krsnamanifests His pastimes in the cities of Mathura and Dvaraka, but Krsnathe son of Nanda Maharaja never at any time leaves Vrndavana."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is included in the Laghu-bhagavatamrta (1.5.461), by
Srila Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 68                    eta kahi' mahaprabhu madhyahne calila
                    rupa-gosani mane kichu vismaya ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to perform His noontime
duties, leaving Srila ROpa Gosvami somewhat surprised.
                                   TEXT 69
                  "prthak nataka karite satyabhama ajna dila
               ja-nilu, prthak nataka karite prabhu-ajna haila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Satyabhama ordered me to write two different dramas," Srila Rupa
Gosvami thought. "Now I understand that this order has been confirmed bySri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 70
                     purve dui nataka chila ekatra racana
                      dui-bhaga kari ebe karimu ghatana
                                 TRANSLATION     "FormerIy I wrote the two dramas as one composition. Now I shall
divide it and describe the incidents in two separate works.
                                   TEXT 71
                   dui`nandi' `prastavana', dui`samghatana'
                      prthak kariya likhi kariya bhavana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I shall write two separate invocations of good fortune and two
different introductions. Let me think deeply about the matter and thendescribe two different sets of incidents."
                                   PURPORT     The two works are Vidagdha-madhava and Lalita-madhava. Vidagdha-
madhava describes pastimes in Vrndavana, and Lalita-madhava describespastimes in Dvaraka and Mathura.                                   TEXT 72
                   ratha-yatraya jagannatha darsana karila
                  ratha-agre prabhura nrtya-kirtana dekhila
                                 TRANSLATION     During the Ratha-yatra ceremony ROpa Gosvami saw Lord Jagannatha.
He also saw Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu dancing and chanting in front ofthe ratha.
                                   TEXT 73
                  prabhura nrtya-sloka suni' sri-rupa-gosani
                    sei slokartha lana sloka karila tathai
                                 TRANSLATION     When Rupa Gosvami heard a verse uttered by Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu
during the ceremony, he immediately composed another verse dealing withthe same subject.
                                   TEXT 74
                    purve sei saba katha kariyachi varnana
                    tathapi kahiye kichu sanksepe kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have already described all these incidents, but I still wish to
add briefly something more.
                                   TEXT 75
                   samanya eka sloka prabhu padena kirtane
                     kene sloka pade--iha keha nahi jane
                                 TRANSLATION     Generally Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu recited a verse while dancing and
chanting before the ratha, but no one knew why He was reciting thatparticular verse.
                                   TEXT 76
                  sabe eka svarupa gosani slokera artha jane
                  slokanurupa pada prabhuke karana asvadane
                                 TRANSLATION     Only Svarupa Damodara Gosvami knew the purpose for which the Lord
recited that verse. According to the Lord's attitude, he used to quoteother verses to enable the Lord to relish mellows.
                                   TEXT 77
                    rupa-gosani prabhura janiya abhipraya
                   sei arthe sloka kaila prabhure ye bhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Rupa Gosvami, however, could understand the intention of the Lord,
and thus he composed another verse that appealed to Sri CaltanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 78
            yah kaumara-harah sa eva hi varas ta eva caitra-ksapas
             te conmilita-malati-surabhayah praudhah kadambanilah             sa caivasmi tathapi tatra surata-vyapara-lila-vidhau              reva-rodhasi vetasi-taru-tale cetah samutkanthate
                                 TRANSLATION     "That very personality who stole my heart during my youth is now
again my master. These are the same moonlit nights of the month ofCaitra. The same fragrance of malati flowers is there, and the samesweet breezes are blowing from the kadamba forest. In our intimaterelationship, I am also the same lover, yet still my mind is not happyhere. I am eager to go back to that place on the bank of the Reva underthe Vetasi tree. That is my desire."
                                   PURPORT     This is the verse recited by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.                                   TEXT 79              priyah so'yam krsnah sahacari kuru-ksetra-militas
              tathaham sa radha tad idam ubhayoh sangama-sukham               tathapy antah-khelan-madhura-murali-pancama-juse                  mano me kalindi-pulina-vipinaya sprhayati
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, now I have met My very old and dear friend Krsna
on this field of Kuruksetra. I am the same Radharani, and now We aremeeting together. It is very pleasant, but I would still like to go tothe bank of the Yamuna beneath the trees of the forest there. I wish tohear the vibration of His sweet flute playing the fifth note within thatforest of Vrndavana."                                   PURPORT
     This is the verse composed by Srila Rupa Gosvami. It is included in
his book Padyavali (383).
                                   TEXT 80                    tala-patre sloka likhi' calete rakhila
                   samudra-snana kaiibare rupa-gosani gela
                                 TRANSLATION     After writing this verse on a palm leaf, ROpa Gosvami put it
somewhere in his thatched roof and went to bathe in the sea.
                                   TEXT 81
                     hena-kale prabhu aila tanhare milite
                    cale sloka dekhi prabhu lagila padite
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went there to meet him, and
when He saw the leaf pushed into the roof and saw the verse, He began toread it.
                                   TEXT 82
                  sloka padi' prabhu sukhe premavista haila
                    hena-kale rupa-gosani snana kari' aila
                                 TRANSLATION     After reading the verse, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was overwhelmed by
ecstatic love. At that very time, Rupa Gosvami returned, having finishedbathing in the sea.
                                   TEXT 83
                    prabhu dekhi' dandavat prangane padila
                   prabhu tanre capada mari' kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the Lord, Sri ROpa Gosvami fell flat in the courtyard to
offer obeisances. The Lord slapped him mildly in love and spoke asfollows.
                                   TEXT 84                   `gudha mora hrdaya tuni janila kemane?'
                     eta kahi' rupe kaila drdha alingane
                                 TRANSLATION     "My heart is very confidential. How did you know My mind in this
way?" After saying this, He firmly embraced ROpa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 85
                    sei sloka lana prabhu svarupe dekhaila
                   svarupera pariksa lagi' tanhare puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took that verse and showed it to SvarOpa
Damodara for him to examine. Then the Lord questioned him.
                                   TEXT 86
                   `mora antara-varta rupa janila kemane?'
                  svarupa kahe--`jani, krpa kariyacha apane
                                 TRANSLATION     "How could Rupa Gosvami have understood My heart?" the Lord asked.
Svarupa Damodara replied, "I can understand that You have alreadybestowed Your causeless mercy upon him.
                                   TEXT 87
                     anyatha e artha kara nahi haya jnana
                     tumi purve krpa kaila, kari anumana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "No one could otherwise understand this meaning. I can therefore
guess that previously You bestowed upon him Your causeless mercy."
                                   TEXT 88
                   prabhu kahe,--"inho amaya prayage milila
                 yogya-patra jani inhaya mora krpa ta' ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     S ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "ROpa Gosvami met Me at Prayaga.
Knowing him to be a suitable person, I naturally bestowed My mercy uponhim.                                   TEXT 89
                    tabe sakti sancari' ami kailun upadesa
                      tumiha kahio ihanya rasera visesa"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I thereupon also bestowed upon him My transcendental potency. Now
you also should give him instructions. In particular, instruct him intranscendental mellows."
                                   TEXT 90
                    svarupa kahe--"yate ei sloka dekhilun
                     tumi kariyacha kroa, tavanhi janilu
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara said, "As soon as I saw the unique composition of
this verse, I could immediately understand that You had bestowed uponhim Your special mercy.
                                   TEXT 91
                       phalena phala-karanam anumiyate                                 TRANSLATION     " `By seeing a result, one can understand the cause of that
result.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from the doctrines of nyaya, or logic.                                   TEXT 92                        svargapaga-h ema-mrnalin inam
                        nana-mrnalagra-bhujo bhajamah                         annanurupam tanu-rupa-rddhim                       karyam nidanad dhi gunan adhite
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The River Ganges flowing from the heavenly planets is full of
golden lotus flowers, and we, the residents of those planets, eat thestems of the flowers. Thus we are very beautiful, more so than theinhabitants of any other planet. This is due to the law of cause andeffect, for if one eats food in the mode of goodness, the mode ofgoodness increases the beauty of his body."'                                   PURPORT
     One's bodily luster and beauty, one's constitution, one's
activities and one's qualities all depend on the law of cause andeffect. There are three qualities in material nature, and as stated inBhagavad-gita (13.22), karanam guna-sango 'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu:one takes birth in a good or bad family according to his previousassociation with the qualities of material nature. Therefore oneseriously eager to achieve transcendental perfection, Krsnaconsciousness, must eat Krsna prasada. Such food is sattvika, or in thematerial quality of goodness, but when offered to Krsna it becomestranscendental. Our Krsna consciousness movement distributes Krsnaprasada, and those who eat such transcendental food are sure to becomedevotees of the Lord. This is a very scientific method, as stated inthis verse from Nala-naisadha (3.17): karyam nidanad dhi gunan adhite.If in all one's activities he strictly adheres to the mode of goodness,he will certainly develop his dormant Krsna consciousness and ultimatelybecome a pure devotee of Lord Krsna.     Unfortunately at the present moment the bodily constitutions of theleaders of society, especially the governmental leaders, are polluted.As described in Srimad-Bhagavatam (12.1.42):     asamskrtah kriya-hina     rajasa tamasavrtah     prajas te bhaksayisyanti     mleccha rajany arupinahSuch leaders have no chance to purify their eating. Politicians meettogether and exchange good wishes by drinking liquor, which is sopolluted and sinful that naturally drunkards and meateaters develop adegraded mentality in the mode of ignorance. The processes of eating indifferent modes are explained in Bhagavad-gita, wherein it is statedthat those who eat rice, wheat, vegetables, milk products, fruit andsugar are situated in the elevated quality of goodness. Therefore if wewant a happy and tranquil political situation, we must select leaderswho eat Krsna prasada. Otherwise the leaders will eat meat and drinkwine, and thus they will be asamskrtah, unreformed, and kriya-hinah,devoid of spiritual behavior. In other words, they will be mlecchas andyavanas, or men who are unclean in their habits. Through taxation, suchmen exploit the citizens as much as possible, and in this way theydevour the citizens of the state instead of benefiting them. Wetherefore cannot expect a government to be efficient if it is headed bysuch unclean mlecchas and yavanas.
                                   TEXT 93                    caturmasya rahi' gaude vaisnava calila
                    rupa-gosani mahaprabhura carane rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     After the four months of Caturmasya [Sravana, Bhadra, Asvina and
Karttika], all the Vaisnavas of Bengal returned to their homes, butSrila Rupa Gosvamiremained in Jagannatha Purt under the shelter of the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 94                     eka-dina rupa karena nataka likhana
                     acambite mahaprabhura haila agamana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day while Rupa Gosvami was writing his book, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu suddenly appeared.
                                   TEXT 95
                     sambhrame dunhe uthi' dandavat haila
                      dunhe alingiya prabhu asane vasila
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as Haridasa Thakura and Rupa Gosvami saw the Lord coming,
they both stood up and then fell down to offer Him their respectfulobeisances. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced them both and then satdown.
                                   TEXT 96
                   `kya punthi likha?' bali' eka-patra nila
                    aksara dekhiya prabhu mane sukhi haila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord inquired, "What kind of book are you writing?" He held up
a palm leaf that was a page of the manuscript, and when He saw the finehandwriting, His mind was very pleased.
                                   TEXT 97
                    sri-rupera aksara--yena mukutara panti
                   prita hana karena prabhu aksarera stuti
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus being pleased, the Lord pralsed the writing by saying, "The
handwriting of Rupa Gosvami is just like rows of pearls."
                                   TEXT 98
                    sei patre prabhu eka sloka ye dekhila
                      paditei sloka, preme avista ha-ila                                 TRANSLATION
     While reading the manuscript, Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw a verse
on that page, and as soon as He read it He was overwhelmed by ecstaticlove.
                                   TEXT 99
              tunde tandavini ratim vitanute tundavali-labdhaye
            karna-kroda-kadambini ghatayate karnarbudebhyah sprham             cetah-prangana-sangini vijayate sarvendriyanam krtim             no jane janita kiyadbhir amrtaih krsneti varna-dvayi
                                 TRANSLATION     "I do not know how much nectar the two syllables `Krs-na' have
produced. When the holy name of Krsna is chanted, it appears to dancewithin the mouth. We then desire many, many mouths. When that nameenters the holes of the ears, we desire many millions of ears. And whenthe holy name dances in the courtyard of the heart, it conquers theactivities of the mind, and therefore all the senses become inert."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is included in the Vidagdha-madhava (1.15), a seven-act
play written by Srila Rupa Gosvami describing the pastimes of Sri Krsnain Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 100                      sloka suni haridasa ha-ila ullasi
                    nacite lagila slokera artha prasamsi'
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu chanted this verse, Haridasa Thakura,
upon hearing the vibration, became jubilant and began dancing andpraising its meaning.
                                   TEXT 101
                 krsna-namera mahima sastra-sadhu-mukhe jani
                     namera madhuri aiche kahan nahi suni
                                 TRANSLATION     One has to learn about the beauty and transcendental position of
the holy name of the Lord by hearing the revealed scriptures from themouths of devotees. Nowhere else can we hear of the sweetness of theLord's holy name.                                   PURPORT
     It is said in the Padma Purana, atah sri-krsna-namadi na bhaved
grahyam indriyaih. Chanting and hearing of the transcendental holy nameof the Lord cannot be performed by the ordinary senses. Thetranscendental vibration of the Lord's holy name is completelyspiritual. Thus it must be received from spiritual sources and must bechanted after having been heard from a spiritual master. One who hearsthe chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra must receive it from the spiritualmaster by aural reception. Srila Sanatana Gosvami has forbidden us tohear the holy name of Krsna chanted by non-Vaisnavas, such asprofessional actors and singers, for it will have no effect. It is likemilk touched by the lips of a serpent, as stated in the padma purana:     a vaisna va-mukhodgirnam     putam hari-kathamrtam     sravanam naiva kartavyam     sarpocchistam yatha payahAs far as possible, therefore, the devotees in the Krsna consciousnessmovement gather to chant the holy name of Krsna in public so that boththe chanters and the listeners may benefit.
                                   TEXT 102                     tabe mahaprabhu dunhe kari' alingana
                    madhyahna karite samudre karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu embraced both Haridasa and Rupa
Gosvami and left for the seaside to perform His noontime duties.
                                 TEXT 103-104
                    ara dina mahaprabhu dekhi' jagannatha
                   sarvabhauma- ramanan da-svarupadi-satha
                     sabe mili' cali aila sri-rupe milite
                    pathe tanra guna sabare lagila kahite
                                 TRANSLATION     On the next day, after visiting the temple of Jagannatha as usual,
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu met Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Ramananda Raya andSvarOpa Damodara. They all went together to Srila Rupa Gosvami, and onthe way the Lord greatly praised his qualities.
                                   TEXT 105
                  dui sloka kahi' prabhura haila maha-sukha
                   nija-bhaktera guna kahe hana panca-mukha
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu recited the two important verses, He
felt great pleasure; thus, as if He had five mouths, He began to praiseHis devotee.
                                   PURPORT     The two verses referred to are those beginning with priyah so'yam
(79) and tunde tandavini (99).
                                   TEXT 106                     sarvabhauma-ramanande pariksa karite
                    sri-rupera guna dunhare lagila kahite
                                 TRANSLATION     Just to examine Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya and Ramananda Raya, the
Lord began to pralse the transcendental qualities of Sri Rupa Gosvamibefore them.
                                   TEXT 107
                 `isvara-svabhava'--bhaktera na laya aparadha
                  alpa-seva bahu mane atma-paryanta prasada
                                 TRANSLATION     Characteristically, the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not
take seriously an offense committed by a pure devotee. The Lord acceptswhatever small service a devotee renders as being such a great servicethat He is prepared to give even Himself, not to speak of otherbenedictions.
                                   TEXT 108
                    bhrtyasya pasyati gurun api naparadhan
                    sevam manag api krtam bahudhabhyupaiti                     aviskaroti pisunesv api nabhyasuyam                     silena nirmala-matih purusottamo'yam
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as Purusottama,
the greatest of all persons, has a pure mind. He is so gentle that evenif His servant is implicated in a great offense, He does not take itvery seriously. Indeed, if His servant renders some small service, theLord accepts it as being very great. Even if an envious personblasphemes the Lord, the Lord never manifests anger against him. Suchare His great qualities."
                                   PURPORTThis verse is from the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.1.138) by Srila Rupa
Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 109                  bhakta-sange prabhu aila, dekhi' dui jana
                      dandavat hana kaila carana vandana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Haridasa Thakura and ROpa Gosvami saw that Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had come with His intimate devotees, they both immediatelyfell down like logs and offered prayers to their lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 110
                   bhakta-sange kaila prabhu dunhare milana
                    pindate vasila prabhu lana bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His personal devotees met Rupa
Gosvami and Haridasa Thakura. The Lord then sat down in an elevatedplace with His devotees.
                                   TEXT 111
                    rupa haridasa dunhe vasila pinda-tale
                    sabara agrahe na uthila pindara upare
                                 TRANSLATION     Rupa Gosvami and Haridasa Thakura sat at the foot of the elevated
place where Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was sitting. Although everyone askedthem to sit on the same level as the Lord and His associates, they didnot do so.
                                   TEXT 112
                  `purva-sloka pada, rupa' prabhu ajna kaila
                      lajjate na pade rupa mauna dharila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered ROpa Gosvami to read the verse
they had previously heard, Rupa Gosvami, because of great shyness, didnot read it but instead remained silent.
                                   TEXT 113                     svarupa-gosani tabe sei sloka padila
                     suni' sabakara citte camatkara haila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Svarupa Damodara Gosvami recited the verse, and when all the
devotees heard it, their minds were struck with wonder.
                                   TEXT 114
              priyah so'yam krsnah sahacari kuru-ksetra-militas
              tathaham sa radha tad idam ubhayoh sangama-sukham               tathapy antah-khelan-madhura-murali-pancama-juse                  mano me kalindi-pulina-vipinaya sprhayati
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, now I have met My very old and dear friend Krsna
on this field of Kuruksetra. I am the same Radharani, and now We aremeeting together. It is very pleasant, but I would still like to go tothe bank of the Yamuna beneath the trees of the forest there. I wish tohear the vibration of His sweet flute playing the fffth note within thatforest of Vrndavana."
                                   TEXT 115
                raya, bhattacarya bale,--"tomara prasada vine
                        tomara hrdaya ei janila kemane
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing this verse, both Ramananda Raya and Sarvabhauma
Bhattacarya said to Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "Without Your special mercy,how could this Rupa Gosvami have understood Your mind?"
                                   TEXT 116
                    amate sancari' purve kahila siddhanta
                   ye saba siddhante brahma nahi paya anta
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Ramananda Raya admitted that previously Srt Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had empowered his heart so that he could express elevated andconclusive statements to which even Lord Brahma has no access.
                                   TEXT 117
                   tate jani--purve tomara panache prasada                     taha vina nahe tomara hrdayanuvada"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Had you not previously bestowed Your mercy on him," they said, "it
would not have been possible for him to express Your internal feelings."
                                   PURPORT     Devotees acknowledge Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's special mercy upon
Srila Rupa Gosvami in the following words:     sri-caitanya-mano'bhistam-     sthapitam yena bhu-tale     svayam rupah kada mahyam     dadati sva-padantikam"When will Srila Rupa Gosvami Prabhupada, who has established withinthis material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya,give me shelter under his lotus feet?"     The special function of Srila Rupa Gosvami is to establish thefeelings of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. These feelings are His desires thatHis special mercy be spread throughout the world in this Kali-yuga.     prthivite ache yata nagaradi-grama     sarvatra pracara haibe mora nama     His desire is that all over the world everyone, in every villageand every town, know of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His sankirtanamovement. These are the inner feelings of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. SriRupa Gosvami committed to writing all these feelings of the Lord. Nowagain, by the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the same feelings arebeing spread all over the world by the servants of the Gosvamis, anddevotees who are pure and simple will appreciate this attempt. Asconcluded by Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, however, those who are onthe level of hogs and dogs will never appreciate such a great attempt.Yet this does not matter to the preachers of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'scult, for all over the world they will continue to perform thisresponsible work, even though persons who are like cats and dogs do notappreciate them.
                                   TEXT 118                   prabhu kahe,--"kaha rupa, natakera sloka
                   ye sloka sunile lokera yaya duhkha-soka
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sald, "My dear Rupa, please recite
that verse from your drama which, upon being heard, makes all people'sunhappiness and lamentation go away."
                                   TEXT 119
                     bara bara prabhu yadi tare ajna dila
                      tabe sei sloka rupa-gosani kahila                                 TRANSLATION
     When the Lord persisted in asking this again and again, ROpa
Gosvami recited that verse [as follows].
                                   TEXT 120
              tunde tandavini ratim vitanute tundavali-labdhaye
            karna-kroda-kadambini ghatayate karnarbudebhyah sprham             cetah-prangana-sangini vijayate sarvendriyanam krtim             no jane janita kiyadbhir amrtaih krsneti varna-dvayi             no jane janita kiyadbhir amrtaih krsneti varna-dvayi
                                 TRANSLATION     "I do not know how much nectar the two syllables `Krs-na' have
produced. When the holy name of Krsna is chanted, it appears to dacewithin the mouth. We then desire many, many mouths. When that nameenters the holes of the ears, we desire many millions of ears. And whenthe holy name dances in the courtyard of the heart, it conquers theactivities of the mind, and therefore all the senses become inert."
                                   TEXT 121
                     yata bhakta-vrnda ara ramananda raya
                   sloka suni' sabara ha-ila ananda-vismaya
                                 TRANSLATION     When all the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, especially Sri
Ramananda Raya, heard this verse, they were all filled withtranscendental bliss and were struck with wonder.
                                   TEXT 122
                   sabe bale,--`nama-mahima suniyachi apara
                     emana madhurya keha nahi varne ara'
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone admitted that although they had heard many statements
glorifying the holy name of the Lord, they had never heard such sweetdescriptions as those of Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 123
                   raya kahe,--"kon grantha kara hena jani?
                    yahara bhitare ei siddhantera khani?"
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya inquired,"What kind of drama are you writing? We ca
understand that it is a mine of conclusive statements."
                                   TEXT 124
                  svarupa kahe,--"krsna-lilara nataka karite
                     vraja-lila-pura-lila ekatra varnite
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara replied for Srila Rupa Gosvami: "He wanted to
compose a drama about the pastimes of Lord Krsna. He planned to describein one book both the pastimes of Vrndavana ad those of Dvaraka andMathura.
                                   TEXT 125
                     arambhiyachila, ebe prabhu-ajna pana
                     dui nataka kariteche vibhaga kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     "He began it in that way, but now, following the order of Sri
Caltanya Mahaprabhu, he has divided it in two and is writing two plays,one concerning the pastimes of Mathura and Dvaraka and the otherconcerning the pastimes of Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 126
                     vidagdha-madhava ara lalita-madhava
                     dui natake prema-rasa adabhuta saba"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The two plays are called Vidagdha-madhava and Lalita-madhava. Both
of them wonderfully describe ecstatic emotional love of God."
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura informs us in this
connection that Srila Rupa Gosvami composed the drama known as Vidagdha-madhava in the year Sakabda 1454, and he finished Lalita-madhava inSakabda 1459. The discussion between Ramananda Raya and Srila RupaGosvami at Jagannatha Puri took place in Sakabda 1437.
                                   TEXT 127                 raya kahe,--"nandi-sloka pada dekhi, suni?"
                    sri-rupa sloka pade prabhu-ajna mani'                                 TRANSLATION
     Ramananda Raya said, "PIease recite the introductory verse of
Vidagdhamadhava so that I can hear and examine it." Thus Sri RupaGosvami, being ordered by S ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, recited the verse(1.1).
                                   TEXT 128
                 sudhanam candrinam api madhurimonmada-damani
               dadhana radhadi-pranaya-ghana-saraih surabhitam               saman tat santapodgama- visama-samsara-saran i-                pranitam te trsnam haratu hari-lila-sikharini
                                 TRANSLATION     "May the pastimes of Sri Krsna reduce the miseries existing in the
material world and nullify all unwated desires. The pastimes of theSupreme Personality of Godhead are like sikharini, a blend of yogurt andsugar cady. They overpower the pride of even the nectar produced on themoon, for they distribute the sweet fragrace of the concentrated lovingaffairs of Srimati Radharani and the gopis."
                                   TEXT 129
                    raya kahe,--`kaha ista-devera varnana'
                    prabhura sankoce rupa na kare pathana
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya sald,"Now please recite the description of the
glories of your worshipable Deity." Rupa Gosvami, however, hesitated dueto embarrassment because Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu was present.
                                   TEXT 130
                 prabhu kahe,--"kaha, kene kara sankoca-laje?
                  granthera phala sunaiba vaisnava samaje?"
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord, however, encouraged Rupa Gosvami, saying, "Why are you
embarrassed? You should recite it so the devotees can hear the goodfruit of your writing."
                                   TEXT 131
                      tabe rupa-gosani yadi sloka padila
                   suni' prabhu kahe,--`ei ati stuti haila'                                 TRANSLATION
     When ROpa Gosvami thus recited his verse, Caltanya Mahaprabhu
disapproved of it because it described His personal glories. Heexpressed the opinion that it was an exaggerated explanation.
                                   TEXT 132
                 anarpita-carim cirat karunayavatirnah kalau
              samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasam sva-bhakti-sriyam                harih purata-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandipitah                sada hrdaya-kandare sphuratu vah saci-nandanah
                                 TRANSLATION     "May the Supreme Lord, who is known as the son of Srimati Sacidevi,
be transcendentally situated in the innermost core of your heart.Resplendent with the radiance of molten gold, He has descended in theage of Kali by His causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation hasever offered before: the most elevated mellow of devotional service, themellow of conjugal love."
                                   PURPORT     This verse (Vidagdha-madhava 1.2) also appears in Adi-lila (1.4 and
3.4). In his commentary on Vidagdha-madhava, Srila Visvanatha CakravartiThaku ra remarks: maha-prabhoh sphurtim vina hari-lila-rasasvadananupapatter iti bhavah. Without the mercy of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, one cannot describe the pastimes of the Supreme personalityof Godhead. Therefore Srila Rupa Gosvami said, vah yusmakam hrdaya-rupa-guha yam saci-nandano harih, pakse, simhah sphuratu: "May Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, who is exactly like a lion that kills all the elephants ofdesire, be awakened within everyone's heart, for by His mercifulblessings one can understand the transcendental pastimes of Krsna."
                                   TEXT 133                      saba bhakta-gana kahe sloka suniya
                     krtartha karila sabaya sloka sunana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees present so greatIy appreciated this verse that
they expressed their gratitude to Sri Rupa Gosvami for his trascendentalrecitation.
                                   TEXT 134
                  raya kahe,--"kon amukhe patra-sannidhana?"
                 rupa kahe,--"kala-samye `pravartaka' nama',
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya inquired, "How have you introduced the assembly of
the players?" Rupa Gosvami replied, "The players assemble at a suitabletime under the heading of pravartaka.
                                   PURPORT     In a drama all the actors are called patra, or players. This is
stated by Visvanatha Kaviraja in the Sahitya-darpana (6.283):     divya-martye sa tad-rupo     misram anyataras tayoh     sucayed vastu-bijam va-     mukham patram athapi vaThe meaning of amukha is stated by Srila Rupa Gosvami in the Nataka-candrika:     sutra-dharo nati brute     s va-karyam pratiyuktitah      prastutaksepicitroktya     yat tad amukham iritamWhen Srila Ramananda Raya inquired about the arrangement for introducingthe assembly of players in the drama, Rupa Gosvami replied that when theplayers first enter the stage in response to the time, the introductionis technically called pravartaka. For an example one may consult theAntya-lila, First Chapter, verse 17. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura says that the introduction, which is technically called amukha,may be of five different kinds, according to the Sahitya-darpana(6.288):     udghatyakah kathodghatah     prayogatisayas tatha     pra vadaka valagite     panca pras tavana-bh idahIntroductions may be classified as follows: (1) udghatyaka, (2)kathodghata, (3) prayogatisaya, (4) pravahaka and (5) avalagita. Thesefive kinds of introduction are called amukha. Thus Srila Ramananda Rayaasked which of the five introductions had been employed, and Srila RupaGosvami replied that he had used the introduction called the pravartaka.
                                   TEXT 135                            aksiptah kala-samyena
                          pravesah syat pravartakah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `When the entrance of the actors is set in motion by the arrival
of a suitable time, the entrance is called pravartaka.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Nataka-candrika (12) by Srila Rupa Gosvami.                                   TEXT 136                    so'yam vasanta-samayah samiyaya yasmin
                    purnam tam isvaram upodha-navanura-gam                     gudha-graha ruciraya saha radhayasau
                     rangaya sangamayita nisi paurnamasi
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Springtime had arrived, and the fuIl moon of that season
inspired the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is complete ineverything, with new attraction to meet the beautiful Srimati Radharaniat night to increase the beauty of Their pastimes."'
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thaku ra interprets this verse ( Vidagdha-
madhava 1.10) in two ways, for Lord Krsna and for Srimati Radharani.When interpreted for Krsna, the night is understood to have been a darkmoon night, and when interpreted for Srimati Radharani, it is consideredto have been a full moon night.
                                   TEXT 137                 raya kahe,--"prarocanadi kaha dekhi, suni?"
                 rupa kahe,--"mahaprabhura sravaneccha jani"
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya sald, "Please recite the prarocana portion so that I
may hear and examine it." Sri Rupa replied, "I think that the desire tohear of Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu is prarocaa.
                                   PURPORT     The method of inducing the audience to become more and more eager
to hear by praising the time and place, the hero and the audience iscalled prarocana. This is the statement regarding prarocana in theNataka-candrika:     desa-kala-katha- vas tu-     sabh yadinam prasamsa ya     srotrnam unmukhi-karah     kathiteyam prarocanaSimilarly the Sahitya-darpana (6.286) says:     tasyah prarocana vithi     tatha prahasana-mukhe     angan yatronmukh i-karah     prasamsatah prarocanaAny literature presented in Sanskrit must follow the rules andregulations mentioned in the authoritative reference books. Thetechnical inquiries by Srila Ramananda Raya and the replies of SrilaRupa Gosvami indicate that both of them were expert and fully conversantwith the techniques of writing drama.
                                   TEXT 138            bhaktanam udagad anargala-dhiyam vargo nisargojjvalah
         silaih pallavitah sa ballava-vadhu-bandho prabandho'py asau           lebhe catvaratam ca tandava-vidher vrndatavi-garbha-bhur
             manye mad-vidha-punya-mandala-paripako'yam unmilati
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The devotees now present are constantly thinking of the Supreme
Lord and are therefore highly advaced. This work named Vidagdha-madhavadepicts the characteristic pastimes of Lord Krsna with decorations ofpoetic ornaments. And the inner grounds of the forest of Vrndavanaprovide a suitable platform for the dancing of Krsna with the gopis.Therefore I think that the pious activities of persons like us, who havetried to advace in devotional service, have now attained maturity.'
                                   PURPORT     This is verse eight of the First Act of Vidagdha-madhava.                                   TEXT 139               abhivyakta mattah prakrti-laghu-rupad api budha
              vidhatri siddharthan hari-guna-mayi vah krtir iyam               pulindenapy agnih kimu samidham-unmathya janito                 hiranya-sreninam apaharati nantah-kalusatam
                                 TRANSLATION     "`O learned devotees, I am by nature ignorant ad low, yet even
though it is from me that Vidagdha-madhava has come, it is filled withdescriptions of the transcendental attributes of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead. Therefore, wiIl not such literature bring about theattainment of the highest goal of life? Although its wood may be ignitedby a low-class ma, fire can nevertheless purify gold. Although I am verylow by nature, this book may help clease the dirt from within the heartsof the golden devotees."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is also from Vidagdha-madhava (1.6).                                   TEXT 140                 raya kahe,--"kaha dekhi premotpatti-karana?
                  purva-raga, vikara, cesta, kama-likhana?"
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Ramananda Raya inquired from Rupa Gosvami about the causes of
the loving affairs between Krsna ad the gopis, such as previousattachment, trasformations of love, endeavors for love, and exchanges ofletters disclosing the gopis' awakening love for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 141                     krame sri-rupa-gosani sakali kahila
                 suni' prabhura bhakta-ganera camatkara haila
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Rupa Gosvami gradually informed Ramanada Raya about
everything he asked. Hearing his explaations, all the devotees of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu were struck with wonder.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Rupa Gosvami has explained kama-likhana in his book Ujjvala-
nilamani ( Vipralambha-prakarana 26):     sa lekhah kama-lekhah syat     yah sva-prema-prakasakah     yuvatya yuni yuna ca     yuvatyam samprah iyate"Exchanges of letters between a young boy and young girl concerningtheir awakening of attachment for one another are called kama-lekha."
                                   TEXT 142              ekasya srutam eva lumpati matim krsneti namaksaram
            sandronmada-paramparam upanayaty anyas ya vamsi-kalah
           esa snigdha-ghana-dyutir manasi me lagnah pate viksanat
           kastam dhik purusa-traye ratir abhun manye mrtih sreyasi
                                 TRANSLATION     Experiencing previous attachment to Krsna [purva-raga], Srimati
Radharani thought: "Since I have heard the name of a person calledKrsna, I have practically lost My good sense. Then, there is aotherperson who plays His flute in such a way that after I hear thevibration, intense madness arises in My heart. And again there is stillanother person to whom My mind becomes attached when I see His beautifullightning effulgence in His picture. Therefore I think that I am greatlycondemned, for I have become simultaneously attached to three persons.It would be better for Me to die because of this."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Vidagdha-madhava (2.9).                                   TEXT 143                           iyam sakhi suduhsadh ya
                            radha hrda ya- vedana                            krta- yatra cikitsapi                            kutsayam paryavasyati
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, these palpitations of Srimati Radharani's heart
are extremely difficult to cure. Even if one applied some medicaltreatment, it would only end in defamation."
                                   PURPORT     This verse ( Vidagdha-madhava 2.8) is spoken by Srimati Radharani
Herself.
                                   TEXT 144                          dhari-a padicchanda-gunam
                      sundara maha mandire tumam vasasi                          taha taha rundhasi bali-am                          jaha jaha ca-ida palaemhi
                                 TRANSLATION     "O dearly beautiful, the artistic loveliness of Your picture is now
impressed within My mind. Since You are now living within My mind,wherever I wish to run because I am agitated by impressions of You, Ifind that You, O My friend, are blocking My way."
                                   PURPORT     This verse (Vidagdha-madhava 2.33) is written in the prakrta
language, not in Sanskrit. When transformed into Sanskrit, it reads asfollows:      dhrtva praticchanda-gunam sundara mama mandire tvam vasasi     tatha tatha runatsi balitam yatha yatha cakita palayeThe meaning is the same, but the native language is different. It wasspoken by Madhumangala to Sri Krsna.
                                   TEXT 145            agre viksya sikhanda-khandam acirad utkampam alambate
             gunjanam ca vilokanan muhur asau sasram parikrosati              no jane janayann apurva-natana-krida-camatkaritam            balayah kila citta-bhumim avisat ko'yam navina-grahah
                                 TRANSLATION     "Upon seeing peacock feathers in front of Her, this girl suddenly
begins trembling. When She sometimes sees a necklace of gunja [smallconchshells], She sheds tears and cries Ioudly. I do not know what kindof new ecstatic influence has entered the heart of this poor girl. Ithas imbued Her with the dancing attitude of a player creating wonderful,unprecedented daces on a stage."
                                   PURPORT     This verse (Vidagdha-madhava 2.15) is spoken by Mukhara, Lord
Krsna's grandmother, in a conversation with the grandmother ofRadharani, Paurnamasi.                                   TEXT 146
                akarunyah krsno yadi mayi tavagah katham idam
                mudha ma rodir me kuru param imam uttara-krtim                tamalasya skandhe vinihita-bhuja-vallarir iyam                yatha vrndaranye ciram avicala tisthati tanuh
                                 TRANSLATION     Srimati Radharani said to Her constant companion Visakha: "My dear
friend, if Krsna is unkind to Me, there wiIl be no need for you to cry,for it wiIl not be due to any fault of yours. I shall then have to die,but afterwards please do one thing for Me: to observe My funeralceremony, place My body with its arms embracing a tamala tree likecreepers so that I may remaln forever in Vrndavana undisturbed. That isMy last request."(Vidagdha-madhava 2.47)
                                   TEXT 147
                  raya kahe,--"kaha dekhi bhavera svabhava?"
               rupa kahe,--"aiche haya krsna-visayaka `bhava"'
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya inquired, "What are the characteristics of emotional
love?" Rupa Gosvami replied, "This is the nature of emotional love forKrsna.
                                   TEXT 148
              pidabhir nava-kala-kuta-katuta-garvasya nirvasano
              nisyandena mudam sudha-madhurimahankara-sankocanah             prema sundari nanda-nandana-paro jagarti yas yantare          jn-a-yante sphutam asya vakra-madhuras tenaiva vikrantayah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear beautiful friend, if one develops love of Godhead, love
of Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja, all the bitter and sweet influencesof this love will manifest in one's heart. Such love of Godhead acts intwo ways. The poisonous effects of love of Godhead defeat the severe andfresh poison of the serpent. Yet there is simultaneously trascendentalbliss, which pours down and defeats the poisonous effects of a snake, aswell as the happiness derived from pouring nectar on one's head. It isperceived as doubly effective, simultaneously poisonous and nectarean.",
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from the Vidagdha-madhava (2.18). It also appears in
Madhya-lila, Chapter Two, verse 52. It is spoken by Paurnamasi.
                                   TEXT 149                  raya kahe,--"kaha sahaja-premera laksana"
                  rupa-gosani kahe,--"sahajika prema-dharma"
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya further inquired, "What are the natural
characteristics of awakening love of Godhead?" ROpa Gosvami replied,"These are the natural characteristics of love of God.
                                   TEXT 150
        stotram yatra tata-sthatam prakatayac cittasya dhatte vyatham
            nindapi pramadam pra yacchati parihasa-sriyam bibhrati               dosena ksayitam gunena gurutam kenapy anatanvati            premnah svarasikasya kasyacid iyam vikridati prakriya
                                 TRANSLATION     " `When one hears pralse from his beloved, he outwardIy remalns
neutral but feels pain within his heart. When he hears his belovedmaking accusations about him, he takes them to be jokes and enjoyspleasure. When he finds faults in his beloved, they do not diminish hislove, nor do the beloved's good qualities increase his spontaneousaffection. Thus spontaneous love continues under all circumstances. Thatis how spontaneous love of Godhead acts within the heart.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Vidagdha-madhava (5.4) is spoken by Paurnamasi, the
grandmother of Radharani and mother of Sandipani Muni.
                                   TEXT 151            srutva nisthuratam mamendu-vadana premankuram bhindati
           svante santi-dhuram vidhaya vidhure prayah parancisyati             kimva pamara-kama-karmuka-paritrasta vimoksyaty asun            ha maugdhyat phalini manoratha-lata mrdvi mayonmulita
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Upon hearing of My cruelty, moon-faced Radharani may establish
some kind of tolerance in Her aggrieved heart. But then She might turnagalnst Me. Or, indeed, being fearful of the lusty desires invoked bythe bow of formidable Cupid, She might even give up Her life. Alas! Ihave foolishly uprooted the soft creeper of Her desire just when it wasready to bear fruit.'
                                   PURPORT     Having been very cruel to Srimati Radharani, Krsna is repenting in
this way ( Vidagdha-madhava 2.40).                                   TEXT 152
            yasyotsanga-sukhasaya sithilita gurvi gurubhyas trapa
           pranebhyo'pi suhrt-tamah sakhi tatha yuyam pariklesitah           dharmah so'pi mahan maya na ganitah sadhvibhir adhyasito            dhig dhairyam tad-upeksitapi yad aham jivami papiyasi
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Desiring the happiness of His association and embraces, My dear
friend, I disregarded even My superiors and relaxed My shyness andgravity before them. Furthermore, aIthough you are My best friend, moredear to Me than My own life, I have given you so much trouble. Indeed, Ieven put aside the vow of dedication to My husband, a vow kept by themost elevated women. Oh, alas! Although He is now neglecting Me, I am sosinful that I am still living. Therefore I must condemn My so-calledpatience.'
                                   PURPORT     Srimati Radharani is speaking this verse (Vidagdha-madhava 2.41) to
Her intimate friend Visakhadevi.
                                   TEXT 153               grhantah-khelantyo nija-sahaja-balyasya balanad
                abhadram bhadram va kim api hi na janiahi anak               vayam netum yuktah katha\ asaranam ka\ api dasam                katham va nyayya te prathayitu\ udasina-padavi
                                 TRANSLATION     " `I was engaged in My own playful activities in My home, and
because of My childish innocence I did not know right from wrong.Therefore, is it good for You to have forced us into being so muchattracted to You and then to have neglected us? Now You are indifferentto us. Do You think that is right?'
                                   PURPORT     This verse ( Vidagdha-\adhava 2.46) is spoken to Krsna by Srimati
Radharani.
                                   TEXT 154           antah-klesa-kalankitah kila vayam yamo'dya yamyam purim
            nayam vancana-sancaya-pranayinam hasam tathapy ujjhati
              asmin sa\putite gabhira-kapatair abhira-palli-vite
             ha medhavini radhike tava katham prema gariyan abhut
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Our hearts are so polluted by miserable conditions that we are
certainly going to Pluto's kingdom. Nevertheless, Krsna does not give upHis beautiful loving smiling, which is full of cheating tricks. OSrimati Radharani, You are very intelligent. How could You havedeveloped such great loving affection for this deceitful debauchee fromthe neighborhood of the cowherds?'
                                   PURPORT     This verse ( Vidagdha-madhava 2.37) is spoken to Radharani by
Lalita-sakhi, another confidential friend.
                                   TEXT 155               hitva dure pathi dhava-taror antikam dhara-setor
               bhangodagra guru-sikharinam ramhasa langhayanti                lebhe krsnarnava nava-rasa radhika-vahini tvam               vag-vicibhih kim iva viukhi-bhavam asyas tanosi
                                 TRANSLATION     "`O Lord Krsna, You are just like an ocean. The river of Srimati
Radharani has reached You from a long distance--leaving far behind thetree of Her husband, breaking through the bridge of social convention,and forcibly crossing the hills of elder relatives. Coming here becauseof fresh feelings of love for You, that river has now received Yourshelter, but now You are trying to turn Her back by the waves ofunfavorable words. How is it that You are spreading this attitude?"'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Vidagdha-madhava (3.9) is spoken to Lord Krsna by
paurnamasi, the grandmother of Srimati Radharani.
                                   TEXT 156                   raya kahe,--"vrndavana, murali-nihsvana
                  krsna, radhikara kaiche kariyacha varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Ramananda Raya further inquired: "How have you described
Vrndavana, the vibration of the transcendental flute, ad therelationship between Krsna and Radhika?
                                   TEXT 157
                  kaha, tomara kavitva suni' haya camatkara"
                    krame rupa-gosani kahe kari' namaskara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please tell me all this, for your poetic ability is wonderful."
After offering obeisances to Ramananda Raya, Rupa Gosvami graduallybegan answering his inquiries.
                                   TEXT 158
                sugandhau makanda-prakara-makarandasya madhure
               vinisyande vandi-krta-madhupa-vrndam muhur idam               krtandolam mandonnatibhir anilais candana-girer                 mamanandam vrnda-vipinam atulam tundilayati
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The sweet, fragrant honey oozing from newly grown mango buds is
again and again attracting groups of bumblebees, and this forest istrembling in the softly moving breezes from the Malaya Hills, which arefull of sadalwood trees. Thus the forest of Vrndavaa is increasing Mytranscendental pleasure.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Vidagdha-madhava (1.23) is spoken by Lord Krsna
Himself.
                                   TEXT 159                        vrndavanam divya-lata-paritam
                      latas ca puspa-sphuritagra-bhajah                       puspani ca sphita-madhu-vratani                       madhu-vratas ca sruti-hari-gitah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear friend, see how this forest of Vrndavana is full of
transcendental creepers and trees. The tops of the creepers are full offlowers, and intoxicated bumblebees are buzzing around them, hummingsongs that please the ear and surpass even the Vedic hymns.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Vidagdha-madhava (1.24) is spoken by Lord Balarama
to His friend Sridama.
                                   TEXT 160               kvacid bhrngi-gitam kvacid anila-bhangi-sisirata
               kvacid valli-lasyam kvacid amala-malli-parimalah                kvacid dhara-sali karaka-phala-pali-rasa-bharo                 hrsikanam vrndam pramadayati vrndavanam idam
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear friend, this forest of Vrndavana is giving great
pleasure to our senses in various ways. Somewhere bumblebees are singingin groups, and in some places mild breezes are cooling the entireatmosphere. Somewhere the creepers and tree twigs are dancing, themallika flowers are expanding their fragrance, and an overabundance ofjuice is constantly flowing in showers from pomegranate fruits.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Vidagdha-madhava (1.31) is spoken by Lord Krsna to
His cowherd friend Madhumangala.
                                   TEXT 161                paramrstangustha-trayam asita-ratnair ubhayato
               vahanti sankirnau manibhir arunais tat-parisarau                ta yor madhye hirojjvala-vimala-jambunada-mayi                  kare kalyaniyam viharati hareh keli-murali
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The flute of Krsna's pastimes measures three fingers in length,
and it is bedecked with indra-nila gems. At the ends of the flute arearuna gems [rubies], glittering beautifully, and in between the flute isplated with gold, set ablaze by diamonds. This auspicious flute,pleasing to Krsna, is glittering in His hand with transcendentalbrilliance.,
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Vidagdha-madhava (3.1) is spoken to Lalitadevi by
Paurnamasi, the grandmother of Radharani.
                                   TEXT 162                    sad-vamsatas tava janih purusottamasya
                    panau sthitir muralike saralasi jatya                    kasmat tvaya sakhi guror visama grhita                    gopangana-gana- vimohana-man tra-diksa
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear friend the flute, it appears that you have been born of
a very good family, for your residence is in the hands of Sri Krsna. Bybirth you are simple and are not at all crooked. Why then have you takeninitiation into this dangerous mantra that enchants the assembledgopis?'
                                   PURPORT     This verse ( Vidagdha-madhava 5.17) is spoken by Srimati Radharani.                                   TEXT 163                   sakhi murali visala-cchidra-jalena purna
                  laghur atikathina tvam granthila nirasasi                 tad api bhajasi svasvac cumbanananda-sandram                    hari-kara-parirambham kena punyodayena
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear friend the flute, you are actually full of many holes or
faults. You are light, hard, juiceless and full of knots. But what kindof pious activities have engaged you in the service of being kissed bythe Lord and embraced by His hands?'
                                   PURPORT     This verse ( Vidagdha-madhava 4.7) is spoken by Candravali-sakhi,
the gopi competitor of Srimati Radharani.
                                   TEXT 164          rundhann ambu-bhrtas camatkrti-param kurvan muhus tumburum
            dhyanad antarayan sanandana-mukhan vismapayan vedhasam            autsukyavalibhir balim catulayan bhogindram aghurnayan          bhindann anda-kataha-bhittim abhito babhrama vamsi-dhvanih
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The transcendental vibration of Krsna's flute blocked the
movements of the rain clouds, struck the Gandharvas full of wonder, andagitated the meditation of great saintly persons like Sanaka andSanandana. It created wonder in Lord Brahma, wrought intense curiositythat agitated the mind of Bali Maharaja, who was otherwise firmly fixed,made Maharaja Ananta, the carrier of the planets, whirl around, andpenetrated the strong coverings of the universe. Thus the sound of theflute in the hands of Krsna created a wonderful situation.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse (Vidagdha-madhava 1.27) is spoken by Madhumangala, a
cowherd friend of Krsna's.
                                   TEXT 165                ayam nayana-dandita-pra vara-pundarika-prabhah
                prabhati nava-jaguda-dyuti-vidambi-pitambarah                 aran yaja-pariskriya-damita-divya- vesadaro                harin-mani-manohara-dyutibhir ujjvalango harih
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The beauty of Krsna's eyes surpasses the beauty of white lotus
flowers, His yellow garments surpass the brilliance of fresh decorationsof kunkuma, His ornaments of selected forest flowers surpass thehankering for the best of garments, and His bodily beauty possessesmind-attracting splendor greater than the jewels known as marakata-mani
[emeralds].'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Vidagdha-madhava (1.17) is spoken by paurnamasi.                                   TEXT 166         janghadhas-tata-sangi-daksina-padam kincid vibhugna-trikam-
           saci-stambhita-kandharam sakhi tirah-sancari-netrancalam             vamsim kutmalite dadhanam adhare lolanguli-sangatam-           ringad-bhru-bhramaram varangi paramanandam purah svikuru
                                 TRANSLATION     " `0 most beautiful friend, please accept the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is standing before you full of transcendental bliss. Theborders of His eyes roam from side to side, and His eyebrows move slowlylike bumblebees on His lotuslike face. Standing with His right footplaced below the knee of His left leg, the middle of His body curved inthree places, and His neck gracefully tilted to the side, He takes Hisflute to His pursed lips and moves His fingers upon it here and there.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from the Lalita-madhava-nataka (4.27), a ten-act play
by Srila Rupa Gosvami. The speaker here is Lalitadevi.
                                   TEXT 167                  kula-varatanu-dharma-grava-vrndani bhindan
                 sumukhi nisita-dirghapanga-tanka-cchatabhih                  yugapad ayam apurvah kah puro visva-karma                  marakata-mani-laksair gostha-kaksam cinoti
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O beautiful-faced one, who is this creative person standing
before us? With the sharp chisels of His loving glances, He is splittingthe hard stones of many women's devotion to their husbands. And with theluster of His body, surpassing the brilliance of countless emeralds, Heis simultaneously constructing private meeting places for His pastimes.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse (Lalita-madhava 1.52) is spoken by Radharanito
Lalitadevi.
                                   TEXT 168                mahendra-mani-mandali-mada-vidambi-deha-dyutir
              vrajendra-kula-candramah sphurati ko'pi navyo yuva               sakhi sthira-kulangana-nikara-nivi-bandhargala-               cchidakarana-kautuki jayati yasya vamsi-dhvanih
                                 TRANSLATION     "`My dear friend, this newly youthful Lord Sri Krsna, the moon in
the family of Nanda Maharaja, is so beautiful that He defies the beautyof clusters of
valuable jewels. All glories to the vibration of His flute, for it is
cunningly breaking the patience of chaste ladies by loosening theirbelts and tight dresses.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Lalita-madhava (1.49) is spoken by Lalitadevi to
Radharani.
                                   TEXT 169               balad aksnor laksmih kavalayati navyam kuvalayam
               mukhollasah phullam kamala-vanam ullanghayati ca               dasam kastam asta-padam api nayaty angika-rucir                vicitram radhayah kim api kila rupam vilasati
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The beauty of Srtmati Radharani's eyes forcibly devours the
beauty of newly grown blue lotus flowers, and the beauty of Her facesurpasses that of an entire forest of fully blossomed lotuses. Herbodily luster seems to place even gold in a painful situation. Thus thewonderful, unprecedented beauty of Srimati Radharani is awakening inVrndavana.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Vidagdha-madhava (1.32). It is spoken by
Paurnamasi.
                                   TEXT 170                          vidhur eti diva virupatam
                        sata-patram bata sarvari-mukhe                          iti kena sada sriyojjvalam                        tulanam arhati mat-priyananam
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Although the effulgence of the moon is brilliant initially at
night, in the daytime it fades away. Similarly, although the lotus isbeautiful during the daytime, at night it closes. But, O My friend, theface of My most dear Srimati Radharani is always bright and beautiful,both day and night. Therefore, to what can Her face be compared?'
                                   PURPORT     This verse (Vidagdha-madhava 5.20) is spoken by Sri Krsna to
Madhumangala.
                                   TEXT 171                pramada- rasa- taranga-smera-ganda-sthala yah
                smara-dhanur anubandhi-bhru-lata-las ya-bhajah                mada-kala-cala-bhrngi-bhranti-bhangim dadhano                 hrdayam idam adanksit paksmalaksyah kataksah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `When Srimati Radharani smiles, waves of joy overtake Her cheeks,
and Her arched eyebrows dance like the bow of Cupid. Her glance is soenchanting that it is like a dancing bumblebee, moving unsteadily due tointoxication. That bee has bitten the whorl of My heart."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Vidagdha-madhava (2.51) is also spoken by Lord
Krsna.
                                   TEXT 172                  raya kahe,--"tomara kavitva amrtera dhara
                    dvitiya natakera kaha nandi-vyavahara"
                                 TRANSLATION     Having heard these verses recited by Rupa Gosvami, Srila Ramananda
Raya said, "Your poetic expressions are like continuous showers ofnectar. Kindly let me hear the introductory portion of the seconddrama."
                                   TEXT 173
                   rupa kahe,--"kahan tumi suryopama bhasa
                   muni kon ksudra,--yena khadyota-prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srtla Rupa Gosvami said, "In your presence, which is just like
brilliant sunshine, I am as insignificant as the light of a glowworm.
                                   TEXT 174
                    tomara age dharstya ei mukha-vyadana"
                    eta bali' nandi-sloka karila vyakhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is even impudent for me to open my mouth before you." Then,
having said this, he recited the introductory verse of Lalita-madhava.
                                   TEXT 175
                        sura-ripu-sudrsam uroja-kokan
                     mukha-kamalani ca khedayann akhandah                       ciram akhila-suhrc-cakora-nandi                     disatu mukunda-yasah-sasi mudam vah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The beautiful moonlike glories of Mukunda give distress to the
lotuslike faces of the wives of the demons and to their raised breasts,which are like gleaming cakravaka birds. Those glories, however, arepleasing to all His devotees, who are like cakora birds. May thoseglories forever give pleasure to you all."'
                                   PURPORT     This is the first verse of Act One of Lalita-madhava.                                   TEXT 176                  `dvitiya nandi kaha dekhi?'--raya puchila
                       sankoca pana rupa padite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Srila Ramananda Raya further inquired about the second
introductory verse, Srila Rupa Gosvami was somewhat hesitant, butnevertheless he began to read.
                                   TEXT 177
               nija-pranayitam sudham udayam apnuvan yah ksitau
                kiraty alam urikrta-dvija-kuladhiraja-sthitih               sa luncita-tamas-tatir mama saci-sutakhyah sasi                vasikrta-jagan-manah kim api sarma vinyasyatu
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The moonlike Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as the
son of mother Saci, has now appeared on earth to spread devotional loveof Himself. He is emperor of the brahmana community. He can drive awayall the darkness of ignorance and control the mind of everyone in theworld. May that rising moon bestow upon us all good fortune."'
                                   PURPORT     This is the third verse of Act One of Vidagdha-madhava.                                   TEXT 178
                      suniya prabhura yadi antare ullasa
                     bahire kahena kichu kari' rosabhasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was inwardly greatly pleased when
He heard this verse, externally He spoke as if angry.
                                   TEXT 179
                  kanha tomara krsna-rasa-kavya-sudha-sindhu
                  tara madhye mithya kene stuti-ksara-bindu
                                 TRANSLATION     "Your exalted poetic descriptions of the mellows of Lord Krsna's
pastimes are like an ocean of nectar. But why have you put in a falseprayer about Me? It is like a drop of detestful alkali."
                                   TEXT 180
                    raya kahe,--"rupera kavya amrtera pura
                    tara madhye eka bindu diyache karpura"
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Ramananda Raya objected, "It is not alkali at all. It is a
particle of camphor he has put into the nectar of his exalted poeticexpression."
                                   TEXT 181
                   prabhu kahe,--"raya, tomara ihate ullasa
                      sunitei lajja, loke kare upahasa"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sald, "My dear Ramananda Raya, you are
jubilant at hearing these poetic expressions, but I am ashamed to hearthem, for people in general will joke about the subject of this verse."
                                   TEXT 182
                   raya kahe,--"lokera sukha ihara sravane
                     abhista-devera smrti mangalacarane"
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya said, "Instead of joking, people in general will
feel great pleasure in hearing such poetry, for the initial remembranceof the worshipable Deity invokes good fortune."
                                   TEXT 183
                   raya kahe,--"kon ange patrera pravesa?"
                     tabe rupa-gosani kahe tahara visesa
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya inquired, "By which subdivision of style do the
players enter?" Rupa Gosvami then began to speak specifically about thissubject.
                                   TEXT 184
                             natata kirata-rajam
                      nihatya ranga-sthale kala-nidhina                             samaye tena vidheyam                         gunavati tara-kara-grahanam
                                 TRANSLATION     " `While dancing on the stage after having killed the ruler of
uncivilized men [Kamsa], Lord Krsna, master of all arts, will at theproper time accept the hand of Srimati Radharani, who is qualified withall transcendental attributes.'     (Lalita-madhava 1.11)
                                   TEXT 185
                  `udghatyaka' nama ei'amukha'--`vithi' anga
                   tomara age kahi--iha dharstyera taranga
                                 TRANSLATION     "This introduction is technically called udghatyaka, and the whole
scene is called vithi. You are so expert in drarnatic expression thateach of my statements before you is like a wave from an ocean ofimpudence.
                                   PURPORT     In this connection Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura again
quotes the following verse from the Sahitya-darpana (6.288):     udghatyakah kathodghatah     prayogatisayas tatha     pra vartaka valagite     panca prastavana-bhidahThus the technical names for the five kinds of introductory scenes of
the drama are listed as udghatyaka, kathodghata, pra yogatisaya, pravaitaka and avalagita. When Srila Ramananda Raya inquired which of thesefive Srila Rupa Gosvami had used to accomplish the technicalintroduction to his drama Lalita-madhava, Rupa Gosvami replied that hehad used the introduction technically called udghatyaka. According toBharati-vrtti, three technical terms used are prarocana, vithi andprahasana. Thus Rupa Gosvami also mentioned vithi, which is a technicalterm for a certain type of expression. According to the Sahitya-darpana(6.520):     vithyam eko bhaved ankah     kascid eko `tra kalpyate     akasa-bhasitair uktais'     citram pratyuktim asritahThe vithi beginning of a drama consists of only one scene. In thatscene, one of the heroes enters the stage, and by means of opposingstatements uttered by a voice from the sky (offstage), he introduces theabundant conjugal mellow and other mellows to some degree. In the courseof the introduction, all the seeds of the play are planted. Thisintroduction is called udghatyaka because the player dances on thestage. This term also indicates that the full moon enters the stage. Inthis case, when the word natata ("dancing on the stage") is linked withthe moon, its meaning is obscure, but because the meaning becomes veryclear when the word natata is linked with Krsna, this type ofintroduction is called udghatyaka.     Srila Ramananda Raya used highly technical terms when he discussedthis with Srila Rupa Gosvami. Rupa Gosvami admitted that Srila RamanandaRaya was a greatly learned scholar of bona fide dramatic composition.Thus although Srila Rupa Gosvami was quite fit to answer Srila RamanandaRaya's questions, due to his Vaisnava humility he admitted that hiswords were impudent. Actually both Rupa Gosvami and Ramananda Raya werescholarly experts in composing poetry and presenting it strictlyaccording to the Sahitya-darpana and other Vedic literatures.
                                   TEXT 186                            padani tv agatarthani
                            tad-artha-gataye narah                           yojayanti padair anyaih                             sa udghatyaka ucyate
                                 TRANSLATION     " `To explain an unclear word, men generally join it with other
words. Such an attempt is called udghatyaka."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is quoted from the Sahitya-darpana (6.289).                                   TEXT 187                     raya kahe,--"kaha age angera visesa"
                    sri-rupa kahena kichu sanksepa-uddesa                                 TRANSLATION
     When Ramananda Raya requested Srila Rupa Gosvami to speak further
about various portions of the play, Srila Rupa Gosvami briefly quotedhis Lalita-mad hava.
                                   TEXT 188
                          harim uddisate rajo-bharah
                        puratah sangamayaty amum tamah                         vrajavama-drsam na paddhatih                        prakata sarva-drsah sruter api
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The dust from cows and calves on the road creates a kind of
darkness indicating that Krsna is returning home from the pasture. Also,the darkness of evening provokes the gopis to meet Krsna. Thus thepastimes of Krsna and the gopis are covered by a kind of transcendentaldarkness and are therefore impossible for ordinary scholars of the Vedasto see.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from the Lalita-madhava (1.23) is spoken by Paurnamasi
in a conversation with Gargi.     Krsna stated in Bhagavad-gita, traigunya-visaya veda nistraigunyobhavarjuna. Thus He advised Arjuna to rise above the modes of materialnature, for the entire Vedic system is filled with descriptionsinvolving sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna. People are generallycovered by the quality of rajo-guna and are therefore unable tounderstand the pastimes of Krsna with the gopis of Vraja. Moreover, thequality of tamo-guna further disturbs their understanding. In Vrndavana,however, although Krsna is covered by the hazy darkness of the dust, thegopis can nevertheless understand that within the dust storm is Krsna.Because they are His topmost devotees, they can perceive His hand ineverything. Thus even in the dark or in a hazy storm of dust, devoteescan understand what Krsna is doing. The purport of this verse is thatKrsna is never lost, under any circumstances, to the vision of exalteddevotees like the gopis.
                                   TEXT 189                      hriyam avagrhya grhebhyah karsati
                           radham vanaya ya nipuna                            sa jayati nisrstartha                           vara-vamsaja-kakali duti
                                 TRANSLATION     " `May the sweet sound of Lord Krsna's flute, His authorized
messenger, be glorified, for it expertly releases Srimati Radharani fromHer shyness and attracts Her from Her home to the forest.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Lalita-madhava (1.24) is spoken by Gargi, the
daughter of Gargamuni.
                                   TEXT 190                sahacari niratankah ko'yam yuva mudira-dyutir
             vraja-bhuvi kutah prapto madyan matangaja-vibhramah               ahaha catulair utsarpadbhir drg-ancala-taskarair               mama dhrti-dhanam cetah-kosad vilunthayatiha yah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear friend, who is this fearless young man? He is as bright
as a lightning cloud, and He wanders in His pastimes like a maddenedelephant. From where has He come to Vrndavana? Alas, by His restlessmovements and attractive glances He is plundering from the vault of Myheart the treasure of My patience.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse (Lalita-madhava 2.11) is spoken by Srimati Radharani to
Her friend Lalitadevi.
                                   TEXT 191                vihara-sura-dirghika mama manah-karindrasya ya
                vilocana-cakorayoh sarad-amanda-candra-prabha                  uro'mbara-tatasya cabharana-caru-taravali                mayonnata-manorathair iyam alambhi sa radhika
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Srimati Radharani is the Ganges in which the elephant of My mind
enjoys pastimes. She is the shining of the full autumn moon for thecakora birds of My eyes. She is the dazzling ornament, the bright andbeautiful arrangement of stars, on the border of the sky of My chest.Now today I have galned Srimati Radharani because of the highly elevatedstate of My mind."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Lalita-madhava (2.10) expresses the thoughts of
Lord Krsna in relation with Radharani.
                                   TEXT 192                     eta suni' raya kahe prabhura carane
                   rupera kavitva prasamsi' sahasra-vadane                                 TRANSLATION
     After hearing this, Srila Ramananda Raya submitted at the lotus
feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu the superexcellence of Srila RupaGosvami's poetic expression and began to pralse it as if he hadthousands of mouths.
                                   TEXT 193
                      "kavitva na haya ei amrtera dhara
                     nataka-laksana saba siddhantera sara
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Ramananda Raya said, "This is not a poetic presentation; it
is a continuous shower of nectar. Indeed, it is the essence of allultimate realizations, appearing in the form of plays.
                                   TEXT 194
                      prema-paripati ei adbhuta varnana
                   suni' citta-karnera haya ananda-ghurnana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The wonderful descriptions of Rupa Gosvami are superb arrangements
to express loving affairs. Hearing them will plunge the heart and earsof everyone into a whirlpool of transcendental bliss.
                                   TEXT 195
                           kim kavyena kaves tasya
                           kim kandena dhanus-matah                            parasya hrdaye lagnam                           na ghurnayati yac chirah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `What is the use of a bowman's arrow or a poet's poetry if they
penetrate the heart but do not cause the head to spin?'
                                   TEXT 196
                    tomara sakti vina jivera nahe ei vani
                    tumi sakti diya kahao,--hena anumani"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Without Your mercy such poetic expressions would be impossible for
an ordinary living being to write. My guess is that You have given himthe power."
                                   TEXT 197
                  prabhu kahe,--"prayage ihara ha-ila milana
                   ihara gune ihate amara tusta haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu replied, "I met Srila Rupa Gosvami at
Prayaga. He attracted and satisfied Me because of his qualities."
                                   PURPORT     The Supreme personality of Godhead is not partial to some and
neutral to others. One can actually draw the attention of the SupremePersonality of Godhead by service. Then one is further empowered by theLord to act in such a way that everyone can appreciate his service. Thisis confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.11): ye yatha mam prapadyante tamstathaiva bhajamy aham. Krsna is responsive. If one tries to render hisbest service to the Lord, the Lord gives him the power to do so. Krsnaalso says in Bhagavad-gita:     tesam satata-yuktanam     bhajatam priti-purvakam     dadami buddhi-yogam tam     yena mam upayanti te"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I givethe understanding by which they can come to Me." (Bg. 10.10) SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu bestowed His special favor upon Srila Rupa Gosvamibecause Rupa Gosvami wanted to serve the Lord to the best of hisability. Such is the reciprocation between the devotee and the Lord inthe discharge of devotional duties.
                                   TEXT 198                    madhura prasanna ihara kavya salankara
                    aiche kavitva vinu nahe rasera pracara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu praised the metaphors and other literary
ornaments of Srtla Rupa Gosvami's transcendental poetry. Without suchpoetic attributes, He sald, there is no possibility of preachingtranscendental mellows.
                                   TEXT 199
                     sabe krpa kari' inhare deha' ei vara
                  vraja-lila-prema-rasa yena varne nirantara                                 TRANSLATION
     Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu requested all His personal associates to
bless Rupa Gosvami so that he might continuously describe the pastimesof Vrndavana, which are full of emotional love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 200
                  inhara ye jyestha-bhrata, nama--`sanatana'
                     prthivite vijna-vara nahi tanra sama
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sald, "Srtla Rupa Gosvami's elder brother,
whose name is Sanatana Gosvami, is such a wise and learned scholar thatno one is equal to him."
                                   TEXT 201
                tomara yaiche visaya-tyaga, taiche tanra riti
                 dain ya-vairag ya-pandityera tanhatei sthiti
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Ramananda Raya, "Sanatana Gosvami's
renunciation of material connections is just like yours. Humility,renunciation and excellent learning exist in him simultaneously.
                                   TEXT 202
                    ei dui bhaiye ami pathailun vrndavane
                  sakti diya bhakti-sastra karite pravartane
                                 TRANSLATION     "I empowered both of these brothers to go to Vrndavana to expand
the literature of bhakti."
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu informed Srila Ramananda Raya that he and
Sanatana Gosvami had engaged equally in devotional service after givingup all relationships with material activity. Such renunciation is asymptom of an unalloyed devotee engaged in the service of the Lord withno tinge of material contamination. According to Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, this is the position of trnad api sunicena taror apisahisnuna. A pure devotee, free from the reactions of the material modesof nature, executes devotional service with tolerance like that of atree. He also feels humbler than the grass. Such a devotee, who iscalled niskincana or free from all material possessions, is alwaysabsorbed in emotional love of Godhead. He is reluctant to perform anykind of sense gratification. In other words, such a devotee is free from
all material bondage, but he engages in Krsna conscious activities. Suchexpert devotional service is performed without hypocrisy. Humility,renunciation and learned scholarship were combined in Sanatana Gosvami,the ideal pure devotee, who was on the same level of understanding asSrila Ramananda Raya. Like Ramananda Raya, Sanatana Gosvami was a fullycognizant expert in the conclusions of devotional service and wastherefore able to describe such transcendental knowledge.
                                   TEXT 203                   raya kahe,--"isvara tumi ye caha karite
                      kasthera putali tumi para nacaite
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Ramananda Raya replied to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "My Lord,
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If You like, You can causeeven a wooden doll to dance.
                                   TEXT 204
                   mora mukhe ye saba rasa karila pracarane
                       sei rasa dekhi ei ihara likhane
                                 TRANSLATION     "I see that the truths regarding transcendental mellow that You
have expounded through my mouth are all explalned in the writings ofSrila Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 205
                  bhakte krpa-hetu prakasite caha vraja-rasa
                   yare karao, sei karibe jagat tomara vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because of Your causeless mercy toward Your devotees, You want to
describe the transcendental pastimes in Vrndavana. Anyone empowered todo this can bring the entire world under Your influence."
                                   PURPORT     This passage parallels the statement krsna-sakti vina nahe tara
pravartana, which means that unless empowered by the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, Krsna, one cannot spread the holy name of the Lordthroughout the entire world (Cc. Antya 7.11). Under the protection ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, a pure devotee can preach the holyname of the Lord so that everyone may take advantage of this facilityand thus become Krsna conscious.                                   TEXT 206
                     tabe mahaprabhu kaila rupe alingana
                     tanre karaila sabara carana vandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then embraced Rupa Gosvami and asked him to
offer prayers at the lotus feet of all the devotees present.
                                   TEXT 207
                    advaita-nityanandadi saba bhakta-gana
                     krpa kari' rupe sabe kaila alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     Advalta Acarya, Nityananda Prabhu and all the other devotees showed
their causeless mercy to Rupa Gosvami by embracing him in return.
                                   TEXT 208
                    prabhu-krpa rupe, ara rupera sad-guna
                     dekhi' camatkara haila sabakara mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's special mercy toward Srila Rupa
Gosvami and seeing his personal qualities, all the devotees were struckwith wonder.
                                   TEXT 209
                    tabe mahaprabhu saba bhakta lana gela
                     haridasa-thakura rupe alingana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu left with all of His devotees,
Haridasa Thakura also embraced Srila Rupa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 210
                  haridasa kahe,--"tomara bhagyera nahi sima
                   ye saba varnila, ihara ke jane mahima?"
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura told him: "There is no limit to your good fortune.
No one can understand the glories of what you have described."                                   TEXT 211
                     sri-rupa kahena,--ami kichui na jani
                     yei mahaprabhu kahana, sei kahi vani
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri ROpa Gosvami said, "I do not know anything. The only
transcendental words I can utter are those which Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhumakes me speak.
                                   PURPORT     The poet or writer dealing with transcendental subject matters is
not an ordinary writer or translator. Because he is empowered by theSupreme Personality of Godhead, whatever he writes becomes veryeffective. The principle of being empowered by the Supreme Personalityof Godhead is essential. A materialistic poet who describes in hispoetry the material activities of man and woman cannot describe thetranscendental pastimes of the Lord or the transcendental conclusions ofdevotional service. Srila Sanatana Gosvami has therefore warned allneophyte devotees that one should not hear from the mouth of a non-Vaisnava.     a vaisna va-mukhodgirnam     putam hari-kathamrtam     sravanam naiva kartavyam     sarpocchistam yatha payah (Padma Purana)Unless one is a fully unalloyed devotee of the Lord, one should not tryto describe the pastimes of Krsna in poetry, for it will be onlymundane. There are many descriptions of Krsna's Bhagavad-gita written bypersons whose consciousness is mundane and who are not qualified by puredevotion. Although they attempted to write transcendental literature,they could not fully engage even a single devotee in Krsna's service.Such literature is mundane, and therefore, as warned by Sri SanatanaGosvami, one should not touch it.
                                   TEXT 212                             hrdi yasya preranaya
                        pravartito'ham varaka-rupo'pi                           tasya hareh pada-kamalam                            vande caitanya-devasya
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Although I am the lowest of men and have no knowledge, the Lord
has mercifully bestowed upon me the inspiration to write transcendentalliterature about devotional service. Therefore I offer my obeisances atthe lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, who has given me the chance to write these books."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.2).
                                   TEXT 213                      ei-mata dui-jana krsna-katha-range
                    sukhe kala gonaya rupa haridasa-sange
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Srila Rupa Gosvami passed his time in close association
with Haridasa Thakura by discussing the pastimes of Lord Krsna in greathappiness.
                                   TEXT 214
                  cari masa rahi' saba prabhura bhakta-gana
                   gosani vidaya dila, gaude karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus spent four months
with Him. Then the Lord bade them farewell, and they retumed to Bengal.
                                   TEXT 215
                     sri-rupa prabhu-pade nilacale rahila
                    dola-yatra prabhu-sange anande dekhila
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Rupa Gosvami, however, stayed at the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and when the Dola-yatra festival took place, he sawit in great happiness with the Lord.
                                   TEXT 216
                    dola anantare prabhu rupe vidaya dila
                     aneka prasada kari' sakti sancarila
                                 TRANSLATION     After the Dola-yatra festival ended, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade
farewell to Rupa Gosvami also. The Lord empowered him and bestowed uponhim all kinds of mercy.
                                   TEXT 217
                   "vrndavane yaha' tumi, rahiha vrndavane
                        ekabara ihan pathaiha sanatane                                 TRANSLATION
     "Now go to Vrndavana and stay there," the Lord sald. "You may send
here your elder brother, Sanatana.
                                   TEXT 218
                    vraje yai rasa-sastra kariha nirupana
                   lupta-tirtha saba tahan kariha pracarana
                                 TRANSLATION     "When you go to Vrndavana, stay there, preach transcendental
literature and excavate the lost holy places.
                                   TEXT 219
                    krsna-seva, rasa-bhakti kariha pracara
                      amiha dekhite tahan yaimu ekabara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Establish the service of Lord Krsna and preach the mellows of Lord
Krsna's devotional service. I shall also go to Vrndavana once more."
                                   TEXT 220
                    eta bali' prabhu tanre kaila alingana
                    rupa gosani sire dhare prabhura carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Having thus spoken, Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu embraced Rupa Gosvami,
who then placed the lotus feet of the Lord upon his head.
                                   TEXT 221
                   prabhura bhakta-gana-pase vidaya la-ila
                     punarapi gauda-pathe vrndavane aila
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Rupa Gosvami took leave of all the devotees of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and returned to Vrndavana by the path to Bengal.
                                   TEXT 222
                     ei ta' kahilana punah rupera milana                      iha yei sune, paya caitanya-carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described the second meeting of ROpa Gosvami and Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Anyone who hears of this incident will certainlyattain the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 223
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, First Chapter, describing the second meeting of Srila RupaGosvami and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                 Chapter Two
                     The Chastisement of Junior Haridasa     The purport of this chapter is explained by Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya as follows. Krsnadasa KavirajaGosvami, the author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, wanted to explain directmeetings with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, meetings with those empowered byHim, and His avirbhava appearance. Thus he described the glories ofNrsimhananda and other devotees. A devotee named Bhagavan Acarya wasexceptionally faithful to the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Nevertheless, his brother, Gopala Bhatta Acarya, discoursed upon thecommentary of impersonalism (Mayavada). Srila Svarupa Damodara Gosvami,the secretary of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, forbid Bhagavan Acarya toindulge in hearing that commentary. Later, when Junior Haridasa,following the order of Bhagavan Acarya, went to collect alms fromMadhavidevi, he committed an offense by talking intimately with a womanalthough he was in the renounced order. Because of this, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu rejected junior Haridasa, and despite all the requests of theLord's stalwart devotees, the Lord did not accept him again. One yearafter this incident, Junior Haridasa went to the confluence of theGanges and Yamuna and committed suicide. In his spiritual body, however,he continued to sing devotional songs, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heardthem. When the Vaisnavas of Bengal went to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,these incidents became known to Svarupa Damodara and others.
                                    TEXT 1      vande'ham sri-guroh sri-yuta-pada-kamalam sri-gurun vaisnavams ca
         sri-rupam sagrajatam saha-gana-raghunathanvitam tam sa-jivam          sadvaitam savadhutam parijana-sahitam krsna-caitanya-devam        sri-radha-krsna-padan saha-gana-lalita-sri- visakhanvita-ms ca
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my
spiritual master and of all the other preceptors on the path ofdevotionaI service. I offer my respectful obeisaces unto all theVaisnavas and unto the six Gosvamis, including Srila Rupa Gosvami, SrtlaSanatana Gosvami, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, Jiva Gosvami and theirassociates. I offer my respectful obeisaces unto Sri Advaita AcaryaPrabhu, Sri Nityanada Prabhu, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and all Hisdevotees, headed by Srivasa Thakura I then offer my respectfulobeisances unto the lotus feet of Lord Krsna, Sri-mati Radharani ad allthe gopis, headed by Lalita and Visakha.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Srt Caitaya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Nityanada
Prabhu! All glories to Advaita Acarya! And all glories to all thedevotees of Srt Caltanya Mahaprabhu!
                                    TEXT 3
                     sarva-loka uddharite gaura-avata-ra
                     nistarera hetu tara trividha prakara
                                 TRANSLATION     In His incarnation as Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Lord Sri Krsna
descended to deliver all the living beings in the three worlds, fromBrahmaloka down to Patalaloka. He caused their deliverance in threeways.
                                    TEXT 4
                    saksat-darsana, ara yogya-bhakta-jive
                   `avesa' karaye kahan, kahan `avirbha-ve'
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord delivered the fallen souls in some places by meeting them
directly, in other places by empowering a pure devotee, and in stilIother places by appearing before someone Himself.                                   TEXT 5-6
                    `saksat-darsane' praya saba nistarila
                   nakula-brahmacarira dehe `avista' ha-ila
                 pradyumna-nrsimhananda age kaila `avirbhava'
                    `loka nistariba',--ei isvara-svabhava
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu delivered almost all the fallen souls by
directly meeting them. He delivered others by entering the body ofNakula Brahmacari and by appearing before Nrsimhananda Brahmacari. "Ishall deliver the fallen souls." This statement characterizes theSupreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   PURPORT     The Lord always manifested His avirbhava appearance in the
following four places: (1) the house of Srimati Sacimata, (2) whereverNityananda Prabhu danced in ecstasy, (3) the house of Srivasa (whenkirtana was peformed), and (4) the house of Raghava Pandita. LordCaitanya Himself appeared in these four places. (In this connection, onemay consult text 34.)
                                    TEXT 7                       saksat-darsane saba jagat tarila
                   eka-bara ye dekhila, se krtartha ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was personally present, anyone in the
world who met Him even once was fully satisfied and became spirituallyadvanced.
                                    TEXT 8
                   gauda-desera bhakta-gana pratyabda asiya
                    punah gauda-dese yaya prabhure miliya
                                 TRANSLATION     Every year, devotees from Bengal would go to Jaganatha Puri to meet
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and after the meeting they would return toBengal.
                                    TEXT 9
                     ara nana-desera loka asi' jagannatha                    caitanya-carana dekhi' ha-ila krtartha
                                 TRANSLATION     Similarly, people who went to Jagannatha Purt from various
provinces of India were fully satisfied after seeing the lotus feet ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 10
                   sapta-dvioera loka ara nava-khanda-vasi
                  deva, gandharva, kinnara manusya-vese asi,
                                 TRANSLATION     People from all over the universe, including the seven islads, the
nine khandas, the planets of the demigods, Gandharvaloka andKinnaraloka, would go there in the forms of huma beings.
                                   PURPORT     For an explanation of sapta-dvipa, see Madhya-lila, Chapter Twenty,
verse 218, and Srimad-Bhagavatam, Fifth Canto, Chapters Sixteen andTwenty. in the Siddhanta-siromani, Chapter One (Goladhyaya), in theBhuvana-kosa section, the nine khandas are mentioned as follows:     aindram kaseru sakalam kila tamraparnam     anyad gabhastimad atas ca kumarikakhyam     nagam ca saumyam iha varunam antya-khandam     gandharva-samjnam iti bharata-varsa-madhye"Within Bharata-varsa, there are nine khandas. They are known as (1)Aindra, (2) Kaseru, (3) Tamraparna, (4) Gabhastimat, (5) Kumarika, (6)Naga (7) Saumya, (8) Varuna and (9) Gandharva."
                                   TEXT 11                    prabhure dekhiya yaya `vaisnava' hana
                    krsna bali' nace saba premavista hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Having seen the Lord, they all became Vaisnavas. Thus they daced
and chanted the Hare Krsna mantra in ecstatic love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 12
                       ei-mata darsane trijagat nistari
                       ye keha asite nare aneka samsari
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus by direct meetings, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu delivered the
three worlds. Some people, however, could not go and were entangled inmaterial activities.
                                   TEXT 13
                     ta-saba tarite prabhu sei saba dese
                    yogya-bhakta jiva-dehe karena `avese'
                                 TRANSLATION     To deliver people in regions throughout the universe who could not
meet Him, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally entered the bodies of puredevotees.
                                   TEXT 14
                     sei jive nija-bhakti karena prakase
                  tahara darsane `vaisnava' haya sarva-dese
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus He empowered living beings [His pure devotees] by manifesting
in them so much of His own devotion that people in all other countriesbecame devotees by seeing them.
                                   PURPORT     As stated in Caitanya-caritamrta (Antya 7.11):
     kali-kalera dharma--krsna-nama-sankirtana     krsna-sakti vina nahe tara pravartanaUnless one is empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, one cannot spread the holy names of the Hare Krsnamaha-mantra throughout the world. Persons who do so are empowered.Therefore they are sometimes called avesa-avataras or incarnations, forthey are endowed with the power of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 15                       ei-mata avese tarila tribhuvana
                    gaude yaiche avesa, kari dig darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu delivered the entire three
worlds, not only by His personal presence but also by empowering others.I shall briefly describe how He empowered a living being in Bengal.
                                   TEXT 16
                     ambuya-muluke haya nakula-brahmacari                     parama-vaisnava tenho bada adhikari
                                 TRANSLATION     In Ambuya-muluka there was a person named Nakula Brahmacari, who
was a perfectly pure devotee, greatly advanced in devotional service.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura says that Ambuya-muluka is the present
Ambika, a city in the Vardhamana district of West Bengal. Formerly,during the Mohammedan regime, it was known as Ambuya-muluka. In thiscity there is a neighborhood called Pyariganja, and that is where NakulaBrahmacari used to live.
                                   TEXT 17                    gauda-desera loka nistarite mana haila
                     nakula-hrdaye prabhu `avesa' karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Desiring to deliver all the people of Bengal, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu entered the heart of Nakula Brahmacari.
                                   TEXT 18
                  graha-grasta-praya nakula premavista hana
                     hase, kande, nace, gaya unmatta hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Nakula Brahmacari became exactly like a man haunted by a ghost.
Thus he sometimes laughed, sometimes cried, sometimes danced andsometimes chanted like a madman.
                                   TEXT 19
                 asru, kampa, stambha, sveda, sattvika vikara
                    nirantara preme nrtya, saghana hunkara
                                 TRANSLATION     He continuously exhibited bodily transformations of transcendental
love. Thus he cried, trembled, became stunned, perspired, danced in loveof Godheadand made sounds like those of a cloud.
                                   TEXT 20
                  taiche gaura-kanti, taiche sada premavesa
                     taha dekhibare aise sarva gauda-desa                                 TRANSLATION
     His body shone with the same luster as that of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and he showed the same absorption in ecstatic love ofGodhead. People came from all provinces of Bengal to see these symptoms.
                                   TEXT 21
                   yare dekhe tare kahe,--`kaha krsna-nama,
                     tanhara darsane loka haya premoddama
                                 TRANSLATION     He advised whomever he met to chant the holy names Hare Krsna. Thus
upon seeing him, people were overwhelmed with love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 22
                     caitanyera avesa haya nakulera dehe
                     suni' sivananda aila kariya sandehe
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sivananda Sena heard that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had entered
the body of Nakula Brahmacari, he went there with doubts in his mind.
                                   TEXT 23
                    pariksa karite tanra yabe iccha haila
                       bahire rahiya tabe vicara karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Desiring to test the authenticity of Nakula Brahmacari, he stayed
outside, thinking as follows.
                                  TEXT 24-25
                      "apane bolana more, iha yadi jani
                     amara ista-mantra jani' kahena apani
                    tabe jani, inhate haya caitanva-avese"
                    eta cinti' sivananda rahila dura-dese
                                 TRANSLATION     "If Nakula Brahmacari personally calls me and knows my worshipable
mantra, then I shall understand that he is inspired by the presence ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu." Thinking in this way, he stayed some distance
apart.
                                   TEXT 26
                    asankhya lokera ghata,--keha aise yaya
                     lokera sanghatte keha darsanana paya
                                 TRANSLATION     There was a large crowd of peopie, some coming and some going.
Indeed, some people in that great crowd could not even see NakulaBrahmacari.
                                   TEXT 27
                 avese brahmacari kahe,--`sivananda ache dure
                      jana dui cari yaha, bolaha tahare'
                                 TRANSLATION     In his inspired state, Nakula Brahmacari sald,"Sivananda Sena is
staying some distance away. Two or four of you go call him."
                                   TEXT 28
                    cari-dike dhaya loke `sivananda' bali
                   sivananda kon, tomaya bolaya brahmacari
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus people began running here and there, calling in all
directions, "Sivananda! Whoever is Sivananda, please come. NakulaBrahmacari is calling you."
                                   TEXT 29
                    suni, sivananda sena tanha sighra aila
                     namaskara kari' tanra nikate vasila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing these calls, Sivananda Sena quickly went there, offered
obeisances to Nakula Brahmacari, and sat down near him.
                                   TEXT 30
                    brahmacari bale,--"tumi karila samsaya
                      eka-mana hana suna tahara niscaya                                 TRANSLATION
     Nakula Brahmacari sald,"I know that you are doubtful. Now please
hear this evidence with great attention.
                                   TEXT 31
                   `gaura-gopala mantra' tomara cari aksara
                    avisvasa chada, yei kariyacha antara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are chanting the Gaura-gopala mantra composed of four
syllables. Now please give up the doubts that have resided within you."
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura explains the Gaura-gopala mantra in his
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. Worshipers of Sri Gaurasundara accept the foursyllables gau-ra-an.-ga as the Gaura mantra, but pure worshipers of Radha and Krsna acceptthe four syllables ra-dha krs-na as the Gaura-gopala mantra. However,Vaisnavas consider Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu nondifferent from Radha-Krsna(sri-krsna-caitanya radha-krsna nahe anya). Therefore one who chants themantra Gauranga and one who chants the names of Radha and Krsna are onthe same level.
                                   TEXT 32                     tabe sivanandera mane pratiti ha-ila
                    aneka sammana kari' bahu bhakti kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena thereupon developed full confidence in his mind that
Nakula Brahmacari was filled with the presence of Sri CaltanyaMahaprabhu. Sivananda Sena then offered him respect and devotionalservice.
                                   TEXT 33
                    ei-mata mahaprabhura acintya prabhava
                  ebe suna prabhura yaiche haya `avirbhava'
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, one should understand the inconceivable potencies of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Now please hear how His appearance [avirbhava]takes place.                                  TEXT 34-35
                    sacira mandire, ara nityananda-nartane
                     srivasa-kirtane, ara raghava-bhavane
                   ei cari thani prabhura sada `avirbhava'
                  premakrsta haya,--prabhura sahaja svabhava
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu always appeared in four places--in the
household temple of mother Saci, in the places where Sri NityanandaPrabhu danced, in the house of Srivasa Pandita during congregationalchanting and in the house of Raghava Pandita. He appeared because of Hisattraction to the love of His devotees. That is His naturalcharacteristic.
                                   TEXT 36
                      nrsimhanandera age avirbhuta hana
                     bhojana karila, taha suna mana diya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared before Nrsimhananda Brahmacari and
ate his offerings. Please hear about this with attention.
                                   TEXT 37
                   sivanandera bhagina sri-kanta-sena nama
                     prabhura krpate tenho bada bhagyavan
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena had a nephew named Srikanta Sena, who by the grace
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was extremely fortunate.
                                   TEXT 38
                     eka vatsara tenho prathama ekesvara
                    prabhu dekhibare aila utkantha-antara
                                 TRANSLATION     One year, Srikanta Sena came alone to Jagannatha Puri in great
eagerness to see the Lord.
                                   TEXT 39
                    mahaprabhu tare dekhi' bada krpa kaila                    masa-dui tenho prabhura nikate rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing Srikanta Sena, Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu bestowed causeless
mercy upon him. Srikanta Sena stayed near Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu forabout two months at Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 40
                   tabe prabhu tanre ajna kaila gaude yaite
                     "bhakta-gane nisedhiha ethake asite
                                 TRANSLATION     When he was about to return to Bengal, the Lord told him, "Forbid
the devotees of Bengal to come to Jagannatha Puri this year.
                                   TEXT 41
                       e-vatsara tanha ami yaimu apane
                       tahai milimu saba advaitadi sane
                                 TRANSLATION     "This year I shall personally go to Bengal and meet all the
devotees there, headed by Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 42
                     sivanande kahiha,--ami ei pausa-mase
                     acambite avasya ami yaiba tanra pase
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please inform Sivananda Sena that this December I shall certainly
go to his home.
                                   TEXT 43
                  jagadananda haya tahan, tenho bhiksa dibe
                   sabare kahiha,--e vatsara keha na asibe"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Jagadananda is there, and he will give Me offerings of food.
Inform them all that no one should come to Jagannatha Puri this year."
                                   TEXT 44                     sri-kanta asiya gaude sandesa kahila
                     suni' bhakta-gana-mane ananda ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Srikanta Sena returned to Bengal and delivered this message,
the minds of all the devotees were very pleased.
                                   TEXT 45
                    calitechila acarya, rahila sthira hana
                 sivananda, jagadananda rahe pratyasa kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya was just about to go to Jagannatha Puri with the
other devotees, but upon hearing this message, He waited. Sivananda Senaand Jagadananda also stayed back, awaiting the arrival of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 46
                     pausa-mase aila dunhe samagri kariya
                     sandhya-paryanta rahe apeksa kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     When the month of Pausa arrived, both Jagadananda and Sivananda
collected all kinds of paraphernalia for the Lord's reception. Everyday, they would wait until evening for the Lord to come.
                                   TEXT 47
                      ei-mata masa gela, gosani na aila
                    jagadananda, sivananda duhkhita ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     As the month passed but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not come,
Jagadananda and Sivananda became most unhappy.
                                  TEXT 48-49
                      acambite nrsimhananda tahani aila
                    dunhe tanre mili' tabe sthane vasaila
                  dunhe duhkhi dekhi' tabe kahe nrsimhananda
                    `toma dunhakare kene dekhi nirananda?'                                 TRANSLATION
     Suddenly Nrsimhananda arrived, and Jagadananda and Sivananda
arranged for him to sit near them. Seeing them both so unhappy,Nrsimhananda inquired,"Why do I see that you are both despondent?"
                                   TEXT 50
                     tabe sivananda ta-nre sakala kahila
                    `asiba ajna dila prabhu kene na aila?'
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Sivananda Sena told him, "Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu promised
that He would come. Why, then, has He not arrived?"
                                   TEXT 51
                   suni' brahmacari kahe,--`karaha santose
                      ami ta' aniba tanre trtiya divase'
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Nrsimhananda Brahmacari replied, "Please be
satisfied. I assure you that I shall bring Him here three days fromnow."
                                   TEXT 52
                     tanhara prabhava-prema jane dui-jane
                     anibe prabhure ebe niscaya kailamane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda and Jagadananda knew of Nrsimhananda Brahmacari's
influence and love of Godhead. Therefore they now felt assured that hewould certainly bring Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 53
                   `pradyumna brahmacari'--tanra nija-nama
                 `nrsimhananda' nama tanra kaila gaura-dhama
                                 TRANSLATION     His real name was Pradyumna Brahmacari. The name Nrsimhananda had
been given to him by Lord Gaurasundara Himself.
                                   TEXT 54                   dui dina dhyana kari' sivanandere kahila
                      "panihati grame ami prabhure anila
                                 TRANSLATION     After meditating for two days, Nrsimhananda Brahmacari told
Sivananda Sena,"I have already brought Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu to thevillage known as Panihati.
                                   TEXT 55
                  kali madhyahne tenho asibena tomara ghare
                  paka-samagri anaha, ami bhiksa dimu tanre
                                 TRANSLATION     "Tomorrow at noon He will come to your home. Therefore please bring
all kinds of cooking ingredients. I shall personally cook and offer Himfood.
                                   TEXT 56
                      tabe tanre etha ami aniba satvara
                   niscaya kahilana, kichu sandeha na kara
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this way I shall bring Him here very soon. Be assured that I am
telling you the truth. Do not be doubtful.
                                   TEXT 57
                      ye cahiye, taha kara hana tat-para
                    ati tvaraya kariba paka, suna atahpara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Bring all the ingredients very soon, for I want to begin cooking
immediately. Please do what I say."
                                   TEXT 58
                      paka-samagri anaha, ami yaha cai'
                      ye magila, sivananda ani' dila tai
                                 TRANSLATION     Nrsimhananda Brahmacari said to Sivananda,"Please bring whatever
cooking ingredients I want." Thus Sivananda Sena immediately broughtwhatever he asked for.
                                   TEXT 59
                     pratah-kala haite paka karila apara
                   nana vyanjana, pitha, ksira nana upahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Beginning early in the morning, Nrsimhananda Brahmacari cooked many
varieties of food, including vegetables, cakes, sweet rice and otherpreparations.
                                   TEXT 60
                   jagannathera bhinna bhoga prthak badila
                   caitanya prabhura lagi' ara bhoga kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     After he finished cooking, he brought separate dishes for
Jagannatha and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 61
                    ista-deva nrsimha lagi' prthak badila
                   tina-jane samaipiya bahire dhyana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     He also separately offered dishes to Nrsimhadeva, his worshipable
Deity. Thus he divided all the food into three offerings. Then, outsidethe temple, he began to meditate upon the Lord.
                                   TEXT 62
                  dekhe, sighra asi' vasila caitanya-gosani
                    tina bhoga khaila, kichu avasista nai
                                 TRANSLATION     In his meditation he saw Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu quickly come, sit
down and eat all three offerings, leaving behind no remnants.
                                   TEXT 63
                  anande vihvala pradyumna, pade asru-dhara                    "haha kiba kara" bali' karaye phutkara
                                 TRANSLATION     Pradyumna Brahmacari was overwhelmed by transcendental ecstasy upon
seeing Caitanya Mahaprabhu eating everything. Thus tears flowed from hiseyes. Nevertheless, he expressed dismay, saying,"Alas, alas! My dearLord, what are You doing? You are eating everyone's food!
                                   TEXT 64
                  jagannathe-tomaya aikya, khao tanra bhoga
                      nrsimhera bhoga kene kara upayoga?
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, You are one with Jagannatha; therefore I have no
objection to Your eating His offering. But why are You touching theoffering to Lord Nrsimhadeva?
                                   TEXT 65
                       nrsimhera haila jani aji upavasa
                   thakura upavasi rahe, jiye kaiche dasa?'
                                 TRANSLATION     "I think that Nrsimhadeva could not eat anything today, and
therefore He is fasting. If the master fasts, how can the servant live?"
                                   TEXT 66
                  bhojana dekhi' yadyapi tanra hrdaye ullasa
              nrsimha laksya kari' bahye kichu kare duhkhabhasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Nrsimha Brahmacari felt jubilation within his heart to see
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu eating everything, for the sake of LordNrsimhadeva he externally expressed disappointment.
                                   TEXT 67
                    svayam bhagavan krsna-caitanya-gosani
                   jagannatha-nrsimha-saha kichu bheda nai
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Himself. Therefore there is no difference between Him, Lord Jagannathaand Lord Nrsimhadeva.
                                   TEXT 68
                  iha janibare pradyumnera gudha haita mana
                     taha dekhaila prabhu kariya bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     Pradyumna Brahmacari was deeply eager to understand this fact.
Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu revealed it to him by a practicaldemonstration.
                                   TEXT 69
                     bhojana kariya prabhu gela panihati
                    santosa paila dekhi' vyanjana-paripati
                                 TRANSLATION     After eating all the offerings, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu started for
Panihati. There, He was greatly satisfied to see the different varietiesof vegetables prepared in the house of Raghava.
                                   TEXT 70
                   sivananda kahe,--`kene karaha phutkara?'
                tenha kahe,--"dekha tomara prabhura vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda sald to Nrsimhananda, "Why are you expressing dismay?"
Nrsimhananda replied,"Just see the behavior of your Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 71
                     tina janara bhoga tenho ekela khaila
                      jagannatha-nrsimha upavasi ha-ila"
                                 TRANSLATION     "He alone has eaten the offerings for all three Deities. Because of
this, both Jagannatha and Nrsimhadeva remaln fasting."
                                   TEXT 72                    suni sivanandera citte ha-ila samsaya
                     kiba premavese kahe, kiba satya haya
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sivananda Sena heard this statement, he was unsure whether
Nrsimhananda Brahmacari was speaking that way because of ecstatic loveor because it was actually a fact.
                                   TEXT 73
                     tabe sivanande kichu kahe brahmacari
                  samagri ana nrsimha lagi punah paka kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sivananda Sena was thus perplexed, Nrsimhananda Brahmacari
said to him,"Bring more food. Let me cook again for Lord Nrsimhadeva."
                                   TEXT 74
                      tabe sivananda bhoga-samagri anila
                      paka kari' nrsimhera bhoga lagaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Sivananda Sena again brought the ingredients with which to
cook, and Pradyumna Brahmacari again cooked and offered the food toNrsimhadeva.
                                   TEXT 75
                    varsantare sivananda lana bhakta-gana
                     nilacale dekhe yana prabhura carana
                                 TRANSLATION     The next year, Sivananda went to Jagannatha Puri with all the other
devotees to see the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 76
                     eka-dina sabhate prabhu vata calaila
                      nrsimhanandera guna kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     One day, in the presence of all the devotees, the Lord raised these
topics concerning Nrsimhananda Brahmacari and pralsed his transcendentalqualities.                                   TEXT 77
                    `gata-varsa pause more karaila bhojana
                   kabhu nahi khai aiche mistanna-vyanjana'
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord sald, "Last year in the month of Pausa, when Nrsimhananda
gave me varieties of sweetmeats and vegetables to eat, they were so goodthat I had never before eaten such preparations."
                                   TEXT 78
                    suni' bhakta-gana mane ascarya manila
                    sivanandera mane tabe pratyaya janmila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, all the devotees were struck with wonder, and
Sivananda became confident that the incident was true.
                                   TEXT 79
                       ei-mata saci-grhe satata bhojana
                    srivasera grhe karena kirtana-darsana
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to eat at the temple of
Sacimata every day and also visit the house of Srivasa Thakura whenkirtana was performed.
                                   TEXT 80
                  nityanandera nrtya dekhena asi' bare bare
                    `nirantara avirbhava' raghavera ghare
                                 TRANSLATION     Similarly, He was always present when Nityananda Prabhu danced, and
He regularly appeared at the house of Raghava.
                                   TEXT 81
                  prema-vasa gaura-prabhu, yahan premottama
                      prema-vasa hana taha dena darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Gaurasundara is greatly influenced by the Iove of His
devotees. Therefore wherever there is pure devotion to the Lord, theLord Himself, subdued by such love, appears, and His devotees see Him.
                                   TEXT 82
                    sivanandera prema-sima ke kahite pare?
                    yanra preme vasa prabhu aise bare bare
                                 TRANSLATION     Influenced by the loving affairs of Sivananda Sena, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu came again and again. Therefore who can estimate the limitsof his love?
                                   TEXT 83
                      ei ta' kahilu gaurera `avirbhava'
                    iha yei sune, jane caitan ya-prabhava
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described the appearance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Anyone who hears about these incidents can understand the transcendentalopulence of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 84
                   purusottame prabhu-pase bhagavan acarya
                     parama vaisnava tenho supandita arya
                                 TRANSLATION     At Jagannatha Puri, in the association of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
lived Bhagavan Acarya, who was certalnly a gentleman, a learned scholarand a great devotee.
                                   PURPORT     For a description of Bhagavan Acarya, one may refer to the Adi-
lila, Tenth Chapter, verse 136.
                                   TEXT 85                   sakh ya-bhavakranta-citta, gopa-a vatara
                     svarupa-gosani-saha sakhya-vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     He was fully absorbed in thoughts of fraternal relationships with
God. He was an incarnation of a cowherd boy, and thus his dealings withSvarOpa Damodara Gosvami were very friendly.
                                   TEXT 86
                   ekanta-bhave asriyachena caitanya-carana
                madhye madhye prabhura tenho karena nimantrana
                                 TRANSLATION     He sought the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with fuIl
surrender. Sometimes he would invite the Lord to dine at his home.
                                   TEXT 87
                  ghare bhata kari' karena vividha vyanjana
                       ekale gosani lana karana bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     Bhagavan Acarya prepared varieties of rice and vegetables at home
and brought the Lord there alone to eat.
                                   PURPORT     Generally those who invited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for dinner used
to offer Him the remnants of food that had first been offered to LordJagannatha. Bhagavan Acarya, however, instead of giving Him the remnantsof Jagannatha's food, prepared dinner at his home. In Orissa, foodoffered to Lord Jagannatha is called prasadi, and that which is notoffered to Lord Jagannatha is known as amani or ghara-bhata, riceprepared at home.
                                   TEXT 88                  tanra pita `visayi' bada satananda-khanna
               `visa ya- vimukha' acarya--`vairag ya-pradhana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Bhagavan Acarya's father, whose name was Satananda Khan, was an
expert statesman, whereas Bhagavan Acarya was not at all interested inthe management of the state. Indeed, he was almost in the renouncedorder of life.
                                   TEXT 89
                  `gopala-bhattacarya' nama tanra chota-bhai
                    kasite vedanta padi' gela tanra thani                                 TRANSLATION
     Bhagavan Acarya's brother, whose name was Gopala Bhattacarya, had
studied Vedanta philosophy at Benares and had then returned to BhagavanAcarya's home.
                                   PURPORT     During those days and also at the present, Vedanta philosophy is
understood through the commentary of Sankaracarya, which is known asSariraka-bhasya. Thus it appears that Gopala Bhattacarya the youngerbrother of Bhagavan Acarya, had studied Vedanta according to the way ofthe Sariraka-bhasya, which expounds the Mayavada philosophy of theimpersonalists.
                                   TEXT 90                      acarya tahare prabhu-pade milaila
                    antaryami prabhu citte sukha na paila
                                 TRANSLATION     Bhagavan Acarya took his brother to meet Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
but the Lord, knowing that Gopala Bhattacarya was a Mayavadiphilosopher, could not get much happiness from meeting him.
                                   TEXT 91
                   acarya-sambandhe bahye kare prityabhasa
                  krsna-bhakti vina prabhura na haya ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu derives no happiness from meeting one who
is not a pure devotee of Krsna. Thus because Gopala Bhattacarya was aMayavadi scholar, the Lord felt no jubilation in meeting him.Nevertheless, because Gopala Bhattacarya was related to Bhagavan Acarya,Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu feigned pleasure in seeing him.
                                   TEXT 92
                    svarupa gosanire acarya kahe ara dine
                    `vedanta padiya gopala aisache ekhane
                                 TRANSLATION     Bhagavan Acarya sald to Svarupa Damodara, "Gopala, my younger
brother, has returned to my home, having concluded his study of Vedantaphilosophy."
                                   TEXT 93                 sabe meli' aisa, suni `bhasya' ihara sthane'
                   prema-krodha kari' svarupa balaya vacane
                                 TRANSLATION     Bhagavan Acarya requested Svarupa Damodara to hear from Gopala the
commentary upon Vedanta. Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, however, somewhatangry because of love, spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 94
                 "buddhi bhrasta haila tomara gopalera sange
                       mayavada sunibare upajila range
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have lost your intelligence in the association of Gopala, ad
therefore you are eager to hear the Mayavada philosophy.
                                   TEXT 95
                   vaisnava hana yeba sariraka-bhasya sune
               sevya-sevaka-bhava chadi' apanare `isvara' mane
                                 TRANSLATION     "When a Vaisnava listens to the Sariraka-bhasya, the Mayavada
commentary upon Vedanta-sutra, he gives up the Krsna conscious attitudethat the Lord is the master and the living entity is His servant.Instead, he considers himseIf the Supreme Lord.
                                   PURPORT     The philosophers known as kevaladvaita-vadis generally occupy
themselves with hearing the Sariraka-bhasya, a commentary bySankaracarya advocating that one impersonally consider oneself theSupreme Lord. Such Mayavada philosophical commentaries upon Vedanta aresimply imaginary, but there are other commentaries on Vedantaphilosophy. The commentary by Srila Ramanujacarya, known as Sri-bhasya,establishes the visistadvaita- vada philosophy. Similarly, in theBrahma-sampradaya, Madhvacarya's Purnaprajna-bhasya establishes suddha-dvaita-vada. in the Kumara-sampradaya, or Nimbarka-sampradaya, SriNimbarka establishes the philosophy of dvaitadvaita-vada in theParijata-saurabha-bhasya. And in the Visnusvami-sampradaya, or Rudra-sampradaya, which comes from Lord Siva, Visnusvami has written acommentary called Sarvajna-bhasya, which establishes suddhadvaita-vada.     A Vaisnava should study the commentaries on Vedanta-sutra writtenby the four sampradaya-acaryas, namely Sri Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya,Visnusvami and Nimbarka, for these commentaries are based upon thephilosophy that the Lord is the master and that all living entities areHis eternal servants. One interested in studying Vedanta philosophyproperly must study these commentaries, especially if he is a Vaisnava.
These commentaries are always adored by Vaisnavas. The commentary bySrila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati is elaborately given in the Adi-lila,Chapter Seven, text 101. The Mayavada commentary Sariraka-bhasya is likepoison for a Vaisnava. It should not be touched at all. SrilaBhaktivinoda Thakura remarks that even a maha-bhagavata, or highlyelevated devotee who has surrendered himself unto the lotus feet ofKrsna, sometimes falls down from pure devotional service if he hears theMayavada philosophy of Sariraka-bhasya. This commentary should thereforebe shunned by all Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 96                  maha-bhagavata yei, krsna prana-dhana yara
                  mayavada-sravane citta avasya phire tanra"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Mayavada philosophy presents such a jugglery of words that
even a highly elevated devotee who has accepted Krsna as his life andsoul chages his decision when he reads the Mayavada commentary onVedanta-sutra."
                                   TEXT 97
                 acarya kahe,--`ama sabara krsna-nistha-citte
                    ama sabara mana bhasya nare phiraite'
                                 TRANSLATION     In spite of Svarupa Damodara's protest, Bhagavan Acarya
continued,"We are all fixed at the lotus feet of Krsna with our heartsand souls. Therefore the Sariraka-bhasya cannot chage our minds."
                                   TEXT 98
                   svarupa kahe, "tathapi mayavada-sravane
                 `cit, brahma, maya, mith ya'--ei-matra sune
                                 TRANSLATION     SvarOpa Damodara replied, "Nevertheless, when we hear the Mayavada
philosophy, we hear that Brahman is knowledge and that the universe ofmaya is false, but we gain no spiritual understanding.
                                   TEXT 99
                  jivajnana-kalpita isvare, sakala-i ajnana
                  yahara sravane bhaktera phate mana prana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Mayavadi philosopher tries to estabIish that the living entity
is onIy imaginary and that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is underthe influence of maya. Hearing this kind of commentary breaks the heartand life of a devotee."
                                   PURPORT     Srila Svarupa Damodara Gosvami wanted to impress upon Bhagavan
Acarya that even though someone firmly fixed in devotion to Krsna'sservice might not be deviated by hearing the Mayavada bha-sya, thatbhasya is nevertheless full of impersonal words and ideas such asBrahman which represent knowledge but which are impersonal. TheMayavadis say that the world created by maya is false, and that actuallythere is no living entity but only one spiritual effulgence. Theyfurther say that God is imaginary, that people think of God only becauseof ignorance, and that when the Supreme Absolute Truth is befooled bythe external energy, maya, He becomes a jiva, or living entity. Uponhearing all these nonsensical ideas from the nondevotee, a devotee isgreatly afflicted, as if his heart and soul were broken.
                                   TEXT 100                     lajja-bhaya pana acarya mauna ha-ila
                       ara dina gopalere dese pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Bhagavan Acarya, greatly ashamed ad fearful, remained silent.
The next day, he asked Gopala Bhattacarya to return to his own district.
                                   TEXT 101
                  eka-dina acarya prabhure kaila nimantrana
                   ghare bhata kari' kare vividha vyanjana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Bhagavan Acarya invited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to dine at
his home. Thus he was preparing rice ad various types of vegetables.
                                   TEXT 102
                   `chota-haridasa' nama prabhura kirtaniya
                      tahare kahena acarya dakiya aniya
                                 TRANSLATION     A devotee named Chota Haridasa used to sing for Sri Caitaya
Mahaprabhu. Bhagavan Acarya called him to his home and spoke as follows.                                   TEXT 103
                `mora name sikhi-mahitira bhagini-sthane giya
                      sukla-caula eka mana anaha magiya'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please go to the sister of Sikhi Mahiti. In my name, ask her for a
mana of white rice and bring it here."
                                   PURPORT     In india sukla-caula (white rice) is also called atapa-caula, or
rice that has not been boiled before being threshed. Another kind ofrice, called siddha-caula (brown rice), is boiled before being threshed.Generally, first-class fine white rice is required for offerings to theDeity. Thus Bhagavan Acarya asked Chota Haridasa, or Junior Haridasa, asinger in the assembly of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, to get some of thisrice from the sister of Sikhi Mahiti. A mana is a standard ofmeasurement in Orissa for rice and other food grains.
                                   TEXT 104                   mahitira bhagini sei, nama--madhavi-devi
                     vrddha tapasvini ara parama vaisnavi
                                 TRANSLATION     Sikhi Mahiti's sister was named Madhavidevi. She was a elderly lady
who always performed austerities. She was very advanced in devotionalservice.
                                   TEXT 105
                   prabhu lekha kare yare--radhikara `gana'
                   jagatera madhye `patra'--sade tina jana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu accepted her as having formerly been an
associate of Srimati Radharani. In the entire world, three and a halfpeople were His intimate devotees.
                                   TEXT 106
                      svarupa gosani, ara raya ramananda
                sikhi-mahiti--tina, tanra bhagini--ardha-jana
                                 TRANSLATION     The three were Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, Ramanada Raya ad Sikhi
Mahiti, and the half a person was Sikhi Mahiti's sister.                                   TEXT 107
                   tanra thani tandula magi' anila haridasa
                    tandula dekhi' acaryera adhika ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     After begging the rice from her, Junior Haridasa brought it to
Bhagavan Acarya, who was very pleased to see its quality.
                                   TEXT 108
                  snehe randhila prabhura priya ye vyanjana
                   deula prasada, ada-caki, lembu-salavana
                                 TRANSLATION     In great affection, Bhagavan Acarya cooked varieties of vegetables
and other preparations dear to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He also obtainedremnants of food from Lord Jagannatha ad digestive alds such as groundginger and also lime with salt.
                                   TEXT 109
                    madhyahne asiya prabhu bhojane vasila
                    salyanna dekhi' prabhu acarye puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     At noon, when Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu came to eat the offerings of
Bhagavan Acarya, He first appreciated the fine rice and thereforequestioned him.
                                   TEXT 110
                    uttama anna eta tandula kanhate paila?
                   acarya kahe,--madhavi-pasa magiya anila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Where did you get such fine rice?" the Lord asked. Bhagavan Acarya
replied, "I got it by begging from Madhavidevi."
                                   TEXT 111
                    prabhu kahe,--`kon yai' magiya anila?'
                     chota-haridasera nama acarya kahila                                 TRANSLATION
     When Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu asked who had begged the rice and
brought it back, Bhagavan Acarya mentioned the name of Junior Haridasa.
                                   TEXT 112
                    anna prasamsiya prabhu bhojana karila
                      nija-grhe asi' govindere ajna dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Praising the quality of the rice, Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu partook
of the prasada. Then, after returning to His residence, He gave thefollowing order to Govinda, His personal assistant.
                                   TEXT 113
                        `aji haite ei mora ajna paliba
                      chota haridase ihan asite na diba'
                                 TRANSLATION     " From this day forward, do not allow Chota Haridasa to come here."
                                   TEXT 114
                 dvara mana haila, haridasa duhkhi haila mane
                     ki lagiya dvara-mana keha nahi jane
                                 TRANSLATION     When Junior Haridasa heard that he had been ordered not to approach
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he was very unhappy. No one could understandwhy he had been ordered not to come.
                                   TEXT 115
                    tina-dina haila haridasa kare upavasa
                   svarupadi asi, puchila mahaprabhura pasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa fasted continuously for three days. Then Svarupa Damodara
Gosvami and other confidential devotees approached Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu to inquire from Him.
                                   TEXT 116                    "kon aparadha, prabhu, kaila haridasa?
                     ki lagiya dvara-mana, kare upavasa?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "What great offense has Junior Haridasa committed? Why has he been
forbidden to come to Your door? He has now been fasting for three days."
                                   TEXT 117
                prabhu kahe,--"vairagi kare prakrti sambhasana
                      dekhite na paron ami tahara vadana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord replied, "I canot tolerate seeing the face of a person who
has accepted the renounced order of life but who stiIl talks intimatelywith a woman.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that saralata, or
simplicity, is the first qualification of a Vaisnava, whereas duplicityor cunning behavior is a great offense against the principles ofdevotional service. As one advances in Krsna consciousness, one mustgradually become disgusted with material attachment and thus become moreand more attached to the service of the Lord. If one is not factuallydetached from material activities but still proclaims himself advancedin devotional service, he is cheating. No one will be happy to see suchbehav ior.
                                   TEXT 118                     durvara indriya kare visaya-grahana
                      daravi prakrti hare munerapi mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "So strongly do the senses adhere to the objects of their enjoyment
that indeed a wooden statue of a woman attracts the mind of even a greatsaintly person.
                                   PURPORT     The senses and the sense objects are so intimately connected that
the mind of even a great saintly person is attracted to a wooden doll ifit is attractively shaped like a young woman. The sense objects, namelyform, sound, smell, taste and touch, are always attractive for the eyes,ears, nose, tongue and skin. Since the senses and sense objects arenaturally intimately related, sometimes even a person claiming controlover his senses remains always subject to the control of sense objects.The senses are impossible to control unless purified and engaged in theservice of the Lord. Thus even though a saintly person vows to control
his senses, the senses are still sometimes perturbed by sense objects.
                                   TEXT 119                           matra svasra duhitra va
                            na viviktasano bhavet                            balavan indriya-gramo                            vidvamsam api karsati
                                 TRANSLATION     " `One should not sit closely with one's mother, sister or
daughter, for the senses are so strong that they may attract even aperson advanced in knowledge.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse appears in the Manu-samhita (2.215) and Srimad-
Bhagavatam (9.19.17).
                                   TEXT 120                   ksudra-jiva saba markata-vairagya kariya
                  indriya carana bule `prakrti' sambhasiya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "There are many persons with little in their possession who accept
the renounced order of life like monkeys. They go here ad there engagingin sense gratification ad speaking intimately with women."
                                   PURPORT     One should strictly follow the regulative principles, namely no
illicit sex, no meat-eating, no intoxication and no gambling, and inthis way one should make progress in spiritual life. if an unfit personsentimentally accepts vairagya or takes sannyasa but at the same timeremains attached to women, he is in a very dangerous position. Hisrenunciation is called markata-vairagya, or renunciation like that of amonkey. The monkey lives in the forest, eats fruit and does not evencover itself with a cloth. In this way it resembles a saint, but themonkey always thinks of female monkeys and sometimes keeps dozens ofthem for sexual intercourse. This is called markata-vairagya. Thereforeone who is unfit should not accept the renounced order of life. One whoaccepts the order of sannyasa but again becomes agitated by sensualdisturbances and talks privately with women is called dharma-dhvaji ordharma-kalanka, which means that he brings condemnation upon thereligious order. Therefore one should be extremely careful in thisconnection. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura explains the wordmarkata to mean "restless." A restless person cannot be steady;therefore he simply wanders about, gratifying his senses. Just to getpraise from others, to get cheap adoration from his followers or peoplein general, such a person sometimes accepts the dress of a sannyasiorbabaji in the renounced order, but he cannot give up desires for sense
gratification, especially for the association of women. Such a personcannot make advancement in spiritual life. There are eight differentkinds of sensual enjoyment with women, including talking about them andthinking about them. Thus for a sannyasi, a person in the renouncedorder, talking intimately with women is a great offense. Sri RamanandaRaya and Srila Narottama dasa Thakura actually achieved the mostelevated stage of the renounced order, but those who imitate them,accepting them as ordinary human beings, fall under the influence of thematerial energy, for that is a great misunderstanding.
                                   TEXT 121                     eta kahi' mahaprabhu abhyantare gela
                    gosanira avesa dekhi' sabe mauna haila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu entered His room. Seeing
Him in such an angry mood, all the devotees fell silent.
                                   TEXT 122
                     ara dine sabe meli' prabhura carane
                     haridasa lagi, kichu kaila nivedane
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, all the devotees together approached the lotus feet
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to submit an appeal on behalf of J uniorHaridasa.
                                   TEXT 123
                    "alpa aparadha, prabhu karaha prasada
                     ebe siksa ha-ila na karibe aparadha"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Haridasa has committed a small offense," they said. "Therefore, O
Lord, please be merciful to him. Now he has received a sufficientlesson. In the future he will not commit such a offense."
                                   TEXT 124
                   prabhu kahe,--"mora vasa nahe mora mana
                   prakrti-sambhasi vairagi na kare darsana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "My mind is not under My control. It
does not like to see anyone in the renounced order who talks intimatelywith women.
                                   TEXT 125
                   nija karye yaha sabe, chada vrtha katha
                    punah yadi kaha ama na dekhibe hetha"
                                 TRANSLATION     "You should all tend to your respective engagements. Give up this
useless talk. If you speak this way again, I shall go away, and you willno longer see Me here."
                                   TEXT 126
                     eta suni' sabe nija-karne hasta diya
                     nija nija karye sabe gela ta' uthiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, all the devotees covered their ears with their hands,
got up and went about their respective duties.
                                   TEXT 127
                    mahaprabhu madhyahna karite cali, gela
                     bujhana na yaya ei mahaprabhura lila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu also left that place to perform His noon
duties. No one could understand His pastimes.
                                   TEXT 128
                    ara dina sabe paramananda-puri-sthane
                   `prabhuke prasanna kara'--kaila nivedane
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, all the devotees went to Sri Paramanada Puri and
requested him to pacify the Lord.
                                   TEXT 129
                   tabe puri-gosani eka prabhu-sthane aila
                  namaskari' prabhu tanre sambhrame vasaila                                 TRANSLATION
     Paramananda Purt thereupon went alone to the residence of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord, after offering him obeisances, seated himby His side with great respect.
                                   TEXT 130
                    puchila,--ki ajna, kene haila agamana?
                    `haridase prasada lagi' kaila nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord inquired, "What is your order? For what purpose have you
come here?" paramananda Puri then submitted his prayer that the Lordshow favor to Junior Haridasa.
                                   TEXT 131
                    suniya kahena prabhu,--"sunaha, gosani
                    saba vaisnava lana tumi raha ei thani
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this request, Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu replied, "My dear
lord, please hear me. It is better for you to stay here with all theVaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 132
                     more ajna haya, muni yana alalanatha
                   ekale rahiba tahan, govinda-matra satha"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please give Me permission to go to Alalanatha. I shall remain
there alone; only Govinda will go with Me."
                                   TEXT 133
                    eta bali' prabhu yadi govinde bolaila
                     purire namaskara kari' uthiya calila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, the Lord called for Govinda. Offering obeisances
to Paramananda Puri, He got up and began to leave.                                   TEXT 134
                   aste-vyaste puri-gosani prabhu age gela
                     anunaya kari' prabhure ghare vasaila
                                 TRANSLATION     In great haste Paramanada Puri Gosani went before Him ad with great
humility persuaded Him to sit down in His own room.
                                   TEXT 135
                   tomara ye iccha, kara, svatantra isvara
                      keba ki balite pare tomara upara?
                                 TRANSLATION     Paramananda Puri said, "My dear Lord Caitanya, You are the
independent Personality of Godhead. You ca do whatever You like. Who cansay anything above You?
                                   TEXT 136
                    loka-hita lagi' tomara saba vyavahara
                   ami saba na jani gambhira hrdaya tomara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "All Your activities are for the benefit of people in general. We
cannot understand them, for Your intentions are deep and grave."
                                   TEXT 137
                    eta bali' puri-gosani gela nija-sthane
                    haridasa-sthane gela saba bhakta-gane
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Paramananda Puri Gosani Ieft for his own home.
Then all the devotees went to see Junior Haridasa.
                                   TEXT 138
                    s varupa-gosani kahe,--"suna, haridasa
                   sabe tomara hita vanchi, karaha visvasa
                                 TRANSLATION     SvarOpa Damodara Gosani sald, "Please hear us, Haridasa, for we all
wish you well. Please believe this.                                   TEXT 139
                   prabhu hathe padiyache svatantra isvara
                    kabhu krpa karibena yate dayalu antara
                                 TRANSLATION     "At present Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu is persisting in His mood of
ager because He is the independent Supreme Personality of Godhead. Atsome time, however, He will surely be merciful, for at heart He is verykind.
                                   TEXT 140
                    tumi hatha kaile tanra hatha se badibe
                    snana bhojana kara, apane krodha yabe"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Lord is persisting, and if you also persist, His persistence
will increase. It is better for you to bathe and take prasada. In duecourse, His anger will automatically subside."
                                   TEXT 141
                     eta bali ta-re snana bhcjana karana
                       apana bhavana aila tare asvasiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Having said this, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami induced Haridasa to
bathe and take prasada. After thus reassuring him, he returned home.
                                   TEXT 142
                     prabhu yadi yana jagannatha-darasane
                      dure rahi' haridasa karena darsane
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to see Lord Jaganatha in the
temple, Haridasa would stay a long distance away and see Him.
                                   TEXT 143
                  mahaprabhu--krpa-sindhu, ke pare bujhite?
                  priya bhakte danda karena dharma bujhaite                                 TRANSLATION
     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the ocean of mercy. Who can understand
Him? When He chastises His dear devotees, He certainly does so toreestablish the principles of religion or duty.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thaku ra says in this connection
that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the ocean of mercy, chastised JuniorHaridasa, although Junior Haridasa was His dear devotee, to establishthat one in the devotional line, engaged in pure devotional service,should not be a hypocrite. For a person engaged in devotional service inthe renounced order, having intimate relationships with women iscertainly hypocrisy. This chastisement was given to Junior Haridasa asan example to future sahajiyas who might adopt the dress of therenounced order to imitate Rupa Gosvami and other bona fide sannyasisbut secretly have illicit connections with women. To teach such men, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu chastised His dear devotee Haridasa for a slightdeviation from the regulative principles. Srimati Madhavidevi was ahighly elevated devotee; therefore approaching her to ask for some riceto serve Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was certainly not very offensive.Nevertheless, just to preserve the regulative principles for the future,Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu enforced the hard-and-fast rule that no one inthe renounced order should intimately mix with women. Had SriCaitanyaMahaprabhu not chastised Junior Haridasa for this slight deviation,socalled devotees of the Lord would have exploited the example of JuniorHaridasa to continue their habit of illicit connections with womenunrestrictedly. Indeed, they still preach that such behavior is allowedfor a Vaisnava. But it is strictly not allowed. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuis the teacher of the entire world, and therefore He enforced thisexemplary punishment to establish that illicit sexual connections arenever allowed by Vaisnava philosophy. This was His purpose in chastisingJunior Haridasa. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is in fact the most magnanimousincarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He strictlyprohibited illicit sex.
                                   TEXT 144                    dekhi' trasa upajila saba bhakta-gane
                    svapne-ha chadila sabe stri-sambhasane
                                 TRANSLATION     After all the devotees saw this example, a mentality of fear grew
among them. Therefore they all stopped talking with women, even indreams.
                                   PURPORT     In connection with stri-sambhasana, talking with women, Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that talking with women for thepurpose of mingling with them for sense gratification, subtle or gross,is strictly prohibited. Canakya Pandita, the great moral instructor,says, matrvat para-daresu. Thus not only a person in the renounced order
or one engaged in devotional service but everyone should avoid minglingwith women. One should consider another's wife his mother.
                                   TEXT 145                     ei-mate haridasera eka vatsara gela
                    tabu mahaprabhura mane prasada nahila
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way a complete year passed for Junior Haridasa, but still
there was not a sign of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy toward him.
                                   TEXT 146
                     ratri avasese prabhure dandavat hana
                    prayagete gela kareha kichu na baliya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus at the end of one night, Junior Haridasa, after offering Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu his respectful obeisances, departed for Prayagawithout saying anything to anyone.
                                   TEXT 147
                   prabhu-pada-prapti lagi' sankalpa karila
                     triveni pravesa kari' prana chadila
                                 TRANSLATION     Junior Haridasa had conclusively decided to attain shelter at the
lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Thus he entered deep into thewater at Triveni, the confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna at Prayaga,and in this way gave up his life.
                                   TEXT 148
                   sei-ksane divya-dehe prabhu-sthane aila
                     prabhu-krpa pana antardhanei rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Immediately after committing suicide in this way, he went in his
spiritual body to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ad received the mercy of theLord. However, he still remained invisible.
                                   TEXT 149                    gandharva-dehe gana karena antardhane
                 ratrye prabhure sunaya gita, anye nahi jane
                                 TRANSLATION     In a spiritual body resembling that of a Gandharva, Junior
Haridasa, although invisible, would sing at night for Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu to hear. No one but the Lord, however, knew of this.
                                   TEXT 150
                   eka-dina mahaprabhu puchila bhakta-gane
                     `haridasa kanha? tare anaha ekhane'
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired from the devotees, "Where
is Haridasa? Now you may bring him here."
                                   TEXT 151
                    sabe kahe,--`haridasa varsa-purna dine
                    ratre uthi kanha gela, keha nahi jane"
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees all replied, "One night at the end of a full year,
Junior Haridasa got up and went away. No one k nows where he has gone."
                                   TEXT 152
                      suni mahaprabhu isat hasiya rahila
                     saba bhakta-gana mane vismaya ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     While hearing the devotees lament, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was
miIdly smiling. Thus all the devotees were very astonished.
                                 TEXT 153-154
                    eka-dina jagadananda, svarupa, govinda
                    kasisvara, sankara, damodara, mukunda
                   samudra-snane gela sabe, sune katho dure
                   haridasa gayena, yena daki' kantha-svare
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Jagadananda, Svarupa, Govinda, Kasisvara, Sankara, Damodara
and Mukunda all went to bathe in the sea. They could hear Haridasasinging from a distant place as if calling them in his original voice.
                                   TEXT 155
                  manusya na dekhe--madhura gita-matra sune
                      govindadi sabe meli' kaila anumane
                                 TRANSLATION     No one could see him, but they could hear him singing in a sweet
voice. Therefore all the devotees, headed by Govinda, made this guess.
                                   TEXT 156
                   `visadi khana haridasa atma-ghata kaila
                     sei pape jani `brahma-raksasa' haila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Haridasa must have committed suicide by drinking poison, ad
because of this sinful act, he has now become a brahmana ghost.
                                   TEXT 157
                    akara na dekhi, matra suni tara gana'
                     svarupa kahena,--"ei mith ya anumana
                                 TRANSLATION     "We cannot see his material form," they sald, "but still we hear
his sweet singing. Therefore he must have become a ghost." SvarupaDamodara, however, protested, "This is a false guess.
                                   TEXT 158
                    ajanma krsna-kirtana, prabhura sevana
                    prabhu-krpa-patra, ara ksetrera marana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Junior Haridasa chanted the Hare Krsna mantra throughout his
entire life and served the Supreme Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Moreover, he is dear to the Lord and has died in a holy place.
                                   TEXT 159
                    durgati na haya tara, sad-gati se haya                   prabhu-bhangi ei, pache janiba niscaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Haridasa cannot have been degraded; he must have attained
liberation. This is a pastime of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. You will alIunderstand it later."
                                   TEXT 160
                  prayaga ha-ite eka vaisnava navadvipa aila
                     haridasera varta tenho sabare kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     A devotee returned to Navadvipa from Prayaga and told everyone the
details of Junior Haridasa's suicide.
                                   TEXT 161
                  yaiche sankalpa, yaiche triveni pravesila
                    suni, srivasadira mane vismaya ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     He explained how Junior Haridasa had made his resolution and had
thus entered the waters at the confluence of the Yamuna and Ganges.Hearing these details, Srivasa Thakura and the other devotees were verysurprised.
                                   TEXT 162
                    varsantare sivananda saba bhakta lana
                      prabhure milila asi' anandita hana
                                 TRANSLATION     At the end of the year, Sivanada Sena came to Jagannatha Purt as
usual, accompanied by the other devotees, ad thus in great happiness metSnCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 163
                    `haridasa kanha?' yadi srivasa puchila
               "sva-karma-phala-bhuk puman"--prabhu uttara dila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Srivasa Thakura inquired from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "Where
is Junior Haridasa?" The Lord replied, "A person is sure to achieve theresults of his fruitive activities."
                                   TEXT 164
                      tabe srivasa tara vrttanta kahila
                  yaiche sankalpa, yaiche triveni pravesila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Srivasa Thakura related the details of Haridasa's decision ad
his entering the waters at the confIuence of the Ganges and Yamuna-.
                                   TEXT 165
                   suni' prabhu hasi' kahe suprasanna citta
                    `prakrti darsana kaile ei prayascitta'
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard these details, He smiled in a
pleased mood and said, "If with sensual intentions one looks at women,this is the only process of atonement."
                                   TEXT 166
                      svarupadi mili' tabe vicara karila
                 triveni-prabhave haridasa prabhu-pada paila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then all the devotees, headed by Svarupa Damodara Gosvami,
concluded that because Haridasa had committed suicide at the confluenceof the rivers Ganges and Yamuna, he must have ultimately attainedshelter at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura remarks that after one adopts the
renounced order and accepts the dress of either a sannyasi or a babaji,if he entertains the idea of sense gratification, especially inrelationship with a woman, the only atonement is to commit suicide inthe confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna. Only by such atonement can hissinful life be purified. If such a person is thus punished, it ispossible for him to attain the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Without such punishment, however, the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuis very difficult to regain.
                                   TEXT 167                       ei-mata lila kare sacira nandana
                  yaha suni' bhakta-ganera yudaya karna-mana
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the son of mother Saci,
performs His pastimes, which greatly satisfy the ears and minds of puredevotees who hear about them.
                                   TEXT 168
                     apana karunya, loke vairagya-siksana
                  sva-bhaktera gadha-anuraga-prakati-karana
                                 TRANSLATION     This incident manifests the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, His
teaching that a sannyasi should remain in the renounced order, ad thedeep attachment to Him felt by His falthful devotees.
                                   TEXT 169
                     tirthera mahima, nija bhakte atmasat
                  eka lilaya karena prabhu karya panca-sata
                                 TRANSLATION     It also demonstrates the glories of holy places ad shows how the
Lord accepts His faithful devotee. Thus the Lord fulfilled five or sevenpurposes by performing one pastime.
                                   TEXT 170
                   madhura caitanya-lila--samudra-gambhira
                 loke nahi bujhe, bujhe yei `bhakta' `dhira'
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are like nectar, and they
are deep like the ocean. People in general cannot understand them, but asober devotee can.
                                   TEXT 171
                     visvasa kariya suna caitanya-carita
                     tarka na kariha, tarke habe viparita
                                 TRANSLATION     Please hear the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with faith and
confidence. Do not argue, for arguments will produce a contrary result.
                                   TEXT 172
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                     caitanya-carita-mrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Instructions from this Chapter
     Summarizing this chapter, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakurasays that one should derive from it the following lessons. (1) AlthoughSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is anincarnation of mercy, He nevertheless gave up the company of one of Hispersonal associates, namely Junior Haridasa, for if He had not done so,pseudo-devotees would have taken advantage of Junior Haridasa's fault byusing it as an excuse to live as devotees and at the same time haveillicit sexual connections. Such activities would have demoralized thecult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and as a result, devotees would surelyhave gone to a hellish life in the name of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. (2)By chastising Junior Haridasa, the Lord set the standard for acaryas, orthe heads of institutions propagating the Caitanya cult, and for allactual devotees. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to maintain the higheststandard. (3) Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed that a pure devoteeshould be simple and free from sinful activities, for thus one can beHis bona fide servant. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught His followers howto observe the renounced order strictly. (4) Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuwanted to prove that His devotees are exalted and that their characteris ideal. He kindly accepts His faithful devotees and teaches them howmuch tribulation and disturbance can be produced by even a slightdeviation from the strict principles of devotional life. (5) Bychastising Junior Haridasa, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His mercytoward him, thus showing how elevated was junior Haridasa's devotion forHim. Because of this transcendental relationship, the Lord correctedeven a slight offense committed by His pure devotee. Therefore one whowants to be a pure devotee of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu should give up allmaterial sense gratification; otherwise, the lotus feet of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu are very difficult to attain. (6) If one dies insuch a celebrated holy place as Prayaga, Mathura or Vrndavana, one canbe relieved of the reactions to sinful life and then attain the shelterof the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (7) Although a pure or faithfuldevotee may fall down, he nevertheless ultimately gets the chance to goback home, back to Godhead, by the mercy of the Lord.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Second Chapter, describing the chastisement of JuniorHaridasa.                                Chapter Three
                    The Glories of Srila Haridasa Thakura     A summary of this Third Chapter of Antya-lila is given by Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura as follows. A beautiful young brahmana girl inJagannatha Puri had a very handsome son who was coming every day to SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. This was not very much to the liking of DamodaraPandita, however, who therefore told Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "If Youdisplay so much love for this boy, people will doubt Your character."Hearing these words from Damodara Pandita, the Lord sent him toNavadvipa to supervise the affairs of His mother, Sacidevi. He alsoespecially requested Damodara Pandita to remind His mother that He wassometimes going to her home to accept the food she offered. Thus,following the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Damodara pandita went toNavadvipa, taking with him all kinds of prasada from Lord Jagannatha.     On another occasion, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu once inquired fromHaridasa Thakura, who was known as Brahma Haridasa, how the yavanas, orpersons bereft of Vedic culture, would be delivered in Kali-yuga.Haridasa Thakura replied that their deliverance would be possible ifthey very loudly chanted the Hare Krsna mantra, for hearing the HareKrsna mantra chanted loudly, even with but little realization, wouldhelp them.     After describing this incident, the author of Caitanya-caritamrtaalso describes how Haridasa Thakura was tested at Benapola, a villagenear Santipura. A person named Ramacandra Khan, who was envious ofHaridasa Thakura, sent a professional prostitute to attempt to defamehim, but by the mercy of Haridasa Thakura, even the prostitute wasdelivered. Because of offending a pure Vaisnava, Ramacandra Khan waslater cursed by Nityananda Prabhu and ruined.     From Benapola, Haridasa Thakura went to the village known asCandapura, where he lived at the house of Balarama Acarya. Thereafter,Haridasa Thakura was received by two brothers known as Hiranya andGovardhana Majumadara, but in the course of a discussion he was offendedby a caste brahmana known as Gopala Cakravarti. Because of this offense,Gopala Cakravarti was punished by being afflicted with leprosy.     Haridasa Thakura later left Candapura and went to the house ofAdvaita Acarya, where he was tested by Mayadevi, the personification ofthe external energy. She also received his favor by being blessed withthe chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
                                    TEXT 1      vande'ham sri-guroh sri-yuta-pada-kamalam sri-gurun vaisnavams ca
         sri-rupam sagrajatam saha-gana-raghunathanvitam tam sa-jivam          sadvaitam savadhutam parijana-sahitam krsna-caitanya-devam        sri-radha-krsna-padan saha-gana-lalita-sri- visakhanvitams ca
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Iotus feet of my
spiritual master and of all the other preceptors on the path ofdevotional service, unto all the Vaisnavas and unto the six Gosvamis,
including Srila ROpa Gosvami, Srila Sanatana Gosvami, Raghunatha dasaGosvami, Jiva Gosvami and their associates. I offer my respectfulobeisances unto Sri Advaita Acarya Prabhu, Sri Nityananda Prabhu and SrtCaitanya Mahaprabhu, as well as all His devotees, headed by SrivasaThakura. I then offer my respectful obeisaces unto the lotus feet ofLord Krsna and Srtmati Radharani ad all the gopis, headed by Lalita andVisakha.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Nityanada
Prabhu! All glories to Advalta Acarya! And all gIories to all thedevotees of Srt Caltanya Mahaprabhu!
                                    TEXT 3
                    purusottame eka udiya-brahmana-kumara
                  pitr-sunya, maha-sundara, mrdu- vya vahara
                                 TRANSLATION     In Jagannatha Puri there was a young boy who had been born of an
Orissa brahmana but had later lost his father. The boy's features werevery beautiful, and his behavior was extremely gentle.
                                   TEXT 4-5
                   prabhu-sthane nitya aise, kare namaskara
                   prabhu-sane vat kahe prabhu-`prana' tara
                   prabhute tahara priti, prabhu daya kare
                      damodara tara priti sahite na pare
                                 TRANSLATION     The boy came dally to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ad offered Him
respectful obeisances. He was free to talk with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhubecause the Lord was his life ad soul, but the boy's intimacy with theLord and the Lord's mercy toward him were intolerable to DamodaraPandita.
                                    TEXT 6
                    bara bara nisedha kare brahmana-kumare                    prabhure na dekhile sei rahite na pare
                                 TRANSLATION     Damodara Pandita again and again forbade the son of the brahmana to
visit the Lord, but the boy could not bear staying home and not seeingSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 7
                   nitya aise, prabhu tare kare maha-prita
                    yanha priti tanha aise,--balakera rita
                                 TRANSLATION     The boy came every day to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who treated him
with great affection. It is the nature of ay boy to go see a ma wholoves him.
                                    TEXT 8
                    taha dekhi' damodara duhkha paya mane
                    balite na pare, balaka nisedha na mane
                                 TRANSLATION     This was intolerable for Damodara Pandita. He became greatly
unhappy, but there was nothing he could say, for the boy would ignorehis restrictions.
                                    TEXT 9
                    ara dina sei balaka prabhu-sthane aila
                    gosani tare priti kari' varta puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     One day when the boy came to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord very
affectionately inquired from him about all kinds of news.
                                   TEXT 10
                     kata-ksane se balaka uthi' yabe gela
                    sahite na pare, damodara kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     After some time, when the boy stood up and left, the intolerant
Damodara Padita began to speak.                                   TEXT 11
                   anyopadese pandita--kahe gosanira thani
                     `gosani'`gosani' ebe janimu `gosani'
                                 TRANSLATION     Damodara Pandita impudently said to the Lord, "Everyone says that
You are a great teacher because of Your instructions to others, but nowwe shall find out what kind of teacher You are.
                                   PURPORT     Damodara pandita was a great devotee of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Sometimes, however, a person in such a position becomes impudent, beinginfluenced by the external energy and material considerations. Thus adevotee mistakenly dares to criticize the activities of the spiritualmaster or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Despite the logic that"Caesar's wife must be above suspicion," a devotee should not bedisturbed by the activities of his spiritual master and should not tryto criticize him. A devotee should be fixed in the conclusion that thespiritual master cannot be subject to criticism and should never beconsidered equal to a common man. Even if there appears to be somediscrepancy according to an imperfect devotee's estimation, the devoteeshould be fixed in the conviction that even if his spiritual master goesto a liquor shop, he is not a drunkard; rather, he must have somepurpose in going there. it is said in a Bengali poem:     yadyapi nityananda sura-badi yaya     tathapio haya nityananda-raya"Even if I see that Lord Nityananda has entered a liquor shop, I shallnot be diverted from my conclusion that Nityananda Raya is the SupremePersonality of Godhead."
                                   TEXT 12                    ebe gosanira guna-yasa saba loke gaibe
                  tabe gosanira pratistha purusottame ha-ibe
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are known as Gosani [teacher or acarya], but now talk about
Your attributes and reputation will spread throughout the city ofPurusottama. How Your position will be impalred!"
                                   TEXT 13
                  suni' prabhu kahe,--`kya kaha, damodara?'
                   damodara kahe,--"tumi svatantra `isvara'
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu knew that Damodara Pandita was a
pure and simple devotee, upon hearing this impudent talk the Lord said,"My dear Damodara, what nonsense are you speaking?" Damodara Panditareplied, "You are the independent Personality of Godhead, beyond allcriticism.
                                   TEXT 14
                    svacchande acara kara, ke pare balite?
                    mukhara jagatera mukha para acchadite?
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, You can act as You please. No one can say aything to
restrict You. Nevertheless, the entire worId is impudent. People ca sayanything. How can You stop them?
                                   TEXT 15
                    pandita hana mane kene vicara na kara?
                   randi brahmanira balake priti kene kara?
                                 TRANSLATION     "Dear Lord, You are a learned teacher. Why then don't You consider
that this boy is the son of a widowed brahmani? Why are You soaffectionate to him?
                                   TEXT 16
                     yadyapi brahmani sei tapasvini sati
                     tathapi tahara dosa--sundari yuvati
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although the boy's mother is completely austere and chaste, she
has one natural fault--she is a very beautiful young girl.
                                   TEXT 17
                     tumi-ha--parama yuva, parama sundara
                      lokera kanakani-vate deha avasara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "And You, my dear Lord, are a handsome, attractive young man.
Therefore certainly people will whisper about You. Why should You givethem such a opportunity?"
                                   PURPORT     As a simple and staunch devotee of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Damodara Pandita could not tolerate criticism of the Lord, butunfortunately he himself was criticizing Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inhis own way. The Lord could understand that it was because of DamodaraPandita's simplicity that he impudently dared criticize Him.Nevertheless, such behavior by a devotee is not very good.
                                   TEXT 18                       eta bali' damodara mauna ha-ila
                     antare santosa prabhu hasi' vicarila
                                 TRANSLATION     Having said this, Damodara Pandita became silent. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu smiled, pleased within Himself, and considered the impudenceof Damodara Pandita.
                                   TEXT 19
                     "ihare kahiye suddha-premera taranga
                     damodara-sama mora nahi `antaranga"'
                                 TRANSLATION     "This impudence is also a sign of pure love for Me. I have no other
intimate friend like Damodara Pandita."
                                   TEXT 20
                    eteka vicari' prabhu madhyahne calila
                      ara dine damodare nibhrte bolaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking in this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to perform His
noon duties. The next day, He called Damodara Pandita to a solitaryplace.
                                   TEXT 21
                    prabhu kahe,--"damodara, calaha nadiya
                      matara samipe tumi raha tanha yana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord sald,"My dear friend Damodara, you had better go to Nadia
ad stay with My mother.                                   TEXT 22
                   toma vina tanhara raksaka nahi dekhi ana
                      amake-ha yate tumi kaila savadhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I see no one but you to protect her, for you are so careful that
you can caution even Me.
                                   TEXT 23
                     toma sama `nirapeksa' nahi mora gane
                 `nirapeksa' nahile `dharma' na yaya raksane
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are the most neutral among My associates. This is very good,
for without being neutral one cannot protect religious principles.
                                   TEXT 24
                   ama haite ye na haya, se toma haite haya
                      amare karila danda, ana keba haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "You can do whatever I cannot. Indeed, you can chastise even Me,
not to speak of others.
                                   TEXT 25
                      matara grhe raha yai matara carane
                   tomara age nahibe karo svacchandacarane
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is best for you to go to the shelter of My mother's lotus feet,
for no one will be able to behave independently in front of you.
                                   TEXT 26
                   madhye madhye asiba kabhu amara darasane
                    sighra kari' punah tahan karaha gamane
                                 TRANSLATION     "At intervals you may come see Me here and then soon again go
there.                                   TEXT 27
                      matare kahiha mora koti namaskare
                   mora sukha-katha kahi' sukha diha' tanre
                                 TRANSLATION     "Offer My mother millions of My obeisaces. Please speak to her
about My happiness here and thus give her happiness.
                                   TEXT 28
                     `nirantara nija-katha tomare sunaite
                    ei lagi' prabhu more pathaila ihante'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Tell her that I sent you to inform her of My personal activities
so that she may share in My happiness.
                                   TEXT 29
                    eta kahi' matara mane santosa janmaiha
                    ara guhya-katha tanre smarana karaiha
                                 TRANSLATION     "Speaking in this way, satisfy the mind of mother Saci. Also,
remind her of one most confidential incident with this message from Me.
                                   TEXT 30
                      `bare bare asi' ami tomara bhavane
                    mistanna vyanjana saba kariye bhojane
                                 TRANSLATION     " `I come to your home again and again to eat all the sweetmeats
and vegetables you offer.
                                   TEXT 31
                      bhojana kariye ami, tumi taha jana
                      bahya virahe taha svapna kari mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "`You know that I come and eat the offerings, but because of
external separation, you consider this a dream.                                   PURPORT
     Because mother Saci was feeling separation from Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, she thought she was dreaming that her son had come to her.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, wanted to inform her that actually itwas not a dream. He actually came there and ate whatever His motheroffered Him. Such are the dealings of advanced devotees with the Supremepersonality of Godhead. As stated in the Brahma-samhita:     premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena     santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti     yam syamasundaram acintya-guna-svarupam     govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devoteewhose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternalform of Syamasundara, situated within the heart of the devotee." (Bs.5.38) pure devotees realize dealings with the Lord on the transcendentalplane, but because the devotees are still in the material world, theythink that these are dreams. The Lord, however, talks with the advanceddevotee, and the advanced devotee also sees Him. It is all factual; itis not a dream.
                                   TEXT 32                   ei magha-sankrantye tumi randhana karila
                 nana vyanjana, ksira, pitha, payasa randhila
                                 TRANSLATION     " `During the last Magha-sankranti festival, you cooked varieties
of vegetables, condensed milk, cakes and sweet rice for Me.
                                   TEXT 33
                     krsne bhoga lagana yabe kaila dhyana
                   amara sphurti haila, asru bharila nayana
                                 TRANSLATION     "`You offered the food to Lord Krsna, and while you were in
meditation I suddenly appeared, and your eyes filled with tears.
                                   TEXT 34
                      aste-vyaste ami giya sakali khaila
                    ami khai,--dekhi' tomara sukha upajila
                                 TRANSLATION     "`I went there in great haste and ate everything. When you saw Me
eating, you felt great happiness.                                   TEXT 35
                    ksaneke asru muchiya sunya dekhi' pata
                 svapana dekhilun,`yena nimani khaila bhata'
                                 TRANSLATION     "`In a moment, after you had wiped your eyes, you saw that the
plate you had offered Me was empty. Then you thought,"I dreamt as ifNimai were eating everything."
                                   TEXT 36
                   bahya-viraha-dasaya punah bhranti haila
                     `bhoga na lagailun',--ei jnana haila
                                 TRANSLATION     " `In the condition of external separation, you were again under
ilIusion, thinking that you had not offered the food to Lord Visnu.
                                   TEXT 37
                   paka-patre dekhila saba anna ache bhari'
                  punah bhoga lagaila sthana-samskara kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Then you went to see the cooking pots and found that every pot
was filled with food. Therefore you again offered the food, aftercleansing the place for the offering.
                                   TEXT 38
                       ei-mata bara bara kariye bhojana
                    tomara suddha-preme more kare akarsana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Thus I again and again eat everything you offer Me, for I am
attracted by your pure love.
                                   TEXT 39
                       tomara ajnate ami achi nilacale
                    nikate lana yao ama tomara prema-bale'
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Only by your order am I living in Nilacala [Jagannatha Puri].
Nevertheless, you still pull Me near you because of your great love forMe."'
                                   TEXT 40
                      ei-mata bara bara karaiha smarana
                     mora nama lana tanra vandiha carana"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Damodara Pandita, "Remind mother Saci
in this way again and again and worship her lotus feet in My name."
                                   TEXT 41
                    eta kahi' jagannathera prasada anaila
                   matake vaisnave dite prthak prthak dila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered that varieties
of prasada offered to Lord Jagannatha be brought. The Lord then gave himthe prasada, separately packed, to offer to various Vaisnavas and Hismother.
                                   TEXT 42
                       tabe damodara cali' nadiya aila
                      matare miliya tanra carane rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Damodara Pandita went to Nadia [Navadvipa]. After
meeting mother Saci, he stayed under the care of her lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 43
                    acaryadi vaisnavere maha-prasada dila
                  prabhura yaiche ajna, pandita taha acarila
                                 TRANSLATION     He delivered all the prasada to such great Vaisnavas as Advaita
Acarya. Thus he stayed there and behaved according to the order of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 44                    damodara age svatantrya na haya kahara
                    tara bhaye sabe kare sankoca vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone knew that Damodara Pandita was strict in practicai
dealings. Therefore everyone was afraid of him and dared not do anythingindependent.
                                   TEXT 45
                prabhu-gane yanra dekhe alpa-maryada-langhana
                   vakya-danda kari' kare maryada sthapana
                                 TRANSLATION     Damodara Pandita would verbally chastise every devotee of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu whom he found deviating even slightly from properbehavior. Thus he established the standard etiquette.
                                   TEXT 46
                     ei-ta kahila damodarera vakya-danda
                    yahara sravane bhage `ajnana pasanda'
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way I have described Damodara Pandita's verbal
chastisements. As one hears about this, atheistic principles andignorance depart.
                                   TEXT 47
                caitanyera lila--gambhira, koti-samudra haite
                    ki lagi' ki kare, keha na pare bujhite
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are deeper than millions of
seas and oceans. Therefore no one can understand what He does nor why Hedoes it.
                                   TEXT 48
                      ataeva gudha artha kichui na jani
                      bahya artha karibare kari tanatani
                                 TRANSLATION     I do not know the deep meaning of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's
activities. As far as possible I shail try to explain them externally.
                                   TEXT 49
                      eka-dina prabhu haridasere milila
                   tanha lana gosthi kari' tanhare puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu met Haridasa Thakura as usual, and
in the course of discussion He inquired as follows.
                                   TEXT 50
                      "haridasa, kali-kale yavana apara
                     go-brahmane himsa kare maha duracara
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Thakura Haridasa, in this age of Kali most people are
bereft of Vedic culture, and therefore they are called yavanas. They areconcerned only with killing cows and brahminical culture. In this waythey all engage in sinful acts.
                                   PURPORT     From this statement by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu we can clearly
understand that the word yavana does not refer only to a particularclass of men. Anyone who is against the behavior of the Vedic principlesis called a yavana. Such a yavana may be in india or outside of India.As described here, the symptom of yavanas is that they are violentkillers of cows and brahminical culture. We offer our prayers to theLord by saying, namo brahmanya-devaya go-brahmana-hitaya ca. The Lord isthe maintainer of brahminical culture. His first concern is to see tothe benefit of cows and brahmanas. As soon as human civilization turnsagainst brahminical culture and allows unrestricted killing of cows, weshould understand that men are no longer under the control of the Vedicculture but are all yavanas and mlec- chas. It is said that the Krsnaconsciousness movement will be prominent within the next ten thousandyears, but after that people will all become mlecchas and yavanas. Thusat the end of the yuga, Krsna will appear as the Kalki avatara and killthem without consideration.
                                   TEXT 51                     iha-sabara kon mate ha-ibe nistara?
                   tahara hetu na dekhiye,--e duhkha apara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "How will these yavanas be delivered? To My great unhappiness, I do
not see any way."
                                   PURPORT     This verse reveals the significance of Lord Sri Caitanya's
appearance as patita- pavana, the deliverer of all the fallen souls.Srila Narottama dasa Thakura sings, patita-pavana-hetu tava avatara: "Omy Lord, You have aopeared just to deliver all the fallen souls." mo-sama patita prabhu na paibe ara: "And among all the fallen souls, I amthe lowest." How Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu was always thinking aboutthe deliverance of the fallen souls is shown by the statement e duhkhaapara ("It is My great unhappiness"). This statement indicates that SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, who is the Supreme personality of Godhead KrsnaHimself, is always very unhappy to see the fallen souls in the materialworld. Therefore He Himself comes as He is, or He comes as a devotee inthe form of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, to deliver love of Krsna directlyto the fallen souls. Namo maha-vadanyaya krsna- prema-pradaya te. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu is so merciful that He not only gives knowledge ofKrsna but by His practical activities teaches everyone how to love Krsna(krsna-prema-pradaya te).     Those who are following in the footsteps of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhushould take the Lord's mission most seriously. In this age of Kali,people are gradually becoming less than animals. Nevertheless, althoughthey are eating the flesh of cows and are envious of brahminicalculture, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is considering how to deliver them fromthis horrible condition of life. Thus He asks all Indians to take up Hismission.     bharata-bhumite haila manusya-janma yara     janma sarthaka kari' kara para-upakara"One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India[Bharata-varsa] should make his life successful and work for the benefitof all other people." (Cc. Adi-lila 9.41) it is therefore the duty ofevery advanced and cultured lndian to take this cause very seriously.All Indians should help the Krsna consciousness movement in itsprogress, to the best of their ability. Then they will be consideredreal followers of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.      Unfortunately, even someso-called Vaisnavas enviously refuse to cooperate with this movement butinstead condemn it in so many ways. We are very sorry to say that thesepeople try to find fault with us, being unnecessarily envious of ouractivities, although we are trying to the best of our ability tointroduce the Krsna consciousness movement directly into the countriesof the yavanas and mlecchas. Such yavanas and mlecchas are coming to usand becoming purified Vaisnavas who follow in the footsteps of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. One who identifies himself as a follower of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu should feel like Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who said,iha-sabara kon mate ha-ibe nistara: "How will all these yavanas bedelivered?" Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was always anxious to deliver thefallen souls because their fallen condition gave Him great unhappiness.That is the platform on which one can propagate the mission of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 52                   haridasa kahe,--"prabhu, cinta na kariha
                  yavanera samsara dekhi' duhkha na bhaviha
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura replied, "My dear Lord, do not be in anxiety. Do
not be unhappy to see the condition of the yavanas in materialexistence.
                                   PURPORT     These words of Haridasa Thakura are just befitting a devotee who
has dedicated his life and soul to the service of the Lord. When theLord is unhappy because of the condition of the fallen souls, thedevotee consoles Him, saying, "My dear Lord, do not be in anxiety." Thisis service. Everyone should adopt the cause of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuto try to relieve Him from the anxiety He feels. This is actuallyservice to the Lord. One who tries to relieve Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'sanxiety for the fallen souls is certainly a most dear and confidentialdevotee of the Lord. To blaspheme such a devotee who is trying his bestto spread the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the greatest offense.One who does so is simply awaiting punishment for his envy.
                                   TEXT 53                    yavana-sakalera `mukti' habe ana yase
                   `ha rama, ha rama' bali' kahe namabhase
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because the yavanas are accustomed to saying, `ha rama, ha rama'
[0 Lord Ramacandra], they will very easily be delivered by thisnamabhasa.
                                   TEXT 54
                 maha-preme bhakta kahe,--`ha rama, ha rama'
                     yavanera bhagya dekha, laya sei nama
                                 TRANSLATION     "A devotee in advanced ecstatic love exclaims, `O my Lord
Ramacandra! O my Lord Ramacandra!' But the yavanas also chant, `ha rama,ha rama!' Just see their good fortune!"
                                   PURPORT     If a child touches fire, the fire will burn him, and if an elderly
man touches fire, it will burn him also. Haridasa Thakura says that agreat devotee of the Lord exclaims, "ha rama, ha rama," but althoughyavanas do not know the transcendental meaning of "ha rama, ha rama,"they say those words in the course of their ordinary life. For theyavanas the words "ha rama" mean "abominable," whereas the devoteeexclaims the words "ha rama" in ecstatic love. Nevertheless, because the
words "ha rama" are the spiritual summum bonum, the fact is the same,whether they are uttered by yavanas or by great devotees, just as fireis the same both for a child and for an elderly man. In other words, theholy name of the Lord, "ha rama," always acts, even when the holy namesare chanted without reference to the Supreme Lord. Yavanas utter theholy name in a different attitude than devotees, but the holy name "harama" is so powerful spiritually that it acts anywhere, whether oneknows it or not. This is explained as follows.
                                   TEXT 55                   yadyapi anya sankete anya haya namabhasa
                      tathapi namera teja na haya vinasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Namacarya Haridasa Thakura, the authority on the chanting of the
hoIy name, said, "The chanting of the Lord's holy name to indicatesomething other than the Lord is an instance of namabhasa. Even when theholy name is chanted in this way, its transcendentai power is notdestroyed.
                                   TEXT 56
                         damstri-damstraha to mleccho
                            ha rameti punah punah                            uktvapi muktim apnoti                          kim punah sraddhaya grnan
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Even a mleccha who is being killed by the tusk of a boar and who
cries in distress again and again, "ha rama, ha rama" attainsliberation. What then to speak of those who chant the holy name withveneration and faith?'
                                   PURPORT     This refers to an instance in which a meateater being killed by a
boar uttered the words "ha rama, ha rama"again and again at the time ofhis death. Since this is a quotation from the Nrsimha purana, thisindicates that in the puranic age there must also have been mlecchas andyavanas (meateaters), and the words "ha rama,,' meaning "condemned,"were also uttered in those days. Thus Haridasa Thakura gives evidencethat even a meateater who condemns something by uttering the words "harama" gets the benefit of chanting the holy name that the devotee chantsto mean "O my Lord Rama."
                                   TEXT 57                     aja-mila putre bolaya bali`narayana'
                   visnu-duta asi' chadaya tahara bandhana                                 TRANSLATION
     "Ajamila was a great sinner during his life, but at the time of
death he accidentally called for his youngest son, whose name wasNarayana, and the attendants of Lord Visnu came to relieve him from thebonds of Yamaraja, the superintendent of death.
                                   TEXT 58
                     `rama' dui aksara iha nahe vyavahita
                     prema-vaci `ha'-sabda tahate bhusita
                                 TRANSLATION     "The word `rama' consists of the two syllables, `ra' and `ma.'
These are unseparated and are decorated with the loving word `ha,'meaning `O.'
                                   TEXT 59
                     namera aksara-sabera ei ta' svabhava
                   vyavahita haile na chade apana-prabhava
                                 TRANSLATION     "The letters of the holy name have so much spiritual potency that
they act even when uttered improperly.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura states that the word
vyavahita ("improperly uttered") is not used here to refer to themundane vibration of the letters of the alphabet. Such negligentutterance for the sense gratification of materialistic persons is not avibration of transcendental sound. Utterance of the holy name while oneengages in sense gratification is an impediment on the path towardachieving ecstatic love for Krsna. On the other hand, if one who iseager for devotional service utters the holy name even partially orimproperly, the holy name, who is identical with the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, exhibits its spiritual potency because of that person'soffenseless utterance. Thus one is relieved from all unwanted practices,and one gradually awakens his dormant love for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 60        namaikam yasya vaci smarana-patha-gatam srotra-mulam gatam va
        suddham vasuddha-varnam vyavahita-rahitam tarayaty eva satyam              tac ced deha-dravina-janata-lobha-pasanda-madh ye             niksiptam syan na phala-janakam sighram evatra vipra
                                 TRANSLATION     " `If a devotee once utters the holy name of the Lord, or if it
penetrates his mind or enters his ear, which is the channel of auralreception, that holy name will certainly deliver him from materialbondage, whether vibrated properly or improperly, with correct orincorrect grammar, and properly joined or vibrated in separate parts. 0brahmana, the potency of the holy name is therefore certainly great.However, if one uses the vibration of the holy name for the benefit ofthe material body, for material wealth and followers, or under theinfluence of greed or atheism--in other words, if one utters the
name with offenses--such chanting will not produce the desired result
very soon. Therefore one should diligently avoid offenses in chantingthe holy name of the Lord."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from the padma purana is included in the Hari-bhakti-
vilasa (11.527) by Sanatana Gosvami. Therein Srila Sanatana Gosvamigives the following explanation:     vaci gatam prasangad van-madhye pravrttam api, smarana-patha-gatamkathancin     manah-sprstam api, srotra-mulam gatam kincit srutam api; suddha-varnam va asuddha-     varnam api va; `vyavahitam' sabdantarena yad- vyava dhanamvaksyaman-nara yana -sab-     dasya kincid uccarananantaram prasangad apatitam sabdantaram tenarahitam sat.     This means that if one somehow or other hears, utters or remembersthe holy     name, or if it catches his mind while coming near his ears, thatholy name, even if     vibrated in separate words, will act. An example of such separationis given as     follows:     yadva, ya dyapi`halam riktam' ity ady-uktau hakara-rikarayor vrttyahariti-namasty eva, tatha `raja-mahisi' ity atra rama-namapi, evam anyadapy uhyam, tathapi tat-tan-namamadhye vya vadhayakam aksarantaram astityetadrsa-vyavadhana-rahitam ity arthah; yadva, vyavahitam ca tad-rahitamcapi va; tatra`vyavahitam'--namnah kincid uccarananantaram kathancidapatitam sabdantaram samadhaya pascan namavasistaksara-grahanam ity evamrupam, madhye sabdantarenantaritam ity arthah, `rahitam' pascadavasistaksaragrahana-varjitam, kenacid amsena hinam ity arthah, tathapitarayaty eva. Suppose one is using the two words "halam riktam." Now thesyllable ha in the word "halam" and the syllable ri in "riktam" areseparately pronounced, but nevertheless it will act because one somehowor other utters the word "hari." Similarly, in the word "raja-mahisi,"the syllables ra and ma appear in two separate words, but because theysomehow or other appear together, the holy name rama will act, providedthere are no offenses.     sarvebhyah papebhyo'paradhebhyas ca samsarad apy uddharayaty evetisatyam eva; kintu nama-sevanasya mukhyam yat phalam, tan na sadyahsampadyate. tatha dehabharanady-artham api nama-sevanena mukhyam phalamasu na sidhyatity aha--tac ced iti. The holy name has so much spiritualpotency that it can deliver one from all sinful reactions and material
entanglements, but utterance of the holy name will not be very soonfruitful if done to facilitate sinning.      tan nama ced yadi dehadi-madh ye niksiptam--deha-bharanady-artham eva     vinyastam, tadapi phala-janakam na bhavati kim? api tu bhavaty eva,kintu atra iha loke     sighram na bhavati, kintu vilambenaiva bhavatity arthah. The holyname is so powerful that it must act, but when one utters the holy namewith offenses, its action will be delayed, not immediate, although infavorable circumstances the holy names of the Lord act very quickly;
                                   TEXT 61                    namabhasa haite haya sarva-papa-ksaya                                 TRANSLATION     Namacarya Haridasa Thakura continued, "If one offenselessly utters
the holy name even imperfectly, one can be freed from all the results ofsinful life.
                                   TEXT 62
               tam nirvyajam bhaja guna-nidhe pavanam pavananam
              sraddha-rajyan-matir atitaram uttamah-sloka-maulim              prodyann antah-karana-kuhare hanta yan-nama-bhanor                abhaso'pi ksapayati maha-pataka-dhvanta-rasim
                                 TRANSLATION     "`O reservoir of all good qualities, just worship Sri Krsna, the
purifier of all purifiers, the most exalted of the personalitiesworshiped by choice poetry. Worship Him with a faithful, unflinchingmind, without duplicity and in a highly elevated manner. Thus worshipthe Lord, whose name is like the sun, for just as a slight appearance ofthe sun dissipates the darkness of night, so a slight appearance of theholy name of Krsna can drive away all the darkness of ignorance thatarises in the heart due to greatly sinful activities performed inprevious Iives.,
                                   PURPORT     This verse is found in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.1.103).                                   TEXT 63                     namabhasa haite haya samsarera ksaya                                 TRANSLATION     "Even a faint light from the hoIy name of the Lord ca eradicate alI
the reactions of sinful life.                                   TEXT 64
                             mriyamano harer nama
                             grnan putropacaritam                            ajamilo'py agad dhama                           kim uta sraddhaya grnan
                                 TRANSLATION     " `While dying, Ajamila chated the holy name of the Lord, intending
to call his son Narayana. Nevertheless, he attained the spiritual world.What then to speak of those who chat the holy name with faith andreverence?'
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (6.2.49);                                   TEXT 65                  namabhase `mukti' haya sarva-sastre dekhi
                      sri-bhagavate tate ajamila--saksi"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because of even the faintest rays of the effulgence of the Lord's
holy name, one ca attain liberation. We ca see this in aIl the revealedscrirtures. The evidence appears in the story of Ajamila in Srimad-Bhagavatam."
                                   TEXT 66
                     suniya prabhura sukha badaye antare
                    punarapi bhangi kari' puchaye tanhare
                                 TRANSLATION     As Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard this from Haridasa Thakura, the
happiness within His heart increased, but as a matter of course, Hestill inquired further.
                                   TEXT 67
                    `prthivite bahu-jiva--sthavara-jangama
                    iha-sabara ki prakare ha-ibe mocana?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "On this earth there are many living entities," the Lord said,
"some moving and some not moving. What will happen to the trees, plats,insects and other living entities? How will they be delivered from
material bondage?"
                                   TEXT 68
                   haridasa kahe,--"prabhu, se kroa tomara
                    sthavara-jangama age kariyacha nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura replied, "My dear Lord, the deliverace of all
moving and nonmoving living entities takes place only by Your mercy. Youhave already grated this mercy and delivered them.
                                   TEXT 69
                     tumi ye kariyacha ei ucca sankirtana
                    sthavara-jangamera sei hayata' sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have loudly chanted the Hare Krsna mantra, and everyone,
moving or not moving, has benefited by hearing it.
                                   TEXT 70
                     suniya jangamera haya samsara-ksaya
                   sthavare se sabda lage, pratidhvani haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord, the moving entities who have heard Your loud sankirtaa
have already been delivered from bondage to the material world, ad afterthe nonmoving living entities like trees hear it, there is an echo.
                                   TEXT 71
                   `pratidhvani' nahe, sei karaye `kirtana'
                       tomara kroara ei akathya kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Actually, however, it is not an echo; it is the kirtana of the
nonmoving living entities. All this, although inconceivable, is possibleby Your mercy.
                                   TEXT 72
                      sakala jagate haya ucca sankirtana                    suniya premavese nace sthavara-jangama
                                 TRANSLATION     "When loud chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra is performed all over
the world by those who follow in Your footsteps, all living entities,moving ad nonmoving, dance in ecstatic devotional love.
                                   TEXT 73
                   yaiche kaila jharikhande vrndavana yaite
                   balabhadra-bhattacarya kahiyachena amate
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, all the incidents that took place while You were
going to Vrndavana through the forest known as Jharikhanda have beenrelated to me by Your servant Balabhadra Bhattacarya.
                                   TEXT 74
                      vasudeva jiva lagi' kaila nivedana
                      tabe angikara kaila jivera mocana
                                 TRANSLATION     "When Your devotee Vasudeva Datta submitted his plea at Your lotus
feet for the deliverance of all living entities, You accepted thatrequest.
                                   TEXT 75
                      jagat nistarite ei tomara avatara
                     bhakta-bhava age tate kaila angikara
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, You have accepted the form of a devotee just to
deliver all the fallen souls of this world.
                                   TEXT 76
                     ucca sankirtana tate karila pracara
                 sthira-cara jivera saba khandaila samsara,,
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have preached the loud chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-matra
and in this way freed all moving and nonmoving living entities frommaterial bondage."                                   TEXT 77
                   prabhu kahe,--"saba jiva mukti yabe pabe
                   ei ta' brahmanda tabe jiva-sunya habe!"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "If all living entities were
liberated, the entire universe would be devoid of living beings."
                                  TEXT 78-79
                 haridasa bale,--"tomara yavat martye sthiti
                   tavat sthavara-jangama, sarva jiva-jati
                   saba mukta kari' tumi vaikunthe pathaiba
                   suksma-jive punah karme udbuddha kariba
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa said, "My Lord, as long as You are situated within the
materiaI world, You will send to the spirituaI sky all the deveIopedmoving ad nonmoving living entities in different species. Then again Youwill awaken the living entities who are not yet developed and engagethem in activities.
                                   TEXT 80
                     sei jiva habe ihan sthavara-jangama
                   tahate bharibe brahmanda yena purva-sama
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this way all moving and nonmoving living entities will come
into existence, and the entire universe will be filled as it waspreviously.
                                   PURPORT     While we are preaching, opposing elements sometimes argue, "If all
living entities were delivered by the Krsna consciousness movement, whatwould happen then? The universe would be devoid of living entities." Inanswer to this, we may say that in a prison there are many prisoners,but if one thinks that the prison would be empty if all the prisonersadopted good behavior, he is incorrect. Even if all the prisoners withina jail are freed, other criminals will fill it again. A prison willnever be vacant, for there are many prospective criminals who will fillthe prison cells, even if the present criminals are freed by thegovernment. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, karanam guna-sango'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu: "Because of the living entity's association withmaterial nature, he meets with good and evil among various species."
(Bg. 13.22) There are many unmanifested living entities covered by themode of ignorance who will gradually come to the mode of passion. Mostof them will become criminals because of their fruitive activities andagain fill the prisons.
                                   TEXT 81                   purve yena raghunatha saba ayodhya lana
                 vaikunthake gela, anya-jive ayodhya bharana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Previously, when Lord Ramacandra left this world, He took with Him
all the living entities of Ayodhya. Then He filled Ayodhya again withother living entities.
                                   TEXT 82
                      avatari' tumi aiche patiyacha hata
                    keha na bujhite pare tomara gudha nata
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, You have set a plan in motion by descending on the
material world, but no one can understand how You are acting.
                                   TEXT 83
                     purve yena vraje krsna kari' avatara
                  sakala brahmanda-jivera khandaila samsara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Formerly, when Lord Krsna descended in Vrndavaa, He freed all
living entities in the universe from material existence in the same way.
                                   TEXT 84
                           na caivam vismayah karyo
                            bhavata bhagavaty aje                             yogesvaresvare krsne                             yata etad vimucyate
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Krsna, the unborn Supreme Personality of Godhead, master of all
of the masters of mystic power, delivers all living entities, moving adnonmoving. Nothing is astonishing in the activities of the Lord.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.29.16),
                                   TEXT 85                "ayam hi bhagavan drstah kirtitah samsmrtas ca
                dvesanubandh enapy akhila-surasuradi-durlabham             phalam prayacchati, kim uta samyag bhaktimatam" iti
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead may be seen,
glorified or remembered with an attitude of envy, He nevertheless awardsthe most confidential liberation, which is rarely achieved by thedemigods and demons. What, then, can be said of those who are alreadyfully engaged in devotional service to the Lord?'
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from the Visnu Purana (4.15.17).                                   TEXT 86                     taiche tumi navadvipe kari' avatara
                    sakala-brahmanda-jivera karila nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     "By descending as an incarnation at Navadvipa, You, just like
Krsna, have already delivered all the living entities of the universe.
                                   TEXT 87
                 ye kahe,--`caitanya-mahima mora gocara haya'
                     se januka, mora punah ei ta' niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "One may say that he understands the glories of Sri Caltanya
Mahaprabhu. He may know whatever he may know, but as far as I amconcerned, this is my conclusion.
                                   TEXT 88
                      tomara ye lila maha-amrtera sindhu
                    mora mano-gocara nahe tara eka bindu"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, Your pastimes are just like an ocean of nectar. It
is not possible for me to conceive how great that ocean is or even tounderstand a drop of it."                                   TEXT 89
                   eta suni' prabhura mane camatkara haila
                  `mora gudha-lila haridasa kemane janila?'
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing all this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was astonished. "These
are actually My confidential pastimes," He thought. "How could Haridasahave understood them?"
                                   TEXT 90
                     manera santose tanre kaila alingana
                    bahye prakasite e-saba karila varjana
                                 TRANSLATION     Greatly satisfied by the statements of Haridasa Thakura, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced him. Outwardly, however, He avoided furtherdiscussions of these matters.
                                   TEXT 91
                  isvara-svabhava,--aisvarya cahe acchadite
                  bhakta-thani lukaite nare, haya ta' vidite
                                 TRANSLATION     This is a characteristic of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Although He wants to cover His opulence, He cannot do so before Hisdevotees. This is well-k nown everywhere.
                                   TEXT 92
                   ullanghita- trividha-sima -samatisa yi-
                   sambhavanam tava parivradhima-svabhavam
                      maya-balena bhavatapi niguhyamanam
                  pas'yanti kecid anisam tvad-ananya-bhavah
                                 TRANSLATION     "O my Lord, everything within material nature is limited by time,
space ad thought. Your characteristics, however, being unequaled adunsurpassed, are always transcendental to such limitations. Yousometimes cover such characteristics by Your own energy, butnevertheless Your unalloyed devotees are always able to see You underall circumstances."                                   PURPORT
     This is a verse from the Stotra-ratna of Yamunacarya;                                   TEXT 93                    tabe mahaprabhu nija-bhakta-pase yana
                     haridasera guna kahe sata-mukha hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to His personal devotees and bega
speaking about Haridasa Thakura's transcendental qualities as if He hadhundreds of mouths. hundreds of mouths.
                                   TEXT 94
                 bhaktera guna kahite prabhura badaye ullasa
                    bhakta-gana-srestha tate sri-haridasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu derives great pleasure from glorifying His
devotees, and among the devotees, Haridasa Thakura is the foremost.
                                   TEXT 95
                    haridasera guna-gana--asankhya, apara
                     keha kona amse varne, nahi paya para
                                 TRANSLATION     The transcendental qualities of Haridasa Thakura are innumerable
and unfathomable. One may describe a portion of them, but to count themall is impossible.
                                   TEXT 96
                   caitan ya-mangale sri- vrnda va na-dasa
                  haridasera guna kichu kariyachena prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In Caitanya-mangala, Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has described the
attributes of Haridasa Thakura to some extent.
                                   TEXT 97
                     saba kaha na yaya haridasera caritra                     keha kichu kahe karite apana pavitra
                                 TRANSLATION     No one can describe all the qualities of Haridasa Thakura. One may
say something about them just to purify himself.
                                   TEXT 98
                     vrndavana-dasa yaha na kaila varnana
                   haridasera guna kichu suna, bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     O devotees of Sri Caitaya Mahaprabhu, please hear something about
the qualities of Haridasa Thakura that Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura hasnot described in detail.
                                   TEXT 99
                     haridasa yabe nija-grha tyaga kaila
                   benapolera vana-madhye kata-dina rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Affer leaving his home, Haridasa Thakura stayed for some time in
the forest of Benapola.
                                   TEXT 100
                   nirjana-vane kutira kari' tulasi sevana
                    ratri-dine tina laksa nama-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura constructed a cottage in a solitary forest. There
he planted a tulasi plant, and in front of the tulasi he would chant theholy narne of the Lord 300,000 times daily. He chanted throughout theentire day and night.
                                   PURPORT     The village of Benapola is situated in the district of Yasohara,
which is now in Bangladesh. Benapola is near the Banagano station, whichis at the border of Bangladesh and may be reached by the eastern railwayfrom Shelda Station in Calcutta. Haridasa Thakura, being the acarya ofchanting the Hare Krsna maha- mantra, is called Namacarya HaridasaThakura. From his personal Example we can understand that chanting theHare Krsna mantra and becoming highly elevated in Krsna consciousness isvery simple. Without difficulty one can sit down anywhere, especially onthe bank of the Ganges, Yamuna or any sacred river, devise a sittingplace or cottage, plant a tulasi, and before the tulasi chant the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra undisturbed.     Haridasa Thakura used to chant the holy name on his beads 300,000times daily. Throughout the entire day and night, he would chant thesixteen names of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. One should not, however,imitate Haridasa Thakura, for no one else can chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra 300,000 times a day. Such chanting is for the mukta-purusa, orliberated soul. We can follow his example, however, by chanting sixteenrounds of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra on beads every day and offeringrespect to the tulasiplant. This is not at all difficult for anyone, andthe process of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra with a vow before thetulasi plant has such great spiritual potency that simpiy by doing thisone can become spiritually strong. Therefore we request the mernbers ofthe Hare Krsna movement to follow Haridasa Thakura's example rigidly.Chanting sixteen rounds does not take much time, nor is offeringrespects to the tulasi plant difficult. The process has immensespiritual potency. One should not miss this opportunity.
                                   TEXT 101                    brahmanera ghare kare bhiksa nirvahana
                      prabhave sakala loka karaye pujana
                                 TRANSLATION     For his bodily maintenance he would go to a brahmana's house and
beg some food. He was spiritually so influential that all theneighboring people worshiped him.
                                   PURPORT     In the days of Haridasa Thakura, all the brahmanas worshiped
Narayana in the form of the salagrama-sila. Therefore begging from abrahmana's house meant taking krsna-prasada, which is transcendental(nirguna). If we take food from the house of others, such as karmis, weshall have to share the qualities of those from whom we take alms.Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took prasada in the houses ofVaisnavas. This is the general process. The members of the Krsnaconsciousness movement are advised not to take food from anywhere but aVaisnava's or brahmana's house where Deity worship is performed. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu has said, visayira anna khaile dusta haya mana: if adevotee takes alms or food from the house of a karmi who is simplyinterested in money, his mind will be unclean. We must always rememberthat a devotee's life is one of vairagya-vidya, or ren u n ciation andknowledge. Therefore all devotees are warned not to live unnecessarilyluxurious lives at the cost of others. Grhasthas living within thejurisdiction of the temple must be especially careful not to imitatekarmis by acquiring opulent clothing, food and conveyances. As far aspossible, these should be avoided. A member of the temple, whethergrhastha, brahmacari or sannyasi, must practice a life of renunciation,following in the footsteps of Haridasa Thakura and the six Gosvamis.Otherwise, because maya is very strong, at any time one may become avictim of maya and fall down from spiritual life.                                   TEXT 102
                   sei desadh yaksa nama--ramacandra khanna
                  vaisnava- vidves i sei pasan da -pradhana
                                 TRANSLATION     A landholder named Ramacadra Khan was the zamindar of that
district. He was envious of Vaisnavas and was therefore a great atheist.
                                   TEXT 103
                      haridase loke puje, sahite na pare
                     tanra apamana karite nana upaya kare
                                 TRANSLATION     Unable to tolerate that such respect was being offered to Haridasa
Thakura, Ramacandra Khan planned in various ways to dishonor him.
                                   TEXT 104
                  kona-prakare haridasera chidra nahi pa ya
                     vesya-gane ani' kare chidrera upaya
                                 TRANSLATION     By no means could he find any fault in the character of Haridasa
Thakura. Therefore he called for local prostitutes and began a plan todiscredit His Holiness.
                                   PURPORT     This is typical of atheistic men, but even among so-called
religionists, sadhus, mendicants, sannyasis and brahmacaris, there aremany enemies of the Krsna consciousness movement who always try to findfaults in it, not considering that the movement is spreadingautomatically by the grace of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who wantedit spread all over the world, in every town and village. We are tryingto fulfill the Lord's desire, and our attempt has become fairlysuccessful, but the enemies of this movement unnecessarily try to findfaults in it, exactly like the old rascal Ramacandra Khan, who opposedHaridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 105                    vesya-gane kahe,--"ei vairagi haridasa
                 tumi-saba kara ihara vairagya-dharma nasa,,
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramacandra Khan said to the prostitutes, "There is a mendicat named
Haridasa Thakura. All of you devise a way to deviate him from his vowsof austerity."
                                   PURPORT     Devotional service is the path of vairagya-vidya (renunciation and
knowledge). Haridasa Thakura was following this path, but RamacandraKhan planned to induce him to break his vows. Renunciation meansrenunciation of sensual pleasure, especially the pleasure of sex.Therefore a brahmacari, sannyasi or vanaprastha is strictly prohibitedfrom having relationships with women. Haridasa Thakura was strictlyrenounced, and thus Ramacandra Khan called for prostitutes becauseprostitutes know how to break a man's vow of celibacy by their feminineinfluence and thus pollute a mendicant or a person engaged in devotionallife. It was impossible for Ramacandra Khan to induce any other women tobreak Haridasa Thakura's vow, and therefore he called for prostitutes.Free mingling with women has never been possible in India, but for onewho wanted to associate with society girls, they were available in adistrict of prostitutes. There were prostitutes in human society even inLord Krsna's time, for it is said that the prostitutes of Dvaraka Citycame forth to receive the Lord. Although they were prostitutes, theywere also devotees of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 106                     vesya-gana-madhye eka sundari yuvati
                   se kahe,--"tina-dine hariba tanra mati"
                                 TRANSLATION     Among the prostitutes, one attractive young girl was selected."I
shall attract the mind of Haridasa Thakura," she promised, "within threedays."
                                   TEXT 107
                 khanna kahe,--"mora paika yauka tomara sane
                  tomara sahita ekatra tare dhari' yena ane"
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramacandra Khan said to the prostitute,"My constable will go with
you so that as soon as he sees you with Haridasa Thakura, immediately hewill arrest him and bring both of you to me."
                                   TEXT 108
                   vesya kahe,--"mora sanga ha-uka eka-bara
                  dvitiya-bare dharite paika la-imu tomara"
                                 TRANSLATION     The prostitute replied,"First let me have union with him once; then
the second time I shall take your constable with me to arrest him."
                                   TEXT 109
                     ratri-kale sei vesya suvesa dhariya
                     haridasera vasaya gela ullasita hana
                                 TRANSLATION     At night the prostitute, after dressing herself most attractively,
went to the cottage of Haridasa Thakura with great jubilation.
                                   TEXT 110
                   tulasi namaskari' haridasera dvare yana
                      gosanire namaskari' rahila dandana
                                 TRANSLATION     After offering obeisances to the tulasi plant, she went to the door
of Haridasa Thakura, offered him obeisances and stood there.
                                   TEXT 111
                      anga ughadiya dekhai vasila duyare
                     kahite lagila kichu sumadhura svare
                                 TRANSLATION     Exposing part of her body to his view, she sat down on the
threshold of the door and spoke to him in very sweet words.
                                   TEXT 112
               "thakura, tumi--parama-sundara, prathama yauvana
                   toma dekhi' kon nari dharite pare mana?
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Thakura, O great preacher, great devotee, you are so
beautifully built, and your youth is just beginning. Who is the womanwho could control her mind after seeing you?
                                   TEXT 113
                    tomara sangama lagi' lubdha mora mana
                     toma na paile prana na yaya dharana"                                 TRANSLATION
     "I am eager to be united with you. My mind is greedy for this. If I
don't obtain you, I shall not be able to keep my body and soultogether."
                                 TEXT 114-115
                    haridasa kahe,--"toma karimu angikara
                   sankhya-nama-samapti yavat na haya amara
                    tavat tumi vasi' suna nama-sankirtana
                  nama-samapti haile karimu ye tomara mana"
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura replied,"I shall accept you without fall, but you
will have to wait until I have finished chanting my regular rounds on mybeads. Until that time, please sit and listen to the chating of the holyname. As soon as I am finished, I shall fulfill your desire."
                                   TEXT 116
                      eta suni' sei vesya vasiya rahila
                   kirtana kare haridasa pratah-kala haila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, the prostitute remained sitting there while Haridasa
Thakura chanted on his beads until the light of morning appeared.
                                   TEXT 117
                    pratah-kala dekhi' vesya uthiya calila
                      saba samacara yai khannere kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     When she saw that it was morning, the prostitute stood up and left.
Coming before Ramacandra Khan, she informed him of all the news.
                                   TEXT 118
                      `aji ama angikara kariyache vacane
                   kali avasya tahara sange ha-ibe sangame'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Today Haridasa Thakura has promised to enjoy with me. Tomorrow
certainly I shall have union with him."
                                   TEXT 119
                       ara dina ratri haile vesya aila
                       haridasa tare bahu asvasa karila
                                 TRANSLATION     The next night, when the prostitute came again, Haridasa Thakura
gave her many assurances.
                                   TEXT 120
                 `kali duhkha paila, aparadha na la-iba mora
                      avasya karimu ami tomaya angikara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Last night you were disappointed. Please excuse my offense. I
shall certainly accept you.
                                   TEXT 121
                    tavat ihan vasi' suna nama-sankirtana
                  nama purna haile, purna habe tomara mana'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please sit down and hear the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra until my regular chating is finished. Then your desire willsurely be fulfilled."
                                   TEXT 122
                     tulasire tanke vesya namaskara kari'
                   dvare vasi' nama sune bale'hari' `hari'
                                 TRANSLATION     After offering her obeisances to the tulasi plant and Haridasa
Thakura, she sat down at the door. Hearing Haridasa Thakura chanting theHare Krsna mantra, she also chated,"O my Lord Hari, O my Lord Hari."
                                   PURPORT     Herein one can clearly see how a Vaisnava delivers a fallen soul by
a transcendental trick. The prostitute came to pollute Haridasa Thakurabut he took it as his duty to deliver the prostitute. As clearlydemonstrated here, the process of deliverance is very simple. With faith
and reverence the prostitute associated with Haridasa Thakura, whopersonally treated her material disease by chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Although the prostitute had an ulterior motive, somehow or othershe got the association of a Vaisnava and satisfied him by occasionallychanting in imitation, "O my Lord Hari, O my Lord Hari." The conclusionis that associating with a Vaisnava, chanting the holy name of the Lordand offering obeisances to the tulasi plant or a Vaisnava all lead oneto become a transcendental devotee who is completely cleansed of allmaterial contamination.
                                   TEXT 123                     ratri-sesa haila, vesya usimisi kare
                   tara riti dekhi' haridasa kahena tahare
                                 TRANSLATION     When the night came to an end, the prostitute was restless. Seeing
this, Haridasa Thakura spoke to her as follows.
                                   TEXT 124
                    "koti-nama-grahana-yajna kari eka-mase
                     ei diksa kariyachi, haila asi, sese
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have vowed to chant ten million names in a month. I have taken
this vow, but now it is nearing its end.
                                   PURPORT     If one regularly chants 333,333 times daily for a month and then
chants one time more, he will thus chant ten million times. In this waya devotee worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such worship iscalled yajna. Yajnaih sankirtana- prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah: thosewhose intelligence is brilliant accept this hari-nama-yajna, the yajnaof chanting the holy name of the Lord. By performing this yajna, onesatisfies the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus attains perfectionin spiritual life.      According to external vision, Haridasa Thakurabelonged to a Mohammedan family. Nevertheless, because he engagedhimself in performing the yajna of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra,he became a regularly initiated brahmana. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam(3.33.6):     yan -namadhe ya-sra va nanuk irtanad     yat-prahvanad yat-smaranad api kvacit     svado'pi sadyah savanaya kalpate     kutah punas te bhagavan nu darsanatEven if a devotee comes from a family of dog-eaters, if he surrenders tothe personality of Godhead he immediately becomes a qualified brahmanaand is immediately fit to perform yajna, whereas a person born in afamily of brahmanas has to wait until completing the reformatoryprocesses before he may be called samskrta, purified. It is further said
in Srimad-Bhagavatam (12.1.42):     asamskrtah kriya-hina     rajasa tamasavrtah     prajas te bhaksayisyanti     mleccha rajanya-rupinah"In the age of Kali, mlecchas, or lowborn people who have not undergonethe purifying process of samskara, who do not know how to apply thatprocess in actual life and who are covered by the modes of passion andignorance, will take the posts of administrators. They will devour thecitizens with their atheistic activities." A person who is not purifiedby the prescribed process of samskara is called asamskrta, but if oneremains kriya-hina even after being purified by initiation--in otherwords, if one fails to actually apply the principles of purity in hislife--he remains an unpurified mleccha or yavana. On the other hand, wefind that Haridasa Thakura, although born in a mleccha or yavana family,became Namacarya Haridasa Thakura because he performed the nama-yajna aminimum of 300,000 times every day.     Herein we find that Haridasa Thakura strictly followed hisregulative principle of chanting 300,000 times. Thus when the prostitutebecame restless, he informed her that first he had to finish hischanting and then he would be able to satisfy her. Actually HaridasaThakura chanted the holy name of the Lord for three nights continuouslyand gave the prostitute a chance to hear him. Thus she became purified,as will be seen in the following verses.
                                   TEXT 125                    aji samapta ha-ibe,--hena jnana chila
                  samasta ratri nilun nama samapta na haila
                                 TRANSLATION     "I thought that today I would be able to finish my performance of
yajna, my chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra. I tried my best to chantthe holy name all night, but I still did not finish.
                                   TEXT 126
                  kali samapta habe, tabe habe vrata-bhanga
                   svacchande tomara sange ha-ibeka sanga"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Tomorrow I will surely finish, and my vow will be fulfilled. Then
it will be possible for me to enjoy with you in full freedom."
                                   PURPORT     Haridasa Thakura never wanted to enjoy the prostitute, but he
tricked her to deliver her by giving her a chance to hear the holy nameof the Lord while he chanted. Pure devotees chant the Hare Krsna mantra,and simply by hearing this chanting from a purified transcendentalperson, one is purified of all sinful activities, no matter how lowborn
or fallen one may be. As soon as one is thus completely free from thereactions of sinful activities, he is eligible to render devotionalservice to the Lord. This is the process for engaging the fallen soulsin devotional service. As Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (7.28):yesam tv anta-gatam papam     jana-nam punya-karmanam     te dvandva-moha-nirmukta     bhajante mam drdha-vratah"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life,whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed fromthe duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service withdetermination."
                                   TEXT 127                     vesya giya samacara khannere kahila
                  ara dina sandhya ha-ite thakura-thani aila
                                 TRANSLATION     The prostitute returned to Ramacandra Khan and informed him of what
had happened. The next day she came earlier, at the beginning of theevening, and stayed with Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 128
                     tulasike, thakurake namaskara kari'
                  dvare vasi' nama sune, bale `hari' `hari'
                                 TRANSLATION     After offering obeisances to the tulasi plant and Haridasa Thakura,
she sat down on the threshold of the room. Thus she began to hearHaridasa Thakura's chanting, and she also personally chanted "Hari,Hari," the holy name of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 129
                    `nama purna habe aji',--bale haridasa
                   `tabe purna karimu aji tomara abhilasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Today it will be possible for me to finish my chanting," Haridasa
Thakura informed her. "Then I shall satisfy all your desires."
                                   TEXT 130
                    kirtana karite aiche ratri-sesa haila
                   thakurera sane vesyara mana phiri' gela                                 TRANSLATION
     The night ended while Haridasa Thakura was chanting, but by his
association the mind of the prostitute had changed.
                                   TEXT 131
                      dandavat hana pade thakura-carane
                   ramacandra-khannera katha kaila nivedane
                                 TRANSLATION     The prostitute, now purified, fell at the lotus feet of Haridasa
Thakura and confessed that Ramacandra Khan had appointed her to pollutehim.
                                   TEXT 132
                    "vesya hana muni papa kariyachon apara
                      kroa kari' kara mo-adhame nistara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because I have taken the profession of a prostitute," she said, "I
have performed unlimited sinful acts. My lord, be merciful to me.Deliver my fallen soul."
                                   TEXT 133
                 thakura kahe,--khannera katha saba ami jani
                    ajna murkha sei, tare duhkha nahi mani
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura replied, "I know everything about the conspiracy
of Ramacandra Khan. He is nothing but an ignorant fool. Therefore hisactivities do not make me feel unhappy.
                                   TEXT 134
                      sei-dina yaitama e-sthana chadiya
                    tina dina rahilana toma nistara lagiya
                                 TRANSLATION     "On the very day Ramacandra Khan was planning his intrigue against
me, I would have left this place immediately, but because you came to meI stayed here for three days to deliver you."                                   TEXT 135
                   vesya kahe,--"krpa kari' karaha upadesa
                   ki mora kartavya, yate yaya bhava-klesa"
                                 TRANSLATION     The prostitute said, "Kindly act as my spiritual master. Instruct
me in my duty by which to get relief from material existence."
                                   TEXT 136
              thakura kahe,--"gharera dravya brahmane kara dana
                      ei ghare asi' tumi karaha visrama
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura replied, "Immediately go home and distribute to
the brahmanas whatever property you have. Then come back to this roomand stay here forever in Krsna consciousness.
                                   PURPORT     Haridasa Thakura's instruction that the prostitute should
distribute to the brahmanas all the property she had at home is verysignificant. Haridasa Thakura never advised the prostitute to givecharity to the so-called daridra-narayana ("poor Narayana") or any othersuch persons. According to Vedic civilization, charity should be givenonly to the qualified brahmanas. As stated in Bhagavad- gita- (18.42):     samo damas tapah saucam.     ksantir arjavam eva ca     jnanam vijnanam astikyam     brahma-karma svabhava-jamThe brahminical qualifications are truthfulness, control of the sensesand mind, tolerance, simplicity, knowledge, practical application oftranscendental knowledge in one's life, and full faith in the SupremePersonality of Godhead. persons engaged in pursuing spiritualunderstanding have no time to earn their livelihood. They dependcompletely on the mercy of the Lord, who says in Bhagavad-gita (9.22)that He personally carries to them all their necessities (yoga-ksemam-vahamy aham). The Vedic civilization recommends that one give charity tobrahmanas and sannyasis, not to the so-called daridra-narayana. Narayanacannot be daridra, nor can daridra be Narayana, for these arecontradictory terms. Atheistic men invent such concoctions and preachthem to fools, but charity should actually be given to brahmanas andsannyasis because whatever money they get they spend for Krsna. Whatevercharity one gives to a brahmana goes to Krsna, who says in Bhagavad-gita(9.27):     yat karosi yad asnasi     yaj j-uhosi dadasi yat     yat tapasyasi kaunteya     tat kurusva mad-arpanam"O son of Kunti, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer
and give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, shouldbe done as an offering unto Me." Everything actually belongs to Krsna,but so-called civilized men unfortunately think that everything belongsto them. This is the mistake of materialistic civilization. Theprostitute (vesya) had earned money by questionable means, and thereforeHaridasa Thakura advised her to distribute to the brahmanas whatever shepossessed. When Srila Rupa Gosvami retired from family life, hedistributed fifty percent of his income to the brahmanas and Vaisnavas.A brahmana knows what the Absolute Truth is, and a Vaisnava, knowing theAbsolute Truth, acts on behalf of the Absolute Truth, the Supremepersonality of Godhead. Generally one earns money by many questionablemeans. Therefore at some time one should retire and distribute whateverone has to the brahmanas and Vaisnavas who engage in devotional serviceby preaching the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 137                    nirantara nama lao, kara tulasi sevana
                       acirat pabe tabe krsnera carana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Chant the Hare Krsna mantra continuously and render service to the
tulasi plant by watering her and offering prayers to her. In this wayyou will very soon get the opportunity to be sheltered at the lotus feetof Krsna."
                                   PURPORT     At least five thousand years ago, Lord Sri Krsna expressed His
desire that everyone surrender to Him (sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekamsaranam vraja). Why is it that people cannot do this? Krsna assures,aham tvam sarva-papebhyo mok- sayisyami ma sucah: "I shall deliver youfrom all sinful reactions. Do not fear." Everyone is suffering from theresults of sinful activities, but Krsna says that if one surrenders untoHim, He will protect one from sinful reactions. Modern civilization,however, is interested neither in Krsna nor in getting relief fromsinful acts. Therefore men are suffering. Surrender is the ultimateinstruction of Bhagavad- gita, but for one who cannot surrender to thelotus feet of Krsna, it is better to chant the Hare Krsna mantraconstantly, under the instruction of Haridasa Thaku ra.     in our Krsna consciousness movement we are teaching our followersto chant the Hare Krsna mantra continuously on beads. Even those who arenot accustomed to this practice are advised to chant at least sixteenrounds on their beads so that they may be trained. Otherwise, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu recommended:     trnad api sunicena     taror api sahisnuna     amanina manadena     kirtaniyah sada harih"One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street. One should be moretolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige, and readyto offer all respect to others. In such a state of mirid one can chant
the holy name of the Lord constantly." Sada means "always." HaridasaThakura says, nirantara nama lao: "Chant the Hare Krsna mantra withoutstopping."     Although Krsna wants everyone to surrender to His lotus feet,because of people's sinful activities they cannot do this. Na mamduskrtino mudhah prapa- dyante naradhamah: rascals and fools, the lowestof men, who engage in sinful activities, cannot suddenly surrender tothe lotus feet of Krsna. Nevertheless, if they begin chanting the HareKrsna mantra and rendering service unto the tulasi plant, they will verysoon be able to surrender. One's real duty is to surrender to the lotusfeet of Krsna but if one is unable to do so, he should adopt thisprocess, as introduced by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His mostconfidential servant, Namacarya Srila Haridasa Thakura. This is the wayto achieve success in Krsna consciousness.
                                   TEXT 138                      eta bali' tare`nama' upadesa kari'
                  uthiya calila thakura bali' `hari' `hari'
                                 TRANSLATION     After thus instructing the prostitute about the process of chanting
the Hare Krsna mantra, Haridasa Thakura stood up and left, continuouslychanting "Hari, Hari."
                                   TEXT 139
                      tabe sei vesya gurura ajna la-ila
                    grha-vitta yeba chila, brahmanere dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter, the prostitute distributed to the brahmanas whatever
household possessions she had, following the order of her spiritualmaster.
                                   PURPORT     Sometimes the word grha-vrtti is substituted for the word grha-
vitta. Vrtti means "profession." The grha-vrtti of the prostitute was toenchant foolish people and induce them to indulge in sex. Here, however,grha-vrtti is not a suitable word. The proper word is grha-vitta, whichmeans "all the possessions she had in her home." All the girl'spossessions had been earned by professional prostitution and weretherefore products of her sinful life. When such possessions are givento brahmanas and Vaisnavas who can engage them in the service of theLord because of their advancement in spiritual life, this indirectlyhelps the person who gives the charity, for he is thus relieved ofsinful reactions. As Krsna promises, aham tvam sarva-papebhyomoksayisyami: "I shall save you from all sinful reactions." When ourKrsna conscious devotees go out to beg charity or collect contributionsin the form of membership fees, the money thus coming to the Krsna
consciousness movement is strictly employed to advance Krsnaconsciousness all over the world. The Krsna conscious devotees collectthe money of others for the service of Krsna, and they are satisfiedwith Krsna's prasada and whatever He gives them for their maintenance.They do not desire material comforts. However, they go to great pains toengage the possessions of prostitutes, or persons who are more or lesslike prostitutes, in the service of the Lord and thus free them fromsinful reactions. A Vaisnava guru accepts money or other contributions,but he does not employ such contributions for sense gratification. Apure Vaisnava thinks himself unfit to help free even one person from thereactions of sinful life, but he engages one's hard-earned money in theservice of the Lord and thus frees one from sinful reactions. A Vaisnavaguru is never dependent on the contributions of his disciples. Followingthe instructions of Haridasa Thakura, a pure Vaisnava does notpersonally take even a single paisa from anyone, but he induces hisfollowers to spend for the service of the Lord whatever possessions theyhave.
                                   TEXT 140                   matha mudi' eka-vastre rahila sei ghare
                   ratri-dine tina-laksa nama grahana kare
                                 TRANSLATION     The prostitute shaved her head clean in accordance with Vaisnava
principles and stayed in that room wearing only one cloth. Following inthe footsteps of her spiritual master, she began chanting the Hare Krsnamahamantra 300,000 times a day. She chanted throughout the entire dayand night.
                                   TEXT 141
                     tulasi sevana kare, carvana, upavasa
                    indriya-damana haila, premera prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     She worshiped the tuiasi plant, following in the footsteps of her
spiritual master. Instead of eating regularly, she chewed whatever foodshe received as alms, and if nothing was supplied she would fast. Thusby eating frugally and fasting she conquered her senses, and as soon asher senses were controlled, symptoms of love of Godhead appeared in herperson.
                                   TEXT 142
                   prasiddha vaisnavi haila parama-mahanti
                   bada bada vaisnava tanra darsanete yanti
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the prostitute became a celebrated devotee. She became very
advanced in spiritual life, and many stalwart Vaisnavas would come tosee her.
                                   PURPORT     Stalwart, highly advanced Vaisnava devotees are not interested in
seeing prostitutes, but when a prostitute or any other fallen soulbecomes a Vaisnava, stalwart Vaisnavas are interested in seeing them.Anyone can be turned into a Vaisnava if he or she follows the Vaisnavaprinciples. A devotee who follows these principles is no longer on thematerial platform. Therefore, it is one's strict adherence to theprinciples that should be considered, not the country of one's birth.Many devotees join our Krsna consciousness movement from Europe andAmerica, but one should not therefore consider them European Vaisnavasor American Vaisnavas. A Vaisnava is a Vaisnava and should therefore begiven all the respect due a Vaisnava.
                                   TEXT 143                    vesyara caritra dekhi' loke camatkara
                    haridasera mahima kahe kari' namaskara
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the sublime character of the prostitute, everyone was
astonished. Everyone glorified the influence of Haridasa Thakura andoffered him obeisances.
                                   PURPORT     It is said, phalena pariciyate: one is recognized by the result of
his actions. In Vaisnava society there are many types of Vaisnavas. Someof them are called gosvamis, some are called svamis, some are prabhus,and some are prabhupada. One is not recognized, however, simply by sucha name. A spiritual master is recognized as an actual guru when it isseen that he has changed the character of his disciples. HaridasaThakura actually changed the character of the professional prostitute.People greatly appreciated this, and therefore they all offeredobeisances to Haridasa Thakura and glorified him.
                                   TEXT 144                    ramacandra khanna aparadha-bija kaila
                      sei bija vrksa hana agete phalila
                                 TRANSLATION     By inducing a prostitute to disturb Haridasa Thakura, Ramacandra
Khan caused a seed of offense at his lotus feet to germinate. This seedlater became a tree, and when it fructified, Ramacandra Khan ate itsfruits.                                   TEXT 145
                    mahad-aparadhera phala adbhuta kathana
                    prastava pana kahi, suna, bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     This offense at the lotus feet of an exalted devotee has resulted
in a wonderful narration. Taking advantage of the opportunity affordedby these incidents, I shall explain what happened. O devotees, pleaselisten.
                                   TEXT 146
                     sahajei avaisnava ramacandra-khanna
                    haridasera aparadhe haila asura-samana
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramacandra Khan was naturally a nondevotee. Now, having offended
the lotus feet of Haridasa Thakura, he became just like a demoniacatheist.
                                   TEXT 147
                 vaisnava-dharma ninda kare, vaisnava-apamana
                     bahu-dinera aparadhe paila parinama
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of blaspheming the cult of Vaisnavism and insulting the
devotees for a long time, he now received the results of his offensiveactivities.
                                   PURPORT     Ramacandra Khan was a great offender at the lotus feet of the
Vaisnavas and Visnu. Just as Ravana, although born of a brahmana father,Visvasrava, was nevertheless called an asura or raksasa because of hisoffenses against Lord Ramacandra (Visnu) and Hanuman (a Vaisnava), soRamacandra Khan also became such an asura because of his offensesagainst Haridasa Thakura and many others.
                                   TEXT 148                      nityananda-gosani gaude yabe aila
                     prema pracarite tabe bhramite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Lord Nityananda returned to Bengal to preach the cult of
bhakti, love of Godhead, He began touring all over the country.
                                   TEXT 149
                      prema-pracarana ara pasanda-dalana
                      dui-karye avadhuta karena bhramana
                                 TRANSLATION     For two purposes--to spread the cult of bhakti and to defeat and
subdue the atheists--Lord Nityananda, the most dedicated devotee of theLord, moved throughout the country.
                                   PURPORT     As stated in Bhagavad-gita- (4.8):
     paritranaya sadh unam-     vinasaya ca duskrtam     dharma-samsthapanarthaya     sambhavami yuge yugeLord Krsna appears in every millennium for two purposes, namely todeliver the devotees and kill the nondevotees. His devotees also havetwo similar purposes--to preach the bhakti cult of Krsna consciousnessand defeat all kinds of agnostics and atheistic demons. Nityanandaprabhu carried out the order of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in thisway, and those who strictly follow Nityananda Prabhu perform the sameactivities. There are two classes of devotees. One is calledgosthyanandi, and the other is called bhajananandi. A devotee who doesnot preach but always engages in devotional activities is called abhajananandi, whereas a devotee who not only is expert in devotionalservice but who also preaches the cult of bhakti and defeats all kindsof agnostics is called a gosthya- nandi.
                                   TEXT 150                     sarvajna nityananda aila tara ghare
                       asiya vasila durga-mandapa-upare
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda, who is omniscient because He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, came to the house of Ramacandra Khan and satdown on the altar of the Durga-mandapa.
                                   PURPORT     Well-to-do Hindu gentlemen constructed their houses with a place
called the Durga-mandapa for the worship of the goddess Durga. Therethey generally held worship of the goddess every year in the month ofAsvina (October). Ramacandra Khan possessed such a Durga-mandapa at hisresidence.                                   TEXT 151
                     aneka loka-jana sange angana bharila
                   bhitara haite ramacandra sevaka pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Durga-mandapa and courtyard were filled with crowds of
men, Ramacandra Khan, who was inside the house, sent his servant to LordNityananda.
                                   PURPORT     In those days, and also even now, the palatial buildings of
respectable people, expecially in the villages of Bengal, were dividedinto two parts. The inside part was especially rneant for the family,and the ladies would live there unexposed to men. That part was calledthe bhitara-badi, or inside house. In the outside house, or bahir-badi,the respectable gentleman received visitors and kept his businessoffice. The Durga-mandapa would be part of the outside house. Thus whenLord Nityananda entered the outside house, Ramacandra Khan was in theinside house with the members of his family. When Nityananda Prabhuarrived, Ramacandra Khan did not receive Him personally but sent hisservant to inform Him indirectly to go away.
                                   TEXT 152                  sevaka bale--"gosani, more pathaila khanna
                   grhasthera ghare tomaya diba vasa-sthana
                                 TRANSLATION     The servant informed Lord Nityananda, "My dear sir, Ramacandra Khan
has sent me to accommodate You in some common man's house.
                                   TEXT 153
                     goyalara gosala haya atyanta vistara
                 ihan sankirna-sthala, tomara manusya--apara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "You might go to the house of a milkman, for the cow shed is
spacious, whereas the space here in the Durga-mandapa is insufficientbecause You have many followers with You."
                                   TEXT 154
                    bhitare achila, suni' krodhe bahirila
                     atta atta hasi' gosani kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Nityananda Prabhu heard this order from the servant of
Ramacandra Khan, He became very angry and came out. Laughing veryloudly, He spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 155
                    "satya kahe,--ei ghara mora yogya naya
                   mleccha go-vadha kare, tara yogya haya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Ramacandra Khan has spoken rightly. This place is unfit for Me. It
is fit for cow-killing meateaters."
                                   TEXT 156
                    eta bali' krodhe gosani uthiya calila
                      tare danda dite se grame na rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Having said this, Lord Nityananda stood up and left in an angry
mood. To chastise Ramacandra Khan, He did not even stay in that village.
                                   TEXT 157
                    ihan ramacandra khana sevake ajna dila
                   gosani yahan vasila, tara mati khodaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramacandra Khan ordered the servant to dig up the dirt in the place
where Nityananda Prabhu had sat.
                                   TEXT 158
                   gomaya-jale lepila saba mandira-prangana
                  tabu ramacandrera mana na haila parasanna
                                 TRANSLATION     To purify the Durga-mandapa temple and the courtyard, Ramacandra
Khan sprinkled and smeared it with water mixed with cow dung, but stillhis mind was unsatisfied.
                                   TEXT 159
               dasyu-vrtti kare ramacandra rajare na deya kara                  kruddha hana mleccha ujira aila tara ghara
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramacandra Khan's business was questionable, for he tried to avoid
paying income tax to the government. Therefore the government's ministerof finance was angry and came to his residence.
                                   TEXT 160
                      asi' sei durga-mandape vasa kaila
                 avadhya vadha kari' mamsa se-ghare randhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Mohammedan minister made his residence in the Durga-mandapa of
Ramacandra Khan. He killed a cow and cooked the meat at that very place.
                                   TEXT 161
                   stri-putra-sahita ramacandrere bandhiya
                    tara ghara-grama lute tina-dina rahiya
                                 TRANSLATION     He arrested Ramacandra Khan, along with his wife and sons, and then
he continuously plundered the house and village for three days.
                                   TEXT 162
                  sei ghare tina dina kare amedhya randhana
                       ara dina saba lana karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     In that very room he cooked the flesh of a cow for three
consecutive days. Then the next day he left, accompanied by hisfollowers.
                                   TEXT 163
                    jati-dhana-jana khanera sakala la-ila
                    bahu-dina paryanta grama ujada rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Mohammedan minister took away Ramacandra Khan's position,
wealth and followers. For many days the village remained deserted.                                   TEXT 164
                     mahantera apamana ye desa-grame haya
                      eka janara dose saba desa ujadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Wherever an advanced devotee is insulted, for one man's fault the
entire town or place is afflicted.
                                   TEXT 165
                    haridasa-thakura cali' aila candapure
                     asiya rahila balarama-acaryera ghare
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura walked until he came to the village known as
Candapura. There he stayed at the house of Balarama Acarya.
                                   PURPORT     The village of Candapura is situated near the confluence of the
rivers Ganges and Yamuna at Saptagrama in the district of Hugli.Candapura is just east of the house of the two brothers Hiranya andGovardhana, the father and uncle of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. InCandapura lived Balarama Acarya and Yadunandana Acarya, the priests ofthese two personalities, and when Haridasa Thakura went there he livedwith them. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that the name ofthis village was later changed to Krsnapura.
                                   TEXT 166                 hiranya, govardhana--dui mulukera majumadara
                     tara purohita--`balarama' nama tanra
                                 TRANSLATION     Hiranya and Govardhana were the two governmental treasurers in that
division of the country. Their priest was named Balarama Acarya.
                                   PURPORT     The word majumadara refers to a treasurer who keeps accounts of
revenue.
                                   TEXT 167                   haridasera krpa-patra, tate bhakti-mane
                   yatna kari' thakurere rakhila sei grame
                                 TRANSLATION     Balarama Acarya, being favored by Haridasa Thakura, was very
attached to him. Therefore he kept Haridasa Thakura in the village withgreat care and attention.
                                   TEXT 168
                     nirjana parna-salaya karena kirtana
                    balarama-acarya-grhe bhiksa-nirvahana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the village, Haridasa Thakura was given a solitary thatched
cottage, where he performed the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantraHe accepted prasada at the house of Balarama Acarya.
                                   TEXT 169
                   raghunatha-dasa balaka karena adh yayana
                    haridasa-thakurere yai' karena darsana
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa, who was the son of Hiranya Majumadara and was
later to become Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, was at that time a boy engagedin study. He came to see Haridasa Thakura daily.
                                   TEXT 170
                       haridasa krpa kare tanhara upare
                   sei krpa `karana' haila caitanya paibare
                                 TRANSLATION     Naturally Haridasa Thakura was merciful toward him, and because of
the merciful benediction of this Valsnava, he later attained the shelterof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 171
                 tahan yaiche haila haridasera mahima kathana
                 vyakhyana,--adbhuta katha suna, bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     At the residence of Hiranya and Govardhana, discourses took place
by which Haridasa Thakura was glorified. O devotees, please listen tothat wonderful story.
                                   TEXT 172                       eka-dina balarama minati kariya
                    majumadarera sabhaya aila thakure lana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Balarama Acarya requested Haridasa Thakura with great
humility to come to the assembly of the Majumadaras, Hiranya andGovardhana. Thus Balarama Acarya went there with Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 173
                  thakura dekhi' dui bhai kaila abhyutthana
                     paya padi' asana dila kariya sammana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing Haridasa Thakura, the two brothers immediately stood up and
fell at his lotus feet. Then with great respect they offered him a placeto sit.
                                   TEXT 174
                   aneka pandita sabhaya, brahmana, sajjana
                  dui bhai maha-pandita--hiranya, govardhana
                                 TRANSLATION     In that assembly were many learned scholars, brahmanas and
respectable gentlemen. The two brothers Hiranya and Govardhana were alsogreatiy learned.
                                   TEXT 175
                    haridasera guna sabe kahe panca-mukhe
                     suniya ta' dui bhai paila bada sukhe
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone there began to speak of Haridasa Thakura's great qualities
as if they had five mouths. Hearing this, both brothers were extremelyhappy.
                                   TEXT 176
                    tina-laksa nama thakura karena kirtana
                      namera mahima uthaila pandita-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     It was mentioned in the assembly that Haridasa Thakura chanted the
holy names of Krsna 300,000 times a day. Thus all the learned scholarsbegan to discuss the glories of the holy name.
                                   TEXT 177
                   keha bale,--`nama haite haya papa-ksaya'
                  keha bale,--`nama haite jivera moksa haya'
                                 TRANSLATION     Some of them said, "By chanting the holy name of the Lord, one is
freed from the reactions of all sinful life." Others sald, "Simply bychanting the holy name of the Lord, a living being is liberated frommaterial bondage."
                                   TEXT 178
                 haridasa kahena,--"namera ei dui phala naya
                    namera phale krsna-pade prema upajaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura protested, "These two benedictions are not the
true result of chanting the holy name. By actually chanting the holyname without offenses, one awakens his ecstatic love for the lotus feetof Krsna.
                                   TEXT 179
                      evam-vratah sva-priya-nama-kirtya
                        jatanurago druta-citta uccaih                       hasaty atho roditi rauti gayaty                        unmadavan nrtyati loka-bahyah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `When a person is actually advanced and takes pleasure in
chanting the holy name of the Lord, who is very dear to him, he isagitated and loudly chants the holy name. He also laughs, cries, becomesagitated and chants just like a madman, not caring for outsiders.'
                                   PURPORT     For an explanation of this verse (SB. 11.2.40) one may consult
Chapter Seven, text 94, of the Adi-lila.
                                   TEXT 180                anusangika phala namera--`mukti;, `papa-nasa'
                    tahara drstanta yaiche suryera prakasa                                 TRANSLATION
     "Liberation and extinction of the reactions of sinful life are two
concomitant by-products of chanting the holy name of the Lord. Anexample is found in the gleams of morning sunlight.
                                   TEXT 181
                         amhah samharad akhilam sakrd
                          udayad eva sakala-lokas ya                         taranir iva timira-jaladhim                       jayati jagan-mangalam harer nama
                                 TRANSLATION     " `As the rising sun immediately dissipates all the world's
darkness, which is deep like an ocean, so the holy name of the Lord, ifchanted once without offenses, can dissipate all the reactions of aliving being's sinful life. All glories to that holy name of the Lord,which is auspicious for the entire world."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is found in the Padyavali (16).                                   TEXT 182                    ei slokera artha kara panditera gana"
                    sabe kahe,--`tumi kaha artha-vivarana,
                                 TRANSLATION     After reciting this verse, Haridasa Thakura said, "O learned
scholars, please explain the meaning of this verse." But the audiencerequested Haridasa Thakura,"It is better for you to explain the meaningof this important verse."
                                   TEXT 183
                   haridasa kahena,--"yaiche suryera udaya
                   udaya na haite arambhe tamera haya ksaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura said, "As the sun begins to rise, even before
visible it dissipates the darkness of night.
                                   TEXT 184
                   caura-preta-raksasadira bhaya haya nasa                    udaya haile dharma-karma-adi parakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "With the first glimpse of sunlight, fear of thieves, ghosts ad
demons immediately disappears, and when the sun is actually visible,everything is manifest, and everyone begins performing his religiousactivities and regulative duties.
                                   TEXT 185
                    aiche namodayarambhe papa-adira ksaya
                    udaya kaile krsna-pade haya premodaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Similarly, the first hint that offenseless chanting of the Lord's
holy name has awakened dissipates the reactions of sinful lifeimmediately. And when
one chats the holy name offenselessly, one awakens to service in
ecstatic love at the lotus feet of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 186
                  `mukti' tuccha-phala haya namabhasa haite                                 TRANSLATION     "Liberation is the insignificant result derived from a glimpse of
awakening of offenseless chanting of the holy name.
                                   TEXT 187
                             mriyamano harer nama
                             grnan putropacaritam                            ajamilo'py agad dhama                           kim uta sraddhaya grnan
                                 TRANSLATION     " `While dying, Ajamila chanted the holy name of the Lord,
intending to call his son Narayana. Nevertheless, he attained thespiritual world. What then to speak of those who chant the holy namewith faith and reverence?,
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (6.2.49).                                   TEXT 188                 ye mukti bhakta na laya, se krsna cahe dite"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Liberation, which is unacceptable for a pure devotee, is always
offered by Krsna without difficulty.
                                   TEXT 189
                          salok ya-sarsti-sarup ya-
                            samipyaikatvam apy uta                            diyamanam na grhnanti                            vina mat-sevanam janah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My devotees do not accept salokya, sarsti, sarupya, samipya, or
oneness with Me--even if I offer these liberations--in preference toserving Me."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is spoken by Lord Kapila, an avatara of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, in Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.29.13).
                                   TEXT 190                      `gopala cakravarti' nama eka-jana
                    majumadarera ghare sei arinda pradhana
                                 TRANSLATION     At the house of Hiraya and Govardhana Majumadara, a person named
Gopala Cakravarti was officially the chief tax collector.
                                   TEXT 191
                   gaude rahi' patsaha-age arinda-giri kare
                   bara-laksa mudra sei patsara thani bhare
                                 TRANSLATION     This Gopala Cakravarti lived in Bengal. His duty as chief tax
collector was to collect 1,200,000 coins to deposit in the treasury ofthe emperor.
                                   TEXT 192
                   parama-sundara, pandita, nutana-yau vana
                   namabhase `mukti' suni' na ha-ila sahana                                 TRANSLATION
     He had handsome bodily features, and he was learned ad youthful,
but he could not tolerate the statement that simply by glimpsing theawakening of the Lord's holy name one can attain liberation.
                                   PURPORT     Vaisnavas strictly follow the directions of the sastras regarding
how one can be liberated simply by a slight awakening of pure chantingof the holy name. Mayavadis cannot tolerate the statements of thesastras about how easily liberation can be achieved, for as stated inBhagavad-gita (12.5), kleso'dhikaratas tesam avyaktasakta-cetasam:impersonalists must work hard for many, many births, and only then willthey perhaps be liberated. Vaisnavas know that simply by chanting theholy name of the Lord offenselessly, one achieves liberation as a by-product. Thus there is no need to endeavor separately for liberation.Srila Bilvamangala Thakura has said, muktih svayam mukulitanjalisevate'sman: liberation stands at one's door, ready to render any kindof service, if one is a pure devotee with unflinching faith andreverence. This the Mayavadis cannot tolerate. Therefore the arindapradhana, chief tax collector, although very learned, handsome andyouthful, could not tolerate the statements of Haridasa Thakura
                                   TEXT 193                     kruddha hana bale sei sarosa vacana
                  "bhavukera siddhanta suna, panditera gana
                                 TRANSLATION     This young man, Gopala Cakravarti, became very angry upon hearing
the statements of Haridasa Thakura. He immediately criticized him. "Oassembly of learned scholars," he sald, "just hear the conclusion of theemotional devotee.
                                   TEXT 194
                   koti-janme brahma-jnane yei `mukti' naya
                    ei kahe,--namabhase sei `mukti' haya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "After many millions upon millions of births, when one is complete
in absolute knowledge, one still may not attain liberation, yet this masays that one may attain it simply by the awakening of a glimpse of theholy name."
                                   TEXT 195
                    haridasa kahena,--kene karaha samsaya?                  sastre kahe,--namabhasa-matre`mukti' haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura said, "Why are you doubtful? The revealed
scriptures say that one can attain liberation simply by a glimpse ofoffenseless chanting of the holy name.
                                   TEXT 196
                   bhakti-sukha-age `mukti' ati-tuccha haya
                     ataeva bhakta-gana `mukti' nahi laya
                                 TRANSLATION     "For a devotee who enjoys the trascendental bliss of devotional
service, liberation is most insignificant. Therefore pure devotees neverdesire to achieve liberation.
                                   TEXT 197
                           tvat-saksatkaranahlada -
                          visuddhabdhi-sthitasya me                             sukhani gospadayante                           brahmany api jagad-guro
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear Lord, O master of the universe, since I have directly
seen You, my transcendental bliss has taken the shape of a great ocean.Being situated in that ocean, I now realize all other so-calledhappiness, including even brahmananda, to be like the water contained inthe hoofprint of a calf."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is quoted from the Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya (14.36).                                   TEXT 198                  vipra kahe,--"namabhase yadi `mukti' naya
                    tabe tomara naka kati' karaha niscaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     Gopala Cakravarti said, "if one is not liberated by namabhasa, then
you may be certain that I shall cut off your nose."
                                   TEXT 199
                haridasa kahena,--"yadi namabhase `mukti' naya                    tabe amara naka katimu,--ei suniscaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Haridasa Thakura accepted the challenge offered by Gopala
Cakravarti. "If by namabhasa liberation is not available," he said,"certainly I shall cut off my nose."
                                   TEXT 200
                     suni' sabha-sad uthe kari' hahakara
                     majumadara sei vipre karila dhikkara
                                 TRANSLATION     All the members of the assembly who had heard the challenge were
greatly agitated, and they got up, making a tumultuous sound. Hiranyaand Govardhana Majumadara both immediately chastised the brahmana taxcollector.
                                   TEXT 201
                     balai-purohita tare karila bhartsana
                 "ghata-patiya murkha tuni bhakti kanha jana?
                                 TRANSLATION     The priest named Balarama Acarya chastised Gopala Cakravarti. "You
are a foolish logician," he said, "What do you know about the devotionalservice of the Lord?
                                   PURPORT     The philosophy enunciated by the Mayavadis is called ghata-patiya
philosophy. According to this philosophy, everything is one, everythingis earth, and therefore anything made of earth, such as different pots,is also the same earth. Such philosophers see no distinction between apot made of earth and the earth itself. Since Gopala Cakravarti was aghata-patiya logician, a gross materialist, what could he understandabout the transcendental devotional service of the Lord?
                                   TEXT 202                     haridasa-thakure tuni kaili apamana!
                    sarva-nasa habe tora, na habe kalyana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have insulted Haridasa Thakura. Thus there will be a dangerous
position for you. You should not expect anything auspicious."                                   TEXT 203
                      suni' haridasa tabe uthiya calila
                      majumadara sei vipre tyaga karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Haridasa Thakura got up to leave, and the Majumadaras, the
masters of Gopala Cakravarti, immediately dismissed Gopala Cakravartifrom their service.
                                   TEXT 204
                    sabha-sahite haridasera padila carane
                      haridasa hasi' kahe madhura-vacane
                                 TRANSLATION     With all the members of the assembly, the two Majumadaras fell at
the lotus feet of Haridasa Thakura. Haridasa Thakura was smiling,however, and he spoke in a sweet voice.
                                   TEXT 205
                   "toma-sabara dosa nahi, ei ajna brahmana
                    tara dosa nahi, tara tarka-nistha mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "None of you are at fault," he sald. "Indeed, even this ignorat so-
called brahmana is not at fault, for he is accustomed to dry speculationand logic.
                                   TEXT 206
                     tarkera gocara nahe namera mahattva
                    kotha haite janibe se ei saba tattva?
                                 TRANSLATION     "One cannot understand the glories of the holy name simply by logic
ad argument. Therefore this man cannot possibly understand the gloriesof the holy name.
                                   TEXT 207
                    yaha ghara, krsna karuna kusala sabara
                   amara sambandhe duhkha na ha-uka kahara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "All of you may now go to your homes. May Lord Krsna bestow his
blessings upon you all. Do not be sorry because of my being insulted."
                                   PURPORT     From this statement by Haridasa Thakura, it is understood that a
pure Vaisnava never takes anyone's insults seriously. This is theteaching of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu:     trnad api sunicena     taror api sahisnuna     amanina manadena     kirtaniyah sada harih"One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street. One should be moretolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and ready tooffer all respects to others. In such a state of mind one can chant theholy name of the Lord constantly." A Vaisnava is always tolerant andsubmissive like trees and grass. He tolerates insults offered by others,for he is simply interested in chanting the holy name of the Lordwithout being disturbed.
                                   TEXT 208                     tabe se hiranya-dasa nija ghare aila
                      sei brahmane nija dvara-mana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Hiranya dasa Majumadara returned to his home and ordered that
Gopala Cakravarti not be admitted therein.
                                   TEXT 209
                 tina dina bhitare sei viprera `kustha' haila
                       ati ucca nasa tara galiya padila
                                 TRANSLATION     Within three days that brahmana was attacked by leprosy, and as a
result his highly raised nose melted away and fell off.
                                   TEXT 210
                      campaka-kali-sama hasta-padanguli
                    konkada ha-ila saba, kusthe gela gali'
                                 TRANSLATION     The brahmana's toes ad fingers were beautiful like golden-colored
campaka buds, but because of leprosy they all withered and graduallymelted away.                                   TEXT 211
                     dekhiya sakala loka haila camatkara
                   haridase prasamsi' tanre kare namaskara
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the condition of Gopala Cakravarti, everyone was astonished.
Everyone praised the influence of Haridasa Thakura and offered himobeisaces.
                                   TEXT 212
                   yadyapi haridasa viprera dosa na la-ila
                     tathapi isvara tare phala bhunjaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Haridasa Thakura, as a Vaisnava, did not take seriously
the brahmana's offense, the Supreme Personality of Godhead could nottolerate it, and thus he made the brahmana suffer the consequences.
                                   TEXT 213
                    bhakta-svabhava,--ajna-dosa ksama kare
                 krsna-svabhava,--bhakta-ninda sahite na pare
                                 TRANSLATION     A characteristic of a pure devotee is that he excuses any offense
by an ignorant rascal. The characteristic of Krsna, however, is that Hecannot tolerate blasphemy of His devotees.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught:
     trnad api sunicena     taror api sahisnuna     amanina manadena     kirtaniyah sada harihA Vaisnava strictly follows this principle of being humbler than thegrass and more tolerant than a tree, expecting no honor from others butoffering honor to everyone. In this way, a Vaisnava is simply interestedin chanting about the Supreme personality of Godhead and glorifying Him.Haridasa Thakura epitomized this foremost order of Vaisnavism. Krsnacannot tolerate any insults or blasphemy against a Vaisnava. Forexample, Prahlada Maharaja was chastised by his father, Hiranyakasipu,in so many ways, but although Prahlada tolerated this, Krsna did not.The Lord therefore came in the form of Nrsimhadeva to killHiranyakasipu. Similarly, although Srila Haridasa Thakura tolerated theinsult by Gopala Cakravarti, Krsna could not. The Lord immediately
punished Gopala Cakravarti by making him suffer from leprosy. Whileinstructing Srila Rupa Gosvami about the many restrictive rules andregulations for Vaisnavas, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has very vividlydescribed the effects of offenses at the lotus feet of a Vaisnava. Yadivaisnava- aparadha uthe hati mata (Madhya 19.156). Offending orblaspheming a Vaisnava has been described as the greatest offense, andit has been compared to a mad elephant. When a mad elephant enters agarden, it ruins all the creepers, flowers and trees. Similarly, if adevotee properly executing his devotional service becomes an offender atthe lotus feet of his spiritual master or a Vaisnava, his devotionalservice is spoiled.
                                   TEXT 214               viprera kustha suni' haridasa mane duhkhi haila
                     balai-purohite kahi' santipura aila
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura was unhappy when he heard that the brahmana Gopala
Cakravarti had been attacked by leprosy. Thus after informing BalaramaAcarya, the priest of Hiranya Majumadara, he went to Santipura, the homeof Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 215
                     acarye miliya kaila dandavat pranama
                    advaita alingana kari' karila sammana
                                 TRANSLATION     Upon meeting Advaita Acarya, Haridasa Thakura offered Him respect
and obeisances. Advaita Acarya embraced him and showed respect to him inreturn.
                                   TEXT 216
                  ganga-tire gonpha kari' nirjane tanre dila
                    bhagavata-gitara bhakti-artha sunaila
                                 TRANSLATION     On the bank of the Ganges, in a solitary place, Advaita Acarya made
a cavelike home for Haridasa Thakura and spoke to him about the realmeaing of Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita in terms of devotionalservice.
                                   TEXT 217
                    acaryera ghare nitya bhiksa-nirvahana                     dui jana mili' krsna-katha-asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura accepted food daily at the house of Advaita
Acarya. Meeting together, the two of them would taste the nectar ofdiscourses on the subject matter of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 218
                    haridasa kahe,--"gosani, kari nivedane
                   more pratyaha anna deha' kon prayojane?
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura said, "My dear Advaita Acarya, let me submit
something before Your Honor. Every day You give me alms of food to eat.What is the necessity of this?
                                   TEXT 219
                      maha-maha-vipra etha kulina-samaja
                   nice adara kara, na vasaha bhaya laja!!
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sir, You are living within a society of great, great brahmanas and
aristocrats, but without fear or shame You adore a lower-class ma likeme.
                                   TEXT 220
                    alaukika acara tomara kahite pai bhaya
                   sei krpa kariba,--yate mora raksa haya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, Your behavior is uncommon. Indeed, sometimes I am
afraid to speak to You. But please favor me by protecting me from thebehavior of society."
                                   PURPORT     While Haridasa Thakura was staying under the care of Advaita
Acarya, he was afraid of the behavior of society in Santipura,Navadvipa, which was full of exceedingly aristocratic brahmanas,ksatriyas and vaisyas. Haridasa Thakura was born in a Mohammedan familyand was later recognized as a great Vaisnava, but nevertheless thebrahmanas were very critical of him. Thus Haridasa Thakura was afraidthat Advaita Acarya would be put into some difficulty because of Hisfamiliarity with Haridasa Thakura. Sri Advaita Acarya treated HaridasaThakura as a most elevated Vaisnava, but others, like Ramacandra Khan,
were envious of Haridasa Thakura. Of course, we have to follow in thefootsteps of Advaita Acarya, not caring for people like Ramacandra Khan.At present, many Vaisnavas are coming to our Krsna consciousnessmovement from among the Europeans and Americans, and although a man likeRamacandra Khan is always envious of such Vaisnavas, one should followin the footsteps of Sri Advaita Acarya by treating all of them asVaisnavas. Although they are not as exalted as Haridasa Thakura, suchAmericans and Europeans, having accepted the principles of Vaisnavaphilosophy and behavior, should never be excluded from Vaisnava society.
                                   TEXT 221                    acarya kahena,--"tumi na kariha bhaya
                      sei acariba, yei sastra-mata haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya replied, "My dear Haridasa, do not be afraid. I
shall behave strictly according to the principles of the revealedscriptures.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Advaita Acarya was not afraid of the strict brahminical
culture and customs of society. As stated in the sastric injunctions,which are the true medium of evidence or proof, anyone can go back toGodhead, even if born of a low family. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita:     mam hi partha vyapasritya     ye'pi syuh papa-yonayah     striyo vaisyas tatha sudras     te'pi yanti param gatim"O son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lowerbirth--women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as sudras [workers]--canapproach the supreme destination." (Bg. 9.32) Though having taken a lowbirth in human society, one who accepts Krsna as the Supreme Personalityof Godhead is quite competent to go back home, back to Godhead; and onewho is a bona fide candidate for going back to Godhead should not beconsidered lowborn, or candala. That is also a sastric injunction. Asstated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.4.18):     kira ta-hunandhra-pulinda-pulkasa     abhira-sumbha yavanah khasadayah     ye'nye ca papa yad-apasrayasrayah     sudhyanti tasmai prabhavisnave namahNot only the yavanas and khasadayah but even those born in still lowerfamilies can be purified (sudhyanti) by the grace of a devotee of LordKrsna, for Krsna empowers such devotees to perform this purification.Advaita Acarya had confidence in the sastric evidence and did not careabout social customs. The Krsna consciousness movement, therefore, is acultural movement that does not care about local social conventions.Following in the footsteps of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and AdvaitaAcarya, we can accept a devotee from any part of the world and recognizehim as a brahmana as soon as he is qualified due to following theprinciples of Vaisnava behavior.                                   TEXT 222
                   tumi khaile haya koti-brahmana-bhojana"
                   eta bali, sraddha-patra karaila bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Feeding you is equal to feeding ten million brahmanas," Advaita
Acarya said. "Therefore, accept this sraddha-patra." Thus Advaita Acaryamade him eat.
                                   PURPORT     Sraddha is prasada offered to the forefathers at a certain date of
the year or month. The sraddha-patra, or plate offered to theforefathers, is then offered to the best of the brahmanas in society.instead of offering the sraddha-patra to any other brahmana, AdvaitaAcarya offered it to Haridasa Thakura, considering him greater than anyof the foremost brahmanas. This act by Sri Advaita Acarya proves thatHaridasa Thakura was always situated in a transcendental position andwas therefore always greater than even the most exalted brahmana, for hewas situated above the mode of goodness of the material world. Referringto the Bhakti- sandarbha, verse 177, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThaku ra quotes the following statements from the Garuda Purana in thisconnection:     brahmananam sahasrebhyah     satra- yaji visis yate     satra- yaji-sahasrebh ya h     sarva- vedanta-paragah     sarva- veda nta-vit-kotya     visnu-bhakto visisyate     vaisnavanam sahasrebhya     ekanty eko visisyate"A brahmana qualified to offer sacrifices is better than an ordinarybrahmana and better than such a brahmana is one who has studied all theVedic scriptures. Among many such brahmanas, one who is a devotee ofLord Visnu is the best; and among many such Vaisnavas, one who fullyengages in the service of the Lord is the best."     bhaktir asta-vidha hy esa     yasmin mlecche'pi vartate     sa viprendro muni-sresthah     sa jnani sa ca panditah     tasmai deyam tato grah yam-     sa ca pujyo yatha harih "There are many different kinds ofdevotees, but even a Vaisnava coming from a family of mlecchas oryavanas is understood to be a learned scholar, complete in knowledge, ifhe knows the Vaisnava philosophy. He should therefore be given charity,for such a Vaisnava is as worshipable as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead."     na me'bhaktas catur-vedi     mad-bhaktah sva-pacah priyah     tasmai deyam tato grahyam     sa ca pujyo yatha hy ahamLord Krsna says, "Even if a nondevotee comes from a brahmana family and
is expert in studying the Vedas, he is not very dear to Me, whereas evenif a sincere devotee comes from a low family of meat-eaters, he is verydear to Me. Such a sincere pure devotee should be given charity, for heis as worshipable as i."
                                   TEXT 223                      jagat-nistara lagi' karena cintana
                    avaisnava-jagat kemane ha-ibe mocana?
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya was always absorbed in thoughts of how to deliver
the fallen souls of the entire world. "The entire world is full ofnondevotees," He thought. "How will they be delivered?"
                                   PURPORT     Srila Advaita Acarya sets the standard for acaryas in the Vaisnava
sampradaya. An acarya must always be eager to deliver the fallen souls.A person who establishes a temple or matha to take advantage of people'ssentiments by using for his livelihood what people contribute for theworship of the Deity cannot be called a gosvami or acarya. One who knowsthe conclusion of the sastras, follows in the footsteps of hispredecessors and endeavors to preach the bhakti cult all over the worldis to be considered an acarya. The role of an acarya is not to earn hislivelihood through the income of the temple. Srila BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Thakura used to say that if one earns his livelihood bydisplaying the Deity in the temple, he is not an acarya or gosvami. itwould be better for him to accept service even as a sweeper in thestreet, for that is a more honorable means of earning one's living.
                                   TEXT 224                   krsne avatarite advaita pratijna karila
                     jala-tulasi diya puja karite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Determined to deliver all the fallen souls, Advaita Acarya decided
to cause Krsna to descend. With this vow, he began to offer Ganges waterand tulasi leaves to worship the Lord.
                                   TEXT 225
                    haridasa kare gonphaya nama-sankirtana
                   krsna avatirna ha-ibena,--ei tanra mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Similarly, Haridasa Thakura chanted in his cave on the bank of the
Ganges with the intention to cause Krsna's descent.                                   TEXT 226
                  dui-janera bhaktye caitanya kaila avatara
                   nama-prema pracari' kaila jagat uddhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of the devotional service of these two persons, Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu descended as an incarnation. Thus He preached theholy name of the Lord and ecstatic love of Krsna to deliver the entireworld.
                                   TEXT 227
                       ara alaukika eka caritra tanhara
                      yahara sravane loke haya camatkara
                                 TRANSLATION     There is another incident concerning Haridasa Thakura's uncommon
behavior. One will be astonished to hear about it.
                                   TEXT 228
                   tarka na kariha, tarkagocara tanra riti
                      visvasa kariya suna kariya pratiti
                                 TRANSLATION     Hear about such incidents without putting forth dry arguments, for
these incidents are beyond our material reasoning. One must believe inthem with falth.
                                   TEXT 229
                      eka-dina haridasa gonphate vasiya
                      nama-sankirtana karena ucca kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Haridasa Thakura was sitting in his cave, reciting very
loudly the holy name of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 230
                    jyotsnavati ratri, dasa dik sunirmala
                   gangara lahari jyotsnaya kare jhala-mala                                 TRANSLATION
     The night was full of moonlight, which made the waves of the Ganges
look dazzling. All directions were clear and bright.
                                   TEXT 231
                       dvare tulasi lepa-pindira upara
                  gonphara sobha dekhi' lokera judaya antara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus everyone who saw the beauty of the cave, with the tulasi plant
on a clean altar, was astonished and satisfied at heart.
                                   TEXT 232
                        hena-kale eka nari angane aila
                  tanra anga-kantye sthana pita-varna ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time, in that beautiful scene, a woman appeared in the
courtyard. The beauty of her body was so bright that it tinged theentire place with a hue of yellow.
                                   TEXT 233
                      tanra anga-gandhe dasa dik amodita
                     bhusana-dhvanite karna haya camakita
                                 TRANSLATION     The scent of her body perfumed all directions, and the tinkling of
her ornaments startled the ear.
                                   TEXT 234
                      asiya tulasire sei kaila namaskara
                   tulasi parikrama kari' gela gonpha-dvara
                                 TRANSLATION     After coming there, the woman offered obeisances to the tulasi
plant, and after circumambulating the tulasi plant she came to the doorof the cave where Haridasa Thakura was sitting.
                                   TEXT 235                     yoda-hate haridasera vandila carana
                    dvare vasi' kahe kichu madhura vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     With folded hands she offered obeisances at the lotus feet of
Haridasa Thakura. Sitting at the door, she then spoke in a very sweetvoice.
                                   TEXT 236
                      "jagatera bandhu tumi rupa-gunavan
                     tava sanga lagi' mora ethake prayana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend," she sald, "you are the friend of the entire
world. You are so beautiful and qualified. I have come here only forunion with you.
                                   TEXT 237
                        more angikara kara hana sadaya
                   dine daya kare,--ei sadhu-svabhava haya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, kindly accept me and be merciful toward me, for it is
a characteristic of all saintly persons to be kind toward the poor andfallen."
                                   TEXT 238
                     eta bali' nana-bhava karaye prakasa
                   yahara darsane munira haya dhairya-nasa
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, she began to manifest various postures, which
even the greatest philosopher would lose his patience upon seeing.
                                   TEXT 239
                      nirvikara haridasa gambhira-asaya
                       balite lagila tanre hana sadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura was immovable, for he was deeply determined. He
began to speak to her, being very merciful toward her.                                   TEXT 240
              "sankh ya-nama-sankirtana--ei `maha- yajna' manye
                      tahate diksita ami ha-i prati-dine
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have been initiated into a vow to perform a great sacrifice by
chanting the holy name a certain number of times every day.
                                   TEXT 241
                yavat kirtana samapta nahe, na kari anya kama
                 kirtana samapta haile, haya diksara visrama
                                 TRANSLATION     "As long as the vow to chant is unfulfilled, I do not desire
anything else. When I finish my chanting, then I have an opportunity todo anything.
                                   TEXT 242
                    dvare vasi' suna tumi nama-sankirtana
                 nama samapta haile karimu tava priti-acarana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sit down at the door and hear the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra. As soon as the chanting is finished, I shall satisfy you as youdesire."
                                   TEXT 243
                    eta bali' karena tenho nama-sankirtana
                     sei nari vasi' kare sri-nama-sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Haridasa Thakura continued to chant the holy
name of the Lord. Thus the woma sitting before him began to hear thechating of the holy name.
                                   TEXT 244
                    kirtana karite asi' pratah-kala haila
                    pratah-kala dekhi' nari uthiya calila                                 TRANSLATION
     In this way, as he chanted and chanted, the morning approached, ad
when the woman saw that it was morning, she got up and left.
                                   TEXT 245
                        ei-mata tina-dina kare agamana
                 nana bhava dekhaya, yate brahmara hare mana
                                 TRANSLATION     For three days she approached Haridasa Thakura in this way,
exhibiting various feminine postures that would bewilder the mind ofeven Lord Brahma.
                                   TEXT 246
                      krsne namavista-mana sada haridasa
                    aranye rodita haila stri-bhava-prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura was always absorbed in thoughts of Krsna and the
holy name of Krsna. Therefore the feminine poses the woman exhibitedwere just like crying in the forest.
                                   TEXT 247
                    trtiya divasera ratri-sesa yabe haila
                     thakurera sthane nari kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     At the end of the night of the third day, the woman spoke to
Haridasa Thakura as follows.
                                   TEXT 248
                    "tina dina vancila ama kari' asvasana
                    ratri-dine nahe tomara nama-samapana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, for three days you have cheated me by giving me false
assurances, for I see that throughout the entire day and night yourchanting of the holy name is never finished."
                                   TEXT 249                  haridasa thakura kahena,--"ami ki karimu?
                   niyama kariyachi, taha kemane chadimu?"
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura said, "My dear friend, what ca I do? I have made a
vow. How, then, can I give it up?"
                                   TEXT 250
                    tabe nari kahe ta-nre kari' namaskara
                   `ami--maya' karite ailana pariksa tomara
                                 TRANSLATION     After offering obeisances to Haridasa Thakura, the woma said: "I am
the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I came hereto test you.
                                   PURPORT     In Bhagavad-gita (7.14) Lord Krsna says:
     daivi hy esa gunamayi     mama maya duratyaya     mam eva ye prapadyante     mayam etam taranti te"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of materialnature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Mecan easily cross beyond it." This was actually proved by the behavior ofHaridasa Thakura. Maya enchants the entire world. Indeed, people haveforgotten the ultimate goal of life because of the dazzling attractionsof the material world. But this dazzling attraction, especially theattractive beauty of a woman, is meant for persons who are notsurrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord says, mameva ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te: "One who is surrendered untoMe cannot be conquered by the illusory energy." The illusory energypersonally came to test Haridasa Thakura, but herein she admits herdefeat, for she was unable to captivate him. How is this possible? itwas because Haridasa Thaku ra, fully surrendered to the lotus feet ofKrsna, was always absorbed in thoughts of Krsna by chanting the holynames of the Lord 300,000times daily as a vow.
                                   TEXT 251                      brahmadi jiva, ami sabare mohilun
                       ekela tomare ami mohite narilun
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have previously captivated the mind of even Brahma, not to speak
of others. Your mind alone have I failed to attract.                                   PURPORT
     Beginning from Lord Brahma down to the insignificant ant, everyone,
without exception, is attracted by the illusory energy of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. The demigods, human beings, animals, birds,beasts, trees and plants are all attracted by sexual desire. That is theillusion of maya. Everyone, whether man or woman, thinks that he is theenjoyer of the illusory energy. In this way, everyone is captivated andengaged in material activities. However, because Haridasa Thakura wasalways thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and was alwaysbusy satisfying the senses of the Lord, this process alone saved himfrom the captivation of maya. This is practical proof of the strength ofdevotional service. Because of his full engagement in the service of theLord, he could not be induced to enjoy maya. The verdict of the sastrasis that a pure Vaisnava, or devotee of the Lord, never thinks ofenjoying the material world, which culminates in sex life. He neverthinks himself an enjoyer; instead, he always wants to be enjoyed by theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the conclusion is that theSupreme Personality of Godhead is eternal, transcendental, beyond theperception of sense gratification and beyond the material qualities.Only if a living entity gives up the false conception that the body isthe self and always thinfs himself an eternal servant of Krsna and theVaisnavas can he surpass the influence of maya (mam eva ye pra- padyantemayam etam taranti te). A pure living entity who thus attains the stageof anartha-nivrtti, cessation of everything unwanted, has nothing toenjoy in the material world. One attains this stage only by properlyperforming the functions of devotional service. Srila Rupa Gosvami haswritten:      adau sraddha tatah sadhu-sango'tha bhajana-kriya     tato'nartha-nivrttih syat tato nistha rucis tatah"In the beginning one must have a preliminary desire for self-realization. This will bring one to the stage of trying to associatewith persons who are spiritually elevated. In the next stage, onebecomes initiated by an elevated spiritual master, and under hisinstruction the neophyte devotee begins the process of devotionalservice. By execution of devotional service under the guidance of thespiritual master, one becomes freed from all material attachments,attains steadiness in self-realization and acquires a taste for hearingabout the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna." (B.r.s. 1.4.15)If one is actually executing devotional service, then anarthas, theunwanted things associated with material enjoyment, will automaticallydisappear.
                                 TEXT 252-253                     maha-bhagavata tumi,--tomara darsane
                      tomara krsna-nama-kirtana-sra vane
                  citta suddha haila, cahe krsna-nama laite
                      krsna-nama upadesi' krpa kara mote
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, you are the foremost devotee. Simply seeing you and
hearing you chant the holy name of Krsna has purified my consciousness.Now I want to chant the holy name of the Lord. Please be kind to me by
instructing me about the ecstasy of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
                                   TEXT 254
                    caitan yavatare vahe premamrta- van ya
                 saba jiva preme bhase, prthivi haila dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     "There is now a flood of the eternal nectar of love of Godhead due
to the incarnation of Lord Caltanya, All living entities are floating inthat flood. The entire world is now thankful to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 255
                    e-vanyaya ye na bhase, sei jiva chara
                     koti-kalpe kabhu tara nahika nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Anyone who does not fIoat in this inundation is most condemned.
Such a person cannot be delivered for millions of kalpas.
                                   PURPORT     The kalpa is explained in Bhagavad-gita. Sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmano viduh. One day of Brahma is called a kalpa. A yuga, ormaha-yuga, consists of 4,320,000 years, and one thousand such maha-yugasconstitute one kalpa. The author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta says that ifone does not take advantage of the Krsna consciousness movement of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, he cannot be delivered for millions of such kalpas.
                                   TEXT 256                   purve ami rama-nama panachi `siva' haite
                  tomara sange lobha haila krsna-nama laite
                                 TRANSLATION     "Formerly I received the holy name of Lord Rama from Lord Siva, but
now, due to your association, I am greatly eager to chant the holy nameof Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 257
                     mukti-hetuka taraka haya `rama-nama'
                   `krsna-nama' paraka hana kare prema-dana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The holy name of Lord Rama certainly gives liberation, but the
holy name of Krsna transports one to the other side of the ocean ofnescience and at last gives one ecstatic love of Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     In an indirect way, this verse explains the chanting of the Hare
Krsna maha- mantra. The Hare Krsna maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--includes both the holy name of Lord Krsna and the name of Lord Rama.Lord Rama gives one the opportunity to be liberated, but simply byliberation one does not get actual spiritual benefit. Sometimes if oneis liberated from the material world but has no shelter at the lotusfeet of Krsna, one falls down to the material world again. Liberation islike a state of convalescence, in which one is free from a fever but isstill not healthy. Even in the stage of convalescence, if one is notvery careful, one may have a relapse. Similarly, liberation does notoffer as much security as the shelter of the lotus feet of Krsna. It isstated in the sastra:     ye'nye'ravindaksa vimukta-maninas     tva yy as ta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah     aruhya krcchrena param padam tatah     patanty adho'nadrta-yusmad-anghra yah"O Lord, the intelligence of those who think themselves liberated butwho have no devotion is impure. Even though they rise to the highestpoint of liberation by dint of severe penances and austerities, they aresure to fall down again into material existence, for they do not takeshelter at Your lotus feet." (Srimad- Bhagavatam 10.2.32) Yusmad-anghrayah refers to the lotus feet of Krsna. If one does not takeshelter of Krsna's lotus feet, he falls down (patanty adhah), even fromliberation. The Hare Krsna maha-mantra, however, gives liberation and atthe same time offers shelter at the lotus feet of Krsna. If one takesshelter at the lotus feet of Krsna after liberation, he develops hisdormant ecstatic love for Krsna. That is the highest perfection of life.
                                   TEXT 258                    krsna-nama deha' tumi more kara dhanya
                     amare bhasaya yaiche ei prema-vanya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please give me the holy name of Krsna and thus make me fortunate,
so that I also may float in the flood of love of Godhead inaugurated bySri Caitaya Mahaprabhu."
                                   TEXT 259
                     eta bali' vandila haridasera carana
                   haridasa kahe,--"kara krsna-sankirtana"
                                 TRANSLATION     After speaking in this way, Maya worshiped the lotus feet of
Haridasa Thakura, who initiated her by saying,"Just perform chanting ofthe Hare Krsna maha-mantra."
                                   PURPORT     Now even Maya wanted to be favored by Haridasa Thakura. Therefore
Haridasa Thakura formally initiated her by asking her to chant the HareKrsna maha-mantra.
                                   TEXT 260                     upadesa pana maya calila hana prita
                     e-saba kathate karo na janme pratita
                                 TRANSLATION     After thus being instructed by Haridasa Thakura, Maya left with
great pleasure. Unfortunately, some peopIe have no faith in thesenarrations.
                                   TEXT 261
                       pratita karite kahi karana ihara
                      yahara sravane haya visvasa sabara
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore I shall explain the reasons why peopIe should have faith.
Everyone who hears this will be faithful.
                                   TEXT 262
                    caitanyavatare krsna-preme lubdha hana
                    brahma-siva-sanakadi prthivite janmiya
                                 TRANSLATION     During the incarnation of Lord Caitanya to inaugurate the Krsna
consciousness movement, even such personalities as Lord Brahma, LordSiva and the four Kumaras took birth upon this earth, being allured byecstatic love of Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 263
                  krsna-nama lana nace, prema-vanyaya bhase
                    narada-prahladadi ase manusya-prakase
                                 TRANSLATION     All of them, including the great sage Narada and devotees Iike
Prahlada, came here as if human beings, chating the holy names of LordKrsna together ad dancing and floating in the inundation of love ofGodhead.
                                   TEXT 264
                   laksmi-adi kari' krsna-preme lubdha hana
                     nama-prema asvadila manusye janmiya
                                 TRANSLATION     The goddess of fortune and others, allured by love of Krsna, also
came down in the form of huma beings and tasted the holy name of theLord in love.
                                   TEXT 265
                   anyera ka katha, apane vrajendra-nandana
                     avatari' karena prema-rasa asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     What to speak of others, even Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja,
personally descends to taste the nectar of love of Godhead in the formof the chanting of Hare Krsna.
                                   TEXT 266
                  maya-dasi `prema' mage,--ithe ki vismaya?
                  `sadhu-kroa-`nama' vina `prema' na janmaya
                                 TRANSLATION     What is the wonder if the maidservant of Krsna, His external
energy, begs for love of Godhead? Without the mercy of a devotee adwithout the chanting of the holy name of the Lord, love of Godheadcannot be possibIe.
                                   TEXT 267
                   caitanya-gosanira lilara ei ta' svabhava
                   tribhuvana nace, gaya, pana prema-bhava
                                 TRANSLATION     In the activities of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the three worlds
dance and chant, having come in touch with love of Godhead. This is thecharacteristic of His pastimes.                                   TEXT 268
                     krsna-adi, ara yata sthavara-jangame
                   krsna-preme matta kare krsna-sankirtane
                                 TRANSLATION     The holy name of Krsna is so attractive that anyone who chants it--
including all living entities, moving and nonmoving, and even Lord KrsnaHimself--becomes imbued with love of Krsna. This is the effect ofchanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
                                   TEXT 269
                   svarupa-gosani kadacaya ye-lila likhila
                     raghunatha-dasa-mukhe ye saba sunila
                                 TRANSLATION     I have heard from the mouth of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami all that
Svarupa Damodara Gosvami recorded in his notes about the pastimes of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 270
                      sei saba lila kahi sanksepa kariya
                    caitanya-krpate likhi ksudra-jiva hana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have briefly described those pastimes. Whatever I have written is
by the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, since I am an insignificantliving being.
                                   TEXT 271
                   haridasa thakurera kahilun mahimara kana
                    yahara sravane bhaktera judaya sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have described but a fragment of the glories of Haridasa Thakura,
Hearing this satisfies the aural reception of every devotee.
                                   TEXT 272
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa                                 TRANSLATION
     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Third Chapter, describing the glories of Srila HaridasaThakura.
                                 Chapter Four
             Sanatana Gosvami Visits the Lord at Jagannatha Puri     The Fourth Chapter of Antya-lila is summarized by Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya as follows. Srila Sanatana Gosvamicame alone from Mathura to Jagannatha Puri to see Lord Caitanya. Becauseof bathing in bad water and not getting enough food every day whiletraveling on the path through Jharikhanda Forest, he developed a diseasethat made his body itch. Suffering greatly from this itching, heresolved that in the presence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu he would throwhimself under the wheel of Jagannatha's car and in this way commitsuicide.     When Sanatana Gosvami came to Jagannatha Puri, he stayed under thecare of Haridasa Thakura for some time, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wasvery happy to see him. The Lord informed Sanatana Gosvami about thedeath of his younger brother, Anupama, who had great faith in the lotusfeet of Lord Ramacandra. One day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said toSanatana Gosvami, "Your decision to commit suicide is the result of themode of ignorance. One cannot get love of God simply by committingsuicide. You have already dedicated your life and body to My service;therefore your body does not belong to you, nor do you have any right tocommit suicide. i have to execute many devotional services through yourbody. I want you to preach the cult of devotional service and go toVrndavana to excavate the lost holy places." After having thus spoken,Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu left, and Haridasa Thakura and Sanatana Gosvamihad many talks about this subject.     One day Sanatana Gosvami was summoned by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,who wanted him to come to Yamesvara-tota. Sanatana Gosvami reached theLord through the path along the beach by the sea. When Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu asked Sanatana Gosvami which way he had come, Sanatanareplied, "Many servitors of Lord Jagannatha come and go on the path bythe Simha-dvara gate of the Jagannatha temple. Therefore, I did not goby that path, but instead went by the beach." Sanatana Gosvami did notrealize that there were burning blisters on his feet because of the heatof the sand. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was pleased to hear about SanatanaGosvami's great respect for the temple of Lord Sri Jagannatha.     Because his disease produced wet sores on his body, SanatanaGosvami used to avoid embracing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, butnevertheless the Lord wouldembrace him by force. This made Sanatana Gosvami very unhappy, andtherefore he consulted Jagadananda Pandita about what he should do.Jagadananda advised him to return to Vrndavana after the cart festival
of Jagannatha, but when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard about thisinstruction, He chastised Jagadananda Pandita and reminded him thatSanatana Gosvami was senior to him and also more learned, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu informed Sanatana Gosvami that because Sanatana was a puredevotee, the Lord was never inconvenienced by his bodily condition.Because the Lord was a sannyasi, He did not consider one body betterthan another. The Lord also informed him that He was maintainingSanatana and the other devotees just like a father. Therefore themoisture oozing from Sanatana's itching skin did not affect the Lord atall. After speaking with Sanatana Gosvami in this way, the Lord againembraced him, and after this embrace, Sanatana Gosvami became free fromthe disease. The Lord ordered Sanatana Gosvami to stay with Him for thatyear, and the next year, after seeing the Rathayatra festival, he leftPurusottama-ksetra and returned to Vrndavana.     After meeting Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sri Rupa Gosvami alsoreturned to Bengal, where he remained for one year. Whatever money heowned, he distr buted among his relatives, the brahmanas and thetemples. In this way he completely retired and returned to Vrndavana tomeet Sanatana Gosvami.     After narrating these incidents, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami hasgiven a list of the main books of Sanatana Gosvami, Srila Rupa Gosvamiand Jiva Gosvami.
                                    TEXT 1                           vrndavanat punah praptam
                           sri-gaurah sri-sanatanam                            deha-patad avan snehat                           suddham cakre pariksaya
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sanatana Gosvami returned from Vrndavana, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu affectionately saved him from his determination to commitsuicide. Then, after testing him, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu purified hisbody.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Caitanya! All glories to Lord Nityananda! All
glories to Advaitacandra! And all glories to all the devotees of LordSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu!
                                    TEXT 3
                     nilacala haite rupa gaude yabe gela                     mathura haite sanatana nilacala aila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Srila Rupa Gosvami returned from Jagannatha Purt to Bengal,
Sanatana Gosvami went from Mathura to Jagannatha Puri to see SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 4
                   jharikhanda-vanapathe aila ekela caliya
                     kabhu upavasa, kabhu carvana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami walked alone on the path through Jharikhanda
Forest in central India. Sometimes he fasted, and sometimes he wouldeat.
                                    TEXT 5
                   jharikhandera jalera dose, upavasa haite
                   gatre kandu haila, rasa pade khajuyaite
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of bad water in Jharikhanda and because of fasting,
Sanatana Gosvami contracted a disease that made his body itch. Thus hewas afflicted with itching sores from which fluid oozed.
                                    TEXT 6
                     nirveda ha-ila pathe, karena vicara
                     ,nica-jati, deha mora--atyanta asara
                                 TRANSLATION     In disappointment, Sanatana Gosvami considered, "I am of a low
caste, and my body is useless for devotional service.
                                    TEXT 7
                    jagannathe gele tanra darsana na paimu
                     prabhura darsana sada karite narimu
                                 TRANSLATION     "When I go to Jagannatha Puri, I shall not be able to see Lord
Jagannatha, nor shall I always be able to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.                                    TEXT 8
                    mandira-nikate suni tanra vasa-sthiti
                     mandira-nikate yaite mora nahi sakti
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have heard that the residential quarters of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu are near the temple of Jagannatha. But I shall not have thepower to go near the temple.
                                    TEXT 9
                   jagannathera sevaka phere karya-anurodhe
                    tanra sparsa haile mora habe aparadhe
                                 TRANSLATION     "The servants of Lord Jagannatha generally move about tending to
their duties, but if they touch me I shall be an offender.
                                   TEXT 10
                     tate yadi ei deha bhala-sthane diye
                     duhkha-santi haya ara sad-gati paiye
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore if I sacrifice this body in a good place, my unhappiness
will be mitigated, and I shall attain an exalted destination.
                                   TEXT 11
                   jagannatha ratha-yatraya ha-ibena bahira
                     tanra ratha-cakaya chadimu ei sarira
                                 TRANSLATION     "During the Ratha-yatra festival, when Lord Jagannatha comes out of
the temple, I shall give up this body under the wheel of His cart.
                                   TEXT 12
                   mahaprabhura age, ara dekhi' jagannatha
                  rathe deha chadimu,--ei parama-purusartha'
                                 TRANSLATION     "After seeing Lord Jagannatha, I shall give up my body under the
wheel of the cart in the presence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This willbe the highest benediction of my life."
                                   TEXT 13
                      ei ta' niscaya kari' nilacale aila
                     loke puchi' haridasa-sthane uttarila
                                 TRANSLATION     Having made this resolution, Sanatana Gosvami went to Nilacala,
where he inquired directions from people and approached the residence ofHaridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 14
                    haridasera kaila tenha carana vandana
                     jani' haridasa tanre kaila alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     He offered his respects to the lotus feet of Haridasa Thakura, who
knew him and thus embraced him.
                                   TEXT 15
                   mahaprabhu dekhite tanra utkanthita mana
                   haridasa kahe,--`prabhu asibena ekhana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami was very eager to see the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Therefore Haridasa Thakura said, "The Lord iscoming here very soon."
                                   TEXT 16
                    hena-kale prabhu `upala-bhoga' dekhiya
                    haridase milite aila bhakta-gana lana
                                 TRANSLATION     At that very moment, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, after visiting the
temple of Jagannatha to see the offering of upala-bhoga [morningrefreshments], came with His other devotees to see Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 17                    prabhu dekhi' dunhe pade dandavat hana
                      prabhu alingila haridasere uthana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they both immediately fell flat
like rods to offer obeisances. The Lord then lifted Haridasa andembraced him.
                                   TEXT 18
                  haridasa kahe,--`sanatana kare namaskara'
                    sanatane dekhi' prabhu haila camatkara
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura said to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "Here is Sanatana
Gosvami offering his obeisances." Seeing Sanatana Gosvami, the Lord wasgreatly surprised.
                                   TEXT 19
                      sanatane alingite prabhu agu haila
                      pache bhage sanatana kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came forward to embrace him, Sanatana
backed away and spoke as folIows.
                                   TEXT 20
                 "more na chuniha, prabhu, padon tomara paya
                  eke nica-jati adhama, ara kandu-rasa gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord, please do not touch me. I fall at Your lotus feet. I am
the lowest of men, having been born of a low caste. Besides that, I haveinfections on my body."
                                   TEXT 21
                    balatkare prabhu tanre alingana kaila
                   kandu-kleda mahaprabhura sri-ange lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, embraced Sanatana Gosvami by
force. Thus the moisture oozing from the itching sores touched thetranscendental body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 22
                   saba bhakta-gane prabhu milaila sanatane
                     sanatana kaila sabara carana vandane
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord introduced all the devotees to Sanatana Gosvami, who
offered his respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of them all.
                                   TEXT 23
                 prabhu lana vasila pindara upare bhakta-gana
                    pindara tale vasila haridasa sanatana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord and His devotees sat on a raised plafform, and below that
sat Haridasa Thakura and Sanatana Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 24
                  kusala- varta- mahaprabhu puchena sanatane
                tenha kahena,--`parama mangala dekhinu carane'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired from Sanatana about news of his
wellbeing. Sanatana replied, "Everything is auspicious because I haveseen Your lotus feet."
                                   TEXT 25
                   mathurara vaisnava-sabera kusala puchila
                        sabara kusala sanatana janaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord asked about all the Vaisnavas at Mathura, Sanatana
Gosvami informed Him of their good health and fortune.
                                   TEXT 26
                   prabhu kahe,--"ihan rupa chila dasa-masa
                    ihan haite gaude gela, haila dina dasa                                 TRANSLATION
     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu informed Sanatana Gosvami, "Srila Rupa
Gosvami was here for ten months. He left for Bengal just ten days ago.
                                   TEXT 27
                   tomara bhai anupamera haila ganga-prapti
                  bhala chila, raghunathe drdha tara bhakti"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Your brother Anupama is now dead. He was a very good devotee who
had firm conviction in Raghunatha [Lord Ramacandra]."
                                   TEXT 28
                    sanatana kahe,--"nica-vamse mora janma
                   adharma anyaya yata,--amara kula-dharma
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami said, "I was born in a low family, for my family
commits all kinds of irreligious acts that violate the scripturalinjunctions.
                                   TEXT 29
                    hena vamsa ghrna chadi' kaila angikara
                      tomara krpaya vamse mangala amara
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord, without hatred for my family You have accepted me as Your
servant. Only by Your mercy is there good fortune in my family.
                                   TEXT 30
                       sei anupama-bhai sisu-kala haite
                     raghunatha-upasana kare drdha-citte
                                 TRANSLATION     "From the very beginning of his childhood, my younger brother
Anupama was a great devotee of Raghunatha [Lord Ramacandra], and heworshiped Him with great determination.
                                   TEXT 31                 ratri-dine raghunathera `nama' ara `dhya-na'
                      ramayana niravadhi sune, kare gana
                                 TRANSLATION     "He always chanted the holy name of Raghunatha and meditated upon
Him. He continuously heard about the activities of the Lord from theRamayana and chanted about them.
                                   TEXT 32
                     ami ara rupa--tara jyestha-sahodara
                     ama-donha-sange tenha rahe nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Rupa and I are his elder brothers. He stayed with us continuously.
                                   TEXT 33
                  ama-saba-sange krsna-katha, bhagavata sune
                      tahara pariksa kailun ami-dui-jane
                                 TRANSLATION     "He heard Srimad-Bhagavatam and talks about Lord Krsna with us, and
both of us examined him.
                                   TEXT 34
                    sunaha vallabha, krsna--parama-madhura
                 saundarya, madhurya, prema- vilasa--pracura
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Dear Vallabha,' we said, `please hear from us. Lord Krsna is
supremely attractive. His beauty, sweetness and pastimes of love arewithout limit.
                                   TEXT 35
                  krsna-bhajana kara tumi ama-dunhara sange
                 tina bhai ekatra rahimu krsna-katha-ran-ge"
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Engage yourself in devotional service to Krsna with both of us.
We three brothers shall stay together and enjoy discussing the pastimesof Lord Krsna.'                                   TEXT 36
                       ei-mata bara-bara kahi dui-jana
                  ama-dunhara gaurave kichu phiri' gela mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this way we both spoke to him again and again, and because of
this persuasion and his respect for us, his mind turned somewhat towardour instructions.
                                   TEXT 37
                   "toma-dunhara ajna ami kemane langhimu?
                   diksa-mantra deha' krsna-bhajana karimu"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Vallabha replied, `My dear brothers, how can I disobey your
orders? Initiate me into the Krsna mantra so that I may performdevotional service to Lord Krsna.'
                                   TEXT 38
                     eta kahi' ratri-kale karena cintana
                      kemane chadimu raghunathera carana
                                 TRANSLATION     "After saying this, at night he began to think, `How shall I give
up the lotus feet of Lord Raghunatha?'
                                   TEXT 39
                   saba ratri krandana kari' kaila jagarana
                    pratah-kale ama-dunhaya kaila nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     "He stayed up all night and cried. In the morning, he came to us
and submitted the following plea.
                                   TEXT 40
                  `raghunathera pada-padme veciyachon matha
                   kadite na paron matha, pana bada vyatha
                                 TRANSLATION     " `I have sold my head at the lotus feet of Lord Ramacandra. I
cannot take it away. That would be too painful for me.
                                   TEXT 41
                     krpa kari' more ajna deha' dui-jana
                    janme-janme sevon raghunathera carana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Both of you please be merciful to me and order me in such a way
so that life after life I may serve the lotus feet of Lord Raghunatha.
                                   TEXT 42
                   raghunathera pada-padma chadana na yaya
                   chadibara mana haile prana phati' ya-ya,
                                 TRANSLATION     " `It is impossible for me to give up the lotus feet of Lord
Raghunatha. When I even think of giving them up, my heart breaks.'
                                   TEXT 43
                     tabe ami-dunhe tare alingana kailun-
               `sadhu, drdha-bhakti tomara '--kahi' prasamsilun
                                 TRANSLATION     "Upon hearing this, both of us embraced him and encouraged him by
saying, `You are a great saintly devotee, for your determination indevotional service is fixed.' In this way we both praised him.
                                   TEXT 44
                    ye vamsera upare tomara haya kroa-lesa
                   sakala mangala tahe khande saba kles'a'
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, the family upon which You bestow even a little mercy
is always fortunate, for such mercy makes all miseries disappear."
                                   TEXT 45
                    gosani kahena,--"ei-mata murari-gupta
                      purve ami pariksilun tara ei rita                                 TRANSLATION
     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "There was a similar incident
concerning Murari Gupta. Formerly I examined him, and his determinationwas similar.
                                   TEXT 46
                sei bhakta dhanya, ye na chade prabhura carana
                   sei prabhu dhanya, ye na chade nija-jana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Glorious is that devotee who does not give up the shelter of his
Lord, and glorious is that Lord who does not abandon His servant.
                                   TEXT 47
                    durdaive sevaka yadi yaya anya sthane
                   sei thakura dhanya tare cule dhari' ane
                                 TRANSLATION     "If by chance a servant falls down and goes somewhere else,
glorious is that master who captures him and brings him back by thehair.
                                   TEXT 48
                    bhala haila, tomara ihan haila agamane
                       ei ghare raha ihan haridasa-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is very good that you have arrived here. Now stay in this room
with Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 49
                   krsna-bhakti-rase dunhe parama pradhana
                  krsna-rasa asvadana kara, laha krsna-nama"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Both of you are expert in understanding the mellows of Lord
Krsna's devotional service. Therefore you should both continue relishingthe taste for such activities and chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra."                                   TEXT 50
                      eta bali' mahaprabhu uthiya calila
                    govinda-dvaraya dunhe prasada pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Having said this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu got up and left, and
through Govinda He sent prasada for them to eat.
                                   TEXT 51
                     ei-mata sanatana rahe prabhu-sthane
                   jagannathera cakra dekhi' karena praname
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, Sanatana Gosvami stayed under the care of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. He would see the wheel on the pinnacle of the Jagannathatemple and offer respectful obeisances.
                                   TEXT 52
                    prabhu asi' prati-dina milena dui-jane
                   ista-gosthi, krsna-katha kahe kata-ksane
                                 TRANSLATION     Every day Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would go there to meet these two
stalwart devotees and discuss topics of Krsna with them for some time.
                                   TEXT 53
                 divya prasada paya nitya jagannatha-mandire
                    taha ani' nitya avasya dena donhakare
                                 TRANSLATION     The offerings of prasada in the temple of Lord Jagannatha were of
the highest quality. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would bring this prasadaand deliver it to both devotees.
                                   TEXT 54
                     eka-dina asi' prabhu dunhare milila
                       sanatane acambite kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     One day when the Lord came to meet them, He suddenly began speaking
to Sanatana Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 55
                    "sanatana, deha-tyage krsna yadi paiye
                    koti-deha ksaneke tabe chadite pariye
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Sanatana," He sald, "if I could attain Krsna by committing
suicide, I would certainly give up millions of bodies without a moment'shesitation.
                                   TEXT 56
                    deha-tyage krsna na pai, paiye bhajane
                krsna-praptyera upaya kona nahi `bhakti' vine
                                 TRANSLATION     "You should know that one cannot attain Krsna simply by giving up
the body. Krsna is attainable by devotional service. There is no othermeas to attain Him.
                                   TEXT 57
                     deha-tyagadi yata, saba--tamo-dharma
                   tamo-rajo-dharme krsnera na paiye marma
                                 TRANSLATION     "Acts such as suicide are influenced by the mode of ignorace, and
in ignorance and passion one cannot understand who Krsna is.
                                   TEXT 58
                  `bhakti' vina krsne kabhu nahe `premodaya'
                   prema vina krsna-prapti anya haite naya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Unless one discharges devotional service, one cannot awaken one's
dormant love for Krsna, and there is no means to attain Him other thanawakening that dormant love.
                                   TEXT 59
                            na sadhayati mam yogo                          na sankhyam dharma uddhava
                          na svadhyayas tapas tyago                           yatha bhaktir mamorjita
                                 TRANSLATION     [The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, said:] " `My dear
Uddhava, neither through astanga-yoga [the mystic yoga system to controlthe senses], nor through impersonal monism or an analytical study of theAbsolute Truth,
nor through study of the Vedas, nor through austerities, charity or
acceptance of sannyasa can one satisfy Me as much as by developingunalloyed devotional service unto Me.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.14.20).                                   TEXT 60                   deha-tyagadi tamo-dharma--pataka-karana
                     sadhaka na paya tate krsnera carana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Measures like suicide are causes for sin. A devotee never achieves
shelter at Krsna's lotus feet by such actions.
                                   TEXT 61
                    premi bhakta viyoge cahe deha chadite
                    preme krsna mile, seha na pare marite
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because of feelings of separation from Krsna, an exalted devotee
sometimes wants to give up his life. By such ecstatic love, however, oneattains the audience of Krsna, and at that time he cannot give up hisbody.
                                   TEXT 62
                     gadhanuragera viyoga na yaya sahana
                       tate anuragi vanche apana marana
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who is deeply in love with Krsna cannot tolerate separation
from the Lord. Therefore such a devotee always desires his own death.                                   TEXT 63
                  yas yanghri-pankala-rajah-snapanam mahanto
                   vanchanty uma-patir ivatma-tamo'pahatyai                  yarhy ambujaksa na labheya bhavat-prasadam                 jahyam asun vrata-krsan chata-janmabhih syat
                                 TRANSLATION     " `0 lotus-eyed one, great personalities like Lord Siva desire to
bathe in the dust of Your lotus feet to drive away ignorance. If I donot get the mercy of
Your Lordship, I shall observe vows to reduce the duration of my life,
and thus I shall give up bodies for hundreds of births if it is possibleto get Your mercy in that way.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse was spoken by Rukminidevi in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(10.52.43). Rukminidevi, the daughter of King Bhismaka, had heard aboutKrsna's transcendental attributes, and thus she desired to get Krsna asher husband. Unfortunately, her elder brother Rukmi was envious of Krsnaand therefore wanted her to be offered to Sisupala. When Rukmini becameaware of this, she was greatly aggrieved. Thus she wrote Krsna aconfidential letter, which was presented and read to Him by a brahmanamessenger. This verse appeared in that letter.
                                   TEXT 64                    sincanga nas tvad-adharamrta-purakena
                   hasa valoka- kala-g itaja-hrc-cha yagnim                    no ced vayam virahajagny-upayukta-deha                    dhyanena yama padayoh padavim sakhe te
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O dear Krsna, by Your smiling glances and melodious talk, You
have awakened a fire of lusty desire in our hearts. Now You shouldextinguish that fire with a stream of nectar from Your lips by kissingus. Kindly do this. Other-wise, dear friend, the fire within our hearts will burn our bodies toashes because of separation from You. Thus by meditation we shall claimshelter at Your lotus feet."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse (SB. 10.29.35) was spoken by the gopis when they were
attracted by the vibration of Krsna's flute in the moonlight of autumn.All of them, being maddened, came to Krsna, but to increase theirecstatic love, Krsna gave them moral instructions to return home. Thegopis did not care for these instructions. They wanted to be kissed byKrsna, for they had come there with lusty desires to dance with Him.                                   TEXT 65
                    kubuddhi chadiya kara sravana-kirtana
                       acirat pabe tabe krsnera carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Sanatana Gosvami, "Give up all your
nonsen- sical desires, for they are unfavorable for getting shelter atthe lotus feet of Krsna. Engage yourself in chanting and hearing. Thenyou will soon achieve the shelter of Krsna without a doubt.
                                   TEXT 66
                     nica-jati nahe krsna-bhajane ayogya
                     sat-kula-vipra nahe bhajanera yogya
                                 TRANSLATION     "A person born in a low family is not unfit for discharging
devotional service to Lord Krsna, nor is one fit for devotional servicesimply because he is born in an aristocratic family of brahmanas.
                                   TEXT 67
                   yei bhaje sei bada, abhakta--hina, chara
                    krsna-bhajane nahi jati-kuladi-vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Anyone who takes to devotional service is exalted, whereas a
nondevotee is always condemned and abominable. Therefore in thedischarge of devotional service to the Lord, there is no considerationof the status of one's f amily.
                                   TEXT 68
                       dinere adhika daya kare bhagavan
                    kulina, pandita, dhanira bada abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is always favorable to
the humble and meek, but aristocrats, learned scholars and the weaIthyare always proud of their positions.
                                   TEXT 69
                  viprad dvisad-guna- yutad ara vinda-nabha-
                   padaravinda-vimukhat svapacam varistham                    manye tad-arpita-mano-vacane'hitartha-
                   pranam punati sa kulam na tu bhurimanah
                                 TRANSLATION     "`One may be born in a brahmana family and have alI twelve
brahminical qualities, but if in spite of being thus qualified he is notdevoted to the lotus feet of Lord Krsna, who has a navel shaped like alotus, he is not as good as a candaIa who has dedicated his mind, words,activities, wealth and life to the service of the Lord. Simply to takebirth in a brahmana family or to have brahminical qualities is notsufficient. One must be a pure devotee of the Lord. Thus if a svapaca,or candaIa, is a devotee, he delivers not only himself but his entirefamily as well, whereas a brahmana who is not a devotee but simply hasbrahminical qualifications cannot even purify himseIf, what to speak ofhis family.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.9.9).                                   TEXT 70                  bhajanera madhye srestha nava-vidha bhakti
                 `krsna-prema;, `krsna' dite dhare maha-sakti
                                 TRANSLATION     "Among the ways of executing devotional service, the nine
prescribed methods are the best, for these processes have great potencyto deliver Krsna and ecstatic love for Him.
                                   PURPORT     The nine kinds of devotional service are mentioned in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (7.5.23):     sravanam kirtanam visnoh     smaranam pada-sevanam     arcanam vandanam dasyam     sakhyam atma-nivedanamThese nine are hearing, chanting, remembering Krsna, offering service toKrsna's lotus feet, offering worship in the temple, offering prayers,working as a servant, making friendship with Krsna and unreservedlysurrendering to Krsna. These nine processes of devotional service cangrant one Krsna and ecstatic love for Him. In the beginning one has todischarge devotional service according to regulative principles, butgradually, as devotional service becomes one's life and soul, oneachieves the most exalted position of ecstatic love for Krsna.Ultimately, Krsna is the goal of life. One need not have taken birth inan aristocratic brahmana family to attain the lotus feet of Krsna, noris a person born in a low family unfit to achieve Krsna's lotus feet. InSrimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7) Devahuti says to Kapiladeva:     aho bata sva-paco'to gariyan     yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyam      tepus tapas te juhuvuh
sasnur arya     brahmanucur nama grnanti ye te"O my Lord, even a person born in a low family of dog-eaters is gloriousif he always chants the holy name of the Lord. Such a person has alreadyperformed all types of austerities, penances and Vedic sacrifices, hasalready bathed in the sacred rivers, and has also studied all the Vedicliterature. Thus he has become an exalted personality." Similarly,Kuntidevi says to Lord Krsna:     janmaisva rya-sruta-sribhir     edhamana-madah puman     naivarhaty abhidhatum vai     tvam akincana-gocaram"A person who is proud of his birth, opulence, knowledge and beautycannot achieve Your lotus feet. You are available only to the humble andmeek, not to the proud." (SB. 1.8.26.)
                                   TEXT 71                  tara madh ye sarva-srestha nama-sankirtana
                   niraparadhe nama laile paya prema-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Of the nine processes of devotional service, the most important is
to always chant the holy name of the Lord. If one does so, avoiding theten kinds of offenses, one very easily obtains the most valuable love ofGodhead."
                                   PURPORT     Srila Jiva Gosvami Prabhu gives the following directions in his
Bhakti-sandarbha (270):     iyam ca kirtanakhya bhaktir bhagavato dravya-jati-guna-kriyabhirdina-janaika- visayapara-karuna-mayiti sruti-puranadi-visrutih. ataevakalau svabhavata evatidinesu lokesu avirbhuya tan anayasenaiva tat tadyuga-gata-maha-sadhananam sarvam eva phalam dadana sa krtarthayati. yataeva tayaiva kalau bhagavato visesatas ca santoso bhavati."Chanting the holy name is the chief means of attaining love of Godhead.This chanting or devotional service does not depend on anyparaohernalia, nor on one's having taken birth in a good family. Byhumility and meekness one attracts the attention of Krsna. That is theverdict of all the Vedas. Therefore if one becomes very humble and meek,he can easily attain the lotus feet of Krsna in this age of Kali. Thatis the fulfillment of all great sacrifices, penances and austeritiesbecause when one achieves ecstatic love of Godhead, he attains thecomplete perfection of life. Therefore whatever one does in executingdevotional service must be accompanied with the chanting of the holyname of the Lord." The chanting of the holy name of Krsna--Hare Krsna,Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,Hare Hare--has been praised by Srila Rupa Gosvami in his Namastaka(verse 1):.     nikhila-sruti-mauli-ratna-mala-     dyuti-nirajita-pada-pankajanta     ayi mukta-kulair upasyamanam
     paritas tvam hari-nama samsrayami"O Hari-nama! The tips of the toes of Your lotus feet are constantlybeing worshiped by the glowing radiance emanating from the string ofgems known as the Upanisads, the crown jewels of all the Vedas. You areeternally adored by liberated souls such as Narada and Sukadeva. O Hari-nama! I take complete shelter of You."     Similarly, Srila Sanatana Gosvami has praised the chanting of theholy name as follows in his Brhad-bhagavatamrta (Chapter One, verse 9):     jayati jayati namananda-rupam murarer     viramita-nija-dharma-dh ya na-pujadi- yatnam     kathamapi sakrd-attam muktidam praninam yat     paramam amrtam ekam jivanam bhusanam me"All glories, all glories to the all-blissful holy name of Sri Krsna,which causes the devotee to give up all conventional religious duties,meditation and worship. When somehow or other uttered even once by aliving entity, the holy name awards him liberation. The holy name ofKrsna is the highest nectar. It is my very life and my only treasure."     In Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.1.11) Sukadeva Gosvami says:     etan nirvidyamananam     icchatam akuto-bhayam     yoginam nrpa nirnitam     harer namanukirtanam "O King, constant chanting of the holy name ofthe Lord after the ways of the great authorities is the doubtless andfearless way of success for all, including those who are free from allmaterial desires, those who are desirous of all material enjoyment, andthose who are self-satisfied by dint of transcendental knowledge."     Similarly, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said in His Siksastaka(3):     trnad api sunicena     taror api sahisnuna     amanina manadena     kirtaniyah sada harih"One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street. One should be moretolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and ready tooffer all respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant theholy name of the Lord constantly." Regarding the ten offenses inchanting the holy name, one may refer to the adi- lila, Chapter Eight,verse 24.
                                   TEXT 72                     eta suni' sanatanera haila camatkara
                     prabhure na bhaya mora marana-vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing this, Sanatana Gosvami was exceedingly astonished. He
could understand,"My decision to commit suicide has not been greatlyappreciated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu."
                                   TEXT 73                      sarvajna mahaprabhu nisedhila more
                    prabhura carana dhari' kahena tanhare
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami concIuded, "Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
knows everything--past, present and future--has forbidden me to commitsuicide." He then fell down, touching the lotus feet of the Lord, andspoke to Him as follows.
                                   TEXT 74
                   "sarvajna, kroalu tumi isvara svatantra
                yaiche nacao, taiche naci,--yena kastha-yantra
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord, You are the omniscient, merciful, independent Supreme
Lord. Exactly like an instrument of wood, I dance as You make me do so.
                                   TEXT 75
                  nica, adhama, pamara muni pamara-svabhava
                    more jiyaile tomara kiba habe labha?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am lowborn. Indeed, I am the lowest. I am condemned, for I have
all the characteristics of a sinful man. If You keep me alive, what willbe the profit?"
                                   TEXT 76
                  prabhu kahe,--"tomara deha mora nija-dhana
                      tumi more kariyacha atma-samarpana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu said,"Your body is My property. You
have already surrendered unto Me. Therefore you no longer have any claimto your body.
                                   TEXT 77                    parera dravya tumi kene caha vinasite?
                   dharmadharma vicara kiba na para karite?
                                 TRANSLATION     "Why should you want to destroy another's property? Can't you
consider what is right and wrong?                                   TEXT 78
                    tomara sarira--mora pradhana `sadhana'
                     e sarire sadhimu ami bahu prayojana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Your body is My principal instrument for executing many necessary
functions. By your body I shall carry out many tasks.
                                   TEXT 79
                  bhakta-bhakti-krsnaprema-tattvera nidhara
                     vaisnavera krtya, ara vaisnava-acara
                                 TRANSLATION     "You shall have to ascertain the basic principles of a devotee,
devotional service, love of Godhead, Vaisnava duties, and Vaisnavacharacteristics.
                                   TEXT 80
                   krsna-bhakti, krsnaprema-seva-pravartana
                  lupta-tirtha-uddhara, ara vairagya-siksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You will also have to explain Krsna's devotional service,
establish centers for cultivation of love of Krsna, excavate lost pIacesof pilgrimage and teach people how to adopt the renounced order.
                                   TEXT 81
                  nija-priya-sthana mora--mathura-vrndavana
                    tahan eta dharma cahi karite pracarana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Mathura-Vrndavana is My own very dear abode. I wat to do many
things there to preach Krsna consciousness.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to accomplish many purposes through
the exegetical endeavors of Srila Sanatana Gosvami. First SanatanaGosvami compiled the book called Brhad-bhagavatamrta to teach people howto become devotees, execute devotional service and attain love of Krsna.Second, he compiled the Hari-bhakti-vilasa, wherein he collectedauthoritative statements from scripturai injunctions regarding how a
Vaisnava should behave. Only by the endeavors of Sri Sanatana Gosvamiwere all the lost places of pilgrimage in the Vrndavana area excavated.He established Madana-mohana, the first Deity in the Vrndavana area, andby his personal behavior he taught how one should act in the renouncedorder, completely devoted to the service of the Lord. By his personalexample, he taught people how to stay in Vrndavana to execute devotionalservice. The principal mission of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was to preachKrsna consciousness. Mathura and Vrndavana are the abodes of Lord Krsna.Therefore these two places are very dear to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, andHe wanted to develop their glories through Sanatana Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 82                       mata-ra ajnaya ami vasi nilacale
                    tahan `dharma' sikhaite nahi nija-bale
                                 TRANSLATION     "By the order of My mother I am sitting here in Jagannatha Puri;
therefore, I cannot go to Mathura-Vrndavana to teach peopIe how to livethere according to religious principles.
                                   TEXT 83
                      eta saba karma ami ye-dehe karimu
                   taha chadite caha tumi, kemane sahimu?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have to do all this work through your body, but you want to give
it up. How can I tolerate this?"
                                   TEXT 84
                    tabe sanatana kahe,--"tomake namaskare
                   tomara gambhira hrdaya ke bujhite pare?
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time Sanatana Gosvami sald to Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu, "I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You. No one can understand the deepideas You plan within Your heart.
                                   TEXT 85
                      kasthera putali yena kuhake nacaya
                    apane na jane, putali kiba nace gaya!
                                 TRANSLATION     "A wooden doll chants and dances according to the direction of a
magician but does not know how he is dancing and singing.
                                   TEXT 86
                  yare yaiche nacao, se taiche kare nartane
                  kaiche nace, keba nacaya, seha nahi jane"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, as You cause one to dance, he dances accordingly,
but how he dances and who is causing him to dance he does not know."
                                   TEXT 87
                    haridase kahe prabhu,--"suna, haridasa
                   parera dravya inho cahena karite vinasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then said to Haridasa Thakura, "My dear
Haridasa, please hear Me. This gentleman wants to destroy aother'sproperty.
                                   TEXT 88
                 parera sthapya dravya keha na khaya, vilaya
                   nisedhiha inhare,--yena na kare anyaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who is entrusted with another's property does not distribute
it or use it for his own purposes. Therefore, teIl him not to do such anunIawful thing."
                                   TEXT 89
                    haridasa kahe,--"mithya abhimana kari
                    tomara gambhira hrdaya bujhite na pari
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura replied, "We are falsely proud of our
capabilities. Actually we cannot understand Your deep intentions.
                                   TEXT 90
                      kon kon karya tumi kara kon dvare
                     tumi na janaile keha janite na pare                                 TRANSLATION
     "Unless You inform us, we cannot understand what Your purpose is
nor what You want to do through whom.
                                   TEXT 91
                    etadrsa tumi inhare kariyacha angikara
                      eta saubhagya ihan na haya kahara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, since You, a great personality, have accepted
Sanatana Gosvami, he is greatly fortunate; no one can be as fortunate ashe."
                                   TEXT 92
                    tabe mahaprabhu kari' dunhare alingana
                    `madhyahna' karite uthi' karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced both Haridasa Thakura and
Sanatana Gosvami and then got up and left to perform His noon duties.
                                   TEXT 93
                    sanatane kahe haridasa kari' alingana
                    "tomara bhagyera sima na yaya kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Sanatana," Haridasa Thakura said, embracing him,"no one
can find the limits of your good fortune.
                                   TEXT 94
                 tomara deha kahena prabhu `mora nija-dhana'
                      toma-sama bhagyavan nahi kona jana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has accepted your body as His own
property. Therefore no one can equal you in good fortune.
                                   TEXT 95                     nija-dehe ye karya na parena karite
                    se karya karaibe toma, seha mathurate
                                 TRANSLATION     "What Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu cannot do with His personal body He
wants to do through you, and He wants to do it in Mathura.
                                   TEXT 96
                   ye karaite cahe isvara, sei siddha haya
                     tomara saubhagya ei kahilun niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Whatever the Supreme Personality of Godhead wants us to do will
successfully be accomplished. This is your great fortune. That is mymature opinion.
                                   TEXT 97
                    bhakti-siddhanta, sastra-acara-nirnaya
                     toma-dvare karaibena, bujhilun asaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "I can understand from the words of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that He
wants you to write books about the conclusive decision of devotionalservice and about the regulative principles ascertained from therevealed scriptures.
                                   TEXT 98
                    amara ei deha prabhura karye na lagila
                 bharata-bhumite janmi' ei deha vyartha haila
                                 TRANSLATION     "My body could not be used in the service of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Therefore although it took birth in the land of India, thisbody has been useless.,,
                                   PURPORT     For a further explanation of the importance of Bharata-bhumi, one
may refer to the Adi-lila (9.41) and also Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.19.19-27). The special feature of a birth in India is that a person born inIndia becomes automatically God conscious. In every part of India, andespecially in the holy places of pilgrimage, even an ordinary uneducatedman is inclined toward Krsna consciousness, and as soon as he sees aKrsna conscious person, he offers obeisances. India has many sacredrivers like the Ganges, Yamuna, Narmada, Kaveri and Krsna, and simply by
bathing in these rivers people are liberated and become Krsna conscious.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore says:     bharata-bhumite haila manusya-janma yara     janma sarthaka kari' kara para-upakaraOne who has taken birth in the land of Bharata-bhumi, India, should takefull advantage of his birth. He should become completely well versed inthe knowledge of the Vedas and spiritual culture and should distributethe experience of Krsna consciousness all over the world. People allover the world are madly engag ng in sense gratification and in this wayspoiling their human lives, with the risk that in th-e next life theymay become animals or less. Human society should be saved from such arisky civilization and the danger of animalism by awakening to Godconsciousness, Krsna consciousness. The Krsna consciousness movement hasbeen started for this purpose. Therefore unbiased men of the highestechelon should study the principles of the Krsna consciousness movementand fully cooperate with this movement to save human society.
                                   TEXT 99                   sanatana kahe,--"toma-sama keba ache ana
                   mah\prabhura gane tumi--maha-bhagyavan!
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami repIied, "O Haridasa Thakura, who is equal to you?
You are one of the associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Therefore youare the most fortunate.
                                   TEXT 100
                    a vatara-karya prabhura--nama-pracare
                  sei nija-karya prabhu karena tomara dvare
                                 TRANSLATION     "The mission of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for which He has descended
as an incarnation, is to spread the importance of chating the holy nameof the Lord. Now instead of personally doing so, He is spreading itthrough you.
                                   TEXT 101
                   pratyaha kara tina-laksa nama-sankirtana
                    sabara age kara namera mahima kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, you are chating the holy name 300,000 times daily and
informing everyone of the importance of such chanting.                                   TEXT 102
                      apane acare keha, na kare pracara
                     pracara karena keha, na karena acara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Some behave very well but do not preach the cult of Krsna
consciousness, whereas others preach but do not behave properly.
                                   TEXT 103
                `\cara', `pracara',--namera karaha `dui' karya
                     tumi--sarva-guru, tumi jagatera arya
                                 TRANSLATION     "You simultaneously perform both duties in relation to the holy
name by your personal behavior and by your preaching. Therefore you arethe spiritual master of the entire world, for you are the most advanceddevotee in the world."
                                   PURPORT     Sanatana Gosvami clearly defines herein the bona fide spiritual
master of the world. The qualifications expressed in this connection arethat one must act according to the scriptural injunctions and at thesame time preach. One who does so is a bona fide spiritual master.Haridasa Thakura was the ideal spiritual master because he regularlychanted on his beads a prescribed number of times. Indeed, he waschanting the holy name of the Lord 300,000 times a day. Similarly, themembers of the Krsna consciousness movement chant a minimum of sixteenrounds a day, which can be done without difficulty, and at the same timethey must preach the cult of Caitanya Mahaprabhu according to the gospelof Bhagavad-gita As It Is. One who does so is quite fit to become aspiritual master for the entire world.
                                   TEXT 104                      ei-mata dui-jana nana-katha-range
                     krsna-katha asvadaya rahi' eka-sange
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way the two of them passed their time discussing subjects
concerning Krsna. Thus they enjoyed life together.
                                   TEXT 105
                   yatra-kale aila saba gaudera bhakta-gana
                   purvavat kaila sabe ratha-yatra darasana                                 TRANSLATION
     During the time of Ratha-yatra, all the devotees arrived from
Bengal to visit the cart festival as they had done previously.
                                   TEXT 106
                   ratha-agre prabhu taiche karila nartana
                    dekhi camatkara haila sanatanera mana
                                 TRANSLATION     During the Ratha-yatra festival, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again
danced before the cart of Jagannatha. When Sanatana Gosvami saw this,his mind was astonished.
                                   TEXT 107
                varsara cari-masa rahila saba nija bhakta-gane
                      saba-sange prabhu milaila sanatane
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord's devotees from Bengal stayed at Jagannatha Puri during
the four months of the rainy season, and Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuintroduced Sanatana Gosvami to them all.
                                 TEXT 108-110
                   advaita, nityananda, srivasa, vakresvara
                     vasudeva, murari, ragha va, damodara
                  puri, bharati, s varupa, pandita-gadadhara
                 sarvabhauma, ramananda, jagadananda, sankara
                    kasisvara, govindadi yata bhakta-gana
                     saba-sane sanatanera karaila milana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu introduced Sanatana Gosvami to these and
other selected devotees: Advaita, Nityananda, Srivasa, Vakresvara,Vasudeva, Murari, Raghava, Damodara, Paramananda Puri, BrahmanandaBharati, Svarupa Damodara, Gadadhara Pandita, Sarvabhauma, Ramananda,Jagadananda, Sankara, Kasisvara and Govinda.
                                   TEXT 111
                  yatha-yogya karaila sabara carana vandana
                     tanre karaila sabara krpara bhajana                                 TRANSLATION
     The Lord asked Sanatana Gosvami to offer obeisances to all the
devotees in a way that befitted each one. Thus He introduced SanatanaGosvami to them all, just to make him an object of their mercy.
                                   TEXT 112
                  sad-gune, panditye, sabara priya--sanatana
                   yatha-yogya krpa-maitri-gaurava-bhajana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami was dear to everyone because of his exalted
qualities in learning. Suitably, therefore, they bestowed upon himmercy, friendship and honor.
                                   TEXT 113
                     sakala vaisnava yabe gauda-dese gela
                     sanatana mahaprabhura carane rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     When all the other devotees returned to Bengal after the Ratha-
yatra festival, Sanatana Gosvami stayed under the care of the lotus feetof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 114
                   dola-yatra-adi prabhura sangete dekhila
                     dine-dine prabhu-sange ananda badila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami observed the Dola-yatra ceremony with Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In this way, his pleasure increased in the companyof the Lord.
                                   TEXT 115
                    purve vaisakha-mase sanatana yabe aila
                  jyaistha-mase prabhu tanre pariksa karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami had come to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at
Jagannatha Puri during the month of April-May, and during the month ofMay-June Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu tested him. Caitanya Mahaprabhu tested
him.
                                   TEXT 116
                   jyaistha-mase prabhu yamesvara-tota aila
                    bhakta-anurodhe tahan bhiksa ye karila
                                 TRANSLATION     In that month of May-June, Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to the
garden of Yamesvara [Lord Siva] and accepted prasada there at therequest of the devotees.
                                   TEXT 117
                    madhyahna-bhiksa-kale sanatane bolaila
                     prabhu bolaila, tanra ananda badila
                                 TRANSLATION     At noon, when it was time for lunch, the Lord called for Sanatana
Gosvami, whose happiness increased because of the call.
                                   TEXT 118
                   madhyahne samudra-valu hanache agni-sama
                       sei-pathe sanatana karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     At noon the sand on the beach was as hot as fire, but Sanatana
Gosvami came by that path.
                                   TEXT 119
                    `prabhu bolanache',--ei anandita mane
                    tapta-valukate pa pode, taha nahi jane
                                 TRANSLATION     Overwhelmed by joy at being called by the Lord, Sanatana Gosvami
did not feel that his feet were burning in the hot sad.
                                   TEXT 120
                dui paye phoska haila, tabu gela prabhu-sthane
                 bhiksa kari' mahaprabhu kariyachena visrame                                 TRANSLATION
     Although the soles of both his feet were blistered because of the
heat, he nevertheless went to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. There he foundthat the Lord, having taken His lunch, was resting.
                                   TEXT 121
                    bhiksa-avasesa-patra govinda tare dila
                    prasada pana sanatana prabhu-pase aila
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda gave Sanatana Gosvami the plate with the remnants of Lord
Caitanya's food. After taking the prasada, Sanatana Gosvami approachedLord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 122
                  prabhu kahe,--`kon pathe aila, sanatana?'
                tenha kahe,--`samudra-pathe, karilun agamana'
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord inquired, "By which path have you come?" Sanatana
Gosvami replied,"I have come on the path along the beach."
                                   TEXT 123
                  prabhu kahe,--"tapta-valukate kemane aila?
                  simha-dvarera patha--sitala, kene na aila?
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said,"How did you come through the beach
where the sand is so hot? Why didn't you come by the path in front ofthe Simha-dvara gate? It is very cool.
                                   PURPORT     Simha-dvara refers to the main gate on the eastern side of the
Jagannatha temple.
                                   TEXT 124                    tapta-valukaya tomara paya haila vrana
                    calite na para, kemane karila sahana?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The hot sand must have blistered your soles. Now you cannot walk.
How did you tolerate it?"
                                   TEXT 125
                   sanatana kahe,--"dukha bahuta na pailun
                      paye vrana hanache taha na janilun
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami replied,"I did not feel much pain, nor did I know
that there are blisters because of the heat.
                                   TEXT 126
                     simha-dvare yaite mora nahi adhikara
                   visese--thakurera tahan sevakera pracara
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have no right to pass by the Simha-dvara, for the servats of
Jagannatha are always coming and going there.
                                   TEXT 127
                      sevaka gatagati kare, nahi avasara
                   tara sparsa haile, sarva-nasa habe mora"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The servants are always coming and going without interval. If I
touch them, I shall be ruined."
                                   PURPORT     Herein it is very clearly indicated that priests performing Deity
worship should be careful to keep themselves completely pure and not betouched by outsiders. Sanatana Gosvami and Haridasa Thakura, thinkingthemselves mlecchas and yavanas because of their past association withMohammedans, did not enter the temple nor even travel on the path infront of the temple gate. It is customary for the priests of temples inIndia not even to touch outsiders nor enter the Deity room after havingbeen touched. This is a very important item in temple worship.
                                   TEXT 128                     suni' mahaprabhu mane santosa paila
                     tusta hana tanre kichu kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Having heard all these details, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, greatly
pleased, spoke as follows.
                                 TEXT 129-130
                       "yadyapio tumi hao jagat-pavana
                   toma-sparse pavitra haya deva-muni-gana
                  tathapi bhak ta-svabhava--maryada-raksana
                     maryada-palana haya sadhura bhusana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Sanatana, although you are the deliverer of the entire
universe and aIthough even the demigods and great saints are purified bytouching you, it is the characteristic of a devotee to observe andprotect the Vaisnava etiquette. Maintenance of the Vaisnava etiquette isthe ornament of a devotee.
                                   TEXT 131
                      maryada-langhane loka kare upahasa
                      iha-loka, para-loka--dui haya nasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "If one transgresses the laws of etiquette, people make fun of him,
and thus he is vanquished in both this world and the next.
                                   TEXT 132
                    maryada rakhile, tusta kaile mora mana
                     tumi aiche na karile kare kon jana?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "By observing the etiquette, you have satisfied My mind. Who else
but you will show this example?"
                                   TEXT 133
                    eta bali' prabhu tanre alingana kaila
                  ta-nra kandu-rasa prabhura sri-ange lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu embraced Sanatana
Gosvami, and the moisture oozing from the itching sores on Sanatana'sbody smeared the body of the Lord.                                   TEXT 134
                   bara bara nisedhena, tabu kare alingana
                     ange rasa lage, duhkha paya sanatana
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Sanatana Gosvami forbade Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to
embrace him, the Lord did so. Thus His body was smeared with themoisture from Sanatana's body, and Sanatana became greatly distressed.
                                   TEXT 135
                    ei-mate sevaka-prabhu dunhe ghara gela
                    ara dina jagadananda sanatanere milila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus both servant and master departed for their respective homes.
The next day, Jagadananda Pandita went to meet Sanatana Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 136
                   dui-jana vasi' krsna-katha-gosthi kaila
                      panditere sanatana duhkha nivedila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Jagadananda Pandita and Sanatana Gosvami sat together and
began to discuss topics about Krsna, Sanatana Gosvami submitted toJagadananda Pandita the cause of his distress.
                                   TEXT 137
                 "ihan ailan prabhure dekhi' duhkha khandaite
                    yeba mane, taha prabhu na dila karite
                                 TRANSLATION     "I came here to diminish my unhappiness by seeing Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, but the Lord did not allow me to execute what was in mymind.
                                   TEXT 138
                    nisedhite prabhu alingana karena more
                     mora kandu-rasa lage prabhura sarire
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although I forbid Him to do so, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
nevertheless embraces me, and therefore His body becomes smeared withthe discharges from my itching sores.
                                   TEXT 139
                      aparadha haya mora, nahika nistara
                   jagannatheha na dekhiye,--e duhkha apara
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this way I am committing offenses at His lotus feet, for which
I shall certainly not be delivered. At the same time, I cannot see LordJagannatha. This is my great unhappiness.
                                   TEXT 140
                   hita-nimitta ailana ami, haila viparite
                     ki karile hita haya nari nirdharite"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I came here for my benefit, but now I see that I am getting just
the opposite. I do not know, nor can I ascertain, how there will bebenefit for me."
                                   TEXT 141
                pandita kahe,--"tomara vasa-yogya `vrndavana'
                    ratha-yatra dekhi' tahan karaha gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita said, "The most suitable place for you to
reside is Vrndavana. After seeing the Ratha-yatra festival, you canreturn there.
                                   TEXT 142
                    prabhura ajna hanache toma' dui bhaye
                   vrndavane vaisa, tahan sarva-sukha paiye
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Lord has already ordered both of you brothers to situate
yourselves in Vrndavana. There you will achieve all happiness.
                                   TEXT 143                    ye-karye aila, prabhura dekhila carana
                    rathe jagannatha dekhi' karaha gamana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Your purpose in coming has been fulfilled, for you have seen the
lotus feet of the Lord. Therefore, affer seeing Lord Jagannatha on theRatha-yatra car, you can leave."
                                   TEXT 144
                     sanatana kahe,--"bhala kaila upadesa
                  ta-han yaba, sei mora `prabhu-datta desa"'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami replied, "You have given me very good advice. I
shall certainly go there, for that is the place the Lord has given mefor my residence."
                                   PURPORT     The words prabhu-datta desa are very significant. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's devotional cult teaches one not to sit down in one placebut to spread the devotional cult all over the world. The Lorddispatched Sanatana Gosvami and Rupa Gosvami to Vrndavana to excavateand renovate the holy places and from there establish the cult ofbhakti. Therefore Vrndavana was given to Sanatana Gosvami and RupaGosvami as their place of residence. Similarly, everyone in the line ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's devotional cult should accept the words of thespiritual master and thus spread the Krsna consciousness movement. Theyshould go everywhere, to all parts of the world, accepting those placesas prabhu-datta desa, the places of residence given by the spiritualmaster or Lord Krsna. The spiritual master is the representative of LordKrsna; therefore one who has carried out the orders of the spiritualmaster is understood to have carried out the orders of Krsna or SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to spread the bhakticult all over the world (prthivite ache yata nagaradi grama). Thereforedevotees in the line of Krsna consciousness must go to different partsof the world and preach, as ordered by the spiritual master. That willsatisfy Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 145                    eta bali' dunhe nija-karye uthi' gela
                      ara dina mahaprabhu milibare aila
                                 TRANSLATION     After talking in this way, Sanatana Gosvami and Jagadananda Pandita
returned to their respective duties. The next day, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu went to see Haridasa and Sanataa Gosvami.                                   TEXT 146
                    haridasa kaila prabhura carana vandana
                     haridase kaila prabhu prema-alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura offered obeisances to the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and the Lord embraced him in ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 147
                   dura haite danda-paranama kare sanatana
                   prabhu bolaya bara bara karite alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami offered his obeisances and dandavats from a
distant place, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu called him again ad again toembrace him.
                                   TEXT 148
                     aparadha-bhaye tenha milite na aila
                      mahaprabhu milibare sei thani gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Out of fear of committing offenses, Sanatana Gosvami did not come
forward to meet Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord, however, went forwardto meet him.
                                   TEXT 149
                     sanatana bhagi' pache karena gamana
                    balatkare dhari, prabhu kaila alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami backed away, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu caught
him by force and embraced him.
                                   TEXT 150
                     dui jana lana prabhu vasila pindate
                       nirvinna sanatana lagila kahite
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord took them both with Him and sat down in a sacred place.
Then Sanatana Gosvami, who was advanced in renunciation, began to speak.
                                   TEXT 151
                    "hita lagi' ainu muni, haila viparita
                  seva-yogya nahi, aparadha karon niti niti
                                 TRANSLATION     "I came here for my benefit," he said, "but I see that I am getting
just the opposite. I am unfit to render service. I simply commitoffenses day after day.
                                   TEXT 152
                  sahaje nica-jati muni, dusta, `papasa ya'
                     more tumi chunile mora aparadha haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "By nature I am lowborn. I am a contaminated reservoir of sinful
activities. If You touch me, sir, that will be a great offense on mypart.
                                   TEXT 153
                   tahate amara ange kandu-rasa-rakta cale
                  tomara ange lage, tabu sparsaha tumi bale
                                 TRANSLATION     "Moreover, blood is running from infected itching sores on my body,
smearing Your body with moisture, but still You touch me by force.
                                   TEXT 154
                     bibhatsa sparsite na kara ghrna-lese
                       ei aparadhe mora habe sarva-nase
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, You do not have even a pinch of aversion to touching
my body, which is in a horrible condition. Because of this offense,everything auspicious will be vanquished for me.
                                   TEXT 155                   tate ihan rahile mora na haya `kalyana'
                   ajna deha'--ratha dekhi' yana vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore I see that I will get nothing auspicious by staying
here. Kindly give me orders allowing me to return to Vrndavana after theRatha-yatra festival.
                                   TEXT 156
                    jagadananda-pandite ami yukti puchila
                     vrndavana yaite tenha upadesa dila"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have consulted Jagadananda Pandita for his opinion, and he has
also advised me to return to Vrndavana."
                                   TEXT 157
                      eta suni' mahaprabhu sarosa-antare
                   jagadanande kruddha hana kare tiraskare
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in an angry mood, began to
chastise Jagadananda Pandita.
                                   TEXT 158
                   "kalikara batuya jaga aiche garvi haila
                     toma-sabareha upadesa karite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Jaga [Jagadananda Pandita] is only a new boy, but he has become so
proud that he thinks himself competent to advise a person like you.
                                   TEXT 159
                  vyavahare-paramarthe tumi--tara guru-tulya
                     tomare upadese, na jane apana-mulya
                                 TRANSLATION     "In affairs of spiritual advancement and even in ordinary dealings,
you are on the level of his spiritual master. Yet not knowing his ownvalue, he dares to advise you.                                   TEXT 160
                     amara upadesta tumi--pramanika arya
                  tomareha upadese--balaka kare aiche karya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Sanatana, you are on the level of My adviser, for you are
an authorized person. But Jaga wants to advise you. This is but theimpudence of a naughty boy."
                                   TEXT 161
                  suni' sanatana paye dhari' prabhure kahila
                    `jagadanandera saubhagya aji se janila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was thus chastising Jagadanada
Pandita, Sanatana Gosvami fell at the Lord's feet and said, "I can nowunderstand the fortunate position of Jagadanada.
                                   TEXT 162
                     apanara `asaubhagya' aji haila jnana
                    jagate nahi jagadananda-sama bhagyavan
                                 TRANSLATION     "I can also understand my misfortune. No one in this world is as
fortunate as Jagadananda.
                                   TEXT 163
                    jagadanande piyao atmiyata-sudha-rasa
                 more piyao gaurava-stuti-nimba-nisinda-rasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sir, You are making Jagadananda drink the nectar of affectionate
relationships, whereas by offering me honorable prayers, You are makingme drink the bitter juice of nimba and nisinda.
                                   TEXT 164
                      ajiha nahila more atmiyata-jnana!
                  mora abhagya, tumi--svatantra bhagavan.i"
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is my misfortune that You have not accepted me as one of Your
intimate relations. But You are the completely independent SupremePersonality of Godhead."
                                   TEXT 165
                  suni' mahaprabhu kichu lajjita haila mane
                     tanre santosite kichu balena vacane
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was somewhat ashamed. Just to
satisfy Sanatana Gosvami, He spoke the following words.
                                   TEXT 166
                   `jagadananda priya amara nahe toma haite
                     maryada-langhana ami na paron sahite
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Sanatana, please do not think that Jagadanada is more dear
to Me than you. However, I cannot tolerate transgressions of thestandard etiquette.
                                   TEXT 167
                   kahan tumi--pramanika, sastre pravina.i
                     kahan jaga--kalikara batuya navina!
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are an experienced authority in the sastras, whereas Jaga is
just a young boy.
                                   TEXT 168
                      amakeha bujhaite tumi dhara sakti
                    kata thani bujhanacha vyavahara-bhakti
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have the power to convince even Me. In many places you have
already convinced Me about ordinary behavior and devotional service.
                                   TEXT 169
                     tomare upadesa kare, na yaya sahana                       ataeva tare ami kariye bhartsana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Jaga's advising you is intolerable for Me. Therefore I am
chastising him.
                                   TEXT 170
                    bahiranga-jnane tomare na kari stavana
                 tomara gune stuti karaya yaiche tomara guna
                                 TRANSLATION     "I offer you praise not because I think of you as being outside an
intimate relationship with Me but because you are actually so qualifiedthat one is forced to praise your qualities.
                                   TEXT 171
                    yadyapi kahara `mamata' bahu-jane haya
                     priti-svabhave kahate kona bhavodaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although one has affection for many persons, different types of
ecstatic love awaken according to the nature of one's personalrelationships.
                                   TEXT 172
                     tomara deha tumi kara bibhatsa-jnana
                     tomara deha amare lage amrta-samana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You consider your body dangerous and awful, but I think that your
body is like nectar.
                                   TEXT 173
                  aprakrta-deha tomara `prakrta' kabhu naya
                   tathapi tomara tate prakrta-buddhi haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Actually your body is transcendental, never material. You are
thinking of it, however, in terms of a material conception.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura gives his opinion about how
a person completely engaged in the service of the Lord transforms hisbody from material to transcendental. He says: "A pure devotee engagedin the service of Lord Krsna has no desire for his personal sensegratification, and thus he never accepts anything for that purpose. Hedesires only the happiness of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,and because of his ecstatic love for Krsna, he acts in various ways.Karmis think that the material body is an instrument for materialenjoyment, and that is why they work extremely hard. A devotee, however,has no such desires. A devotee always engages wholeheartedly in theservice of the Lord, forgetting about bodily conceptions and bodilyactivities. The body of a karmi is called material because the karmi,being too absorbed in material activities, is always eager to enjoymaterial facilities, but the body of a devotee who tries his best towork very hard for the satisfaction of Krsna by fully engaging in theLord's service must be accepted as transcendental. Whereas karmis areinterested only in the personal satisfaction of their senses, devoteeswork for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. Therefore one who cannotdistinguish between devotion and ordinary karma may mistakenly considerthe body of a pure devotee material. One who knows does not commit sucha mistake. Nondevotees who consider devotional activities and ordinarymaterial activities to be on the same level are offenders to thechanting of the transcendental holy name of the Lord. A pure devoteeknows that a devotee's body, being always transcendental, is justsuitable for rendering service to the Lord.     A devotee on the topmost platform of devotional service alwayshumbly thinks that he is not rendering any devotional service. He thinksthat he is poor in devotional service and that his body is material. Onthe other hand, those known as the sahajiyas foolishly think that theirmaterial bodies are transcendental. Because of this, they are alwaysbereft of the association of pure devotees, and thus they cannot behavelike Vaisnavas. Observing the defects of the sahajiyas, SrilaBhaktivinoda Thakura has sung as follows in his book Kalyana-kalpa-taru:     ami ta' vaisnava, e-buddhi ha-ile,     amani na haba ami     pratisthasa asi;, hrdaya dusibe,     ha-iba niraya-gami     nije srestha jani', ucchistadi-dane,     habe abhimana bhara     tai sisya tava, thakiya sarvada,     na la-iba puja kara"If I think I am a Vaisnava, I shall look forward to receiving respectfrom others. And if the desire for fame and reputation pollute my heart,certainly I shall go to hell. By giving others the remnants of my food,I shall consider myself superior and shall be burdened with the weightof false pride. Therefore, always remaining your surrendered disciple, Ishall not accept worship from anyone else." Srila Krsnadasa KavirajaGosvami has written (Antya-lila 20.28):     premera svabhava--yahan premera sambandha     sei mane,--`krsne mora nahi prema-gandha'"Wherever there is a relationship of love of Godhead, the naturalsymptoms are that the devotee does not think himself a devotee, butalways thinks that he has not even a drop of love for Krsna."                                   TEXT 174
                 prakrta' haile ha tomara vapu nari upeksite
                  bhadrabhadra-vastu-jnana nahika `prakrte'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Even if your body were material, I still could not neglect it, for
the material body should be considered neither good nor bad.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Sanatana Gosvami, "Since you are a
Vaisnava, your body is spiritual, not material. Therefore you should notconsider this body to be subjected to superior or inferior qualities.Moreover, I am a sannyasi. Therefore even if your body were material, asannyasi should see no distinction between a good body and a bad body.
                                   TEXT 175                         kim bhadram kim abhadram va
                           dvaitasyavastunah kiyat
                             vacoditam tad anrtam
                            manasa dhyatam eva ca
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Anything not conceived in relationship to Krsna should be
understood to be illusion [maya]. None of the illusions uttered by wordsor conceived in the mind are factual. Because illusion is not factual,there is no distinction between what we think is good and what we thinkis bad. When we speak of the Absolute Truth, such speculations do notapply.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.28.4).                                   TEXT 176               `dvaite' bhadrabhadra-jnana, saba--`manodharma'
                   `ei bhala, ei manda;,--ei saba `bhrama'
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the material world, conceptions of good and bad are all mental
speculations. Therefore, saying, `This is good, and this is bad,' is alla mistake.
                                   PURPORT     Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the Absolute Truth,
ever existing with different varieties of energies. When one is absorbedin the illusory energy of Krsna and cannot understand Krsna, one cannotascertain what is good and bad for him. Conceptions of good and bad areall imaginations or mental speculations. When one forgets that he is aneternal servant of Krsna, he wants to enjoy the material world throughdifferent plans. At that time he distinguishes between material plansthat are good and those that are bad. Actually, however, they are allfalse.
                                   TEXT 177                           vidya- vina ya-sampanne
                            brahmane gavi hastini                            suni caiva svapake ca                            panditah sama-darsinah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal
vision a learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and adog-eater.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Bhagavad-gita (5.18).                                   TEXT 178                           jnana- vijnana-trpta tma
                            kutastho vijitendnyah                            yukta ity ucyate yogi                           sama-lostrasma-kanca nah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `One who is fully satisfied in knowledge obtained and practically
applied in life, who is always determined and fixed in his spiritualposition, who completely controls his senses, and who sees pebbles,stone and gold on the same level, is understood to be a perfect yogi.'
                                   PURPORT     This is also a quotation from Bhagavad-gita (6.8).                                   TEXT 179                 ami ta'--sannyasi, amara `sama-drsti' dharma
                   candana-pankete amara jnana haya `sama'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Since I am in the renounced order, My duty is to make no
distinctions but instead be equipoised. My knowledge must be equallydisposed toward sandalwood pulp and dirty mud.
                                   PURPORT     It is the duty of a sannyasi, a person in the renounced order, to
be always equipoised, and that is also the duty of a learned man and aVaisnava. A Vaisnava, a sannyasi or a learned person has no conceptionof the material world; in other words, he has no conception of anythingmaterially important. He has no desire to use sandalwood pulp for sensegratification, nor does sense gratification make him hate mud.Acceptance or rejection of material things is not the concern of asannyasi, a Vaisnava or a learned person. An advanced devotee has nodesire to enjoy or reject anything. His only duty is to accept whateveris favorable for the advancement of Krsna consciousness. A Vaisnavashould be indifferent to material enjoyment and renunciation and shouldalways hanker for the spiritual life of rendering service to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 180                     ei lagi' toma tyaga karite na yuyaya
                  ghrna-buddhi kari yadi, nija-dharma yaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "For this reason, I cannot reject you. If I hated you, I would
deviate from My occupational duty."
                                   TEXT 181
                   haridasa kahe,--"prabhu, ye kahila tumi
                      ei `bahya pratarana' nahi mani ami
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa said, "My dear Lord, what You have spoken deals with
external formalities. I do not accept it.
                                   TEXT 182
                    ama-saba adhame ye kariyacha angikara
                   dina-dayalu-guna tomara tahate pracara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord, we are all fallen, but You have accepted us due to Your
attribute of being merciful to the fallen. This is well known all overthe world."
                                   TEXT 183                prabhu hasi' kahe,--"suna, haridasa, sanatana
                 tattvatah kahi toma-visaye yaiche mora mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya smiled and said, "Listen, Haridasa and Sanatana. Now
I am speaking the truth about how My mind is attached to you.
                                   TEXT 184
                  tomare `lalya;, apanake `lalaka' abhimana
                      lalakera lalye nahe dosa-parijnana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Haridasa and Sanatana, I think of you as My little boys,
to be maintained by Me. The maintainer never takes seriously any faultsof the maintained.
                                   PURPORT     When a father maintains a child and the child is maintained by the
father, the father never takes seriously the faults of the child. Evenif they actually are faults, the father does not mind them.
                                   TEXT 185                       apanare haya mora amanya-samana
                    toma-sabare karon muni balaka-abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I always think of Myself as deserving no respect, but because of
affection I always consider you to be like My little children.
                                   TEXT 186
                  matara yaiche balakera `amedhya' lage gaya
                    ghrna nahi janme, ara maha-sukha paya
                                 TRANSLATION     "When a child passes stool and urine that touch the body of the
mother, the mother never hates the child. On the contrary, she takesmuch pleasure in cleansing him.
                                   TEXT 187
                  `lalyamedhya' lalakera candana-sama bhaya
                   sanatanera klede amara ghrna na upajaya"                                 TRANSLATION
     "The stool and urine of the maintained child appear like sandalwood
pulp to the mother. Similarly, when the foul moisture oozing from theitches of Sanatana touches My body, I have no hatred for him."
                                   TEXT 188
                    haridasa kahe,--"tumi isvara daya-maya
                    tomara gambhira hrdaya bujhana na yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura said, "My dear sir, You are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and are most merciful toward us. No one canunderstand what is within Your deeply affectionate heart.
                                   TEXT 189
                 vasudeva--galat-kusthi, tate anga--kida-maya
                       tare alingana kaila hana sadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "You embraced the leper Vasudeva, whose body was fully infected by
worms. You are so kind that in spite of his condition You embraced him.
                                   TEXT 190
                    alingiya kaila tara kandarpa-sama anga
                    bujhite na pari tomara krpara taranga"
                                 TRANSLATION     "By embracing him You made his body as beautiful as that of Cupid.
We cannot understand the waves of Your mercy."
                                   TEXT 191
              prabhu kahe,--"vaisnava-deha `prakrta' kabhu naya
                  `aprakrta' deha bhaktera `cid-ananda-maya'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "The body of a devotee is never
material. It is considered to be transcendental, full of spiritualbliss.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is trying to convince Haridasa Thakura and
Sanatana Gosvami that a devotee whose life is dedicated to the serviceof the Lord is never in the material conception. Because he alwaysengages in the service of the Lord, his body is transcendental and fullof spiritual bliss. His body should never be considered material, justas the body of the Deity worshiped in the temple is never consideied tobe made of stone or wood. Factually, the Deity is directly the SupremePersonality of Godhead, without a doubt. The injunctions of the PadmaPurana therefore state: arcye visnau siladhir gurusu nara-matir vaisnavejati-bud- dhih...yasya va naraki sah. The Deity worshiped in the templeis never stone or wood. Similarly, the body of a Vaisnava fullydedicated to the service of the Lord is never considered to belong tothe material modes of nature.
                                   TEXT 192                    diksa-kale bhakta kare atma-samarpana
                      sei-kale krsna tare kare atma-sama
                                 TRANSLATION     "At the time of initiation, when a devotee fully surrenders unto
the service of the Lord, Krsna accepts him to be as good as Himself.
                                   TEXT 193
                      sei deha kare tara cid-ananda-maya
                      aprakrta-dehe tanra carana bhajaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "When the devotee's body is thus transformed into spiritual
existence, the devotee, in that transcendental body, renders service tothe lotus feet of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 194
                       martyo yada tyakta-samasta-karma
                          niveditatma vicikirsito me                         tadamrtatvam pratipadyamano                        mayatma-bhuyaya ca kalpate vai
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The living entity who is subjected to birth and death, when he
gives up all material activities dedicating his life to Me for executingMy order, and thus acts according to My direction, at that time hereaches the plafform of immortality, and becomes fit to enjoy thespiritual bliss of exchange of loving mellows with Me.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.29.34). At the time
of initiation, a devotee gives up all his material conceptions.Therefore, being in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he issituated on the transcendental platform. Thus having attained knowledgeand the spiritual platform, he always engages in the service of thespiritual body of Krsna. When one is freed from material connections inthis way, his body immediately becomes spiritual, and Krsna accepts Hisservice. However, Krsna does not accept anything from a person with amaterial conception of life. When a devotee no longer has any desire formaterial sense gratification, in his spiritual identity he engages inthe service of the Lord, for his dormant spiritual consciousnessawakens. This awakening of spiritual consciousness makes his bodyspiritual, and thus he becomes fit to render service to the Lord. Karmismay consider the body of a devotee material, but factually it is not,for a devotee has no conception of material enjoyment. If one thinksthat the body of a pure devotee is material, he is an offender, for thatis a vaisnava- aparadha. In this connection one should consult SrilaSanatana Gosvami's Brhad- bhagavatamrta (1.3.45 and 2.3.139).
                                   TEXT 195                     sanatanera dehe krsna kandu upajana
                       ama pariksite ihan dila pathana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna somehow or other maifested these itching sores on the body
of Sanatana Gosvami and sent him here to test Me.
                                   TEXT 196
                    ghrna kari' alingana na karitama yabe
                   krsna-thani aparadha-danda paitama tabe
                                 TRANSLATION     "If I had hated Sanatana Gosvami and had not embraced him, I would
certainly have been chastised for offenses to Krsna.
                                   TEXT 197
                     parisada-deha ei, na haya durgandha
                   prathama divase pailun catuhsama-gandha"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sanatana Gosvami is one of the associates of Krsna. There could
not be any bad odor from his body. On the first day I embraced him, Ismelled the aroma of catuhsama [a mixture of sandalwood pulp, camphor,aguru and musk]."                                   PURPORT
     An associate of the Lord is one whose body is fully engaged in the
service of the Lord. A materialist might see Sanatana Gosvami's body asbeing full of itching sores that exuded foul moisture and a bad smell.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, said that actually the aroma of hisbody was the excellent scent of a mixture of sandalwood pulp, camphor,musk and aguru. In the Garuda Purana this mixture, which is calledcatuhsama, is described as follows:     kasturikaya dvau bhagau     catvaras candanasya tu     kunkumasya trayas caikah     sasinah syat catuhsamam"Two parts of musk, four parts of sandalwood, three parts of aguru orsaffron and one part of camphor, when mixed together, form catuhsama."The aroma of catuhsama is very pleasing. It is also mentioned in theHari-bhakti-vilasa (6.115).
                                   TEXT 198                     vastutah prabhu yabe kaila alingana
                   tanra sparse gandha haila candanera sama
                                 TRANSLATION     In fact, however, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced the body of
Sanatana Gosvami, by the Lord's touch alone there was manifest afragrance exactly like that of sandalwood pulp.
                                   TEXT 199
                  prabhu kahe,--"sanatana, na maniha duhkha
                      tomara alingane ami pai bada sukha
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, "My dear Sanatana, do not be
aggrieved, for when I embrace you I actually get great pleasure.
                                   TEXT 200
                      e-vatsara tumi ihan raha ama-sane
                 vatsara rahi' tomare ami pathaimu vrndavane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Stay with Me at Jagannatha Puri for one year, and after that I
shall send you to Vrndavana."
                                   TEXT 201                     eta bali' punah tanre kaila alingana
kandu gela, anga haila suvarnera sama
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again embraced Sanatana
Gosvami. Thus immediately Sanatana's itches disappeared, and his entirebody resembled the color of gold.
                                   TEXT 202
                     dekhi' haridasa mane haila camatkara
                    prabhure kahena,--"ei bhangi ye tomara
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the change, Haridasa Thakura, greatly astonished, told the
Lord, "This is Your pastime.
                                   TEXT 203
                    sei jharikhandera pani tumi khaoyaila
                    sei pani-laksye inhara kandu upajaila
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, You made Sanatana Gosvami drink the water of
Jharikhanda, and You actually generated the consequent itching sores onhis body.
                                   TEXT 204
                     kandu kari' pariksa karile sanatane
                    ei lila-bhangi tomara keha nahi jane"
                                 TRANSLATION     "After thus causing these itching sores, You examined Saatana
Gosvami. No one can understand Your transcendental pastimes."
                                   TEXT 205
                     dunhe alingiya prabhu gela nijalaya
                   prabhura guna kahe dunhe hana prema-maya
                                 TRANSLATION     After embracing both Haridasa Thakura and Sanatana Gosvami, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to His residence. Then both HaridasaThakura and Sanatana Gosvami, in great ecstatic love, began to describe
the Lord's transcendental attributes.
                                   TEXT 206
                     ei-mata sanatana rahe prabhu-sthane
                   krsna-caitanya-guna-katha haridasa-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Sanatana Gosvami stayed under the care of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and discussed the transcendental qualities of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu with Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 207
                  dola-yatra dekhi' prabhu tanre vidaya dila
                     vrndavane ye karibena, saba sikhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     After they saw the Dola-yatra festival, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
instructed Sanatana Gosvami fully about what to do in Vrndavana and badehim farewell.
                                   TEXT 208
                     ye-kale vidaya haila prabhura carane
                   dui-janara viccheda-dasa na yaya varnane
                                 TRANSLATION     The scene of separation that took place when Sanatana Gosvami and
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took leave of one another is so piteous that itcannot be described herein.
                                   TEXT 209
                     yei vana-pathe prabhu gela vrndavana
                     sei-pathe yaite mana kaila sanatana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami decided to go to Vrndavana by the very forest path
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had traversed.
                                   TEXT 210
                ye-pathe, ye-grama-nadi-saila, yahan yei lila                  balabhadra-bhatta-sthane saba likhi' nila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami noted from Balabhadra Bhattacarya all the
villages, rivers and hills where Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had performedHis pastimes.
                                   TEXT 211
                    mahaprabhura bhakta-gane sabare miliya
                    sei-pathe cali' yaya se-sthana dekhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami met all the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ad
then, traveling by that same path, visited the places through which SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu had passed.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura writes in a song (Saranagati 31.3):
     gaura amara, ye saba sthane,     karala bhramana range     se-saba sthana, heriba ami,     pranayi-bhakata-sange."May I visit all the holy places associated with the lilas of LordCaitanya and His devotees." A devotee should make a point of visitingall the places where Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed His pastimes.Indeed, pure devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu even want to see theplaces He simply visited for only hoursorminutes.
                                   TEXT 212                  ye-ye-lila prabhu pathe kaila ye-ye-sthane
                     taha dekhi' premavesa haya sanatane
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as Sanatana Gosvami visited a place where Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had performed His pastimes on the way, he was immediatelyfilled with ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 213
                       ei-mate sanatana vrndavane aila
                    pache asi' rupa-gosani tanhare milila
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Sanatana Gosvami reached Vrndavana. Later Rupa Gosvami
came and met him.                                   TEXT 214
                eka-vatsara rupa-gosanira gaude vilamba haila
                 kutumbera `sthiti'-artha vibhaga kari' dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Rupa Gosvami was delayed in Bengal for a year because he was
dividing his money among his relatives to situate them in their properpositions.
                                   PURPORT     Although Srila Rupa Gosvami renounced his family life, he
nevertheless was not unjust to his family members. Even afterrenunciation, he returned to Bengal, where he properly divided whatevermoney he had and gave it to his relatives so that they would not beinconvenienced.
                                   TEXT 215                      gaude ye artha chila, taha anaila
                    kutumba-brahmana-devalaye banti' dila
                                 TRANSLATION     He collected whatever money he had accumulated in Bengal ad divided
it among his relatives, the brahmanas and the temples.
                                   TEXT 216
                   saba manah-katha gosani kari' nirvahana
                     niscinta hana sighra aila vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus after finishing all the tasks he had on his mind, he returned
to Vrndavana f ully satisfied.
                                   TEXT 217
                     dui bhai mili' vrndavane vasa kaila
                    prabhura ye ajna, dunhe saba nirvahila
                                 TRANSLATION     The brothers met at Vrndavaa, where they stayed to execute the will
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     sri-caitan ya-mano-'bhistam
     sthapitam yena bhu-tale     svayam rupah kada mahyam     dadati sva-padantikam"When will Srila Rupa Gosvami Prabhupada, who has established within thematerial world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, giveme shelter under his lotus feet?" Srila Rupa Gosvami and SanatanaGosvami were previously ministers directly in charge of the governmentof Nawab Hussain Shah, and they were also householders, but later theybecame gosvamis. A gosvami, therefore, is one who executes the will ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The title "gosvami" is not an inheriteddesignation; it is meant for a person who has controlled his sensegratification and dedicated his life to executing the order of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. Therefore Srila Sanatana Gosvami and Srila RupaGosvami became genuine gosvamis after dedicating their lives to theservice of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 218                   nana-sastra ani' lupta-tirtha uddharila
                     vrndavane krsna-seva prakasa karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila ROpa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami collected many revealed
scriptures, and from the evidence in those scriptures they excavated allthe lost sites of pilgrimage. Thus they established temples for theworship of Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 219
                    sanatana grantha kaila `bhagavatamrte'
                  bhakta-bhakti-krsna-tattva jani yaha haite
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Sanatana Gosvami compiled the Bhagavatamrta. From this book
one can understand who is a devotee, what is the process of devotionalservice, and who is Krsna, the Absolute Truth.
                                   TEXT 220
                siddhanta-sara grantha kaila `dasama-tippani'
                    krsna-lila-rasa-prema yaha haite jani
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Sanatana Gosvami wrote a commentary on the Tenth Cato known
as Dasama-tippani, from which we can understand the transcendentalpastimes and ecstatic love of Lord Krsna.                                   TEXT 221
              `hari-bhakti-vilasa'-grantha kaila vaisnava-acara
                     vaisnavera kartavya yahan paiye para
                                 TRANSLATION     He also compiled the Hari-bhakti-vilasa, from which we can
understand the standard behavior of a devotee and the full extent of aVaisnava's duty.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thaku ra writes: "The Hari-bhakti-
vilasa was originally compiled by Srila Sanatana Gosvami. Later, GopalaBhatta Gosvami produced a shortened version of it and added the Dig-darsini-tika. In the Hari-bhakti- vilasa there are so many quotationsfrom the satvata scriptures that sometimes it is inquired how theatheistic smartas can refuse to accept them and instead imagine someother opinions. What is recorded in the Hari-bhakti-vilasa strictlyfollows the Vedic scriptures and is certainly pure, but the attitude ofthe karmis is always one of giving up the conclusion of pure Vaisnavaunderstanding. Because the karmis are very much attached to the worldand material activities, they always try to establish atheisticprinciples that oppose the understanding of the Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 222                 ara yata grantha kaila, taha ke kare ganana
                   `madana-gopala-govindera seva'-prakasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Sanatana Gosvami also compiled many other books. Who can
enumerate them? The basic principle of all these books is to show us howto love Madana-mohana and Govindaji.
                                   PURPORT     The Bhakti-ratnakara refers to the following books by Srila
Sanatana Gosvami: (1) Brhad-bhagavatamrta, (2) Hari-bhakti-vilasa andhis commentary known as Dig-darsini, (3) Lila-stava and (4) thecommentary on the Tenth Canto of Srimad- Bhagavatam known as Vaisnava-tosani. Sanatana Gosvami compiled many, many books, all with the aim ofdescribing how to serve the principal Deities of Vrndavana--Govinda andMadana-gopala. Later, other Deities were gradually established, and theimportance of Vrndavana increased.
                                   TEXT 223                   rupa-gosani kaila `rasamrta-sindhu' sara
                   krsna-bhakti-rasera yahan paiye vistara                                 TRANSLATION
     Srila Rupa Gosvami also wrote many books, the most famous of which
is Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. From that book one can understand the essenceof devotional service to Krsna and the transcendental mellow one canderive from such service.
                                   TEXT 224
                  `ujjvala-nilamani'-nama grantha kaila ara
                    radha-krsna-lila-rasa tahan paiye para
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Rupa Gosvami also compiled the book named Ujjvala-nilamani,
from which one can understand, to the fullest limits, the loving affairsof Sri Sri Radha and Krsna.
                                   TEXT 225
           `vidagdha-madha va', `lalita-madha va;,--nataka- yuga la
                      krsna-lila-rasa tahan paiye sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     Srtla Rupa Gosvami also compiled two important dramas named
Vidagdhamadhava and Lalita-madhava, from which one can understand allthe mellows derived from the pastimes of Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 226
                 `dana-keli-kaumudi' adi laksa-grantha kaila
                    sei saba granthe vrajera rasa vicarila
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Rupa Gosvami compiled 100,000 verses, beginning with the book
Dana-keli-kaumudi. In all these scriptures he elaborately explained thetranscendental mellows of the activities of Vrndavana.
                                   PURPORT     Referring to the words laksa-grantha ("100,000 verses"), Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that the total number of verseswritten by Srila Rupa Gosvami is 100,000 (eka-laksa or laksa-grantha).The copyists count both the verses and the prose sections of theSanskrit works. One should not mistakenly think that Srila Rupa Gosvamicompiled 100,000 books. He actually wrote sixteen books, as mentioned inthe First Wave of the Bhakti-ratnakara (sri-rupa-gosvami grantha sodasakarila).                                   TEXT 227
                   tanra laghu-bhrata--sri-vallabha-anupama
                  tanra putra maha-pandita--jiva-gosani nama
                                 TRANSLATION     The son of Sri Vallabha, or Anupama, Srila Rupa Gosvami's younger
brother, was the great learned scholar named Srila Jiva Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 228
                   sarva tyaji' tenho pache aila vrndavana
                   tenha bhakti-sastra bahu kaila pracarana
                                 TRANSLATION     After renouncing everything, Srila Jiva Gosvami went to Vrndavana.
Later he also wrote many books on devotional service and expanded thework of preaching.
                                   TEXT 229
                `bhagavata-sandarbha'-nama kaila grantha-sara
                    bhagavata-siddhantera tahan paiye para
                                 TRANSLATION     In particular, Srila Jiva Gosvami compiled the book named
Bhagavata-sandarbha, or Sat-sandarbha, which is the essence of allscriptures. From this book one can obtain a conclusive understanding ofdevotional service and the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 230
                    `gopala-campu' nama grantha sara kaila
                     vraja-prema-lila-rasa-sara dekhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     He also compiled the book named Gopala-campu, which is the essence
of all Vedic literature. In this book he has exhibited the ecstaticloving transactions and pastimes of Radha and Krsna in Vrndavaa.
                                   TEXT 231
                 `sat sandarbhe' krsna-prema-tattva prakasila
                   cari-laksa grantha tenho vistara karila
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Sat-sandarbha Srila Jiva Gosvami set forth the truths about
the transcendental love of Krsna. In this way he expanded 400,000 versesin all his books.
                                   TEXT 232
                    jiva-gosani gauda haite mathura calila
                     nityananda-prabhu-thani ajna magila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Jiva Gosvami wanted to go to Mathura from Bengal, he requested
permission from Srila Nityananda Prabhu.
                                   TEXT 233
                  prabhu pritye ta-nra mathe dharila carana
                    rupa-sanatana-sambandhe kaila alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of Jiva Gosvami's relationship with Rupa Gosvami and
Sanatana Gosvami, who were greatly favored by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,Lord Nitya--nanda Prabhu placed His feet on the head of Srila JivaGosvami and embraced him.
                                   TEXT 234
                   ajna dila,--"sighra tumi yaha vrndavane
                   tomara vamse prabhu diyachena sei-sthane
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda Prabhu ordered, "Yes, go soon to Vrndavana. That
place has been awarded to your family, to your father and uncles, by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, and therefore you must go there immediately."
                                   TEXT 235
                     tanra ajnaya aila, ajna-phala paila
                  sastra kari' kata-kala `bhakti' pracarila
                                 TRANSLATION     By the order of Nityananda Prabhu, he went and actually achieved
the result of His order, for he compiled many books for a long time andpreached the cult of bhakti from Vrndavana.                                   TEXT 236
                      ei tina-guru, ara raghunatha-dasa
                 inha-sabara carana vandon, yanra muni `dasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     These three--Rupa Gosvami, Sanatana Gosvami and Jiva Gosvami--are
my spiritual masters, and so also is Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. Itherefore offer prayers at their lotus feet, for I am their servant.
                                   TEXT 237
                    ei ta' kahilun punah sanatana-sangame
                      prabhura asaya jani yahara sravane
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described the Lord's meeting again with Sanatana
Gosvami. By hearing this I can understand the Lord's desire.
                                   TEXT 238
                     caitanya-caritra ei--iksu-danda-sama
                      carvana karite haya rasa-asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     These characteristics of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are like sugar
cane that one can chew to relish transcendental juice.
                                   TEXT 239
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Fourth Chapter, describing Sanatana Gosvami's stay with theLord at Jagannatha Puri.
                                 Chapter Five
        How Pradyumna Misra Received Instructions from Ramananda Raya     The following summary of the Fifth Chapter is given by Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. Pradyumna Misra, aresident of Srihatta, came to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to hear fromHim about Lord Krsna and His pastimes. The Lord, however, sent him toSrila Ramananda Raya. Srila Ramananda Raya was training the deva-dasidancing girls in the temple, and when Pradyumna Misra heard about this,he returned to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord, however, elaboratelydescribed the character of Srila Ramananda Raya. Then Pradyumna Misrawent to see Ramananda Raya again to hear about the transcendental truthfrom him.     A brahmana from Bengal composed a drama about the activities of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu and went to Jagannatha Puri to show it to theassociates of the Lord. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's secretary,Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, heard the drama, he discerned a tinge ofMayavada philosophy and pointed it out to the author. Although SvarupaDamodara condemned the entire drama, by reference to secondary meaningsof the introductory verse he nevertheless satisfied the brahmana. Thatbrahmana poet thus became greatly obliged to Svarupa Damodara Gosvami,renounced his family connections and stayed at Jagannatha Puri with theassociates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 1                            vaigunya-kita-kalitah
                          paisun ya- vrana-p iditah                           dainyarnave nimagno'ham                          caitan ya- vaidyam asra ye
                                 TRANSLATION     I am infected by germs of material activity and suffering from
boils due to envy. Therefore, falling in an ocean of humiIity, I takeshelter of the great physician Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya saci-suta sri-krsna-caitanya
                    jaya jaya krpa-maya nityananda dhanya
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the son of mother Saci! All
glories to Sri Nityananda Prabhu! Indeed, He is the most gIorious andmerciful.
                                    TEXT 3
                   jayadvaita krpa-sindhu jaya bhakta-gana
                   jaya svarupa, gadadhara, rupa, sanatana
                                 TRANSLATION     I offer my respecfful obeisances unto Advaita Prabhu, the ocean of
mercy, and to all the devotees, such as Svarupa Damodara Gosvami,Gadadhara Pandita, Sri Rupa Gosvami and Sri Sanatana Gosvami.
                                    TEXT 4
                   eka-dina pradyumna-misra prabhura carane
                      dandavat kari' kichu kare nivedane
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Pradyumna Misra came to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
offering his respects and inquiring from Him with great submission.
                                    TEXT 5
                  "suna, prabhu, muni dina grhastha adhama!
                 kona bhagye panachon tomara durlabha carana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord," he said,"kindly hear me. I am a cripple-minded
householder, the most fallen of men, but somehow, by my good fortune, Ihave received the shelter of Your lotus feet, which are rarely to beseen.
                                    TEXT 6
                     krsna-katha sunibare mora iccha haya
                      krsna-katha kaha more hana sadaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I wish to hear topics concerning Lord Krsna constantly. Be
merciful unto me and kindly tell me something about Krsna."
                                    TEXT 7
                  prabhu kahena,--"krsna-katha ami nahi jani
                    sabe ramananda jane, tanra mukhe suni
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "I do not know about topics
concerning Lord Krsna. I think that only Ramananda Raya knows, for Ihear these topics from him.
                                    TEXT 8                  bhagye tomara krsna-katha sunite haya mana
                      ramananda-pasa yai' karaha sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is your good fortune that you are inclined to hear topics
regarding Krsna. The best course for you would be to go to Ramanada Rayaad hear these topics from him.
                                    TEXT 9
                  krsna-kathaya ruci tomara--bada bhagyavan
                    yara krsna-kathaya ruci, sei bhagyavan
                                 TRANSLATION     "I see that you have acquired a taste for hearing talks regarding
Krsna. Therefore you are extremely fortunate. Not only you but anyonewho has awakened such a taste is considered most fortunate.
                                   TEXT 10
                         dharmah svanusthitah pumsam
                            visvaksena-kathasu yah                            notpadayed yadi ratim                             srama eva hi kevalam
                                 TRANSLATION     " `A person who properly performs his regulative duties according
to varna and asrama but does not develop his dormant attachment forKrsna or awaken his taste to hear and chant about Krsna is certainlylaboring fruitlessly."'
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.8).                                   TEXT 11                 tabe pradyumna-misra gela ramanandera sthane
                      rayera sevaka tanre vasaila asane
                                 TRANSLATION     Pradyumna Misra, being thus advised by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
went to the home of Ramananda Raya. There the servant of Ramananda Rayagave him a proper place to sit down.
                                   TEXT 12                     darsana na pana misra sevake puchila
                    rayera vrtta-nta sevaka kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Unable to see Ramananda Raya immediately, Pradyumna Misra inquired
from the servant, who then gave a description of Sri Ramananda Raya.
                                   TEXT 13
                     "dui deva-kanya haya parama-sundari
                      nrtya-gite sunipuna, vayase kisori
                                 TRANSLATION     "There are two dancing girls who are extremely beautiful. They are
very youthful, and they are expert in dancing and singing.
                                   TEXT 14
                      sei dunhe lana raya nibhrta udyane
                      nija-nataka-gitera sikhaya nartane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Srila Ramananda Raya has taken these two girls to a solitary place
in his garden, where he is teaching and directing them to danceaccording to the songs he has composed for his drama.
                                   PURPORT     The drama being rehearsed by Ramananda Raya and the two young girls
was the well-known jagannatha-vallabha-nataka. The songs and dances weremeant for the pleasure of Lord Jagannatha; therefore Ramananda Raya waspersonally giving instructions on how to sing and dance for the drama.
                                   TEXT 15                    tumi ihan vasi' raha, ksaneke asibena
                      tabe yei ajna deha, sei karibena"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please sit here and wait for a few moments. As soon as he comes,
he will execute whatever order you give him."
                                   TEXT 16
                   tabe pradyumna-misra tahan rahila vasiya
                     ramananda nibhrte sei dui-jana lana                                 TRANSLATION
     While Pradyumna Misra remained seated there, Ramananda Raya took
the two girls to a solitary place.
                                   TEXT 17
                    sva-haste karena tara abhyanga-mardana
                   sva-haste karana snana, gatra sammarjana
                                 TRANSLATION     With his own hand, Sri Ramananda Raya massaged their bodies with
oil and bathed them with water. Indeed, Ramananda Raya cleansed theirentire bodies with his own hand.
                                   TEXT 18
                  sva-haste parana vastra, sarvanga mandana
                     tabu nirvikara raya-ramanandera mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Although he dressed the two young girls and decorated their bodies
with his own hand, he remained unchanged. Such is the mind of SrilaRamananda Raya.
                                   TEXT 19
                    kastha-pasana-sparse haya yaiche bhava
                 taruni-sparse ranianandera taiche `svabhava'
                                 TRANSLATION     While touching the young girls, he was like a person touching wood
or stone, for his body and mind were unaffected.
                                   TEXT 20
                      sevya-bujhi aropiya karena sevana
                     svabhavika dasi-bhava karena aropana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Ramananda Raya used to act in that way because he thought of
himself in his original position as a maidservant of the gopis. Thusalthough externally he appeared to be a man, internally, in his originalspiritual position, he considered himself a maidservant and consideredthe two girls gopis.                                   PURPORT
     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura writes in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya:
"Srila Ramananda Raya composed a drama named jagannatha-vallabha-nataka,and he engaged two young girls who were professional dancers and singersto demonstrate the ideology of the drama. Such girls, who are calleddeva-dasis, are still employed in the temple of Jagannatha, where theyare called maharis. Sri Ramananda Raya engaged two such girls, andbecause they were meant to play the parts of gopis, he taught them howto awaken thoughts like those of the gopis. Because the gopis areworshipable personalities, Ramananda Raya, who considered the two girlsgopis and himself their maidservant, engaged in their service bymassaging their bodies with oil to cleanse them completely. BecauseRamananda Raya always placed himself in the position of a maidservant ofthe gopis, his rehearsal with the girls was actually on the spiritualplatform."     Because there was no question of personal sense gratification whenSri Ramananda Raya was serving the girls, his mind was steady and hisbody untransformed. This is not to be imitated, nor is such a mentalitypossible for anyone but Sri Ramananda Raya, as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuwill explain. The example of Sri Ramananda Raya is certainly unique. Theauthor of Sri Caitanya- caritamrta has given this description because inperfect devotional service one can attain such a position. Nevertheless,one must understand this subject very seriously and never attempt toimitate such activities.
                                   TEXT 21                  mahaprabhura bhakta-ganera durgama mahima
                   tahe ramanandera bhava-bhakti-prema-sima
                                 TRANSLATION     The greatness of the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is
exceedingly difficult to understand. Sri Ramananda Raya is unique amongthem all, for he showed how one can extend his ecstatic love to theextreme limit.
                                   TEXT 22
                       tabe sei dui-jane nrtya sikhaila
                     gitera gudha artha abhinaya karaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya directed the two girls how to dance and express the
deep meaning of his songs through dramatic performances.
                                   TEXT 23
                  sancari, sattvika, sthayi-bha vera laksana                     mukhe netre abhinaya kare prakatana
                                 TRANSLATION     He taught them how to express the symptoms of continuous, natural
and transitional ecstasies with the movements of their faces, their eyesand the other parts of their bodies.
                                   TEXT 24
                    bhava-prakatana-lasya raya ye sikhaya
                    jagannathera age dunhe prakata dekhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Through the feminine poses and dances they were taught by Ramananda
Raya, the two girls precisely exhibited all these expressions of ecstasybefore Lord Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 25
                     tabe sei dui-jane prasada khaoyaila
                     nibhrte dunhare nija-ghare pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Ramananda Raya fed the two girls sumptuous prasada and sent
them to their homes unexposed.
                                   TEXT 26
                     prati-dina raya aiche karaya sadhana
                    kon jane ksudra jiva kanha tanra mana?
                                 TRANSLATION     Every day he tralned the two deva-dasis how to dance. Who among the
small living entities, their minds always absorbed in material sensegratification, could understand the mentality of Sri Ramananda Raya?
                                   PURPORT     Ramananda Raya's service to the gopis for the satisfaction of Krsna
is purely an affair of the spiritual world. Unless one is fully situatedin the spiritual atmosphere, the activities of Ramananda Raya are mostdifficult to understand.
                                   TEXT 27                      misrera agamana raye sevaka kahila
                      sighra ramananda tabe sabhate aila                                 TRANSLATION
     When the servant informed Ramananda Raya of Pradyumna Misra's
arrival, Ramananda Raya immediately went to the assembly room.
                                   TEXT 28
                    misrere namaskara kare sammana kariya
                       nivedana kare kichu vinita hana
                                 TRANSLATION     He offered his obeisances to Pradyumna Misra with all respect ad
then, with great humility, spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 29
                    "bahu-ksana aila, more keha na kahila
                      tomara carane mora aparadha ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sir, you came here long ago, but no one informed me. Therefore I
have certainly become an offender at your lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 30
                   tomara agamane mora pavitra haila ghara
                     ajna kara, kya karon tomara kinkara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My entire home has been purified by your arrival. Kindly order me.
What can I do for you? I am your servant."
                                   TEXT 31
                   misra kahe,--"toma dekhite haila agamane
                    apana pavitra kailun tomara darasane"
                                 TRANSLATION     Pradyumna Misra replied, "I came simply to see you. Now I have
purified myself by seeing Your Honor."
                                   TEXT 32
                     atikala dekhi' misra kichu na kahila                     vidaya ha-iya misra nija-ghara gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Because Pradyumna Misra saw that it was late, he did not say
anything else to Ramananda Raya. Instead, he took leave of him andreturned to his own home.
                                   TEXT 33
                     ara dina misra aila prabhu-vidyamane
               prabhu kahe,--`krsna-katha sunila raya-sthane'?
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, when Pradyumna Misra arrived in the presence of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord inquired, "Have you heard talks aboutKrsna from Sri Ramananda Raya?"
                                   TEXT 34
                    tabe misra ramanandera vrttanta kahila
                     suni' mahaprabhu tabe kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Pradyumna Misra thereupon described the activities of Sri Ramananda
Raya. After hearing about these activities, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhubegan to speak.
                                  TEXT 35-36
                "ami ta' sannyasi, apanare vilakta kari' mani
                darsana rahu dure, `prakrtira' nama yadi suni
                      tabahin vikara paya mora tanu-mana
                    prakrti-darsane sthira haya kon jana?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am a sannyasi," He said, "and I certainly consider Myself
renounced. But not to speak of seeing a woman, if I even hear the nameof a woman, I feel changes in My mind and body. Therefore who couldremain unmoved by the sight of a woman? It is very difficult.
                                   TEXT 37
                   ramananda rayera katha suna, sarva-jana
                  kahibara katha nahe, yaha ascarya-kathana                                 TRANSLATION
     "Everyone please hear these topics about Ramananda Raya, although
they are so wonderful and uncommon that they should not be spoken.
                                   TEXT 38
                      eke deva-dasi, ara sundari taruni
                       tara saba anga-seva karena apani
                                 TRANSLATION     "The two professional dancing girls are beautiful ad youthful, yet
Sri Ramananda Raya personally massages oil upon their bodies.
                                   TEXT 39
                   snanadi karaya, para ya vasa- vibhusana
                   guhya angera haya taha darsana-sparsana
                                 TRANSLATION     "He personally bathes and dresses them and decorates them with
ornaments. In this way, he naturally sees and touches the private partsof their bodies.
                                   TEXT 40
                     tabu nirvikara raya-ramanandera mana
                     nana-bhavodgara tare karaya siksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Nevertheless, the mind of Sri Ramananda Raya never chages,
although he teaches the girls how to physically express all thetransformations of ecstasy.
                                   TEXT 41
                   nirvikara deha-mana--kastha-pasana-sama!
                    ascarya,--taruni-sparse nirvikara mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "His mind is as steady as wood or stone. Indeed, it is wonderful
that even when he touches such young girls, his mind never changes.
                                   TEXT 42                       eka ramanandera haya ei adhikara
                       tate jani aprakrta-deha tanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The authority for such acts is the prerogative of Ramananda Raya
alone, for I can understand that his body is not material but has beencompletely transformed into a spiritual entity.
                                   TEXT 43
                    tanhara manera bhava tenha jane matra
                     taha janibare ara dvitiya nahi patra
                                 TRANSLATION     "He alone, and no one else, can understand the position of his
mind.
                                   TEXT 44
                     kintu sastra-drstye eka kari anumana
                     sri-bhagavata-sastra--tahate pramana
                                 TRANSLATION     "But I can make a guess in terms of directions from the sastra.
SrimadBhagavatam, the Vedic scripture, gives the direct evidence in thismatter.
                                  TEXT 45-46
                   vraja-vadhu-sange krsnera rasadi-vilasa
                      yei jana kahe, sune kariya visvasa
                   hrd-roga-kama tanra tat-kale haya ksaya
                   tina-guna-ksobha nahe, `maha-dhira' haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "When one hears or describes with great faith the pastimes of Lord
Krsna, such as His rasa dance with the gopis, the disease of lustydesires in his heart and the agitation caused by the three modes ofmaterial nature are immediately nullified, and he becomes sober andsilent.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments in this
connection, "Any person seriously inclined to hear about the pastimes ofKrsna's rasa dance, as mentioned in Srimad-Bhagavatam, with great faithand a transcendental, spiritually inspired mind, is immediately freed
from the natural lusty desires found within the heart of a materialisticman."     When a pure Vaisnava speaks on Srimad-Bhagavatam and another pureVaisnava hears Srimad-Bhagavatam from such a realized soul, both of themlive in the transcendental world, where the contamination of the modesof material nature cannot touch them. Freed from the contamination ofthe modes of nature, the speaker and hearer are fixed in atranscendental mentality, knowing that their position on thetranscendental platform is to serve the Supreme Lord. The class known asprakrta-sahajiya, who consider the transcendental pastimes of Lord Krsnasomething like the behavior between a man and a woman in the materialfield, artificially think that hearing the rasa-lila will help them bydiminishing the lusty desires of their diseased hearts. But because theydo not follow the regulative principles but instead violate evenordinary morals, their contemplation of rasa-lila is a futile attempt,which sometimes results in their imitating the dealings of the gopis andLord Krsna. To forbid such habits of the prakrta-sahajiyas, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu has excluded their material intelligence by using the wordvisvasa ("faith"). In Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.31), Srila SukadevaGosvami says:     naitat samacarej jatu     manasapi hy anisvarah     vinasyaty acaran maudhyad     yatha rudro'bdhijam visam"Certainly one who is not the Supreme Personality of Godhead shouldnever, even within his mind, imitate the activities of thetranscendental rasa-lila of Krsna. If out of ignorance one does so, hewill be destroyed, just as if he were to imitate Lord Siva, who drankpoison produced from the ocean."
                                   TEXT 47                    ujjvala madhura prema-bhakti sei paya
                     anande krsna-madhurye vihare sadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Tasting the transcendental, effulgent, sweetly ecstatic love of
Krsna, such a person can enjoy life twenty-four hours a day in thetranscendental bIiss of the sweetness of Krsna's pastimes.
                                   TEXT 48
                  vikriditam vraja-vadhubhir idam ca visnoh
                   sraddhanvito'nusrnuyad atha varnayed yah                  bhaktim param bhagavati pratilabhya kamam                    hrd-rogam asv apahinoty acirena dhirah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `A transcendentally sober person who, with faith and love
continuously hears from a realized soul about the activities of LordKrsna in His rasa dance with the gopis, or one who describes such
activities, can attain full transcendental devotional service at thelotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus lusty materialdesires, which are the heart disease of all materialistic persons, arefor him quickly and completely vaquished.'
                                   PURPORT     All the activities of Lord Krsna are transcendental, and the gopis
are also transcendentally situated. Therefore the activities of thegopis and Lord Krsna, if seriously understood, will certainly free onefrom material attachment. Then there is no possibility that lustymaterial desires will awaken.
“Caitanya-caritamrita – Antya Lila ” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Summary: Caitanya-caritamrita is the biography of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
written by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami in the 16
th century, now published
with elaborate translations and commentaries in English by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami. The multi-volume Caitanya-caritamrita is dividedinto three sections, Adi Lila, Madhya Lila, and Antya Lila, representingthe beginning, middle, and concluding pastimes of Lord ChaitanyaMahaprabhu. This file comprises the text of the several volumes thatmake up the Antya Lila section.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluationcopy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyrightinformation intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Caitanya Caritamrita” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1975-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .
                                  TEXT 49-50
                    ye sune, ye pade, tanra phala etadrsi
                      sei bhavavista yei seve ahar-nisi                    tanra phala ki kahimu, kahane na yaya
                  nitya-siddha sei, praya-siddha tanra kaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "If a transcendentally situated person, following in the footsteps
of Srila Rupa Gosvami, hears and speaks about the rasa-lila dance ofKrsna and is always absorbed in thoughts of Krsna while serving the Lordday and night within his mind, what shall I say about the result? It isso spiritually exalted that it
cannot be expressed in words. Such a person is an eternally liberated
assoc.iate of the Lord, and his body is completely spiritualized.Although he is visible to material eyes, he is spiritually situated, andall his activities are spiritual. By the will of Krsna, such a devoteeis understood to possess a spiritual body.
                                   TEXT 51
                      raganuga-marge jani rayera bhajana
                 siddha-deha-tulya, tate `prakrta' nahe mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Srila Ramananda Raya is situated on the path of spontaneous love
of Godhead. Therefore he is in his spiritual body, and his mind is notmaterially affected.
                                   TEXT 52
                     amiha rayera sthane suni krsna-katha
                   sunite iccha haya yadi, punah yaha tatha
                                 TRANSLATION     "I also hear topics about Krsna from Ramananda Raya. If you want to
hear such topics, go to him again.
                                   TEXT 53
                    mora nama la-iha,--`teho pathaila more
                   tomara sthane krsna-katha sunibara tare'
                                 TRANSLATION     "You can take My name before him, saying, `He has sent me to hear
about Lord Krsna from you.'
                                   TEXT 54                   sighra yaha, yavat tenho achena sabhate"
                   eta suni' pradyumna-misra calila turite
                                 TRANSLATION     "Go hastily while he is in the assembly room." Hearing this,
Pradyumna Misra immediately departed.
                                   TEXT 55
                     raya-pasa gela, raya pranati karila
                     `ajna kara, ye lagi' agamana haila'
                                 TRANSLATION     Pradyumna Misra went to Ramananda Raya, who offered him respectful
obeisances and said, "Please order me. For what purpose have you come?"
                                   TEXT 56
                    misra kahe,--`mahaprabhu pathaila more
                   tomara sthane krsna-katha sunibara tare'
                                 TRANSLATION     Pradyumna Misra answered, "Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has sent me to
hear topics about Lord Krsna from you."
                                   TEXT 57
                     suni, ramananda raya haila premavese
                      kahite lagila kichu manera harise
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Ramananda Raya became absorbed in ecstatic love ad
began to speak with great transcendental pleasure.
                                   TEXT 58
                "prabhura ajnaya krsna-katha sunite aila etha
                    iha va-i maha-bhagya ami paba kotha?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Following the instruction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, you have
come to hear about Krsna. This is my great fortune. How else would I getsuch an opportunity?"                                   TEXT 59
                      eta kahi tare lana nibhrte vasila
                   `ki katha sunite caha?' misrere puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     Saying this, Sri Ramananda Raya took Pradyumna Misra to a secluded
place and inquired from him, "What kind of krsna-katha do you want tohear from me?"
                                   TEXT 60
                     tenho kahe,--"ye kahila vidyanagare
                      sei katha krame tumi kahiba amare
                                 TRANSLATION     Pradyumna Misra replied, "Kindly tell me about the same topics you
spoke about at Vidyanagara.
                                   TEXT 61
                  anera ki katha, tumi--prabhura upadesta.i
                   ami ta' bhiksuka vipra, tumi--mora posta
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are an instructor even for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, not to
speak of others. I am but a beggar brahmana, and you are my maintainer.
                                   TEXT 62
                   bhala, manda--kichu ami puchite na jani
                    `dina' dekhi' krpa kari' kahiba apani"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I do not know how to inquire, for I do not know what is good and
what is bad. Seeing me to be poor in knowledge, kindly speak whatever isgood for me by your own good will."
                                   TEXT 63
                      tabe ramananda krame kahite lagila
                     krsna-katha-rasamrta-sindhu uthalila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereupon Ramananda Raya gradually began speaking on topics of
Krsna. Thus the ocean of the transcendental mellow of those topicsbecame agitated.
                                   TEXT 64
                  apane prasna kari' pache karena siddhanta
                    trtiya prahara haila, nahe katha-anta
                                 TRANSLATION     He began personally posing questions and then answering them with
conclusive statements. When afternoon came, the topics still did notend.
                                   TEXT 65
                    vakta- srota kahe sune dunhe premavese
                   atma-smrti nahi, kahan janiba dina-sese
                                 TRANSLATION     The speaker and listener spoke and heard in ecstatic love. Thus
they forgot their bodily consciousness. How, then, could they perceivethe end of the day?
                                   TEXT 66
                     sevaka kahila,--`dina haila avasana,
                    tabe raya krsna-kathara karila visrama
                                 TRANSLATION     The servant informed them, "The day has already ended." Then
Ramananda Raya ended his discourses about Krsna.
                                   TEXT 67
                     bahu-sammana kari' misre vidaya dila
                `krtartha ha-ilana' bali' misra nacite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya paid great respect to Pradyumna Misra ad bade him
farewell. Pradyumna Misra said, "I have become very satisfied." He thenbegan to dance.
                                   TEXT 68                    ghare giya misra kaila snana, bhojana
                  sandhya-kale dekhite aila prabhura carana
                                 TRANSLATION     After returning home, Pradyumna Misra bathed and ate his meal. In
the evening he came to see the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 69
                     prabhura carana vande ullasita-mane
                 prabhu kake,--`krsna-katha ha-ila sravane'?
                                 TRANSLATION     In great happiness he worshiped the lotus feet of Srt Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. The Lord inquired, "Have you heard topics about Krsna?"
                                   TEXT 70
                  misra kahe,--"prabhu, more krtartha karila
                      krsna-kathamrtarnave more dubaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Pradyumna Misra said, "My dear Lord, You have made me extremely
obliged to You because You have drowned me in a nectarean ocean of talksabout Krsna.
                                   TEXT 71
                     ramananda raya-katha kahile na haya
                 `manusya' nahe raya, krsna-bhakti-rasa-maya
                                 TRANSLATION     "I cannot properly describe the discourses of Ramananda Raya, for
he is not an ordinary human being. He is fully absorbed in thedevotional service of the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     One is forbidden to accept the guru, or spiritual master, as an
ordinary human being (gurusu nara-matih). When Ramananda Raya spoke toPradyumna Misra, Pradyumna Misra could understand that Ramananda Rayawas not an ordinary human being. A spiritually advanced person who actswith authority, as the spiritual master, speaks as the SupremePersonality of Godhead dictates from within. Thus it is not he that ispersonally speaking. When a pure devotee or spiritual master speaks,what he says should be accepted as having been directly spoken by theSupreme Personality of Godhead in the parampara system.                                   TEXT 72
                       ara eka katha raya kahila amare
                   `krsna-katha-vakta kari' na janiha more
                                 TRANSLATION     "There is one other thing Ramananda Raya said to me. `Do not
consider me the speaker in these talks about Krsna.
                                   TEXT 73
                  mora mukhe katha kahena apane gauracandra
                yaiche kahaya, taiche kahi,--yena vina-yantra
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Whatever I speak is personally spoken by Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Like a stringed instrument, I vibrate whatever He causes meto speak.
                                   TEXT 74
                    mora mukhe kahaya katha, kare paracara
                     prthivite ke janibe e-lila tanhara?'
                                 TRANSLATION     " `In this way the Lord speaks through my mouth to preach the cult
of Krsna consciousness. Within the world, who will understand thispastime of the Lord?'
                                   TEXT 75
                     ye-saba sunilun, krsna-rasera sagara
                    brahmadi-devera e saba na haya gocara
                                 TRANSLATION     "What I have heard from Ramananda Raya is like a nectarean ocean of
discourses about Krsna. Even the demigods, beginning with Lord Brahma,cannot understand all these topics.
                                   TEXT 76
                      hena `rasa' pana more karaila tumi
                    janme janme tomara paya vikailana ami
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, You have made me drink this transcendental nectar of
krsna-katha. Therefore I am sold to Your lotus feet, life after life."
                                   TEXT 77
                   prabhu kahe,--"ramananda vinayera khani
                      apanara katha para-munde dena ani'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "Ramananda Raya is a source of all
humility. Therefore he has attributed his own words to another'sintelligence.
                                   TEXT 78
                   mahanubhavera ei sahaja `svabhava' haya
                       apanara guna nahi apane kahaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "This is a natural characteristic of those advanced in devotional
service. They do not personally speak of their own good qualities."
                                   TEXT 79
                     ramananda-rayera ei kahilu guna-lesa
                    pradyumna misrere yaiche kaila upadesa
                                 TRANSLATION     I have described but a fraction of the transcendental attributes of
Ramananda Raya, as revealed when he instructed Pradyumna Misra.
                                   TEXT 80
                  `grhastha' hana nahe raya sad-vargera vase
                       `visayi' hana sannyasire upadese
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Ramananda Raya was a householder, he was not under the
control of the six kinds of bodily change. Although apparently a pounds-and-shillings man, he advised even persons in the renounced order.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Ramananda Raya externally appeared to be a grhastha who was
under the influence of the external, material energy, not a self-controlled brahmaca-ri, vanaprastha or sannyasi. Grhasthas
(householders) who are under the influence of the external energy accepthouseholder life for the purpose of sense enjoyment, but atranscendentally situated Vaisnava is not subjected to the influence ofthe senses by the Lord's material rule of the six kinds of bodily change(kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, and matsarya), even when he plays thepart of a grhastha. Thus although Srila Ramananda Raya acted as agrhastha and was accepted as an ordinary pounds-and-shillings man, hewas always absorbed in the transcendental pastimes of Lord Krsna.Therefore his mind was spiritually situated, and he was interested onlyin the subject of Krsna. Ramananda Raya was not among the Mayavadiimpersonalists or materialistic logicians who are opposed to theprinciples of Lord Krsna's transcendental pastimes. He was alreadyspiritually situated in the order of renounced life; therefore he wasable to turn sand into gold by spiritual potency, or, in other words, toelevate a person from a material to a spiritual position.
                                   TEXT 81                      ei-saba guna tanra prakasa karite
                    misrere pathaila tahan sravana karite
                                 TRANSLATION     To demonstrate the transcendental attributes of Ramananda Raya, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu sent Pradyumna Misra to hear discourses about Krsnafrom him.
                                   TEXT 82
                   bhakta-guna prakasite prabhu bhala jane
                 nana-bhangite guna prakasi' nija-labha mane
                                 TRANSLATION     The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, knows
very well how to demonstrate the quaIities of His devotees. Therefore,acting like an artistic painter, He does so in various ways andconsiders this His personal profit.
                                   TEXT 83
                 ara eka `svabhava' gaurera suna, bhakta-gana
                    aisvarya-svabhava gudha kare prakatana
                                 TRANSLATION     There is yet another characteristic of Lord Sri Caitaya Mahaprabhu.
O devotees, listen carefully to how He manifests His opulence andcharacteristics, although they are exceptionally deep.                                   TEXT 84
                  sannyasi pandita-ganera karite garva nasa
                   nica-sudra-dvara karena dharmera prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     To vanquish the false pride of so-called renunciants and learned
scholars, He spreads real religious principles, even through a sudra, orlowborn fourthclass man.
                                   PURPORT     When a man is greatly learned in the Vedanta-sutras, he is known as
pandita, or a learned scholar. Generally this qualification s attributedto brahmanas and san- nyasis. Sannyasa, the renounced order of life, isthe topmost position for a brahmana, a member of the highest of the fourvarnas (brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and sudra). According to publicopinion, a person born in a brahmana family, duly reformed by thepurificatory processes and properly initiated by a spiritual master, isan authority on Vedic literature. When such a person is offered thesannyasa order, he comes to occupy the topmost position. The brahmana issupposed to be the spiritual master of the other three varnas, namelyksatriya, vaisya and sudra, and the sannyasi is supposed to be thespiritual master even of the exalted brahmanas.     Generally brahmanas and sannyasis are very proud of their spiritualpositions. Therefore, to cut down their false pride, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu preached Krsna consciousness through Ramananda Raya, who wasneither a member of the renounced order nor a born brahmana. indeed, SriRamananda Raya was a grhastha belonging to the sudra class, yet SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu arranged for him to be the master who taughtPradyumna Misra, a highly qualified brahmana born in a brahmana family.Even Sr- Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself, although belonging to therenounced order, took instruction from Sri Ramananda Raya. In this waySri Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited His opulence through Sri RamanandaRaya. That is the special significance of this incident.      Accordingto Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's philosophy, yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei`guru' haya: anyone who knows the science of Krsna can become aspiritual master, without reference to whether or not he is a brahmanaor sannyasi. Ordinary people cannot understand the essence of sastra,nor can they understand the pure character, behavior and abilities ofstrict followers of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's principles. The Krsnaconsciousness movement is creating pure, exalted Vaisnavas even fromthose born in families considered lower than those of sudras. This isproof that a Vaisnava may appear in any family, as confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam:     kirata-h unandhra-pulinda-pulkasa     abhira-sumbha yavanah khasadayah     ye'nye ca papa yad-apasrayasrayah     sudhyanti tasmai prabhavisnave namah"Kirata, Huna, Andhra, Pulinda, Pulkasa, Abhira, Sumbha, Yavana and theKhasa races, and even others addicted to sinful acts, can be purified bytaking shelter of the devotees of the Lord, for He is the supreme power.I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him." (SB. 2.4.18) By thegrace of the Supreme Lord Visnu, one can be completely purified, become
a preacher of Krsna consciousness, and become the spiritual master ofthe entire world. This principle is accepted in all Vedic literature.Evidence can be quoted from authoritative sastras showing how a lowbornperson can become the spiritual master of the entire world. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu is to be considered the most munificent personality, for Hedistributes the real essence of Vedic sastras to anyone who becomesqualified by becoming His sincere servant.
                                   TEXT 85             `bhakti', `prema', `tattva' kahe raye kari' `vakta'
                   apani pradyumna-misra-saha haya `srota'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu preached about devotional service, ecstatic
love and the Absolute Truth by making Ramananda Raya, a grhastha born ina low family, the speaker. Then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself, theexalted brahmana-sannyasi, and Pradyumna Misra, the purified brahmana,both became the hearers of Ramananda Raya.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura says in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya that
sannyasis in the line of Sankaracarya always think that they haveperformed all the duties of brahmanas and that, furthermore, havingunderstood the essence of Vedanta- sutra and become sannyasis, they arethe natural spiritual masters of all society. Similarly, persons born inbrahmana families think that because they execute the ritualisticceremonies recommended in the Vedas and follow the principles of smrti,they alone can become spiritual masters of society. These highly exaltedbrahmanas think that unless one is born in a brahmana family, one cannotbecome a spiritual master and teach the Absolute Truth. To cut down thepride of these birthright brahmanas and Mayavadi sannyasis, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu proved that a person like Ramananda Raya, although born in asudra family and situated in the grhastha-asrama, can become thespiritual master of such exalted personalities as Himself and PradyumnaMisra. This is the principle of the Vaisnava cult, as evinced in theteachings of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. A person who knows what isspiritual and what is material and who is firmly fixed in the spiritualposition can be jagad-guru, the spiritual master of the entire world.One cannot become jagad- guru simply by advertising oneself as jagad-guru without knowing the essential principles for becoming jagad-guru.Even people who never see what a jagad- guru is and never talk withother people become puffed-up sannyasis and declare themselves jagad-gurus. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not like this. Any person who knowsthe science of Krsna and who is fully qualified in spiritual life canbecome jagad-guru. Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally took lessonsfrom Sri Ramananda Raya and also sent Pradyumna Misra, an exaltedbrahmana, to take lessons from him.
                                   TEXT 86                    haridasa- dvara nama-mahatmya-prakasa
                    sanatana-dvara bhakti-siddhanta-vilasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited the glories of the holy name of
the Lord through Haridasa Thakura, who was born in a Mohammedan family.Similarly, He exhibited the essence of devotional service throughSanatana Gosvami, who had almost been converted into a Mohammedan.
                                   TEXT 87
                    sri-rupa-dvara vrajera prema-rasa-lila
                  ke bujhite pare gambhira caitanyera khela?
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord also fully exhibited the ecstatic love and trascendental
pastimes of Vrndavana through Srila Rupa Gosvami. Considering all this,who can understand the deep plans of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu?
                                   TEXT 88
                     sri-caitanya-lila ei--amrtera sindhu
                    trijagat bhasaite pare yara eka bindu
                                 TRANSLATION     The activities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are just like an ocean of
nectar. Even a drop of this ocean ca inundate all the three worlds.
                                   PURPORT     To inundate the three worlds with nectar is the purpose of the
pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. How this could be possible wasexhibited by Srila Raghunatha Gosvami and later by Thakura Narottamadasa and Syamananda Gosvami, who all represented the mercy of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. Now that same mercy is overflooding the entireworld through the Krsna consciousness movement. The present Krsnaconsciousness movement is nondifferent from the pastimes performed bySri Caitanya Mahaprabhu when He was personally present, for the sameprinciples are being followed and the same actions performedwithoutfail.
                                   TEXT 89                     caitanya-caritamrta nitya kara pana
                yaha haite `premananda;, `bhakti-tattva-jnana'
                                 TRANSLATION     0 devotees, relish daily the nectar of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta ad
the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for by doing so one can mergein the transcendental bliss and full knowledge of devotional service.
                                   TEXT 90
                     ei-mata mahaprabhu bhakta-gana lana
                      nilacale viharaye bhakti pracariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Lord Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu, accompanied by His associates,
His pure devotees, enjoyed transcendental bliss in Jagannatha Puri[Nilacala] preaching the bhakti cult in many ways.
                                   TEXT 91
                     banga-desi eka vipra prabhura carite
                   nataka kari' lana aila prabhuke sunaite
                                 TRANSLATION     A brahmana trom Bengal wrote a drama about the characteristics of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and came with his manuscript to induce the Lordto hear it.
                                   TEXT 92
                      bhagavan-acarya-sane tara paricaya
                     tanre mili' tanra ghare karila alaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The brahmana was acquainted with Bhagavan Acarya, one of the
devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Therefore after meeting him atJagannatha Puri, the brahmana made his residence at Bhagavan Acarya' shome.
                                   TEXT 93
                     prathame nataka tenho tanre sunaila
                   tanra sange aneka vaisnava nataka sunila
                                 TRANSLATION     First the brahmana induced Bhagavan Acarya to hear the drama, and
then many other devotees joined Bhagavan Acarya in listening to it.
                                   TEXT 94                    sabei prasamse nataka `parama uttama'
                    mahaprabhure sunaite sabara haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the Vaisnavas pralsed the drama, saying,"Very good, very good."
They also desired for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to hear the drama.
                                   TEXT 95
                 gita, sloka, grantha, kavitva--yei kari' ane
                     prathame sunaya sei svarupera sthane
                                 TRANSLATION     Customarily, anyone who composed a song, verse, literary
composition or poem about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu first had to bring itto Svarupa Damodara Gosvami to be heard.
                                   TEXT 96
                 svarupa-thani uttare yadi, lana, tanra mana
                     tabe mahaprabhu-thani karaya sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     If passed by Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, it could be presented for
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to hear.
                                   TEXT 97
                  `rasabhasa' ha ya yadi `siddhanta-virodha,
                   sahite na pare prabhu, mane haya krodha
                                 TRANSLATION     If there were a hint that transcendental mellows overlapped in a
manner contrary to the principles of the bhakti cult, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu would not tolerate it and would become very angry.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura quotes the following
definition of rasabhasa from the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (Uttara-vibhaga,Ninth Wave, 1-3,20,22,24):     purvam evanusistena     vikala rasa-laksana     rasa eva rasabhasa     rasajnair anukirtitah     syus tridhoparasas canu-     rasas caparasas ca te
     uttama madhyamah proktah     kanisthas cety ami kramat     praptaih sthayi-vibhavanu-     bhavadyais tu virupatam     santadayo rasa eva     dvadasoparasa matah     bhak tadibhir vibhavadyaih     krsna-sambandha- varjitaih     rasa hasyadayah sapta     santas canurasa matah     krsna-tat-pratipaksas ced     visayasrayatam gatah     hasadinam tada te'tra     prajnair aparasa matah      bhavah sarve tadabhasa     rasabhasas ca kecana     ami prokta- rasabhijnaih     sarve'pi rasanad rasahA mellow temporarily appearing transcendental but contradicting mellowspreviously stated and lacking some of a mellow's necessities is calledrasabhasa, an overlapping mellow, by advanced devotees who know how totaste transcendental mellows. Such mellows are called uparasa(submellows), anurasa (imitation transcendental mellows) and aparasa(opposing transcendental mellows). Thus the overlapping oftranscendental mellows is described as being first giade, second gradeor third grade. When the twelve mellows--such as neutrality,servitorship and friendship--are characterized by adverse sthayi-bhava,vibhava and anubhava ecstasies, they are known as uparasa, submellows.When the seven indirect transcendental mellows and the dried up mellowof neutrality are produced by devotees and moods not directly related toKrsna and devotional service in ecstatic love, they are described asanurasa, imitation mellows. If Krsna and the enemies who harbor feelingsof opposition toward Him are respectively the object and abodes of themellow of laughter, the resuiting feelings are called aparasa, opposingmellows. Experts in distinguishing one mellow from another sometimesaccept some overlapping transcendental mellows (rasabhasa) as rasas dueto their being pleasurable and tasteful. Srila Visvanatha Cakr;vartiThakura says, paraspara-vairayor yadi yogas tada rasabhasah: "When twoopposing transcendental mellows overlap, they produce rasabhasa, or anoverlapping of transcendental mellows."
                                   TEXT 98                      ataeva prabhu kichu age nahi sune
                      ei maryada prabhu kariyache niyame
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would not hear anything before
Svarupa Damodara heard it first. The Lord made this etiquette aregulative principle.
                                   TEXT 99                    svarupera thani acarya kaila nivedana
                  eka vipra prabhura nataka kariyache uttama
                                 TRANSLATION     Bhagavan Acarya submitted to Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, "A good
brahmana has prepared a drama about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that appearsexceptionally well composed.
                                   TEXT 100
                    adau tumi suna, yadi tomara mana mane
                   pache mahaprabhure tabe karaimu sravane
                                 TRANSLATION     "First you hear it, and if it is acceptable to your mind, I shall
request Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to hear it."
                                   TEXT 101
                   svarupa kahe,--"tumi `gopa' parama-udara
                    ye-se sastra sunite iccha upaje tomara
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami replied, "Dear Bhagavan Acarya, you are a
very liberal cowherd boy. Sometimes the desire awakens within you tohear any kind of poetry.
                                   TEXT 102
                 `yadva-tadva' kavira vakye haya `rasabhasa'
                   siddhanta-viruddha sunite na haya ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the writings of so-called poets there is generally a
possibility of overlapping transcendental mellows. When the mellows thusgo against the conclusive understanding, no one likes to hear suchpoetry.
                                   PURPORT     Yadva-tadva kavi refers to anyone who writes poetry without
knowledge of how to do so. Writing poetry, especially poetry concerningthe Vaisnava conclusion, is very difficult. If one writes poetry withoutproper knowledge, there is every possibility that the mellows willoverlap. When this occurs, no learned or advanced Vaisnava will like tohear it.                                   TEXT 103
                    `rasa', `rasabhasa' yara nahika vicara
                    bhakti-siddhanta-sindhu nahi paya para
                                 TRANSLATION     "A so-called poet who has no knowledge of transcendentaI mellows
and the overlapping of transcendental mellows cannot cross the ocean ofthe conclusions of devotional service.
                                 TEXT 104-105
                  `vyakarana' nahi jane, na jane `alankara'
                     `natakalankara'-jnana nahika yahara
                    krsna-lila varnite na jane sei chara!
                      visese durgama ei caitanya-vihara
                                 TRANSLATION     "A poet who does not know the grammatical regulative principles,
who is unfamiliar with metaphorical ornaments, especially those employedin drama, and who does not know how to present the pastimes of LordKrsna is condemned. Moreover, the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuare especially difficult to understand.
                                   TEXT 106
                    krsna-lila, gaura-lila se kare varnana
                   gaura-pada-padma yanra haya prana-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who has accepted the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as
his life and soul can describe the pastimes of Lord Krsna or thepastimes of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 107
                  gramya-kavira kavitva sunite haya `duhkha'
                  vidagdha-atmiya-vakya sunite haya `sukha`
                                 TRANSLATION     "Hearing the poetry of a person who has no transcendental knowledge
and who writes about the relationships between man and woman simplycauses unhappiness, whereas hearing the words of a devotee fullyabsorbed in ecstatic love causes great happiness.                                   PURPORT
     Gramya-kavi refers to a poet or writer such as the authors of
novels and other fiction who write only about the relationships betweenman and woman. Vidagdha-atmiya-vakya, however, refers to words writtenby a devotee who fully understands pure devotional service. Suchdevotees, who follow the parampara system, are sometimes described assajatiyasaya-snigdha, or "pleasing to the same class of people." Onlythe poetry and other writings of such devotees are accepted with greathappiness by devotees.
                                   TEXT 108                   rupa yaiche dui nataka kariyache arambhe
                    sunite ananda bade yara mukha-bandhe"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The standard for writing dramas has been set by Rupa Gosvami. If a
devotee hears the introductory portions of his two dramas, they enhacehis transcendental pleas ure."
                                   TEXT 109
                    bhagavan-acarya kahe,--`suna eka-bara
                    tumi sunile bhala-manda janibe vicara,
                                 TRANSLATION     Despite the explanation of SvarOpa Damodara, Bhagavan Acarya
requested, "Please hear the drama once. If you hear it, you can considerwhether it is good or bad."
                                   TEXT 110
                      dui tina dina acarya agraha karila
                  tanra agrahe svarupera sunite iccha ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     For two or three days Bhagavan Acarya continually asked Svarupa
Damodara Gosvami to hear the poetry. Because of his repeated requests,Svarupa Damodara Gosvami wanted to hear the poetry written by thebrahmana from Bengal.
                                   TEXT 111
                    saba lana svarupa gosani sunite vasila
                       tabe sei kavi nandi-sloka padila
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami sat down with other devotees to hear the
poetry, and then the poet began to read the introductory verse.
                                   TEXT 112
                  vikaca-kamala-netre sri-jagannatha-samjne
                 kanaka-rucir ihatmany atmatam yah prapannah                    prakrti-jadam asesam cetayann avirasit                 sa disatu tava bhavyam krsna-caitanya-devah
                                 TRANSLATION     "The Supreme Personality of Godhead has assumed a golden complexion
and has become the soul of the body named Lord Jagannatha, whoseblooming lotus eyes are widely expanded. Thus He has appeared inJagannatha Puri and brought dull matter to life. May that Lord, SriKrsna Caitanyadeva, bestow upon you all good fortune."
                                   TEXT 113
                    sloka suni' sarva-loka tahare vakhane
                  svarupa kahe,--`ei sloka karaha vyakhyane'
                                 TRANSLATION     When everyone present heard the verse, they all commended the poet,
but Svarupa Damodara Gosvami requested him, "Kindly explain this verse."
                                   TEXT 114
                   kavi kahe,--`jagannatha--sundara-sarira
                     caitan ya-gosani--sariri maha-dhira
                                 TRANSLATION     The poet said, "Lord Jagannatha is a most beautiful body, and Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is exceptionally grave, is the owner of thatbody.
                                   PURPORT     Sariri refers to a person who owns the sarira, or body. As stated
in Bhagavad- gita:     dehino'smin yatha dehe     kaumaram yauvanam jara     tatha dehantara-praptir     dhiras tatra na muhyati"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood toyouth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death.The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13)For the ordinary living being in material existence there is a division
or distinction between the body and the owner of the body. In spiritualexistence, however, there is no such distinction, for the body is theowner himself and the owner is the body itself. In spiritual existence,everything must be spiritual. Therefore there is no distinction betweenthe body and its owner.
                                   TEXT 115                     sahaje jada-jagatera cetana karaite
                     nilacale mahaprabhu haila avirbhute
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has appeared here in Nilacala [Jagannatha
Puri] to spiritualize the entire dull material world."
                                   TEXT 116
                      suniya sabara haila anandita-mana
                   duhkha pana svarupa kahe sakrodha vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, everyone present was greatly happy. But Svarupa
Damodara, who alone was very unhappy, began to speak in great anger.
                                   TEXT 117
                    "are murkha, apanara kaili sarva-nasa!
                      dui ta' isvare tora nahika visvasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are a fool," he said."You have brought ill fortune upon
yourself, for you have no knowledge of the existence of the two Lords,Jagannathadeva and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, nor have you faith in Them.
                                   TEXT 118
                  purnanan da- cit-s varupa jagannatha- raya
                   tanre kaili jada-nasvara-prakrta-ka ya!!
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Jagannatha is completely spiritual and full of transcendental
bliss, but you have compared Him to a dull, destructible body composedof the inert, external energy of the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     If one thinks that the form of Lord Jagannatha is an idol made of
wood, he immediately brings ill fortune into his life. According to thedirection of the Padma purana: arcye visnau sila-dhih...yasya va narakisah. Thus one who thinks that the body of Lord jagannatha is made ofmatter and who distinguishes between Lord Jagannatha's body and soul iscondemned, for he is an offender. A pure devotee who knows the scienceof Krsna consciousness makes no distinction between Lord Jagannatha andHis body. He knows that they are identical, just as Lord Krsna and Hissoul are one and the same. When one's eyes are purified by devotionalservice performed on the spiritual platform, one can actually envisionLord Jagannatha and His body as being completely spiritual. The advanceddevotee, therefore, does not see the worshipable Deity to have a soulwithin a body like an ordinary human being. There is no distinctionbetween the body and soul of Lord Jagannatha, for Lord Jagannatha issac-cid-ananda-vigraha, just as the body of Krsna is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. There is actually no difference between Lord Jagannatha and SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, but the ignorant poet from Bengal applied amaterial distinction to the body of Lord Sri Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 119                 purna-sad-aisvarya caitanya--svayam bhagavan
                  tanre kaili ksudra jiva sphulinga-samana!!
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have calculated Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, full in six opulences, to be on the level of anordinary living being. Instead of knowing Him as the supreme fire, youhave accepted Him as a spark."
                                   PURPORT     In the Upanisads it is said, yathagner visphulinga vyuccaranti: the
living entities are like sparks of fire, and His Lordship the SupremePersonality of Godhead is considered the original great fire. When wehear this sruti-vakya, or message from the Vedas, we should understandthe distinction between the Supreme Lord Krsna and the living entities.A person under the control of the external energy, however, cannotunderstand that distinction. Such a person cannot understand that theSupreme Person is the original great fire, whereas the living entitiesare simply small fragmental parts of that Supreme Personality ofGodhead. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (15.7):     mamaivamso jiva-loke     jiva-bhutah sanatanah     manah sasthanindriyani     prakrti-sthani karsati"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal,fragmental parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hardwith the six senses, which include the mind."     There is a distinction between the body and soul of the materiallyexisting living being, but because Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and LordJagannatha do not possess material bodies, there is no distinctionbetween Their bodies and souls. On the spiritual platform, body and soulare identical; there is no distinction between them. As stated in
Srimad-Bhagavatam:     etad isanam isasya     prakrti-stho'pi tad-gunaih     na yujyate sadatma-sthair     yatha buddhis tad-asraya "This is the divinity of the Personalityof Godhead. He is not affected by the qualities of material nature, eventhough He is in contact with them. Similarly, the devotees who havetaken shelter of the Lord cannot be influenced by the materialqualities." (SB. 1.11.38) His Lordship the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna, is unaffected by the influence of the three modes ofmaterial nature. Indeed, His devotees are also unpolluted by theinfluence of the external energy because they engage in the service ofHis Lordship. Even the very body of a devotee becomes spiritualized,just as an iron rod put into fire becomes as qualified as fire becauseit becomes red hot and will immediately burn anything it touches.Therefore the poet from Bengal committed a great offense by treatingLord Jagannatha's body and Lord Jagannatha, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, as two different entities, material and spiritual, as if theLord were an ordinary living being. The Lord is always the master of thematerial energy; therefore He is not doomed to be covered by thematerial energy like an ordinary living entity.
                                   TEXT 120                      dui-thani aparadhe paibi durgati!
                  atattva-jna `tattva' varne, tara ei riti!
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara continued, "Because you have committed an offense
to Lord Jagannatha and Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu, you will attain ahellish destination. You do not know how to describe the Absolute Truth,but nevertheless you have tried to do so. Therefore you must becondemned.
                                   PURPORT     The brahmana poet from Bengal was an offender in the estimation of
Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, for although the poet had no knowledge of theAbsolute Truth, he had nevertheless tried to describe it. The Bengalipoet was an offender to both Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and LordJagannatha. Because he had made a distinction between Lord Jagannatha'sbody and soul and because he had indicated that Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was different from LordJagannatha, he had committed offenses to Them both. A-tattva-jna refersto one who has no knowledge of the Absolute Truth or who worships hisown body as the Supreme personality of Godhead. If an ahangrahopasaka-mayavadi, a person engaged in fruitive activities or a person interestedonly in sense gratification, describes the Absolute Truth, heimmediately becomes an offender.
                                   TEXT 121                     ara eka kariyacha parama `pramada'!
                   deha-dehi-bheda isvare kaile `aparadha'!
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are in complete illusion, for you have distinguished between
the body and soul of His Lordship [Lord Jagannatha or Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu]. That is a great offense.
                                   PURPORT     When one differentiates between the body and soul of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he immediately becomes an offender. Because theliving entities in the material world are generally covered by materialbodies, the body and soul of an ordinary human being cannot beidentical. The Supreme Lord bestows the fruits of one's activities, forHe is the Lord of the results of fruitive action. He is also the causeof all causes, and He is the master of the material energy. Therefore Heis supreme. An ordinary living being, however, in his materialcondition, enjoys the results of his own fruitive activities andtherefore falls under their influence. Even in the liberated stage ofbrahma-bhuta identification, he engages in rendering service to HisLordship. Thus there are distinctions between an ordinary human beingand the Supreme Lord. Karmis and jnanis who ignore these distinctionsare ofienders against the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.     An ordinary human being is prone to be subjugated by the materialenergy, whereas His Lordship the Supreme Personality of Godhead--SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, Lord Krsna or Lord Jagannatha--is always the masterof the material energy and is therefore never subject to its influence.His Lordship the Supreme Personality Of Godhead has an unlimitedspiritual identity, never to be broken, whereas the consciousness of theliving entity is limited and fragmented. The living entities arefragmental portions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead eternally(mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhutah sanatanah). It is not that they arecovered by the material energy in conditioned life but become one withthe Supreme Personality of Godhead when freed from the influence ofmaterial energy. Such an idea is offensive.     According to the considerations of Mayavadi fools, the SupremePersonality of Godhead accepts a material body when He appears in thematerial world. A Vaisnava, however, knows perfectly well that forKrsna, Lord Jagannatha or Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu--unlike ordinary humanbeings--there is no distinction between the body and the soul. Even inthe material world His Lordship retains His spiritual identity;therefore Lord Krsna exhibited all opulences even in His childhood body.There is no distinction between the body and soul of Krsna; whether Heis in His childhood body or His youthful body, He is always identicalwith His body. Even though Krsna appears like an ordinary human being,He is never subjected to the rules and regulations of the materialworld. He is svarat, or fully independent. He can appear in the materialworld, but contrary to the offensive conclusion of the Mayavada school,He has no material body. In this connection one may again refer to theabove-mentioned verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.11.38):     etad isanam isasya     prakrti-stho'pi tad-gunaih
     na yujyate sadatma-sthair     yatha buddhis tad-asrayaThe Supreme Person has an eternal spiritual body. If one tries todistinguish between the body and soul of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, he commits a great offense.
                                   TEXT 122                     isvarera nahi kabhu deha-dehi-bheda
                  svarupa, deha,--cid-ananda, nahika vibheda
                                 TRANSLATION     "At no time is there a distinction between the body and soul of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. His personal identity and His body aremade of blissful spiritual energy. There is no distinction between them.
                                   PURPORT     Lord Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja, is advaya-jnana; in other
words, there is no distinction between His body and soul, for Hisexistence is completely spiritual. According to the verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam beginning with the words vadan- ti tat tattva-vidas tattvam(1.2.11), the Absolute Truth is always to be understood from threeangles of vision as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Unlike the objectsof the material world, however, the Absolute Truth is always one andalways the same. Thus there is no distinction between His body and soul.His form, name, attributes and pastimes, therefore, are completelydistinct from those of the material world. One should know perectly wellthat there is no difference between the body and soul of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. When one conceives of a distinction between Hisbody and soul, one is immediately conditioned by material nature.Because a person in the material world makes such distinctions, he iscalled baddha-jiva, a conditioned soul.
                                   TEXT 123                            "deha-dehi-vibhago'yam
                           nesvare vidyate kvacit"
                                 TRANSLATION     "`There is no distinction between the body and soul of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead at any time.'
                                   PURPORT     This quotation, which is included in the Laghu-bhagavatamrta
(1.5.342), is from the Kurma purana.
                                 TEXT 124-125                   natah param parama yad bhavatah svarupam                    ananda-matram avikalpam aviddha-varcah
                    pasyami visva-srjam ekam avisvam atman                    bhutendriyatmaka-madas ta upasrito'smi
                    tad va idam bhuvana-mangala mangalaya
                    dhyane sma no darasitam ta upasakanam                   tasmai namo bhagavate'nuvidhema tubhyam                  yo'nadrto naraka-bhagbhir asat-prasangaih
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O my Lord, I do not see a form superior to Your present form of
eternal bliss and knowledge. In Your impersonal Brahman effulgence inthe spiritual sky, there is no occasional change and no deterioration ofinternal potency. I surrender unto You because, whereas I am proud of mymaterial body and senses, Your Lordship is the cause of the cosmicmanifestation. Yet You are untouched by matter.     "`This present form, or any transcendental form expanded by theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, is equally auspicious for alIthe universes. Since You have manifested this eternal personal form uponwhom Your devotees meditate, I therefore offer my respectful obeisancesunto You. Those who are destined to be dispatched to the path of helIneglect Your personaI form because of speculating on material topics.'
                                   PURPORT     These verses from Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.9.3,4) were spoken by Lord
Brahma.
                                   TEXT 126                kahan `purnanandaisvarya' krsna `mayesvara'.i
                kahan`ksudra' jiva `duhkhi;, `mayara kinkara'!
                                 TRANSLATION     "Whereas Krsna, the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is full of transcendental bliss, possesses all six spiritualopulences in full, and is the master of the material energy, the smallconditioned soul, who is always unhappy, is the servant of the materialenergy.
                                   PURPORT     The living entity is an ever-conditioned servant of the material
energy, whereas Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is master ofthe material energy. How, then, could they be on an equal level? Therecan be no comparison between them. His Lordship is always in a happycondition of transcendental bliss, whereas the conditioned soul isalways unhappy because of his contact with the material energy. TheSupreme Lord controls the material energy, and the material energycontrols the conditioned souls. There is therefore no comparison betweenthe Supreme Personality of Godhead and the ordinary living entities.                                   TEXT 127
                           "hladinya samvidaslistah
                           sac-cid-anan da- isvarah                            svavidya samvrto jivah                             sanklesa-nikarakara"
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Controller, is
always full of transcendental bliss and is accompanied by the potenciesknown as hladini and samvit. The conditioned soul, however, is alwayscovered by ignorance and embarassed by the threefold miseries of life.Thus he is a treasure house of all kinds of tribulations.",
                                   PURPORT     This verse is found in Sridhara Svami's Bhavartha-dipika (1.7.6),
wherein he quotes Sri Visnusvami.
                                   TEXT 128                   suni' sabha-sadera citte haila camatkara
               `satya kahe gosani, dunhara kariyache tiraskara'
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this explanation, all the members of the assembly were
struck with wonder. "Svarupa Damodara Gosvami has spoken the realtruth," they admitted. "The brahmana from Bengal has committed anoffense by wrongly describing Lord Jagannatha and Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu."
                                   TEXT 129
                  suniya kavira haila lajja, bhaya, vismaya
                   hamsa-madhye baka yaiche kichu nahi kaya
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Bengali poet heard this chastisement from Svarupa Damodara
Gosvami, he was ashamed, fearfuI and astonished. Indeed, being like aduck in a society of white swans, he could not say anything.
                                   TEXT 130
                   tara duhkha dekhi, svarupa sadaya-hrdaya
                    upadesa kaila tare yaiche `hita' haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the poet's unhappiness, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, who was
naturally very kindhearted, advised him so that he could derive somebenefit.
                                   TEXT 131
                   "yaha, bhagavata pada vaisnavera sthane
                      ekanta asraya kara caitanya-carane
                                 TRANSLATION     "If you want to understand Srimad-Bhagavatam," he said, "you must
approach a self-realized Vaisnava and hear from him. You can do thiswhen you have completely taken shelter of the lotus feet of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu."
                                   PURPORT     Herein Svarupa Damodara Gosvami instructs the poet from Bengal to
hear Srimad-Bhagavatam from a pure Vaisnava and learn from him. In Indiaespecially, there is now a class of professional Bhagavatam readerswhose means of livelihood is to go from village to village, town totown, reading Bhagavatam and collecting daksina, or rewards, in the formof money or goods, like umbrellas, cloth and fruit. Thus there is now asystem of Bhagavata business, with recitations called Bhagavata-saptahathat continue for one week, although this is not mentioned in Srimad-Bhagavatam. Nowhere does Srimad-Bhagavatam say that the Bhagavatamshould be heard for one week from professionals. Rather, Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.17) says: srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah punya-sravana-kirtanah. One should regularly hear Srimad-Bhagavatam from a self-realized Vaisnava. By such hearing, one becomes pious. Hrdyantahstho hyabhadrani vidhunoti suhrt-satam. As one thus hears the Bhagavatamregularly and sincerely, his heart is purified of all materialcontamination.     nasta-prayesv abhadresu     nityam bhagavata-sevaya     bhagavaty uttama-sloke     bhaktir bhavati naisthiki"As one regularly hears the Bhagavatam or renders service unto the puredevotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is practically destroyed,and loving service unto the glorious Lord, who is praised withtranscendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact." (SB.1.2.18)     This is the proper process, but people are accustomed to beingmisled by professional Bhagavatam reciters. Therefore Svarupa DamodaraGosvami herein advises that one should not hear Srimad-Bhagavatam fromprofessional reciters. Instead, one must hear and learn the Bhagavatamfrom a self-realized Vaisnava. Sometimes it is seen that when a Mayavadisannyasi reads the Bhagavatam, flocks of men go to hear jugglery ofwords that cannot awaken their dormant love for Krsna. Sometimes peoplego to see professional dramas and offer food and money to the players,who are expert at collecting these offerings very nicely. The result isthat the members of the audience remain in the same position of grham
andha- kupam, family affection, and do not awaken their love for Krsna.     In the Bhagavatam (7.5.30), it is said, matir na krsne paratahsvato va mitho 'bhipadyeta grha-vratanam: the grhavratas, those who aredetermined to continue following the materialistic way of life, willnever awaken their dormant love of Krsna, fur they hear the Bhagavatamonly to solidify their position in household life and to be happy infamily affairs and sex. Condemning this process of hearing theBhagavatam from professionals, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami says, yaha,bhagavata pada vaisnavera sthane: "To understand the Srimad-Bhagavatam,you must approach a self-realized Vaisnava." One should rigidly avoidhearing the Bhagavatam from a Mayavadi or other nondevotee who simplyperforms a grammatical jugglery of words to twist some meaning from thetext, collect money from the innocent public, and thus keep people indarkness.     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami strictly prohibits the behavior of thematerialistic so-called hearers of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Instead ofawakening real love for Krsna, such hearers of the Bhagavatam becomemore and more attached to household affairs and sex life (yanmaithunadi-grhamedhi-sukham hi tuccham). One should hear Srimad-Bhagavatam from a person who has no connection with material activities,or, in other words, from a paramahamsa Vaisnava, one who has achievedthe highest stage of sannyasa. This, of course, is not possible unlessone takes shelter of the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. TheSrimad-Bhagavatam is understandable only for one who can follow in thefootsteps of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 132                 caitanyera bhakta-ganera nitya kara `sanga'
                   tabeta janiba siddhanta-samudra-taranga
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara continued, "Associate regularly with the devotees
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for then only will you understand the wavesof the ocean of devotional service.
                                   PURPORT     It is clearly to be understood in this connection that the
followers of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's way of devotional service areeternally associates of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and perfectknowers of the Absolute Truth. If one immediately follows the principlesof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by associating with His devotees, lustydesires for material enjoyment will vanish from one's heart. Then onewill be able to understand the meaning of Srimad-Bhagavatam and thepurpose of listening to it. Otherwise such understanding is impossible.
                                   TEXT 133                    tabeta panditya tomara ha-ibe saphala
                     krsnera svarupa-lila varniba nirmala                                 TRANSLATION
     "Only if you follow the principles of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
His devotees will your learning be successful. Then you will be able towrite about the transcendental pastimes of Krsna without materialcontamination.
                                   TEXT 134
                       ei sloka kariyacha pana santosa
                  tomara hrdayera arthe dunhaya lage `dosa'
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have composed this introductory verse to your great
satisfaction, but the meaning you have expressed is contaminated byoffenses to both Lord Jagannatha and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 135
                   tumi yaiche-taiche kaha, na janiya riti
                     sarasvati sei-sabde kariyache stuti
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have written something irregular, not knowing the regulative
principles, but the goddess of learning, Sarasvati, has used your wordsto offer her prayers to the Supreme Lord.
                                   PURPORT     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami informed the Bengali poet, "Because of
your ignorance and your leaning toward Mayavada philosophy, you cannotdistinguish the difference between the Mayavada and Vaisnavaphilosophies. Therefore the process you have adopted to praise Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Jagannatha does not follow the propersystem; indeed, it is irregular and offensive. Fortunately, however,through your words, the goddess of learning, mother Sarasvati, hastactfully offered her prayers to her master, Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu."
                                   TEXT 136                yaiche indra, daityadi kare krsnera bhartsana
                      sei-sabde sarasvati karena stavana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sometimes demons, and even Lord Indra, the King of heaven,
chastised Krsna, but mother Sarasvati, taking advantage of their words,offered prayers to the Lord.                                   TEXT 137
                           vacalam balisam stabdham
                            ajnam pandita-maninam                           krsnam martyam upasritya                            gopa me cakrur apriyam
                                 TRANSLATION     "[Lord Indra said:] `This Krsna, who is an ordinary human being, is
talkative, childish, impudent and ignorant, although He thinks Himselfvery learned. The cowherd men in Vrndavana have offended me by acceptingHim. This has not been greatIy appreciated by me.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.25.5).                                   TEXT 138                  aisvarya-made matta indra,--yena matoyala
                  buddhi-nasa haila, kevala nahika sambhala
                                 TRANSLATION     "Indra, the King of heaven, being too proud of his heavenly
opulences, became like a madman. Thus bereft of his intelligence, hecould not restrain himself from speaking nonsensicaIly about Krsna.
                                   TEXT 139
                indra bale,--"muni krsnera kariyachi nindana"
                    tara-i mukhe sarasvati karena stavana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Thus Indra thought, `I have properly chastised Krsna and defamed
Him.' But Sarasvati, the goddess of learning, took this opportunity tooffer prayers to Krsna.
                                   TEXT 140
                   `vacala kah iye--eda-pravartaka' dhanya
                 `balisa'--tathapi `sisu-pra ya' garva-sun ya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The word `vacala' is used to refer to a person who can speak
according to Vedic authority, and the word `balisa' means `innocent.'Krsna spoke the Vedic knowledge, yet He always presents Himself as aprideless, innocent boy.                                   TEXT 141
                 vandyabhave `anamra'--`stabdha'-sabde ka ya
                 yaha haite anya `vijna' nahi--se `ajna' haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "When there is no one else to receive obeisances, one may be called
,anamra,' or one who offers obeisances to no one. This is the meaning ofthe word `stabdha.' And because no one is found to be more learned thanKrsna, He may be called `ajna,' indicating that nothing is unknown toHim.
                                   TEXT 142
                 `panditera manya-patra--haya `pandita-mani'
                  tathapi bhakta-vatsalye `manusya' abhimani
                                 TRANSLATION     "The word `pandita-mani' can be used to indicate that Krsna is
honored even by learned scholars. Nevertheless, because of affection forHis devotees, Krsna appears like an ordinary human being and maytherefore be caIled `martya.'
                                   TEXT 143
                   jara-sandha kahe,--"krsna--purusa-adhama
                   tora sange na yujhimu,"yahi bandhu-han"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The demon Jarasandha chastised Krsna, saying, `You are the lowest
of human beings. I shall not fight with You, for You killed Your ownrelatives.'
                                   PURPORT     In this verse also, mother Sarasvati offers prayers to Krsna. The
word purusa- adhama refers to the Personality of Godhead, under whom allother persons remain, or, in other words, purusa-uttama, the best of allliving beings. Similarly, the word bandhu-han means "the killer ofmaya." In the conditioned state of life, one is closely related withmaya as a friend, but when one comes in contact with Krsna one is freedfrom that relationship.
                                   TEXT 144                   yaha haite anya purusa-sakala--`adhama'
                   sei haya `purusadhama'--sarasvatira mana                                 TRANSLATION
     "Mother Sarasvati takes `purusadhama' to mean `purusottama,' He to
whom all men are subordinate.
                                   TEXT 145
                  `bandhe sabare'--tate avidya `bandhu' haya
                  `avidya-nasaka'--`bandhu-han'-sabde ka ya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Nescience, or maya, may be called `bandhu' because she entangles
everone in the material world. Therefore by using the word `bandhu-han,'mother Sarasvati says that Lord Krsna is the vanquisher of ma-ya-.
                                   PURPORT     Everyone is entangled in the illusory energy, but as stated in
Bhagavad-gita, mam eva ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te: as soon asone surrenders to Krsna, he is freed from maya. Therefore Krsna may becalled bandhu-han, the killer of maya.
                                   TEXT 146                       ei-mata sisupala karila nindana
                      sei-vakye sarasvati karena stavana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sisupala also blasphemed Krsna in this way, but the goddess of
learning, Sarasvati, offered her prayers to Krsna even by his words.
                                   TEXT 147
                  taiche ei sloke tomara arthe `ninda' aise
                  sarasvatira artha suna, yate `stuti' bhase
                                 TRANSLATION     "In that way, although your verse is blasphemous according to your
meaning, mother Sarasvati has taken advantage of it to offer prayers tothe Lord.
                                   TEXT 148
                   jagannatha hana krsnera `atma-svaru-pa'
                   kintu ihan daru-brahma--sthavara-svarupa
                                 TRANSLATION     "There is no difference between Lord Jagannatha and Krsna, but here
Lord Jagannatha is fixed as the Absolute Person appearing in wood.Therefore He does not move.
                                   TEXT 149
                       tanha-saha atmata eka-rupa hana
                     krsna eka-tattva-rupa--dui rupa hana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Thus Lord Jagannatha and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, although
appearing as two, are one because They are both Krsna, who is one alone.
                                   TEXT 150
                     samsara-tarana-hetu yei iccha-sakti
                   tahara milana kari' ekata yaiche prapti
                                 TRANSLATION     "The supreme desire to deliver the entire world meets in both of
Them, and for that reason also They are one and the same.
                                   TEXT 151
                     sakala samsari lokera karite uddhara
                       gaura-jangama-rupe kaila avatara
                                 TRANSLATION     "To deliver all the materially contaminated people of the world,
that same Krsna has descended, moving as Lord Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 152
                    jagannathera darsane khandaya samsara
                      saba-desera saba-loka nare asibara
                                 TRANSLATION     "By visiting Lord Jagannatha one is freed from material existence,
but not all men of all countries can come or be admitted here inJagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 153
                   sri-krsna-caitanya-prabhu dese dese yana                   saba-loke nistarila jangama-brahma hana
                                 TRANSLATION     ,`Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, moves from one country to
another, personally or by His representative. Thus He, as the movingBrahman, delivers all the people of the world.
                                   TEXT 154
                    sarasvatira artha ei kahilun vivarana
                    eho bhagya tomara aiche karile varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Thus I have explained the meaning intended by mother Sarasvati,
the goddess of learning. It is your great fortune that you havedescribed Lord Jagannatha and Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in that way.
                                   TEXT 155
                      krsne gali dite kare nama uccarana
                     sei nama haya tara `muktira' karana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sometimes it so happens that one who wants to chastise Krsna
utters the holy name, and thus the holy name becomes the cause of hisliberation."
                                   TEXT 156
                      tabe sei kavi sabara carane padiya
                     sabara sarana laila dante trna lana
                                 TRANSLATION     Upon hearing this proper explanation by Svarupa Damodara Gosvami,
the Bengali poet fell down at the feet of all the devotees and tookshelter of them with a straw in his mouth.
                                   TEXT 157
                     tabe saba bhakta tare angikara kaila
                     tara guna kahi' mahaprabhure milaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereupon all the devotees accepted his association. Explaining his
humble behavior, they introduced him to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.                                   TEXT 158
                    sei kavi sarva tyaji' rahila nilacale
                   gaura-bhakta-ganera krpa ke kahite pare?
                                 TRANSLATION     By the mercy of the devotees of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, that
poet from Bengal gave up all other activities and stayed with them atJagannatha Puri. Who can explain the mercy of the devotees of SriCaltanya Mahaprabhu?
                                   TEXT 159
                   ei ta' kahilun pradyumna-misra-vivarana
                 prabhura ajnaya kaila krsna-kathara sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have thus described the narration concerning Pradyumna Misra and
how, following the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he listened todiscourses about Krsna spoken by Ramananda Raya.
                                   TEXT 160
                    tara madhye kahilun ramanandera mahima
                   apane sri-mukhe prabhu varne yanra sima
                                 TRANSLATION     Within the narration I have explained the glorious characteristics
of Sri Ramananda Raya, through whom Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personallydescribed the limits of ecstatic love for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 161
                   prastave kahilun kavira nataka-vivarana
                  ajna hana sraddhaya paila prabhura carana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the course of the narration, I have also told about the drama by
the poet from Bengal. Although he was ignorant, because of his faith andhumility he nevertheless obtained the shelter of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 162                    sri-krsna-caitanya-lila--amrtera sara
                    eka-lila-pravahe vahe sata-sata dhara
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu are the essence
of nectar. From the stream of one of His pastimes flow hundreds andthousands of branches.
                                   TEXT 163
                     sraddha kari' ei lila yei pade, sune
                  gaura-lila, bhakti-bhakta-rasa-tattva jane
                                 TRANSLATION     Anyone who reads and hears these pastimes with faith and love can
understand the truth about devotional service, devotees and thetranscendental mellows of the pastimes of Lord Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 164
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Fifth Chapter, describing how Pradyumna Misra receivedinstructions from Rama- nanda Raya.
                                 Chapter Six
     The Meeting of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Raghunatha dasa Gosvaami     A summary of this chapter is given by Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his
Amrta-pravaha-bhasya as follows. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went intotranscendental fits of ecstatic love, Ramananda Raya and SvarupaDamodara Gosvami attended to Him and satisfied Him as He desired.Raghunatha dasa Gosvami had been attempting to come to the lotus feet ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for a long time, and finally he left his homeand met the Lord. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had gone to Santipura onHis way to Vrndavana, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami had offered to dedicatehis life at the Lord's lotus feet. in the meantime, however, aMohammedan official became envious of Hiranya dasa, Raghunatha dasaGosvami's uncle, and induced some big official court minister to havehim arrested. Thus Hiranya dasa left his home, but by the intelligenceof Raghunatha dasa the misunderstanding was mitigated. Then Raghunatha
dasa went to Panihati, and, following the order of Nityananda Prabhu, heobserved a festival (cida-dadhi-mahotsava) by distributing chipped ricemixed with yogurt. The day after the festival, Nityananda Prabhu gaveRaghunatha dasa the blessing that he would very soon attain the shelterof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. After this incident, Raghunatha dasa, withthe help of his priest, whose name was Yadunandana Acarya, got out ofhis house by trickery and thus ran away. Not touching the general path,Raghunatha dasa Gosvami secretly went to Jagannatha Puri. After twelvedays, he arrived in Jagannatha Puri at the lotus feet of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu entrusted Raghunatha dasa Gosvami toSvarupa Damodara Gosvami. Therefore another name for Raghunatha dasaGosvami is Svarupera Raghu, or the Raghunatha of Svarupa Damodara. Forfive days Raghunatha dasa Gosvami took prasada at the temple, but laterhe would stand at the Simha-dvara gate and eat only whatever he couldgather by alms. Later he lived by taking alms from various chatras, orfood distributing centers. When Raghunatha's father received news ofthis, he sent some men and money, but Raghunatha dasa Gosvami refused toaccept the money. Understanding that Raghunatha dasa Gosvami was livingby begging from the chatras, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu presented him withHis own gunja-mala and a stone from Govardhana Hill. Thereafter,Raghunatha dasa Gosvami used to eat rejected food that he had collectedand washed. This renounced life greatly pleased bothSvarupa Damodara Gosvami and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. One day SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu took by force some of the same food, thus blessingRaghunatha dasa Gosvami for his renunciation.
                                    TEXT 1                       krpa-gunair yah kugrhandha-kupad
                      uddhrtya bhangya raghunatha-dasam                      nyasya svarupe vidadhe'ntarangam-                      sri-krsna-caitanyam amum prapadye
                                 TRANSLATION     With the ropes of His causeless mercy, Sri Krsna Caitanya
Mahaprabhu employed a trick to deliver Raghunatha dasa Gosvami from theblind well of contemptible family life. He made Raghunatha dasa Gosvamione of His personal associates, placing him under the charge of SvarupaDamodara Gosvami. I offer my obeisances unto Him.
                                    TEXT 2
                   jaya jaya sri-caitanya, jaya nityananda
                 ja yadvaita-candra, jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glory to Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glory to Lord
Nityananda! All glory to Sri Advaita Acarya! And all glory to all thedevotees of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu!                                    TEXT 3
                    ei-mata gauracandra bhakta-gana-sange
                      nilacale nana lila kare nana-range
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Lord Gauracandra performed various pastimes with His
associates at Jagannatha Puri in varieties of transcendental pleasure.
                                    TEXT 4
                     yadyapi antare krsna-viyoga badha ye
                   bahire na prakasaya bhakta-duhkha-bhaye
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt pangs of separation from
Krsna, He did not manifest His feelings externally, for He feared theunhappiness of His devotees.
                                    TEXT 5
                      utkata viraha-duhkha yabe bahiraya
                  tabe ye vaikalya prabhura varnana na yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The transformations undergone by the Lord when He manifested severe
unhappiness due to separation from Krsna cannot be described.
                                    TEXT 6
                   ramanan dera krsna-katha, svarupera gana
                   viraha-vedanaya prabhura rakhaye parana
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord acutely felt pangs of separation from Krsna, only Sri
Rama--nanda Raya's talk about Krsna and the sweet songs of SvarupaDamodara kept Him alive.
                                    TEXT 7
                    dine prabhu nana-sange haya anya mana
                    ratri-kale bade prabhura viraha-vedana
                                 TRANSLATION     Because the Lord associated with various devotees during the day,
His mind was somewhat diverted, but at night the pangs of separationfrom Krsna increased very rapidly.
                                    TEXT 8
                     tanra sukha-hetu sange rahe dui jana
                    krsna-rasa-sloka-gite karena santvana
                                 TRANSLATION     Two people--Ramananda Raya and Svarupa Damodara Gosvami--stayed
with the Lord to pacify Him by reciting various verses about Krsna'spastimes and by singing appropriate songs for His satisfaction.
                                    TEXT 9
                   subala yaiche purve krsna-sukhera sahaya
                    gaura-sukha-dana-hetu taiche rama-raya
                                 TRANSLATION     Previously, when Lord Krsna was personally present, Subala, one of
His cowherd boy friends, gave Him happiness when He felt separation fromRadharani. Similarly, Ramananda Raya helped give happiness to Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 10
                 purve yaiche radhara lalita sahaya-pradhana
                taiche svarupa-gosani rakhe mahaprabhura prana
                                 TRANSLATION     Previously, when Srimati Radharani felt the pangs of separation
from Krsna, Her constant companion Lalita kept Her alive by helping Herin many ways. Similarly, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt Radharani'semotions, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami helped Him maintain His life.
                                   TEXT 11
                    ei dui janara saubhagya kahana na yaya
                  prabhura `antaranga' bali' yanre loke gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     To describe the fortunate position of Ramananda Raya and Svarupa
Damodara Gosvami is extremely difficult. They were renowned asintimately confidential friends of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.                                   TEXT 12
                    ei-mata vihare gaura lana bhakta-gana
                   raghunatha-milana ebe suna, bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord thus enjoyed His life with His devotees. O devotees of
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, now hear how Raghunatha dasa Gosvami metthe Lord.
                                   TEXT 13
                     purve santipure raghunatha yabe aila
                     mahaprabhu krpa kari' tanre sikhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Raghunatha dasa, during his family life, went to meet Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Santipura, the Lord gave him worthy instructionsby His causeless mercy.
                                   TEXT 14
                    prabhura siksate tenho nija-ghare yaya
                markata- vairagya chadi' haila `visayi-praya'
                                 TRANSLATION     Instead of becoming a so-called renunciate, Raghunatha dasa,
foIlowing the instructions of the Lord, returned home and played exactlylike a pounds-andshillings man.
                                   TEXT 15
                  bhitare vairagya, bahire kare sarva-karma
                    dekhiya ta' mata-pitara anandita mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa was inwardly completely renounced, even in family
life, but he did not express his renunciation externally. Instead, heacted just like an ordinary businessman. Seeing this, his father andmother were satisfied.
                                   TEXT 16
                `mathura haite prabhu aila',--varta yabe paila                      prabhu-pasa calibare udyoga karila
                                 TRANSLATION     When he received a message that Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had
returned from Mathura City, Raghunatha dasa endeavored to go to thelotus feet of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 17
                   hena-kale mulukera eka mleccha adhikari
                    saptagrama-mulukera se haya `caudhuri'
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time there was a Mohammedan official collecting the taxes
of Saptagrama.
                                   PURPORT     Formerly, when the Mohammedan government was in power, the person
appointed tax collector would collect the taxes of the local Zamindars,or landholders. He would keep one-fourth of the collection for himselfas a profit, and the balance he would deliver to the treasury of thegovernment.
                                   TEXT 18                  hiranya-dasa muluka nila `makrari' kariya
                     tara adhikara gela, mare se dekhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     When Hiranya dasa, Raghunatha dasa's uncle, made an agreement with
the government to collect taxes, the Mohammedan caudhuri, or taxcollector, having lost his position, became extremely envious of him.
                                   TEXT 19
                   bara laksa deya rajaya, sadhe bisa laksa
                  se `turuk' kichu na pana haila pratipaksa
                                 TRANSLATION     Hiranya dasa was collecting 2,000,000 coins ad therefore should
have delivered 1,500,000 to the government. Instead, he was giving only1,200,-medan caudhuri, who was a Turk, became his rival.
                                   TEXT 20                    raja-ghare kaiphiyat diya ujire anila
                 hiranya-dasa palaila, raghunathere bandhila
                                 TRANSLATION     After sending a confidential account to the government treasury,
the caudhuri brought the minister in charge. The caudhuri came, wantingto arrest Hiranya dasa, but Hiranya dasa had leff home. Therefore thecaudhuri arrested Raghunatha dasa.
                                   TEXT 21
                    prati-dina raghunathe karaye bhartsana
                    `bapa-jyethare ana;, nahe paiba yatana
                                 TRANSLATION     Every day, the Mohammedan would chastise Raghunatha dasa and tell
him, "Bring your father and his elder brother. Otherwise you will bepunished."
                                   TEXT 22
                      marite anaye yadi dekhe raghunathe
                    mana phiri' yaya, tabe na pare marite
                                 TRANSLATION     The caudhuri wanted to beat him, but as soon as he saw Raghunatha's
face, his mind changed, and he could not beat him.
                                   TEXT 23
                  visese kayastha-buddh ye antare kare dara
                   mukhe tarje garje, marite sabhaya antara
                                 TRANSLATION     Indeed, the caudhuri was afraid of Raghunatha dasa because
Raghunatha dasa belong to the kayastha community. Although the caudhuriwould chastise him with oral vibrations, he was afraid to beat him.
                                   PURPORT     Raghunatha dasa belonged to a very aristocratic family of the
kayastha community. He had substantial influence with the local people,and therefore the caudhuri, or minister, was afraid to beat him.Superficially he would chastise Raghunatha dasa with threateningvibrations, but he did not beat him. The members of the kayasthacommunity in India are generally very intelligent and expert in businessmanagement. Formerly they were mostly government officers. They werementioned even by Yajnavalkya, as quoted by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura
in his Amrta-pravaha-bhas ya:      cata-taskara-durvrttair     maha-sahasikadibhih     pidyamana praja rakset     kayasthais ca visestahFrom this verse it appears that the governmental officials of thekayastha community would sometimes chastise the citizens, and thus itwas the duty of the king to protect the people in general from theatrocities of the kayasthas. In Bengal the kayastha community is honoredalmost as much as the brahmana community, but in the up-country of Indiathe kayasthas are considered sudras because they generally eat meat anddrink wine. In any case, from history the kayasthas appear veryintelligent. Thus the Mohammedan caudhuri was afraid of Raghunatha dasabecause he belonged to the kayastha community.
                                   TEXT 24                     tabe raghunatha kichu cintila upaya
                     vinati kariya kahe sei mleccha-paya
                                 TRANSLATION     While this was going on, Raghunatha dasa thought of a tricky method
of escape. Thus he humbly submitted this plea at the feet of theMohammedan caudhuri.
                                   TEXT 25
                   "amara pita, jyetha haya tomara dui bhai
                   bhai-bhaiye tomara kalaha kara sarvadai
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, my father and his elder brother are both your
brothers. All brothers always fight about something.
                                   TEXT 26
                 kabhu kalaha, kabhu priti--ihara niscaya nai
                    kali punah tina bhai ha-iba eka-thani
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sometimes brothers fight among themselves, and sometimes they have
very friendly dealings. There is no certainty when such chages will takeplace. Thus I am sure that although today you are fighting, tomorrow youthree brothers will be sitting together in peace.
                                   TEXT 27
                   ami yaiche pitara, taiche tomara balaka                     ami tomara palya, tumi amara palaka
                                 TRANSLATION     "Just as I am my father's son, so I am also yours. I am your
dependent, and you are my maintainer.
                                   TEXT 28
                     palaka hana palyere tadite na yuyaya
                  tumi sarva-sastra jana jinda-pira'-praya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "For a maintainer to punish the person he maintains is not good.
You are expert in all the scriptures. Indeed, you are like a livingsaint."
                                   TEXT 29
                   eta suni' sei mlecchera mana ardra haila
                     dadi vahi' asru pade, kandite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing Raghunatha dasa's appealing voice, the Mohammedan's heart
softened. He began to cry, and tears glided down his beard.
                                   TEXT 30
                 mleccha ba1e,--"aji haite tumi--mora`putra'
                     aji chadaimu toma' kari' eka sutra"
                                 TRANSLATION     The Mohammedan caudhuri told Raghunatha dasa,"You are my son from
this day on. Today, by some means, I shall have you released."
                                   TEXT 31
                       ujire kahiya raghunathe chadaila
                     priti kari' raghunathe kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     After informing the minister, the caudhuri released Raghunatha dasa
and then began to speak to him with great affection.
                                   TEXT 32                  "tomara jyetha nirbuddhi asta-laksa khaya
                    ami--bhagi, amare kichu dibare yuyaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The elder brother of your father is less intelligent," he said.
"He enjoys of it to me.
                                   TEXT 33
                   yaha tumi, tomara jyethare milaha amare
                 ye-mate bhala haya karuna, bhara dilun tanre
                                 TRANSLATION     "Now you go arrange a meeting between me and your uncle. Let him do
whatever he thinks best. I shall completely depend on his decision."
                                   TEXT 34
                    raghunatha asi' tabe lyethare milaila
                 mleccha-sahita vasa kaila--saba santa haila
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa arranged a meeting between his uncle and the
caudhuri. He settled the matter, and everything was peaceful.
                                   TEXT 35
                     ei-mata raghunathera vatsareka gela
                      dvitiya vatsare palaite mana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Raghunatha dasa passed one year exactly like a first-
class business manager, but the next year he again decided to leavehome.
                                   TEXT 36
                       ratre uthi' ekela calila palana
                     dura haite pita tanre anila dhariya
                                 TRANSLATION     He got up alone one night and leff, but his father caught him in a
distant place and brought him back.                                   TEXT 37
                     ei-mate bare bare palaya, dhari' ane
                     tabe tanra mata kahe tanra pita sane
                                 TRANSLATION     This became almost a dally affalr. Raghunatha would run away from
home, and his father would again bring him back. Then Raghunatha dasa'smother began speaking to his father.
                                   TEXT 38
               "putra `batula' ha-ila, ihaya rakhaha bandhiya"
                      tanra pita kahe tare nirvinna hana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Our son has become mad," she said. "Just keep him by binding him
with ropes." His father, being very unhappy, replied to her as follows.
                                   TEXT 39
                    "indra-sama aisvarya, stri apsara-sama
                     e saba bandhite narileka yanra mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Raghunatha dasa, our son, has opulences like Indra, the heavenly
King, and his wife is as beautiful as an angel. Yet all this could nottie down his mind.
                                   TEXT 40
                    dadira bandhane tanre rakhiba ke-mate?
                 janma-data- pita nare `prarabdha' khandaite
                                 TRANSLATION     "How then could we keep this boy home by binding him with ropes? It
is not possible even for one's father to nullify the reactions of one'spast activities.
                                   TEXT 41
                    caitanya-candrera kroa hanache inhare
                 caitanya-candrera `batula' ke rakhite pare?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has fully bestowed His mercy on him.
Who can keep home such a madman of Caitanyacandra?"
                                   TEXT 42
                     tabe raghunatha kichu vicarila mane
                   nityananda-gosanira pasa calila ara dine
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Raghunatha dasa considered something in his mind, and the next
day he went to Nityananda Gosani.
                                   TEXT 43
                    panihati-grame paila prabhura darasana
                     kirtaniya sevaka sange ara bahu-jana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the village of Panihati, Raghunatha dasa obtained an interview
with Nityananda Prabhu, who was accompanied by many kirtana performers,servants and others.
                                   TEXT 44
                     ganga-tire vrksa-mule pindara upare
                    vasi yachena--yena koti suryodaya kare
                                 TRANSLATION     Sitting on a rock under a tree on the bank of the Ganges, Lord
Nityananda seemed as effulgent as hundreds and thousands of rising suns.
                                   TEXT 45
                    tale upare bahu-bhakta hanache vestita
                 dekhi' prabhura prabhava raghunatha--vismita
                                 TRANSLATION     Many devotees sat on the ground surrounding Him. Seeing the
influence of Nityananda Prabhu, Raghunatha dasa was astonished.
                                   TEXT 46
                      dandavat hana sei padila kata-dure
                   sevaka kahe,--`raghunatha dandavat kare'                                 TRANSLATION
     Raghunatha dasa offered his obeisances by falling prostrate at a
distant place, and the servant of Nityananda Prabhu pointed out, "Thereis Raghunatha dasa, offering You obeisances."
                                   TEXT 47
                   suni' prabhu kahe,--"cora dili darasana
                     aya, aya, aji tora karimu dandana',
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Lord Nityananda Prabhu said,"You are a thief. Now you
have come to see Me. Come here, come here. Today I shall punish you!"
                                   TEXT 48
                  prabhu bolaya, tenho nikate na kare gamana
                  akarsiya tanra mathe prabhu dharila carana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord called him, but Raghunatha dasa did not go near the Lord.
Then the Lord forcibly caught him and placed His lotus feet uponRaghunatha dasa's head.
                                   TEXT 49
                      kautuki nityananda sahaje dayamaya
                      raghunathe kahe kichu hana sadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda was by nature very merciful and funny. Being
merciful, He spoke to Raghunatha dasa as follows.
                                   TEXT 50
                   "nikate na aisa, cora, bhaga' dure dure
                       aji lag panachi, dandimu tomare
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are just like a thief, for instead of coming near, you stay
away at a distant place. Now that I have captured you, I shall punishyou.                                   TEXT 51
                    dadhi, cida bhaksana karaha mora gane"
                     suni' anandita haila raghunatha mane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Make a festival and feed all My associates yogurt and chipped
rice." Hearing this, Raghunatha dasa was greatly pleased.
                                   TEXT 52
                      sei-ksane nija-loka pathaila grame
                   bhaksya-dravya loka saba grama haite ane
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa immediately sent his own men to the village to
purchase all kinds of eatables and bring them back.
                                   TEXT 53
                 cida, dadhi, dugdha, sandesa, ara cini, kala
                      saba dravya anana caudike dharila
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa brought chipped rice, yogurt, milk, sweetmeats,
sugar, bananas and other eatables and placed them all around.
                                   TEXT 54
                   `mahotsava'-nama suni' brahmana-sajjana
                      asite lagila loka asankhya-ganana
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as they heard that a festival was going to be held, all
kinds of brahmanas and other gentlemen began to arrive. Thus there wereinnumerable people.
                                   TEXT 55
                      ara gramantara haite samagri anila
                       sata dui-cari holna tanha anaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the crowd increasing, Raghunatha dasa arranged to get more
eatables from other villages. He also brought two to four hundred large,round earthen pots.
                                   TEXT 56
                   bada bada mrt-kundika anaila panca sate
                   eka vipra prabhu lagi' cida bhijaya tate
                                 TRANSLATION     He also obtained five or seven especially large earthen pots, and
in these pots a brahmana began soaking chipped rice for the satisfactionof Lord Nityananda.
                                   TEXT 57
                     eka-thani tapta-dugdhe cida bhijana
                    ardheka chanila dadhi, cini, kala diya
                                 TRANSLATION     In one place, chipped rice was soaked in hot milk in each of the
large pots. Then half the rice was mixed with yogurt, sugar and bananas.
                                   TEXT 58
                    ara ardheka ghanavrta-dugdhete chanila
                  canpa-kala, cini, ghrta, karpura tate dila
                                 TRANSLATION     The other half was mixed with condensed milk and a special type of
banana known as canpa-kala. Then sugar, clarified butter and camphorwere added.
                                   TEXT 59
                    dhuti pari' prabhu yadi pindate vasila
                     sata-kundi vipra tanra agete dharila
                                 TRANSLATION     After Nityananda Prabhu had changed His cloth for a new one and sat
on a raised platform, the brahmana brought before Him the seven hugepots.
                                   TEXT 60                    cabutara-upare yata prabhura nija-gane
                     bada bada loka vasila mandali-racane
                                 TRANSLATION     On that platform, all the most important associates of Sri
Nityananda Prabhu, as well as other important men, sat down in a circlearound the Lord.
                                   TEXT 61
                   ramadasa, sundarananda, das a-gadadhara
                  murari, kamalakara, sadasi va, puran dara
                                 TRANSLATION     Among them were Ramadasa, Sundarananda, Gadadhara dasa, Murari,
Kamalakara, Sadasiva and Purandara.
                                   TEXT 62
                   dhananja ya, jagadisa, paramesvara-dasa
                      mahesa, gau ridasa, hoda-krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Dhananjaya, Jagadisa, Paramesvara dasa, Mahesa, Gauridasa and Hoda
Krsnadasa were also there.
                                   TEXT 63
                      uddharana datta adi yata nija-gana
                      upare vasila saba, ke kare ganana?
                                 TRANSLATION     Similarly, Uddharana Datta Thakura and many other personal
associates of the Lord sat on the ralsed plafform with NityanandaPrabhu. No one could count them all.
                                   PURPORT     The devotees mentioned herein are described by Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura in his Anubhasya. For furtherinformation one may consult the following references in the Adi-lila.Ramadasa--Chapter Ten, texts 116 and 118, and Chapter Eleven, texts 13and 16. Sundarananda--11.23, Gadadhara dasa--10.53, His full name isMurari Caitanya dasa, and he is a personal associate of NityanandaPrabhu. Thus one should consult Chapter Eleven, text 20. Kamalakara--11.24. Sadasiva--11.38. Purandara--11.28. Dhananjaya--11.31. Jagadisa--11.30. Paramesvara--11.29. Mahesa--11.32. Gauridasa--11.26. Hoda
Krsnadasa--11.47. Uddharana Datta Thakura--11.41.
                                   TEXT 64                  suni' pandita bhattacarya yata vipra aila
                   manya kari' prabhu sabare upare vasaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing about the festival, all kinds of learned scholars,
brahmanas and priests went there. Lord Nityananda Prabhu honored themand made them sit on the raised platform with Him.
                                   TEXT 65
                     dui dui mrt-kundika sabara age dila
                    eke dugdha-cida, are dadhi-cida kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone was offered two earthen pots. In one was put chipped rice
with condensed milk and in the other chipped rice with yogurt.
                                   TEXT 66
                       ara yata loka saba cotara-talane
                  mandali-bandhe vasila, tara na haya ganane
                                 TRANSLATION     All the other people sat in groups around the platform. No one
could count how many people there were.
                                   TEXT 67
                       ekeka janare dui dui holna dila
                    dadhi-cida dugdha-cida, duite bhijaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Each and every one of them was supplied two earthen pots--one of
chipped rice soaked in yogurt and the other of chipped rice soaked incondensed milk.
                                   TEXT 68
                     kona kona vipra upare sthana na pana
                   dui holnaya cida bhijaya ganga-tire giya                                 TRANSLATION
     Some of the brahmanas, not having gotten a place on the plafform,
went to the bank of the Ganges with their two earthen pots and soakedtheir chipped rice there.
                                   TEXT 69
                      tire sthana na pana ara kata jana
                    jale nami' dadhi-cida karaye bhaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Others, who could not get a place even on the bank of the Ganges,
got down into the water and began eating their two kinds of chippedrice.
                                   TEXT 70
                    keha upare, keha tale, keha ganga-tire
                     bisa-jana tina-thani parivesana kare
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus some sat on the platform, some at the base of the platform,
and some on the bank of the Ganges, and they were all supplied two potseach by the twenty men who distributed the food.
                                   TEXT 71
                     hena-kale aila tatha raghava pandita
                      hasite lagila dekhi' hana vismita
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time, Raghava Pandita arrived there. Seeing the situation,
he began to laugh in great surprise.
                                   TEXT 72
                       ni-sakdi nana-mata prasada anila
                   prabhure age diya bhakta-gane banti dila
                                 TRANSLATION     He brought many other kinds of food cooked in ghee and offered to
the Lord. This prasada he first pIaced before Lord Nityananda and thendistributed among the devotees.                                   TEXT 73
                  prabhure kahe,--"toma lagi' bhoga lagaila
                 tumi ihan utsava kara, ghare prasada rahila"
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghava Pandita said to Lord Nityananda, "For You, sir, I have
already offered food to the Deity, but You are engaged in a festivalhere, and so the food is lying there untouched."
                                   TEXT 74
                 prabhu kahe,--"e-dravya dine kariye bhojana
                 ratrye tomara ghare prasada karimu bhaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda replied, "Let Me eat all this food here during the
day, and I shall eat at your home at night.
                                   TEXT 75
                      gopa-jati ami bahu gopa-gana sange
                    ami sukha pai ei pulina-bhojana-range"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I belong to a community of cowherd boys, and therefore I generally
have many cowherd associates with Me. I am happy when we eat together ina picnic like this by the sandy bank of the river."
                                   TEXT 76
                      raghave vasana dui kundi deoyaila
                     raghava dvividha cida tate bhijaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda made Raghava Pandita sit down and had two pots
delivered to him also. There were two kinds of chipped rice soaked inthem.
                                   TEXT 77
                     sakala-lokera cida purna yabe ha-ila
                    dhyane tabe prabhu mahaprabhure anila
                                 TRANSLATION     When chipped rice had been served to everyone, Lord Nityananda
Prabhu, in meditation, brought Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 78
                     mahaprabhu aila dekhi' nitai uthila
                    tanre lana sabara cida dekhite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arrived, Lord Nityananda Prabhu stood
up. They then saw how the others were enjoying the chipped rice withyogurt and condensed milk.
                                   TEXT 79
                 sakala kundira, holnara cidara eka eka grasa
                    mahaprabhura mukhe dena kari' parihasa
                                 TRANSLATION     From each and every pot, Lord Nityananda Prabhu took one morsel of
chipped rice and pushed it into the mouth of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asa joke.
                                   TEXT 80
                     hasi' mahaprabhu ara eka grasa lana
                   tanra mukhe diya khaoyaya hasiya hasiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, also smiling, took a morsel of food,
pushed it into the mouth of Nityananda and laughed as He made LordNityananda eat it.
                                   TEXT 81
                      ei-mata nitai bule sakala mandale
                     dandana ranga dekhe vaisnava sakale
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Lord Nityananda was walking through all the groups of
eaters, and all the Vaisnavas standing there were seeing the fun.
                                   TEXT 82
                    ki kariya bedaya,--iha keha nahi jane                  mahaprabhura darsana pa ya kona bhagyavane
                                 TRANSLATION     No one could understand what Nityananda Prabhu was doing as He
walked about. Some, however, who were very fortunate, could see thatLord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was also present.
                                   TEXT 83
                      tabe hasi' nityananda vasila asane
                     cari kundi aroya cida rakhila dahine
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Nityananda Prabhu smiled and sat down. On His right side He
kept four pots of chipped rice that had not been made from boiled paddy.
                                   TEXT 84
                    asana diya mahaprabhure tahan vasaila
                       dui bhai tabe cida khaite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda offered Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu a place and had Him
sit down. Then together the two brothers began eating chipped rice.
                                   TEXT 85
                   dekhi' nityananda-prabhu anandita haila
                      kata kata bhavavesa prakasa karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu eating with Him, Lord Nityananda
Prabhu became very happy and exhibited varieties of ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 86
                   ajna dila,--`hari bali' karaha bhojana'
                  `hari' `hari'-dhvani uthi' bharila bhuvana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda Prabhu ordered,"All of you eat, chanting the holy
name of Hari." Immediately the holy names "Hari, Hari" resounded,filling the entire universe.                                   TEXT 87
                 `hari' `hari' bali' vaisnava karaye bhojana
                     pulina-bhojana sabara ha-ila smarana
                                 TRANSLATION     When all the Vaisnavas were chanting the holy names"Hari, Hari" and
eating, they remembered how Krsna and Balarama ate with Their companionsthe cowherd boys on the bank of the Yamuna.
                                   TEXT 88
                     nityananda mahaprabhu--krpalu, udara
                    raghunathera bhagye eta kaila angikara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord Nityananda Prabhu are extremely
merciful and liberal. It was Raghunatha dasa's good fortune that Theyaccepted all these dealings.
                                   TEXT 89
                  nityananda-prabhava-krpa janibe kon jana?
                    mahaprabhu ani' kara ya pulina-bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     Who can understand the influence and mercy of Lord Nityananda
Prabhu? He is so powerful that He induced Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuto come eat chipped rice on the bank of the Ganges.
                                   TEXT 90
                     sri-ramadasadi gopa premavista haila
                    ganga-tire `yamuna-pulina' jnana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     All the confidential devotees who were cowherd boys, headed by Sri
Ramadasa, were absorbed in ecstatic love. They thought the bank of theGanges to be the bank of the Yamuna.
                                   TEXT 91
                   mahotsava suni' pasari nana-grama haite
                   cida, dadhi, sandesa, kala anila vecite
                                 TRANSLATION     When the shopkeepers of many other villages heard about the
festival, they arrived there to sell chipped rice, yogurt, sweetmeatsand bananas.
                                   TEXT 92
                 yata dravya lana aise, saba mulya kari' laya
                    tara dravya mulya diya tahare khaoyaya
                                 TRANSLATION     As they came, bringing all kinds of food, Raghunatha dasa purchased
it all. He gave them the price for their goods and later fed them thevery same food.
                                   TEXT 93
                     kautuka dekhite aila yata yata jana
                    sei cida, dadhi, kala karila bhaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Anyone who came to see how these funny things were going on was
also fed chipped rice, yogurt and bananas.
                                   TEXT 94
                    bhojana kari' nityananda acamana kaila
                     cari kundira avasesa raghunathe dila
                                 TRANSLATION     After Lord Nityananda Prabhu finished eating, He washed His hands
and mouth and gave Raghunatha dasa the food remaining in the four pots.
                                   TEXT 95
                       ara tina kundikaya avasesa chila
                   grase-grase kari' vipra saba bhakte dila
                                 TRANSLATION     There was food remaining in the three other big pots of Lord
Nityananda, and a brahmana distributed it to all the devotees, giving amorsel to each.
                                   TEXT 96                    puspa-mala vipra ani' prabhu-gale dila
                    candana aniya prabhura sarvange lepila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then a brahmana brought a flower garland, placed the garland on
Nityananda Prabhu's neck and smeared sandalwood pulp all over His body.
                                   TEXT 97
                      sevaka tambula lana kare samarpana
                     hasiya hasiya prabhu karaye carvana
                                 TRANSLATION     When a servant brought betel nuts and offered them to Lord
Nityananda, the Lord smiled and chewed them.
                                   TEXT 98
                     mala-candana-tambula sesa ye achila
                  sri-haste prabhu taha sabakare banti' dila
                                 TRANSLATION     With His own hands Lord Nityananda Prabhu distributed to all the
devotees whatever flower garlands, sandalwood pulp and betel nutsremained.
                                   TEXT 99
                   anandita raghunatha prabhura `sesa, pana
                       apanara gana-saha khaila bantiya
                                 TRANSLATION     After receiving the remnants of food leff by Lord Nityananda
Prabhu, Raghunatha dasa, who was greatly happy, ate some and distributedthe rest among his own associates.
                                   TEXT 100
                      ei ta' kahilun nityanandera vihara
                   `cida-dadhi-mahotsava'-name khyati yara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described the pastimes of Lord Nityananda Prabhu in
relation to the celebrated festival of chipped rice and yogurt.                                   TEXT 101
                  prabhu visrama kaila, yadi dina-sesa haila
                    raghava-mandire tabe kirtana arambhila
                                 TRANSLATION     Nityananda Prabhu rested for the day, and when the day ended He
went to the temple of Raghava Pandita and began congregational chantingof the holy name of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 102
                      bhakta saba nacana nityananda-raya
                     sese nrtya kare preme jagat bhasaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda Prabhu first influenced all the devotees to dance,
and finally He Himself began dancing, thus inundating the entire worldin ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 103
                    mahaprabhu tanra nrtya karena darasana
                  sabe nityananda dekhe, na dekhe anya-jana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was observing the dancing of Lord
Nityananda Prabhu. Nityananda Prabhu could see this, but the otherscould not.
                                   TEXT 104
                  nityanandera nrtya,--yena tanhara nartane
                       upama dibara nahi e-tina bhuvane
                                 TRANSLATION     The dancing of Lord Nityananda Prabhu, like the dancing of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, cannot be compared to anything within these threeworlds.
                                   TEXT 105
                     nrtyera madhuri keba varnibare pare
                     mahaprabhu aise yei nrtya dekhibare                                 TRANSLATION
     No one can properly describe the sweetness of Lord Nityananda's
dancing. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabh u personally comes to see it.
                                   TEXT 106
                    nrtya kari' prabhu yabe visrama karila
                    bhojanera lagi' pandita nivedana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     After the dancing and after Lord Nityananda had rested, Raghava
Pandita submitted his request that the Lord take supper.
                                   TEXT 107
                     bhojane vasila prabhu nija-gana lana
                       mahaprabhura asana dahine patiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda Prabhu sat down for supper with His personal
associates and made a sitting place on His right side for Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 108
                       mahaprabhu asi' sei asane vasila
                     dekhi' raghavera mane ananda badila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came there and sat down at His place.
Seeing this, Raghava Pandita felt increasing happiness. Raghava Panditafelt increasing happiness.
                                   TEXT 109
                      dui-bhai-age prasada aniya dharila
                    sakala vaisnave piche parivesana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghava Pandita brought the prasada before the two brothers ad
thereaffer distributed prasada to all the other Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 110                  nana-prakara pitha, payasa, divya salyanna
                     amrta nindaye aiche vividha vyanjana
                                 TRANSLATION     There were varieties of cakes, sweet rice and fine cooked rice that
surpassed the taste of nectar. There were also varieties of vegetables.
                                   TEXT 111
                    raghava-thakurera prasada amrtera sara
                    mahaprabhu yaha khaite aise bara bara
                                 TRANSLATION     The food prepared and offered to the Deity by Raghava Pandita was
like the essence of nectar. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came there again andagain to eat such prasada.
                                   TEXT 112
                     paka kari' raghava yabe bhoga lagaya
                    mahaprabhura lagi' bhoga prthak badaya
                                 TRANSLATION     When Raghava Pandita offered the food to the Deity after cooking,
he would make a separate offering for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 113
                     prati-dina mahaprabhu karena bhojana
                   madhye madhye prabhu tanre dena darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Every day, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would eat at the house of
Raghava Pandita. Sometimes He would give Raghava Pandita the opportunityto see Him.
                                   TEXT 114
                       dui bhaire raghava ani' parivese
                    yatna kari' khaoyaya, na rahe avasese
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghava Pandita would bring and distribute prasada to the two
brothers, feeding Them with great attention. They ate everything, andtherefore there were no remnats letf.                                   TEXT 115
                       kata upahara ane, hena nahi jani
                    raghavera ghare randhe radha-thakurani
                                 TRANSLATION     He brought so many presentations that no one could know them
perfectly. Indeed, it was a fact that the supreme mother, Radharani,personally cooked in the house of Raghava Pandita.
                                   TEXT 116
                     durvasara thani tenho panachena vara
                    amrta ha-ite paka tanra adhika madhura
                                 TRANSLATION     Srimati Radharani received from Durvasa Muni the benediction that
whatever She cooked would be sweeter than nectar. That is the specialfeature of Her cooking.
                                   TEXT 117
                  sugan dhi sundara prasada--madhuryera sara
                      dui bhai taha khana santosa apara
                                 TRANSLATION     Aromatic and pleasing to see, the food was the essence of all
sweetness. Thus the two brothers, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu and LordNityananda Prabhu, ate it with great satisfaction.
                                   TEXT 118
                  bhojane vasite raghunathe kahe sarva-jana
                  pandita kahe,--inha pache karibe bhojana'
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees present requested Raghunatha dasa to sit down and
take prasada, but Raghava Pandita told them,"He will take prasadalater."
                                   TEXT 119
                  bhakta-gana akantha bhariya karila bhojana
                   `hari' dhvani kari' uthi' kaila acamana                                 TRANSLATION
     All the devotees took prasada, filling themselves to the brim.
Thereafter, chanting the holy name of Hari, they stood up and washedtheir hands and mouths.
                                   TEXT 120
                     bhcjana kari' dui bhai kaila acamana
                      raghava ani' paraila malya-candana
                                 TRANSLATION     After eating, the two brothers washed Their hands and mouths. Then
Raghava Pandita brought fIower garlads and sandalwood pulp and decoratedThem.
                                   TEXT 121
                     bida khaoyaila, kaila carana vandana
                     bhakta-gane dila bida, malya-candana
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghava Pandita offered Them betel nuts and worshiped Their lotus
feet. He also distributed betel nuts, flower garlands and sandalwoodpulp to the devotees.
                                   TEXT 122
                      raghavera kroa raghunathera upare
                    dui bhaiera avasista patra dila tanre
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghava Pandita, being very mercif ul toward Raghunatha dasa,
offered him the dishes with the remnats of food left by the twobrothers.
                                   TEXT 123
                kahila,--"caitanya gosani kariyachena bhojana
                 tanra sesa paile, tomara khandila bandhana"
                                 TRANSLATION     He said, "Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has eaten this food. If you
take His remnants, you will be released from the bondage of yourfamily."                                   TEXT 124
                   bhakta-citte bhakta-grhe sada avasthana
                kabhu gupta, kabhu vyakta, svatantra bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     The Supreme Personality of Godhead always resides either in the
heart or in the home of a devotee. This fact is sometimes hidden andsometimes manifest, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead is fullyindependent.
                                   TEXT 125
                sarvatra `vyapaka' prabhura sada sarvatra vasa
                      ihate samsaya yara, sei yaya nasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The Supreme Personality of Godhead is all-pervasive, and therefore
He resides everywhere. Anyone who doubts this will be annihilated.
                                   TEXT 126
                  prate nityananda prabhu ganga-snana kariya
                     sei vrksa-mule vasila nija-gana lana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the morning, after taking His bath in the Ganges, Nityananda
Prabhu sat down with His associates beneath the same tree under which Hehad previously sat.
                                   TEXT 127
                     raghunatha asi' kaila carana vandana
                     raghava-pandita-dvara kaila nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa went there and worshiped Lord Nityananda's lotus
feet. Through Raghava Pandita, he submitted his desire.
                                   TEXT 128
                     "adhama, pamara mui hina jivadhama!
                    mora iccha haya--pana caitanya-carana                                 TRANSLATION
     "I am the lowest of men, the most sinful, fallen and condemned.
Nevertheless, I desire to attain the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 129
                    vamana hana yena canda dharibare caya
                  aneka yatna kainu, tate kabhu siddha naya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Like a dwarf who wants to catch the moon, I have tried my best
many times, but I have never been successful.
                                   TEXT 130
                      yata-bara palai ami grhadi chadiya
                    pita, mata--dui more rakhaye bandhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Every time I tried to go away and give up my home relationships,
my father and mother unfortunately kept me bound.
                                   TEXT 131
                   tomara krpa vina keha `caitanya' na paya
                     tumi krpa kaile tanre adhameha paya
                                 TRANSLATION     "No one can attain the shelter of Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu without
Your mercy, but if You are merciful, even the lowest of men ca attainshelter at His lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 132
                    ayogya mui nivedana karite kari bhaya
                   more `caitanya' deha' gosani hana sadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although I am unfit and greatly afrald to submit this plea, I
nevertheless request You, sir, to be especially merciful toward me bygranting me shelter at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 133                    mora mathe pada dhari' karaha prasada
                   nirvighne caitanya pana--kara asirvada"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Placing Your feet on my head, give me the benediction that I may
achieve the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu without difficulty. Ipray for this benediction."
                                   TEXT 134
                   suni' hasi' kahe prabhu saba bhakta-gane
                    "ihara visaya-sukha--indra-sukha-sama
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing this appeal by Raghunatha dasa, Lord Nityananda
Prabhu smiled and told all the devotees, "Raghunatha dasa's standard ofmaterial happiness is equal to that of Indra, the King of heaven.
                                   TEXT 135
                     caitanya-krpate seha nahi bhaya mane
                  sabe asirvada kara--pauka caitanya-carane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because of the mercy bestowed upon him by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Raghunatha dasa, although situated in such material happiness, does notlike it at all. Therefore let every one of you be merciful toward himand give him the benediction that he may very soon attain shelter at thelotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 136
                    krsna-pada-padma-gandha yei jana paya
                    brahmaloka-adi-sukha tanre nahi bhaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who experiences the fragrance of the lotus feet of Lord Krsna
does not even value the standard of happiness avallable in Brahmaloka,the topmost planet. And what to speak of heavenly happiness?
                                   TEXT 137
                           yo dustyajan dara-sutan
                           suhrd-rajyam hrdi-sprsah                            jahau yuvaiva malavad                            uttama-sloka- lalasah                                 TRANSLATION
     " `Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is offered
sublime, poetic prayers by those trying to attain His favor. Thus He isknown as Uttamasloka. Being very eager to gain the association of LordKrsna, King Bharata, although in the prime of youth, gave up his veryattractive wife, affectionate children, most beloved friends and opulentkingdom, exactly as one gives up stool after excreting it."'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.14.43).                                   TEXT 138                    tabe raghunathe prabhu nikate bolaila
                    tanra mathe pada dhari' kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Lord Nityanada Prabhu called Raghunatha dasa near Him, placed
His lotus feet upon Raghunatha dasa's head and began to speak.
                                   TEXT 139
                      "tumi ye karaila ei pulina-bhojana
                    tomaya kroa kari' gaura kaila agamana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Raghunatha dasa," He said, "since you arranged the feast
on the bank of the Ganges, Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu came here just toshow you His mercy.
                                   TEXT 140
                     kroa kari' kaila cida-dugdha bhojana
                  nrtya dekhi' ratrye kaila prasada bhaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "By His causeless mercy He ate the chipped rice and milk. Then,
after seeing the dancing of the devotees at night, He took His supper.
                                   TEXT 141
                       toma uddharite gaura aila apane
                    chutila tomara yata vighnadi-bandhane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Gaurahari, came here personally to
deliver you. Now rest assured that all the impediments meant for yourbondage are gone.
                                   TEXT 142
                    svarupera sthane toma karibe samarpane
                   `antaranga' bhrtya bali' rakhibe carane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu will accept you and place you under the
charge of His secretary, Svarupa Damodara. You will thus become one ofthe most confidential internal servants and will attain the shelter ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 143
                       niscinta hana yaha apana-bhavana
                    acire nirvighne pabe caitanya-carana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Being assured of all this, return to your own home. Very soon,
without impediments, you will attain the shelter of Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu."
                                   TEXT 144
                   saba bhakta-dvare tanre asirvada karaila
                     tan-sabara carana raghunatha vandila
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Nityananda had Raghunatha dasa blessed by all the devotees, ad
Raghunatha dasa offered his respects to their lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 145
                   prabhu-ajna lana vaisnavera ajna la-ila
                     raghava-sahite nibhrte yukti karila
                                 TRANSLATION     After taking leave of Lord Nityananda Prabhu and then all the other
Vaisnavas, Srt Raghunatha dasa consulted secretly with Raghava Pandita.
                                   TEXT 146                    yukti kari' sata mudra, sona tola-sate
                    nibhrte dila prabhura bhandarira hate
                                 TRANSLATION     After consulting with Raghava Pandita, he secretly delivered one
hundred gold coins and about seven tolas of gold to the hand ofNityananda Prabhu's treasurer.
                                   TEXT 147
                  tanre nisedhila,--"prabhure ebe na kahiba
                    nija-ghare yabena yabe tabe nivediba"
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa admonished the treasurer, "Do not speak about this
to Lord Nityanada Prabhu now, but when He returns home, kindly informHim about this presentation."
                                   TEXT 148
                  tabe raghava-pandita tanre ghare lana gela
                   thakura darsana karana mala-candana dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereupon, Raghava Pandita took Raghunatha dasa to his home. After
inducing him to see the Deity, he gave Raghunatha dasa a garland andsandalwood pulp.
                                   TEXT 149
                     aneka `prasada' dila pathe khaibare
                     tabe punah raghunatha kahe panditere
                                 TRANSLATION     He gave Raghunatha dasa a large quantity of prasada to eat on his
way home. Then Raghunatha dasa again spoke to Raghava Pandita.
                                   TEXT 150
               "prabhura sange yata mahanta, bhrtya asrita jana
                       pujite cahiye ami sabara carana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I wat to give money," he said, "just to worship the lotus feet of
all the great devotees, servants and subservants of Lord NityanadaPrabhu.
                                   TEXT 151
                   bisa, panca-dasa, bara, dasa, panca haya
                   mudra deha' vicari' yara yata yogya haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "As you think fit, give twenty, fiffeen, twelve, ten or five coins
to each of them."
                                   TEXT 152
                     saba lekha kariya raghava-pasa dila
                    yanra name yata raghava cithi lekhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa drew up an account of the amount to be given and
submitted it to Raghava Pandita, who then made up a list showing howmuch money was to be paid to each and every devotee.
                                   TEXT 153
                      eka-sata mudra ara sona tola-dvaya
                       panditera age dila kariya vinaya
                                 TRANSLATION     With great humility, Raghunatha dasa placed one hundred gold coins
and about two tolas of gold before Raghava Pandita for all the otherdevotees.
                                   TEXT 154
                      tanra pada-dhuli lana svagrhe aila
                     nityananda-krpa pana krtartha manila
                                 TRANSLATION     After taking dust from the feet of Raghava Pandita, Raghunatha dasa
returned to his home, feeling greatly obligated to Lord Nityanada Prabhubecause of having received His merciful benediction.
                                   TEXT 155                    sei haite abhyantare na karena gamana
                   bahire durga-mandape yana karena sayana
                                 TRANSLATION     From that day on, he did not go into the interior section of the
house. Instead, he would sleep on the Durga-mandapa [the place wheremother Durga was worshiped].
                                   TEXT 156
                      tanha jagi' rahe saba raksaka-gana
                      palaite karena nana upaya cintana
                                 TRANSLATION     There, however, the watchmen alertly kept guard. Raghunatha dasa
was thinking of various means by which to escape their vigilace.
                                   TEXT 157
                   hena-kale gauda-desera saba bhakta-gana
                   prabhure dekhite nilacale karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time, all the devotees of Bengal were going to Jagannatha
Puri to see Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 158
                  tan-sabara sange raghunatha yaite na pare
                 prasiddha prakata sanga, tabahin dhara pade
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa could not accompany them, for they were so famous
that he would immediately have been caught.
                                 TEXT 159-160
                        ei-mata cintite daive eka-dine
                    bahire devi-mandape kariyachena sayane
                     danda-cari ratri yabe ache a vasesa
                    yadunandana-acarya tabe karila pravesa
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Raghunatha dasa thought deeply about how to escape, and one
night while he was sleeping on the Durga-mandapa, the priest YadunandanaAcarya entered the house when only four dandas remained until the end ofthe night.
                                   TEXT 161
                   vasudeva-dattera tenha haya `anugrhita'
                  raghunathera `guru' tenho haya `purohita'
                                 TRANSLATION     Yadunandana Acarya was the priest and spiritual master of
Raghunatha dasa. Although born in a brahmana family, he had accepted themercy of Vasudeva Datta.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that although the
atheists who have deviated from the order of Sri Advaita Acaryaintroduce themselves as followers of Advaita Acarya, they do not acceptSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.Yadunandana Acarya, one of the most confidential followers of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, was the initiated disciple of Advaita Acarya. Hewas not polluted by sentimental distinctions classifying Vaisnavasaccording to birth. Therefore although Vasudeva Datta had not been bornin a brahmana family, Yadunandana Acarya accepted Vasudeva Datta as hisspiritual master.
                                   TEXT 162                   advaita-acaryera tenha `sisya antaranga'
                  acarya-ajnate mane--caitanya `prana-dhana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Yadunandana Acarya had been officially initiated by Advaita Acarya.
Thus he considered Lord Caitanya his life and soul.
                                   TEXT 163
                       angane asiya tenho yabe dandaila
                     raghunatha asi' tabe dandavat kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Yadunandana Acarya entered the house of Raghunatha dasa and
stood in the courtyard, Raghunatha dasa went there and fell down tooffer his obeisances.
                                   TEXT 164                  tanra eka sisya tanra thakurera seva kare
                     seva chadiyache, tare sadhibara tare
                                 TRANSLATION     One of Yadunandana Acarya's disciples had been worshiping the Deity
but had left that service. Yadunandana Acarya wanted Raghunatha dasa toinduce the disciple to take up that service again.
                                   TEXT 165
                    raghunathe kahe,--"tare karaha sadhana
                     seva yena kare, ara nahika brahmana"
                                 TRANSLATION     Yadunandana Acarya requested Raghunatha dasa, "Please induce the
brahmana to resume the service, for there is no other brahmana to doit."
                                   TEXT 166
                       eta kahi' raghunathe lana calila
                    raksaka saba sesa-ratre nidraya padila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Yadunandana Acarya took Raghunatha dasa with him
and went out. By that time all the watchmen were deeply asleep becauseit was the end of the night.
                                   TEXT 167
                      acaryera ghara ihara purva-disate
                      kahite sunite dunhe cale sei pathe
                                 TRANSLATION     East of the house of Raghunatha dasa was the house of Yadunandana
Acarya. Yadunandana Acarya and Raghunatha dasa talked together as theywent toward that house.
                                   TEXT 168
                  ardha-pathe raghunatha kahe gurura carane
                  "ami sei vipre sadhi' pathaimu toma sthane
                                 TRANSLATION     Halfway along the path, Raghunatha dasa submitted at the lotus feet
of his spiritual master, "I shall go to the home of that brahmana,induce him to return, and send him to your home.
                                   TEXT 169
                    tumi sukhe ghare yaha--more ajna haya"
                      ei chale ajna magi' karila niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "You may go home without anxiety. Following your order, I shall
persuade the brahmana." On this plea, after asking permission, hedecided to go away.
                                   TEXT 170
                     "sevaka raksaka ara keha nahi sange
                      palaite amara bhala eita prasange
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa thought, "This is the greatest opportunity to go
away because this time there are no servants or watchmen with me."
                                   TEXT 171
                     eta cinti' purva-mukhe karila gamana
                     ulatiya cahe pache,--nahi kona jana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking in this way, he quickly proceeded toward the east.
Sometimes he turned around and looked back, but no one was followinghim.
                                   TEXT 172
                    sri-caitanya-nityananda-carana cintiya
                      patha chadi' upapathe yayena dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking of the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Lord
Nityananda Prabhu, he left the general path and proceeded with greathaste on the one not generally used.
                                   TEXT 173                  grame-gramera patha chadi' yaya vane vane
                    kaya-mano-vakye cinte caitanya-carane
                                 TRANSLATION     Giving up the general path from village to village, he passed
through the jungles, thinking with heart and soul about the lotus feetof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 174
                  panca-dasa-krosa-patha cali' gela eka-dine
                    sandhya-kale rahila eka gopera bathane
                                 TRANSLATION     He walked about thirty miles in one day, and in the evening he took
rest in the cowshed of a milkman.
                                   TEXT 175
                     upavasi dekhi' gopa dugdha ani' dila
                     sei dugdha pana kari' padiya rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the milkman saw that Raghunatha dasa was fasting, he gave him
some milk. Raghunatha dasa drank the milk and lay down to rest there forthe night.
                                   TEXT 176
                  etha tanra sevaka raksaka tanre na dekhiya
                     tanra guru-pase varta puchilena giya
                                 TRANSLATION     At the house of Raghunatha dasa, the servant and watchman, not
seeing him there, immediately went to inquire about him from hisspiritual master, Yadunandana Acarya.
                                   TEXT 177
                   tenha kahe, `ajna magi' gela nija-ghara'
                    `palaila raghunatha'--uthila kolahala
                                 TRANSLATION     Yadunandana Acarya said, "He has already asked my permission and
returned home." Thus there arose a tumultuous sound, as everyone cried,"Now Raghunatha has gone away!"
                                   TEXT 178
                 tanra pita kahe,--"gaudera saba bhakta-gana
                     prabhu-sthane nilacale karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa's father said, "Now all the devotees from Bengal
have gone to Jagannatha Puri to see Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 179
                       sei-sange raghunatha gela palana
                    dasa jana yaha, tare anaha dhariya-,,
                                 TRANSLATION     "Raghunatha dasa has fled with them. Ten men should immediately go
catch him and bring him back."
                                   TEXT 180
                      sivanande patri dila vinaya kariya
                      `amara putrere tumi diba bahudiya'
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa's father wrote a letter to Sivananda Sena, asking
him with great humility, "Please return my son."
                                   TEXT 181
                     jhankara paryanta gela sei dasa jane
                    jhankarate paila giya vaisnavera gane
                                 TRANSLATION     In Jhankara, the ten men caught up with the group of Vaisnavas
going to Nilacala.
                                   TEXT 182
                      patri diya sivanande varta puchila
                    sivananda kahe,--`tenha etha na aila'                                 TRANSLATION
     After delivering the letter, the men inquired from Sivananda Sena
about Ragh unatha dasa, but Sivananda Sena replied, "He did not comehere."
                                   TEXT 183
                      bahudiya sei dasa jana aila ghara
                    tanra mata-pita ha-ila cintita antara
                                 TRANSLATION     The ten men returned home, and Raghunatha dasa's father and mother
were filled with anxiety.
                                   TEXT 184
                     etha raghunatha-dasa prabhate uthiya
                  purva-mukha chadi' cale daksina-mukha hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa, who had been resting at the milkman's house, got
up early in the morning. Instead of going to the east, he turned hisface south and proceeded.
                                   TEXT 185
                     chatrabhoga para hana chadiya sarana
                       kugrama diya diya karila prayana
                                 TRANSLATION     He crossed Chatrabhoga, but instead of going on the general path,
he proceeded on the path that went from village to village.
                                   PURPORT     Chatrabhoga, known now as Chada-khadi, is in the district of
twenty-four parganas in West Bengal. It is situated near the celebratedvillage Jayanagara-majilapura. Formerly the Ganges or some of itsbranches flowed through this region. Sometimes Chatrabhoga ismisunderstood to have been a village on the River Kansai-nadi inBenapola.
                                   TEXT 186                 bhaksana apeksa nahi, samasta divasa gamana
               ksudha nahi badhe, caitanya-carana-praptye mana                                 TRANSLATION
     Not caring about eating, he traveled all day. Hunger was not an
impediment, for his mind was concentrated upon obtaining shelter at thelotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 187
               kabhu carvana, kabhu randhana, kabhu dugdha-pana
                     yabe yei mile, tahe rakhe nija prana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sometimes he chewed fried grains, sometimes he cooked, and
sometimes he drank milk. In this way he kept his life and soul togetherwith whatever was available wherever he went.
                                   TEXT 188
                     bara dine cali' gela sri-purusottama
                     pathe tina-dina matra karila bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     He reached Jagannatha Puri in twelve days but could only eat for
three days on the way.
                                   TEXT 189
                     svarupadi-saha gosani achena vasiya
                      hena-kale raghunatha milila asiya
                                 TRANSLATION     When Raghunatha dasa met Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord was
sitting with His companions, headed by Svarupa Damodara.
                                   TEXT 190
                     anganete dure rahi' karena pranipata
                  mukunda-datta kahe,--`ei aila raghunatha'
                                 TRANSLATION     Staying at a distant place in the courtyard, he fell down to offer
obeisances. Then Mukunda Datta said, "Here is Raghunatha."
                                   TEXT 191                 prabhu kahena,--`aisa;, tenho dharila carana
                   uthi' prabhu kroaya tanre kaila alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard these words, He
immediately welcomed Raghunatha dasa. "Come here," He said. Raghunathadasa then clasped the lotus feet of the Lord, but the Lord stood up andembraced him out of His causeless mercy.
                                   TEXT 192
                    svarupadi saba bhaktera carana vandila
                    prabhu-krpa dekhi' sabe alingana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa offered prayers at the lotus feet of all the
devotees, headed by Svarupa Damodara Gosvami. Seeing the special mercySri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had bestowed upon Raghunatha dasa, they embracedhim also.
                                   TEXT 193
                prabhu kahe,--"krsna-kroa balistha saba haite
                   tomare kadila visaya-vistha-garta haite"
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "The mercy of Lord Krsna is
stronger than anything else. Therefore the Lord has delivered you fromthe ditch of materialistic life, which is like a hole into which peoplepass stool."
                                   PURPORT     According to the law of karma, everyone is destined to suffer or
enjoy according to a certain material standard, but the mercy of LordKrsna is so powerful that the Lord can change all the reactions of one'spast karma, or fruitive activities. Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuspecifically drew attention to the mercy of Lord Krsna. That mercy ismore powerful than anything else, for it had saved Raghunatha dasa fromthe strong bondage of materialistic life, which the Lord compared to ahole where people pass stool. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave His verdictthat those addicted to the materialistic way of life are like worms that are livingin stool but cannot give it up. A grhavrata, one who has decided to livein a comfortable home although it is actually miserable, is in acondemned position. Only the mercy of Krsna can save one from suchmisery. Without Krsna's mercy, one cannot get out of the filthyentanglement of materialistic life. The poor living entity cannot giveup his materialistic position on his own; only when granted the specialmercy of Krsna can he give it up. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu knew very
well that Raghunatha dasa was already liberated. Nevertheless Heemphasized that Raghunatha dasa's life of material comfort as a veryrich man's son with a very beautiful wife and many servants to attendhim was like a ditch of stool. The Lord thus specifically indicated thatordinary men who are very happy with material comforts and family lifeare in no better position than worms in stool.
                                   TEXT 194                   raghunatha mane kahe,--`krsna nahi jani
                     tava krpa kadila ama,--ei ami mani'
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa answered within his mind, "I do not know who Krsna
is. I simply know that Your mercy, O my Lord, has saved me from myfamily life."
                                   TEXT 195
                 prabhu kahena,--"tomara pita-jyetha dui jane
                  cakravarti-sambandhe hama `aja' kari' mane
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord continued, "Your father and his elder brother are both
related as brothers to My grandfather, Nilambara Cakravarti. Therefore Iconsider them My grandfathers.
                                   PURPORT     Nilambara Cakravarti, the grandfather of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
was very intimately related to Raghunatha dasa's father and uncle.Nilambara Cakravarti used to call them his younger brothers because bothof them were very devoted to the brahmanas and were very respectablegentlemen. Similarly, they used to call him Dada Cakravarti, addressinghim as an elder brother brahmana. Raghunatha dasa, however, was almostthe same age as Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Generally a grandchild mayjoke about his grandfather. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu tookadvantage of the relationship between His grandfather and Raghunathadasa's father and uncle to speak in a joking way.
                                   TEXT 196                   cakravartira duhe haya bhratr-rupa dasa
                        ataeva tare ami kari parihasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "Since your father and his elder brother are younger brothers of
Nilambara Cakravarti, I may joke about them in this way.                                   TEXT 197
                tomara bapa-jyetha--visaya-vistha-gartera kida
                   sukha kari' mane visaya-visera maha-pida
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Raghunatha dasa, your father and his elder brother are
just like worms in stool in the ditch of material enjoyment, for thegreat disease of the poison of material enjoyment is what they considerhappiness.
                                   PURPORT     When a man is attached to material enjoyment, he is attached to
many miserable conditions, but nevertheless he accepts his condemnedposition as one of happiness. Sense enjoyment is so strong for such aperson that he cannot give it up, exactly as a worm in stool cannot giveup the stool. From the spiritual point of view, when a person is tooabsorbed in material enjoyment, he is exactly like a worm in stool.Although such a position is utterly miserable to the eyes of liberatedsouls, the materialistic enjoyer is greatly attached to it.
                                   TEXT 198                   yadyadi brahmanya kare brahmanera sahaya
               `suddha-vaisnava' nahe, haye `vaisnavera praya'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although your father and uncle are charitable to brahmanas and
greatly help them, they are nevertheless not pure Valsnavas. However,they are almost like Vaisnavas.
                                   PURPORT     As stated by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-
bhasya, some people, usually very rich men, dress like Vaisnavas andgive charity to brahmanas. They are also attached to Deity worship, butbecause of their attachment to material enjoyment, they cannot be pureVaisnavas. Anyabhilasita-sunyam jnana- karmady-anavrtam. The pureVaisnava has no desire for material enjoyment. That is the basicqualification of a pure Vaisnava. There are men, especially rich men,who regularly worship the Deity, give charity to brahmanas and are piousin every respect, but they cannot be pure Vaisnavas. Despite theiroutward show of Vaisnavism and charity, their inner desire is to enjoy ahigher standard of material life. Raghunatha dasa's father, Hiranyadasa, and uncle, Govardhana, were both very charitable to brahmanas.Indeed, the brahmanas from the Gaudiya district were practicallydependent upon them. Thus they were accepted as very pious gentlemen.However, they presented themselves as Vaisnavas to the eyes of people ingeneral, although from a purely spiritual point of view they wereordinary human beings, not pure Vaisnavas. Actual Vaisnavas consideredthem almost Vaisnavas, not pure Vaisnavas. In other words, they were
kanistha-adhikaris, for they were ignorant of higher Vaisnava regulativeprinciples. Nevertheless, they could not be called visayis, or blindmaterialistic enjoyers.
                                   TEXT 199                  tathapi visayera svabhava--kare maha-andha
                   sei karma karaya, yate haya bhava-bandha
                                 TRANSLATION     "Those who are attached to materialistic life and are blind to
spiritual life must act in such a way that they are bound to repeatedbirth and death by the actions and reactions of their activities.
                                   PURPORT     As clearly stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.9), yajnarthat karmano'nyatra
loko'yam- karma-bandhanah: if one does not act as a pure devotee,whatever acts he performs will produce reactions of fruitive bondage (karma-bandhanah). InSrimad- Bhagavatam it is said:     nunam pramattah kurute vikarma     yad-indriya-prita ya aprnoti     na sadhu manye yata atmano'yam     asann api klesada asa dehah"A materialistic person, madly engaged in activities for senseenjoyment, does not know that he is entangling himself in repeated birthand death and that his body, although temporary, is full of miseries."(Srimad-Bhagavatam 5.5.4) A visayi, a person blindly caught in a web ofmaterialistic life, remains in the cycle of birth and death perpetually.Such a person cannot understand how to execute pure devotional service,and therefore he acts as a karmi, jnani, yogi or something else,according to his desire, but he does not know that the activities ofkarma, jnana and yoga simply bind one to the cycle of birth and death.
                                   TEXT 200                  hena `visaya' haite krsna uddharila toma'
                     kahana na yaya krsna-kroara mahima"
                                 TRANSLATION     "By His own free will, Lord Krsna has delivered you from such a
condemned materialistic life. Therefore the glories of Lord Krsna'scauseless mercy cannot be expressed."
                                   PURPORT     in the Brahma-samhita (5.54) it is said, karmani nirdahati kintu ca
bhakti-bha--jam. Lord Krsna is so merciful that He can stop the reactionof karma for His devotee. Everyone--from a small insect called indra-gopa up to Indra, the King of heaven--is bound by the reactions of
fruitive activities.      yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-     bandhanurupa-phala-bhajanam atanoti     karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam     govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajamiEveryone, whether iike an insect or the King of heaven, is entangled andbound by the actions and reactions of his karma However, when onebecomes a pure devotee, free from material desires and from bondage tokarma, jnana and yoga, one is freed from material actions and reactionsby the causeless mercy of Krsna. One cannot express sufficient gratitudeto Krsna for being freed from the materialistic way of life.
                                   TEXT 201                     raghunathera ksinata-malinya dekhiya
                 svarupere kahena prabhu krpardra-citta hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing Raghunatha dasa skinny and dirty because of having traveled
for twelve days and fasted, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, His heartmelting due to causeless mercy, spoke to Svarupa Damodara.
                                   TEXT 202
                      "ei raghunathe ami sanpinu tomare
                     putra-bhrtya-rupe tumi kara angikare
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Svarupa," He said, "I entrust this Raghunatha dasa to you.
Please accept him as your son or servant.
                                   TEXT 203
                    tina `raghunatha'-nama haya amara gane
                   `svarupera raghu'--aji haite ihara name"
                                 TRANSLATION     "There are now three Raghunathas among My associates. From this day
forward, this Raghunatha should be known as the Raghu of SvarupaDamodara."
                                   PURPORT     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had three Raghus among His associates-
-Vaidya Raghunatha (vide Adi-lila 11.22), Bhatta Raghunatha and DasaRaghunatha. Dasa Raghunatha became celebrated as the Raghunatha ofSvarupa.
                                   TEXT 204                     eta kahi' raghunathera hasta dharila
                    svarupera haste tanre samarpana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu grasped the hand of Raghunatha
dasa and entrusted him to the hands of Svarupa Damodara Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 205
                 svarupa kahe,--`mahaprabhura ye ajna haila'
                     eta kahi' raghunathe punah alingila
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami accepted Raghunatha dasa, saying, "Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, whatever You order is accepted." He then embracedRaghunatha dasa again.
                                   TEXT 206
                  caitanyera bhakta-vatsalya kahite na pari
                     govindere kahe raghunathe daya kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     I cannot properly express the affection of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
for His devotees. Being merciful toward Raghunatha dasa, the Lord spokeas follows to Govinda.
                                   TEXT 207
                     "pathe inha kariyache bahuta lanhana
                    kata-dina kara ihara bhala santarpana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "On the way, Raghunatha dasa has fasted and undergone hardships for
many days. Therefore, take good care of him for some days so that he mayeat to his satisfaction."
                                   TEXT 208
                  raghunathe kahe--"yana, kara sindhu-snana
                    jagannatha dekhi' asi' karaha bhojana"
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Raghunatha dasa, "Go bathe in the
sea. Then see Lord Jagannatha in the temple and return here to take yourmeal."
                                   TEXT 209
                   eta bali' prabhu madhyahna karite uthila
                     raghunatha-dasa saba bhaktere milila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu got up and went to
perform His midday duties, and Raghunatha met all the devotees present.
                                   TEXT 210
                 raghunathe prabhura kroa dekhi, bhakta-gana
                  vismita hana kare tanra bhagya-prasamsana
                                 TRANSLATION     Having seen the causeless mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu upon
Raghunatha dasa, all the devotees, struck with wonder, praised his goodfortune.
                                   TEXT 211
                     raghunatha samudre yana snana karila
                  jagannatha dekhi' punah govinda-pasa aila
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa took his bath in the sea and saw Lord Jagannatha.
Then he returned to Govinda, the personal servant of Sri CaltanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 212
                  prabhura avasista patra govinda tanre dila
                    anandita hana raghunatha prasada paila
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda offered him a plate with the remnants of food left by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and Raghunatha dasa accepted the prasada with greathappiness.
                                   TEXT 213                      ei-mata rahe tenha svarupa-carane
                    govinda prasada tanre dila panca dine
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa stayed under the care of SvarOpa Damodara Gosvami,
and Govinda supplied him remnants of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's food forfive days.
                                   TEXT 214
                    ara dina haite `puspa-anjali' dekhiya
                    simha-dvare khada rahe bhiksara lagiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Beginning from the sixth day, Raghunatha dasa would stand at the
gate known as Simha-dvara to beg alms after the puspa-anjali ceremony,in which flowers were offered to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 215
                  jagannathera sevaka yata--`visayira gana'
                     seva sari' ratrye kare grhete gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     After finishing their prescribed duties, the many servants of Lord
Jagannatha, who are known as visayis, return home at night.
                                   TEXT 216
                    simha-dvare annarthi vaisna ve dekhiya
                   oasarira thani anna dena krpa ta' kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     If they see a Vaisnava standing at the Simha-dvara begging alms,
out of mercy they arrange with the shopkeepers to give him something toeat.
                                   TEXT 217
                      ei-mata sarva-kala ache vyavahara
                   niskincana bhakta khada haya simha-dvara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus it is a custom for all time that a devotee who has no other
means of support stands at the Simha-dvara gate to receive alms from theservants,
                                   TEXT 218
                  sarva-dina karena vaisnava nama-sankirtana
                    svacchande karena jagannatha darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     A completely dependent Vaisnava thus chats the holy name of the
Lord all day and sees Lord Jagannatha with full freedom.
                                   TEXT 219
                   keha chatre magi' khaya, yeba kichu paya
                   keha ratre bhiksa lagi' simha-dvare raya
                                 TRANSLATION     It is a custom for some Vaisnavas to beg from the charity booths ad
eat whatever they obtain, whereas others stand at night at the Simha-dvara gate, begging alms from the servants.
                                   TEXT 220
                 mahaprabhura bhakta-ganera vairagya pradhana
                    yaha dekhi' prita hana gaura-bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     Renunciation is the basic principle sustaining the lives of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's devotees. Seeing this renunciation, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is extremely satisfied.
                                   PURPORT     Anyone, whether an ordinary materialistic person or a pure devotee,
can understand the behavior of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's devotees if hestudies it minutely. One will thus find that the devotees of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu are not at all attached to any kind of materialenjoyment. They have completely given up sense enjoyment to engage fullyin the service of Lord Sri Krsna and dedicate their lives and souls toserving Krsna without material desires. Because their devotional serviceis free from material desires, it is unimpeded by materialcircumstances. Although ordinary men have great difficulty understandingthis attitude of the devotees, it is greatly appreciated by the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 221            prabhure govinda kahe,--"raghunatha `prasada' na laya
                  ratrye simha-dvare khada hana magi' khaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda said to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "Raghunatha dasa no longer
takes prasada here. Now he stands at the Simha-dvara, where he begs somealms to eat."
                                   TEXT 222
                    suni' tusta hana prabhu kahite lagila
                    "bhala kaila, vairagira dharma acarila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard this, He was greatly satisfied.
"Raghunatha dasa has done well," He sald."He has acted suitably for aperson in the renounced order.
                                   TEXT 223
                     vairagi karibe sada nama-sankirtana
                       magiya khana kare jivana raksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "A person in the renounced order should always chant the holy name
of the Lord. He should beg some alms to eat, and he should sustain hislife in this way.
                                   PURPORT     As stated in the Hari-bhakti-vilasa at the end of the Twentieth
Vilasa (366, 379, 382):     krtyanyetani tu prayo     grhinam dhaninam satam     likhitani na tu tyakta-     parigraha-mah atmanam     prabhate cardha-ratre ca     madh yahne divasa-ksa ye     kirtayanti harim ye vai     te taranti bhavarnavam     evam ekantinam prayah     kirtanam smaranam prabhoh      kurvatam parama-pritya     krtyam anyan na rocateA well-to-do householder Vaisnava cannot live like a person in therenounced order who completely takes shelter of the holy name. Such ahouseholder should chant the holy name of Krsna in the morning, atmidday and in the evening. Then he will be able to cross beyondnescience. Pure devotees in the renounced order, however, who fullysurrender to the lotus feet of Krsna, should chant the holy name of the
Lord with great love and faith, always thinking of Krsna's lotus feet.They should have no other occupation than chanting the holy name of theLord. In the Bhakti-sandarbha, Srila Jiva Gosvami says:yadyapi sri-bhagavata-mate panca-ratradivad-arcana-margasyavasyakatvamnasti, tad vinapi saranapattyadinam ekatarenapi purusartha-siddherabhihitatvat.
                                   TEXT 224                       vairagi hana yeba kare parapeksa
                    karya-siddhi nahe, krsna karena upeksa
                                 TRANSLATION     "A vairagi [a person in the renounced order] should not depend on
others. `If he does so, he will be unsuccessful, and he will beneglected by Krsna.
                                   TEXT 225
                       vairagi hana kare jihvara lalasa
                    paramartha yaya, ara haya rasera vasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "If a renunciant is eager for his tongue to taste different foods,
his spiritual life will be lost, and he will be subservient to thetastes of his tongue.
                                   TEXT 226
                    vairagira krtya--sada nama-sankirtana
                     saka-patra-phala-mule udara-bharana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The duty of a person in the renounced order is to chant the Hare
Krsna mantra always. He should satisfy his belly with whatevervegetables, leaves, fruits and roots are available.
                                   TEXT 227
                       jihvara lalase yei iti-uti dhaya
                     sisnodara-parayana krsna nahi paya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who is subservient to the tongue and who thus goes here and
there, devoted to the genitals and the belly, cannot attain Krsna."                                   TEXT 228
                      ara dina raghunatha svarupa-carane
                      apanara krtya lagi' kaila nivedane
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, Raghunatha dasa inquired at the lotus feet of Svarupa
Damodara about his duty.
                                   TEXT 229
                   "ki lagi' chadaila ghara, na jani uddesa
                    ki mora kartavya, prabhu kara upadesa"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I do not know why I have given up household life," he sald."What
is my duty? Kindly give me instructions."
                                   TEXT 230
                 prabhura age katha-matra na kahe raghunatha
                    svarupa-govinda-dvara kaha ya nija-vat
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa never even spoke a word before the Lord. Instead,
he informed the Lord of his desires through Svarupa Damodara Gosvami andGovinda.
                                   TEXT 231
                    prabhura age svarupa nivedila ara dine
                     raghunatha nivedaya prabhura carane
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami submitted to Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu,"Raghunatha dasa has this to say at Your lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 232
                    "ki mora kartavya, muni na jani uddesa
                      apani sri-mukhe more kara upadesa"
                                 TRANSLATION     "`I do not know my duty or the goal of my life. Therefore, please
personally give me instructions from Your transcendental mouth."'
                                   TEXT 233
                     hasi' mahaprabhu raghunathere kahila
                    "tomara upadesta kari' svarupere dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Smiling, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Raghunatha dasa,"I have
already appointed Svarupa Damodara Gosvami as your instructor.
                                   TEXT 234
                `sadhya'-`sadhana'-tattva sikha inhara sthane
                      ami tata nahi jani, inho yata jane
                                 TRANSLATION     "You may learn from him what your duty is and how to discharge it.
I do not know as much as he.
                                   TEXT 235
                   tathapi amara ajna ya sraddha yadi haya
                      amara ei vakye tabe kariha niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Nevertheless, if you want to take instructions from Me with faith
and love, you may ascertain your duties from the following words.
                                   TEXT 236
                gramya-katha na sunibe, gramya-varta na kahibe
                     bhala na khaibe ara bhala na paribe
                                 TRANSLATION     "Do not talk like people in general or hear what they say. You
should not eat very palatable food, nor should you dress very nicely.
                                   TEXT 237
                   amani manada hana krsna-nama sada la'be
                     vraje radha-krsna-seva manase karibe
                                 TRANSLATION     "Do not expect honor, but offer all respect to others. Always chant
the holy name of Lord Krsna, and within your mind render service toRadha and Krsna in Vrndavana.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura says in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya that
when a man and woman are married, they beget children and are thusentangled in family life. Talk concerning such family life is calledgramya-katha. A person in the renounced order never indulges in eitherhearing or talking about such subjects. He should not eat palatabledishes, since that is unfit for a person in the renounced order. Heshould show all respect to others, but should not expect respect forhimself. In this way, one should chant the holy name of the Lord andthink of how to serve Radha and Krsna in Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 238                      ei ta' sanksepe ami kailun upadesa
                      svarupera thani ihara paibe visesa
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have briefly given you My instructions. Now you will get all
details about them from Svarupa Damodara.
                                   TEXT 239
                              trnad api sunicena
                             taror iva sahisnuna                               amanina manadena                            kirtaniyah sada harih"                                TRANSLATION
     "One who thinks himself lower than grass, who is more tolerant tha
a tree, and who does not expect personal honor but is always prepared togive respect to others, can very easily always chant the holy name ofthe Lord."
                                   TEXT 240
                     eta suni' raghunatha vandila carana
                     mahaprabhu kaila tanre krpa-alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     Having heard this, Raghunatha dasa offered prayers at the lotus
feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and the Lord, with great mercy,embraced him.                                   TEXT 241
                    punah samarpila tanre svarupera sthane
                     `antaranga-seva' kare svarupera sane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu agaln entrusted him to Svarupa Damodara.
Thus Raghunatha dasa rendered very confidential service with SvarupaDamodara Gosvami.
                                   PURPORT     Antaranga-seva refers to service performed in one's spiritual body.
Svarupa Damodara Gosvami was formerly Lalitadevi. Raghunatha dasaGosvami, who was among his assistants, now also began to serve Radha andKrsna within his mind.
                                   TEXT 242                   hena-kale aila saba gaudera bhakta-gana
                     purvavat prabhu sabaya karila milana
                                 TRANSLATION     At this time, all the devotees from Bengal arrived, and, as
previously, Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu met them with great feeling.
                                   TEXT 243
                    saba lana kaila prabhu gundica-marjana
                     saba lana kaila prabhu vanya-bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     As He had previously done, He cleansed the Gundica temple ad held a
picnic feast in the garden with the devotees.
                                   TEXT 244
                    ratha-yatraya saba lana karila nartana
                   dekhi' raghunathera camatkara haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord again danced with the devotees during the Ratha-yatra
festival. Seeing this, Raghunatha dasa was struck with wonder.
                                   TEXT 245
                      raghunatha-dasa yabe sabare milila                     advaita-acarya tanre bahu krpa kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Raghunatha dasa met all the devotees, Advaita Acarya showed
him great mercy.
                                   TEXT 246
                     sivananda-sena tanre kahena vivarana
                  toma laite tomara pita pathaila dasa jana
                                 TRANSLATION     He also met Sivananda Sena, who informed him, "Your father sent ten
men to take you away.
                                   TEXT 247
                     tomare pathaite patri pathaila more
                   jhankara ha-ite toma na pana gela ghare
                                 TRANSLATION     "He wrote me a letter asking me to send you back, but when those
ten men received no information about you, they returned home fromJhankara."
                                   TEXT 248
                    cari masa rahi' bhakta-gana gaude gela
                   suni' raghunathera pita manusya pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When all the devotees from Bengal returned home affer staying at
Jagannatha Puri for four months, Raghunatha dasa's father heard abouttheir arrival and therefore sent a man to Sivananda Sena.
                                   TEXT 249
                     se manusya sivananda-senere puchila
                  "mahaprabhura sthane eka `vairagi' dekhila
                                 TRANSLATION     That man inquired from Sivananda Sena, "Did you see ayone in the
renounced order at the residence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu?                                   TEXT 250
                 govardhanera putra tenho, nama--`raghunatha'
                    nilacale paricaya ache tomara satha?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "That person is Raghunatha dasa, the son of Govardhaa Majumadara.
Did you meet him in Nilacala?"
                                   TEXT 251
                 sivananda kahe,--"tenho haya prabhura sthane
                    parama vikhyata tenho, keba nahi jane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena replied, "Yes, sir. Raghunatha dasa is with Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and is a very famous man. Who does not know him?
                                   TEXT 252
                 svarupera sthane tare kariyachena samarpana
                 prabhura bhakta-ganera tenho haya prana-sama
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has placed him under the charge of Svarupa
Damodara. Raghunatha dasa has become just like the life of all theLord's devotees.
                                   TEXT 253
                    ratri-dina kare tenho nama-sankirtana
                    ksana-matra nahi chade prabhura carana
                                 TRANSLATION     "He chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra all day and night. He never
gives up the shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, not even for a moment.
                                   TEXT 254
                 parama vairagya tara, nahi bhaksya-paridhana
                   yaiche taiche ahara kari' rakhaye parana
                                 TRANSLATION     "He is in the supreme order of renounced life. Indeed, he does not
care about eating or dressing. Somehow or other he eats and maintainshis life.
                                   TEXT 255
                  dasa-danda ratri gele `puspanjali' dekhiya
                     simha-dvare khada haya ahara lagiya
                                 TRANSLATION     "After ten dandas [four hours] of the night have passed and
Raghunatha dasa has seen the performance of puspanjali, he stands at theSimha-dvara gate to beg some alms to eat.
                                   TEXT 256
                     keha yadi deya, tabe karaye bhaksana
                     kabhu upavasa, kabhu karaye carvana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "He eats if someone gives him something to eat. Sometimes he fasts,
and sometimes he chews fried grains."
                                   TEXT 257
                   eta suni, sei manusya govardhana-sthane
                     kahila giya saba raghunatha-vivarane
                                 TRANSLATION     Affer hearing this, the messenger returned to Govardhana Majumadara
and informed him all about Raghunatha dasa.
                                   TEXT 258
                    suni' tanra mata pita duhkhita ha-ila
                putra-thani dravya-manusya pathaite mana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing the description of Raghunatha dasa's behavior in the
renounced order, his father and mother were very unhappy. Therefore theydecided to send him some men with goods for his comfort.
                                   TEXT 259
                  cari-sata mudra, dui bhrtya, eka brahmana                    sivanandera thani pathaila tata-ksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa's father immediately sent four hundred coins, two
servants and one brahmana to Sivananda Sena.
                                   TEXT 260
                   sivananda kahe,--"tumi saba yaite nariba
                       ami yai yabe, amara sange yaiba
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena informed them, "You cannot go to Jagannatha Puri
directly. When I go there, you may accompany me.
                                   TEXT 261
                     ebe ghara yaha, yabe ami saba calimu
                      tabe toma sabakare sange lana yamu
                                 TRANSLATION     "Now go home. When all of us go, I shall take all of you with me."                                   TEXT 262                      ei ta' prastave sri kavi-karnapura
                  raghunatha-mahima granthe likhila pracura
                                 TRANSLATION     Describing this incident, the great poet Sri Kavi-karnapura has
written extensively about the glorious activities of Raghunatha dasa inhis book.
                                   TEXT 263
              acaryo yadunandanah sumadhurah sri-vasudeva-priyas
            tac-chisyo raghunatha ity adhigunah pranadhiko madrsam             sri-caitanya-krpatireka-satata-snigdhah svarupanugo            vairagyaika-nidhir na kasya vidito nilacale tisthatam
                                 TRANSLATION     "Raghunatha dasa is a disciple of Yadunandana Acarya, who is very
gentle and is extremely dear to Vasudeva Datta, a resident ofKancanapalli. Because of Raghunatha dasa's transcendental qualities, heis always more dear than life for all of us devotees of Sri CaltanyaMahaprabhu. Since he has been favored by the abundant mercy of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu, he is always pleasing. Vividly providing a superior
example for the renounced order, this very dear follower of SvarupaDamodara Gosvami is the ocean of renunciation. Who among the residentsof Nilacala [Jagannatha Puri] does not know him very well?
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Sri Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka (10.3) of Kavi-
karnapura.
                                   TEXT 264                        yah sarva-lokaika-manobhirucya
                      saubhagya-bhuh kacid akrsta-pacya                        yatra yam aropana-tulya-kalam                       tat-prema-sakhi phalavan atulyah
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because he is very pleasing to all the devotees, Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami easily became like the fertile earth of good fortune in which itwas suitable for the seed of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be sown. At thesame time that the seed was sown, it grew into a matchless tree of thelove of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and produced fruit."
                                   PURPORT     This is the next verse from Sri Caitanya-candrodaya-nataka (10.4).                                   TEXT 265                     sivananda yaiche sei manusye kahila
                       karnapura sei-rupe sloka varnila
                                 TRANSLATION     In these verses, the great poet Kavi-karnapura gives the same
information that Sivananda Sena conveyed to the messenger fromRaghunatha dasa's father.
                                   TEXT 266
                      varsantare sivananda cale nilacale
                 raghunathera sevaka, vipra ta-nra sange cale
                                 TRANSLATION     The next year, when Sivananda Sena was going to Jagannatha Puri as
usual, the servants and the brahmana, who was a cook, went with him.
                                   TEXT 267                    sei vipra bhrtya, cari-sata mudra lana
                       nilacale raghunathe milila asiya
                                 TRANSLATION     The servants and brahmana brought four hundred coins to Jagannatha
Puri, and there they met Raghunatha dasa.
                                   TEXT 268
                      raghunatha-dasa angikara na karila
                     dravya lana dui-jana ta-hani rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa did not accept the money and men sent by his
father. Therefore a servant and the brahmana stayed there with themoney.
                                   TEXT 269
                      tabe raghunatha kari' aneka yatana
                   mase dui-dina kaila prabhura nimantrana
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time, Raghunatha dasa invited Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu to
his house with great attention for two days every month.
                                   TEXT 270
                     dui nimantrane lage kaudi asta-pana
                  brahmana-bhrtya-thani karena eteka grahana
                                 TRANSLATION     The cost for these two occasions was 640 kaudis. Therefore he would
take that much from the servant and the brahmana.
                                   TEXT 271
                      ei-mata nimantrana varsa dui kaila
                   pache raghunatha nimantrana chadi' dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa continued to invite Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in this
way for two years, but at the end of the second year he stopped.                                   TEXT 272
                 masa-dui yabe raghunatha na kare nimantrana
                     svarupe puchila tabe sacira nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Raghunatha dasa neglected to invite Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu for two consecutive months, the Lord, the son of Saci,questioned Svarupa Damodara.
                                   TEXT 273
                  `raghu kene amaya nimantrana chadi' dila?'
                   svarupa kahe,--"mane kichu vicara karila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord asked, "Why has Raghunatha dasa stopped inviting Me?"
Svarupa Damodara replied, "He must have reconsidered something in hismind.
                                   TEXT 274
                     visayira dravya lana kari nimantrana
                  prasanna na haya ihaya jani prabhura mana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `I invite Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by accepting goods from
materialistic people. I know that the Lord's mind is not satisfied bythis.
                                   TEXT 275
                   mora citta dravya la-ite na haya nirmala
                ei nimantrane dekhi,--`pratistha'-matra phala
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My consciousness is impure because I accept all these goods from
people who are interested only in pounds, shillings and pence. Thereforeby this kind of invitation I only get some material reputation.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura remarks that people who are
under the bodily conception of life are called materialists. If weaccept the offerings of such people, place them before the Lord andinvite Vaisnavas to partake of the prasada, that attempt will gain usonly a material reputation, not the actual benefit of service to a pureVaisnava. One should therefore try to serve the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by fully surrendering at His lotus feet. If one engages for theservice of the Lord whatever money one has honestly earned, that isspiritual service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the spiritualmaster and the Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 276                    uparodhe prabhu mora manena nimantrana
                    na manile duhkhi ha-ibeka murkha jana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `At my request Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu accepts the invitations
because He knows that a foolish person like me would be unhappy if Hedid not accept them.'
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that people who are
advanced in learning but attached to material enjoyment, who are puffedup by material possessions, by birth in an elevated aristocratic familyor by education, may offer showbottle devotional service to the Deityand also offer prasada to Vaisnavas. Because of their ignorance,however, they cannot understand that since their minds are materiallypolluted, neither the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna, northe Vaisnavas accept their offerings. If one accepts money from suchmaterialistic persons to offer food to the Deity and Vaisnavas, a pureVaisnava does not accept it. This causes unhappiness for thematerialists because they are fully absorbed in the bodily conception oflife. Therefore they sometimes turn against the Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 277                     eta vicariya nimantrana chadi' dila"
                     suni' mahaprabhu hasi' balite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Considering all these points," Svarupa Damodara concluded, "he has
stopped inviting You." Hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu smiled andspoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 278
                    "visayira anna khaile malina haya mana
                    malina mana haile nahe krsnera smarana
                                 TRANSLATION     "When one eats food offered by a materialistic man, one's mind
becomes contaminated, and when the mind is contaminated, one is unableto think of Krsna properly.                                   PURPORT
     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura suggests that people who
are materialistically inclined and sahajiyas, or so-called Vaisnavas whotake everything very casually, are both visayi materialists. Eating foodoffered by them causes contamination, and as a result of suchcontamination, even a serious devotee becomes like a materialistic man.There are six kinds of association--giving charity, accepting charity,accepting food, offering food, talking confidentially and inquiringconfidentially. One should very carefully avoid associating with boththe saha- jiyas, who are sometimes known as Vaisnavas, and the non-Vaisnavas, or avaisnavas. Their association changes the transcendentaldevotional service of Lord Krsna into sense gratification, and whensense gratification enters the mind of a devotee, he is contaminated.The materialistic person who aspires after sense gratification cannotproperly think of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 279                    visayira anna haya `rajasa' nimantrana
                    data, bhokta--dunhara malina haya mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "When one accepts an invitation from a person contaminated by the
material mode of passion, the person who offers the food and the personwho accepts it are both mentally contaminated.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura says that there are three varieties of
invitations--those in the mode of goodness, those in passion and thosein ignorance. An invitation accepted from a pure devotee is in the modeof goodness, an invitation accepted from a person who is pious butmaterially attached is in the mode of passion, and an invitationaccepted from a person who is materially very sinful is in the mode ofignorance.
                                   TEXT 280                       inhara sankoce ami eta dina nila
                    bhala haila--janiya apani chadi dila"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because of Raghunatha dasa's eagerness, I accepted his invitation
for many days. It is very good that Raghunatha dasa, knowing this, hasnow automatically given up this practice."
                                   TEXT 281
                   kata dine raghunatha simha-dvara chadila                   chatre yai' magiya khaite arambha karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Affer some days, Raghunatha dasa gave up standing near the Simha-
dvara gate and instead began eating by begging alms from a booth forfree distribution of food.
                                   TEXT 282
                 govinda-pasa suni' prabhu puchena svarupere
              `raghu bhiksa lagi' thada kene nahe simha-dvare'?
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard this news from Govinda, He
inquired from Svarupa Damodara, "Why does Raghunatha dasa no longerstand at the Simha-dvara gate to beg alms?"
                                   TEXT 283
                svarupa kahe,--"simha-dvare duhkha anubhaviya
                   chatre magi' khaya madhyahna-kale giya"
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara replied, "Raghunatha dasa felt unhappy standing at
the Simha-dvara. Therefore he is now going at midday to beg alms fromthe charity booth."
                                   TEXT 284
               prabhu kahe,--"bhala kaila, chadila simha-dvara
                  simha-dvare bhiksa- vrtti--ves yara acara
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this news, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "He has done very
well by no longer standing at the Simha-dvara gate. Such begging of almsresembles the behavior of a prostitute.
                                   TEXT 285
          kim artham ayam agacchati, ayam dasyati, anena dattam ayam
                aparah. samety ayam dasyati, anenapi na dattam                     anyah samesyati, sa dasyati ity adi.
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Here is a person coming near. He will give me something. This
person gave me something last night. Now another person is coming near.He may give me something. The person who just passed did not give meanything, but another person will come, and he will give me something.'Thus a person in the renounced order gives up his neutrality and dependson the charity of this person or that. Thinking in this way, he adoptsthe occupation of a prostitute.
                                   TEXT 286
                     chatre yai yatha-labha udara-bharana
                   anya katha nahi, sukhe krsna-sankirtana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "If one goes to the booth where free food is distributed and fills
his belly with whatever he obtains, there is no chance of furtherunwanted talk, and one can very peacefully chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra."
                                   TEXT 287
                     eta bali' tanre punah prasada karila
                 `govardhanera sila', `gunja-mala' tanre dila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again bestowed His mercy
upon Raghunatha dasa by giving him a piece of stone from Govardhana Hilland a garland of small conchshells.
                                   TEXT 288
                 sankarananda-sarasvati vrndavana haite aila
                     tenha sei sila-gunja-mala lana gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Previously, when Sankarananda Sarasvati had returned from
Vrndavana, he had brought the piece of stone from Govardhana Hill andalso the garland of conchshells.
                                   TEXT 289
                  parsve gantha gunja-mala, govardhana-sila
                     dui vastu mahaprabhura age ani' dila
                                 TRANSLATION     He presented Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu these two items--the garland
of conchshells and the stone from Govardhana Hill.
                                   TEXT 290
                   dui apurva-vastu pana prabhu tusta haila
                     smaranera kale gaie pare gunja-mala
                                 TRANSLATION     Upon receiving these two uncommon items, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was extremely happy. While chanting, He would put the garland around Hisneck.
                                   TEXT 291
                  govardhana-sila prabhu hrdaye-netre dhare
                  kabhu nasaya ghrana laya, kabhu sire kare
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord would put the stone to His heart or sometimes to His eyes.
Sometimes He would smell it with His nose and sometimes place it on Hishead.
                                   TEXT 292
                     netra-jale sei sila bhije nirantara
                    silare kahena prabhu--`krsna-kalevara'
                                 TRANSLATION     The stone from Govardhana was always moist with tears from His
eyes. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would say, "This stone is directly thebody of Lord Krsna."
                                   TEXT 293
                    ei-mata tina-vatsara sila-mala dharila
                     tusta hana sila-mala raghunathe dila
                                 TRANSLATION     For three years He kept the stone and garland. Then, greatly
satisfied by the behavior of Raghunatha dasa, the Lord delivered both ofthem to him.
                                   TEXT 294                    prabhu kahe,--"ei sila krsnera vigraha
                     inhara seva kara tumi kariya agraha
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed Raghunatha dasa, "This stone is
the transcendental form of Lord Krsna. Worship the stone with greateagerness."
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura writes in his Anubhasya
that in the opinion of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the govardhana-sila, thestone from Govardhana Hill, was directly the form of Krsna, the son ofMaharaja Nanda. The Lord used the stone for three years, and then in theheart of Raghunatha dasa the Lord awakened devotional service to thestone. The Lord then gave the stone to Raghunatha dasa, accepting him asone of His most confidential servants. However, some envious peopleconclude that because Raghunatha dasa had not taken birth in the familyof a brahmana, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not give him the right toworship the Deity directly, but instead gave him a stone fromGovardhana. This kind of thought is naraki, or hellish. As stated in thePadma purana, arcye visnau siladhir gurusu nara-matir vaisnave jati-buddhih... yasya va naraki sah: "One who considers the arca-murti (theworshipable Deity of Lord Visnu) to be stone, the spiritual master to bean ordinary human being, or a Vaisnava to belong to a particular creedis possessed of hellish intelligence." If one thinks that theworshipable salagrama-sila is a mere stone, that the spiritual master isan ordinary human being or that a pure Vaisnava preaching the bhakticult all over the world is a member of a particular caste or materialdivision of society, he is considered a naraki, a candidate for hellishlife. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed that the govardhana-sila,the stone taken from Govardhana, is nondifferent from the body of SriKrsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He indirectly advised suchfoolish persons that one should not be envious of a Vaisnava who belongsto a different caste or sect. One should accept a Vaisnava astranscendental. in this way one can be saved; otherwise, one is surelyawaiting a hellish life.
                                   TEXT 295                     ei silara kara tumi sattvika pujana
                      acirat pabe tumi krsna-prema-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, "Worship this stone in the mode
of goodness like a perfect brahmana, for by such worship you will surelyattain ecstatic love of Krsna without delay.
                                   TEXT 296
                      eka kunja jala ara tulasi-manjari                     sattvika-seva ei--suddha-bhave kari
                                 TRANSLATION     "For such worship, one needs a jug of water and a few flowers from
a tulasi tree. This is worship in complete goodness when performed incomplete purity.
                                   TEXT 297
                   dui-dike dui-patra madhye komala manjari
                   ei-mata asta-manjari dibe sraddha kari"'
                                 TRANSLATION     "With faith and love, you should offer eight soft tulasi flowers,
each with two tulasi leaves, one on each side of each flower.',
                                   TEXT 298
                       sri-haste sila diya ei ajna dila
                     anande raghunatha seva karite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     After thus advising him how to worship, Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu personally offered Raghunatha dasa the govardhana-sila withHis transcendental hand. As advised by the Lord, Raghunatha dasaworshiped the sila in great transcendental jubilation.
                                   TEXT 299
                   eka-vitasti dui-vastra, pinda eka-khani
                      svarupa dilena kunja anibare pani
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara gave Raghunatha dasa two cloths, each about six
inches long, a wooden platform and a jug in which to keep water.
                                   TEXT 300
                       ei-mata raghunatha karena pujana
                  puja-kale dekhe silaya `vrajendra-nandana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Raghunatha dasa began worshiping the stone from Govardhana,
and as he worshiped he saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,the son of Nanda Maharaja, directly in the stone.                                   TEXT 301
                   `prabhura svahasta-datta govardhana-sila
                    ei cinti' raghunatha preme bhasi' gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking of how he had received the govardhana-sila directly from
the hands of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Raghunatha dasa was alwaysoverflooded with ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 302
                  jala-tulasira sevaya tanra yata sukhodaya
                     sodasopacara-pujaya tata sukha naya
                                 TRANSLATION     The amount of transcendental bliss that Raghunatha dasa enjoyed
simply by offering water and tulasi is impossible to achieve even if oneworships the Deity with sixteen kinds of paraphernalia.
                                   TEXT 303
                       ei-mata kata dina karena pujana
                   tabe svarupa-gosani tanre kahila vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     After Raghunatha dasa had thus worshiped the govardhana-sila for
some time, Svarupa Damodara one day spoke to him as follows.
                                   TEXT 304
                  "asta-kaudira khaja-sandesa kara samarpana
                     sraddha kari' dile, sei amrtera sama
                                 TRANSLATION     "Offer the Govardhana stone eight kaudis worth of the first-class
sweetmeats known as khaja and sandesa. If you offer them with faith andlove, they will be just like nectar."
                                   TEXT 305
                    tabe asta-kaudira khaja kare samarpana
                  svarupa-ajnaya govinda taha kare samadhana                                 TRANSLATION
     Raghunatha dasa then began offering the costly sweetmeats known as
khaja, which Govinda, following the order of Svarupa Damodara, wouldsupply.
                                   TEXT 306
                     raghunatha sei sila-mala yabe paila
                     gosanira abhioraya ei bhavana karila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Raghunatha dasa received from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu the
stone and the garland of conchshells, he could understand the Lord'sintention. Thus he thought as follows.
                                   TEXT 307
                   "sila diya gosani samarpila `govardhane'
                    gunja-mala diya dila `radhika-carane,
                                 TRANSLATION     "By offering me the govardhana-sila, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has
offered me a place near Govardhana Hill, and by offering me the garlandof conch shells, He has offered me shelter at the lotus feet of SrimatiRadharani."
                                   TEXT 308
                     anande raghunathera bahya vismarana
                      kaya-mane sevilena gauranga-carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa's transcendental bliss was boundless. Forgetting
everything external, he served the lotus feet of Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhuwith his body and mind.
                                   TEXT 309
                  ananta guna raghunathera ke karibe lekha?
                  raghunathera niyama,--yena pasanera rekha
                                 TRANSLATION     Who could list the unlimited transcendental attributes of
Raghunatha dasa? His strict regulative principles were exactly likelines on a stone.                                   PURPORT
     The words pasanera rekha are very significant. Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami followed the regulative principles so strictly and rigidly thatthey were compared to the lines on a stone. As such lines cannot beerased at any time, so the regulative principles observed by SriRaghunatha dasa Gosvami could not be changed under any circumstances.
                                   TEXT 310                    sade sata prahara yaya kirtana-smarane
                  ahara-nidra cari danda seha nahe kona dine
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa spent more than twenty-two hours out of every
twentyfour chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra and remembering the lotusfeet of the Lord. He ate and slept for less than an hour and a half, andon some days that also was impossible.
                                   TEXT 311
                    vairagyera katha tanra adbhuta-kathana
                    ajanma na dila jihvaya rasera sparsana
                                 TRANSLATION     Topics concerning his renunciation are wonderful. Throughout his
life he never allowed his tongue sense gratification.
                                   TEXT 312
                    chinda kani kantha vina na pare vasana
                    savadhane prabhura kaila ajnara palana
                                 TRANSLATION     He never touched anything to wear except a small torn cloth and a
patchwork wrapper. Thus he very rigidly executed the order of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     The principle of very rigidly carrying out the order of the
spiritual master must be observed. The spiritual master gives differentorders to different people. For example, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu orderedJiva Gosvami, Rupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami to preach, and Heordered Raghunatha dasa Gosvami to strictly follow the rules andregulations of the renounced order. All six Gosvamis strictly followedthe instructions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This is the principle forprogress in devotional service. After receiving an order from thespiritual master, one must strictly try to execute the order. That is
the way of success.
                                   TEXT 313                    prana-raksa lagi' yeba karena bhaksana
                    taha khana apanake kahe nirveda-vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Whatever he ate was only to keep his body and soul together, and
when he ate he would reproach himself thus.
                                   TEXT 314
                            atmanam ced vijaniyat
                           param jnana-dh utasa yah                          kim icchan kasya va hetor                            deham pusnati lampatah
                                 TRANSLATION     "If one's heart has been cleansed by perfect knowledge and one has
understood Krsna, the Supreme Brahman, he then gains everything. Whyshould
such a person act like a debauchee by trying very carefully to maintain
his material body?"
                                   PURPORT     This verse (SB. 7.15.40) was spoken by Narada to Yudhisthira
Maharaja regarding a householder's liberation from material bondage. Onthe spiritual platform, one does not unnecessarily care for the body.Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has said, deha-smrti nahi yara, samsarabandhana kahan tara. One who is spiritually situated does not think thathe is the body. Therefore he can transcendentally execute severepenances in the renounced order of life. The best example of suchrenunciation is Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 315                      prasadanna pasarira yata na vikaya
                     dui-tina dina haile bhata sadi' yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Jagannatha's prasada is sold by shopkeepers, and that which is
not sold decomposes after two or three days.
                                   TEXT 316                     simha-dvare gabhi-age sei bhata dare
                   sada-gandhe tailangi-gai khaite na pare
                                 TRANSLATION     All the decomposed food is thrown before the cows from Tailanga at
the Simha-dvara gate. Because of its rotten odor, even the cows cannoteat it.
                                   TEXT 317
                    sei bhata raghunatha ratre ghare ani'
                  bhata pakhaliya phele ghare diya bahu pani
                                 TRANSLATION     At night Raghunatha dasa would collect that decomposed rice, bring
it home and wash it with ample water.
                                   TEXT 318
                     bhitarera drdha yei maji bhata paya
                    lavana diya raghunatha sei anna khaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Then he ate the hard inner portion of the rice with salt.
                                   TEXT 319
                     eka-dina svarupa taha karite dekhila
                      hasiya tahara kichu magiya khaila
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Svarupa Damodara saw the activities of Raghunatha dasa.
Thus he smiled and asked for a small portion of that food and ate it.
                                   TEXT 320
                  svarupa kahe,--"aiche amrta khao niti-niti
                 ama-sabaya nahi deha;,--ki tomara prakrti?"
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara said, "You eat such nectar every day, but you
never offer it to us. Where is your character?"
                                   TEXT 321                    govindera mukhe prabhu se varta sunila
                      ara dina asi' prabhu kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard news of this from the mouth of
Govinda, He went there the next day and spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 322
                 kanha vastu khao sabe, more na deha' kene?'
                     eta bali' eka grasa karila bhaksane
                                 TRANSLATION     "What nice things are you eating? Why don't you give anything to
Me?" Saying this, He forcibly took a morsel and began to eat.
                                   TEXT 323
                    ara grasa laite svarupa hatete dharila
                   `tava yogya nahe' bali' bale kadi' nila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was taking another morsel of food,
Svarupa Damodara caught Him by the hand and said, "It is not fit forYou." Thus he forcibly took the food away.
                                   TEXT 324
                  prabhu bale,--"niti-niti nana prasada khai
                     aiche svada ara kona prasade na pai"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "Of course, every day I eat varieties
of prasada, but I have never tasted such nice prasada as that whichRaghunatha is eating."
                                   TEXT 325
                      ei-mata mahaprabhu nana lila kare
                 raghunathera vairagya dekhi' santosa antare
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed many pastimes at Jagannatha
Puri. Seeing the severe penances performed by Raghunatha dasa in therenounced order, the Lord was greatly satisfied.
                                   TEXT 326
                       apana-uddhara ei raghunatha-dasa
               `gauranga-stava-kalpa-vrkse' kariyachena prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In his own poem known as the Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa, Raghunatha
dasa has described his personal deliverance.
                                   TEXT 327
                maha-sampad-davad api patitam uddhrtya krpaya
               svarupe yah sviye kujanam api mam nyasya muditah                uro-gunja-haram priyam api ca govardhana-silam                 dadau me gaurango hrdaya udayan mam madayati
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although I am a fallen soul, the lowest of men, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu delivered me from the blazing forest fire of great materialopulence by His mercy. He handed me over in great pleasure to SvarupaDamodara, His per-sonal associate. The Lord also gave me the garland of small conchshellsthat He wore on His chest and a stone from Govardhana Hill, althoughthey were very dear to Him. That same Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuawakens within my heart and makes me mad after Him."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Sri Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa (11), written by
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 328                      ei ta' kahilun raghunathera milana
                      iha yei sune paya caitanya-carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described the meeting of Raghunatha dasa with Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Anyone who hears about this incident attains thelotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 329
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa,                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri ROpa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Sixth Chapter, describing Lord Caitanya's meeting withRaghunatha dasa Gosvami.
                                Chapter Seven
          The Meeting of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Vallabha Bhatta     The following summary of Chapter Seven is given by Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. In this chapter, LordSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's meeting with Vallabha Bhatta is described.There was some joking behavior between these two personalities, andfinally Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu corrected Vallabha Bhatta andsympathetically accepted an invitation from him. Before this, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu saw that Vallabha Bhatta was greatly attached toGadadhara Pandita. Therefore He acted as if displeased with GadadharaPandita. Later, when Vallabha Bhatta became intimately connected withthe Lord, the Lord advised him to take instructions from GadadharaPandita. Thus the Lord expressed His feelings of love for GadadharaPandita.
                                    TEXT 1                            caitanya-caranambhoja-
                             makaranda-liho bhaje                            yesam prasada-ma trena                            pamaro'py amaro bhavet
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the devotees of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Simply by the causeless mercy of the devoteesengaged in licking honey from His lotus feet, even a fallen soul becomeseternally liberated.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  ja yadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Nityananda
Prabhu! All glories to Advaitacandra! And all glories to the devotees ofLord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu!
                                    TEXT 3
                   varsantare yata gaudera bhakta-gana aila
                      purvavat mahaprabhu sabare milila
                                 TRANSLATION     The next year, all the devotees of Bengal went to visit Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and as previously, the Lord met each and every oneof them.
                                    TEXT 4
                   ei-mata vilasa prabhura bhakta-gana lana
                    hena-kale vallabha-bhatta milila asiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed His pastimes with His
devotees. Then a learned scholar named Vallabha Bhatta went toJagannatha Puri to meet the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     For a description of Vallabha Bhatta, one may refer to the Madhya-
lila, Chapter Nineteen, text 61.
                                    TEXT 5                     asiya vandila bhatta prabhura carane
                  prabhu `bhagavata-buddh ye' kaila alingane
                                 TRANSLATION     When Vallabha Bhatta arrived, he offered his obeisances at the
lotus feet of the Lord. Accepting him as a great devotee, the Lordembraced him.
                                    TEXT 6
                    manya kari' prabhu tare nikate vasaila
                      vinaya kariya bhatta kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     With great respect, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu seated Vallabha Bhatta
near Him. Then Vallabha Bhatta very humbly began to speak.                                    TEXT 7
                     "bahu-dina manoratha toma' dekhibare
                   jagannatha purna kaila, dekhilun tomare
                                 TRANSLATION     "For a long time," he said,"I have desired to see You, my Lord. Now
Lord Jagannatha has fulfilled this desire; therefore I am seeing You.
                                    TEXT 8
                     tomara darsana ye paya sei bhagyavan
                    tomake dekhiye,--yena saksat bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who receives Your audience is fortunate indeed, for You are
the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself.
                                    TEXT 9
                   tomare ye smarana kare, se haya pavitra
                   darsane pavitra habe,--ithe ki vicitra?
                                 TRANSLATION     "Since one who remembers You is purified, why should it be
astonishing that one becomes purified by seeing You?
                                   TEXT 10
                           yesam samsmaranat pumsam
                         sadyah suddhyanti vai grhah                          kim punar darsana-sparsa-                            pa da-saucasanadibhih
                                 TRANSLATION     " `One can immediately purify his entire house simply by
remembering exalted personalities, to say nothing of directIy seeingthem, touching their lotus feet, washing their feet or offering themplaces to sit.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.19.33).                                   TEXT 11                  kali-kalera dharma--krsna-nama-sankirtana
                    krsna-sakti vina nahe tara pravartana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The fundamental religious system in the age of Kali is the
chanting of the holy name of Krsna. Unless empowered by Krsna, onecannot propagate the sankirtana movement.
                                   TEXT 12
                   taha pravartaila tumi,--ei ta `pramana'
                    krsna-sakti dhara tumi,--ithe nahi ana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have spread the sankirtana movement of Krsna consciousness.
Therefore it is evident that You have been empowered by Lord Krsna.There is no question about it.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Madhvacarya has brought our attention to this quotation from
the Narayana-samhita:      dvapariyair janair visnuh     pancaratrais ca kevalaih     kalau tu nama-matrena     pujyate bhagavan harih"in the Dvapara-yuga one could satisfy Krsna or Visnu only by worshipingopulently according to the pancaratriki system, but in the age of Kalione can satisfy and worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead Harisimply by chanting His holy name." Srila Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura explains that unless one is directly empowered by the causelessmercy of Krsna, one cannot become the spiritual master of the entireworld (jagad-guru). One cannot become an acarya simply by mentalspeculation. The true acarya presents Krsna to everyone by preaching theholy name of the Lord throughout the world. Thus the conditioned souls,purified by chanting the holy name, are liberated from the blazing fireof material existence. In this way, spiritual benefit grows increasinglyfull, like the waxing moon in the sky. The true acarya, the spiritualmaster of the entire world, must be considered an incarnation of Krsna'smercy. indeed, he is personally embracing Krsna. He is therefore thespiritual master of all the varnas (brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya andsudra) and all the asramas (brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha andsannyasa). Since he is understood to be the most advanced devotee, he iscalled paramahamsa-thakura. Thakura is a title of honor offered to theparamahamsa. Therefore one who acts as an acarya, directly presentingLord Krsna by spreading His name and fame, is also to be calledparamahamsa-thakura.
                                   TEXT 13                    jagate karila tumi krsna-nama prakase                    yei toma dekhe, sei krsna-preme bhase
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have manifested the holy name of Krsna throughout the entire
world. Anyone who sees You is immediately absorbed in ecstatic love ofKrsna.
                                   TEXT 14
                     prema-parakasa nahe krsna-sakti vine
                   `krsna'--eka prema-data, sastra-pramane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Without being especially empowered by Krsna, one cannot manifest
ecstatic love of Krsna, for Krsna is the only one who gives ecstaticlove. That is the verdict of all revealed scriptures.
                                   TEXT 15
                            santv avatara bahavah
                       puskara-nabhasya sarvato-bhadrah                          krsnad anyah ko va latasv                             api premado bhavati"
                                 TRANSLATION     " `There may be many all-auspicious incarnations of the Personality
of Godhead, but who other than Lord Sri Krsna can bestow love of Godupon the surrendered souls?"'
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse written by Bilvamangala Thakura. it is found in the
Laghu- bhagavatamrta (1.5.37).
                                   TEXT 16                   mahaprabhu kahe--"suna, bhatta maha-mati
                 mayavadi sannyasi ami, na jani krsna-bhakti
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "My dear Vallabha Bhatta, you are
a learned scholar. Kindly listen to Me. I am a sannyasi of the Mayavadaschool. Therefore I have no chance of knowing what krsna-bhakti is.
                                   TEXT 17
                     advaitacarya-gosani--`saksat isvara'                    tanra sange amara mana ha-ila nirmala
                                 TRANSLATION     "Nevertheless, My mind has become purified because I have
associated with Advaita Acarya, who is directly the Supreme Personalityof Godhead.
                                   TEXT 18
                  sarva-sastre krsna-bhaktye nahi yanra sama
                      ataeva `advaita-acarya' tanra nama
                                 TRANSLATION     "He is unparalleled in His understanding of all the revealed
scriptures and the devotional service of Lord Krsna. Therefore He iscalled Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 19
                  yanhara kroate mlecchera haya krsna-bhakti
                    ke kahite pare tanra vaisnavata-sakti?
                                 TRANSLATION     "He is such a great personality that by His mercy He can convert
even the meateaters [mlecchas] to the devotional service of Krsna. Who,therefore, can estimate the power of His Vaisnavism?
                                   PURPORT     It is extremely difficult to convert a mleccha, or meateater, into
a devotee of Lord Krsna. Therefore anyone who can do so is situated onthe highest level of Vaisnavism.
                                   TEXT 20                     nityananda-avadhuta--`saksat isvara'
                    bhavonmade matta krsna-premera sagara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Nityananda Prabhu, the avadhOta, is also directly the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He is always intoxicated with the madness ofecstatic love. Indeed, He is an ocean of love of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 21
                  sad-darsana-vetta bhattacarya-sarvabhauma
                    sad-darsane jagad-guru bhagavatottama                                 TRANSLATION
     "Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya perfectly knows the six philosophical
theses. He is therefore the spiritual master of the entire world in thesix paths of philosophy. He is the best of devotees.
                                   TEXT 22
                     tenha dekhaila more bhakti-yoga-para
                tanra prasade janilun `krsna-bhakti-yoga' sara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya has shown Me the limit of devotional
service. Only by his mercy have I understood that devotional service toKrsna is the essence of all mystic yoga.
                                   TEXT 23
                    ramananda-raya krsna-rasera `nidhana'
                    tenha janaila--krsna--svayam bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     "Srila Ramananda Raya is the ultimate knower of the transcendental
mellows of Lord Krsna's devotional service. He has instructed Me thatLord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 24
                   tate prema-bhakti--`purusartha-siromani'
                  raga-marge prema-bhakti `sarvadhika' jani
                                 TRANSLATION     "Through the mercy of Ramananda Raya, I have understood that
ecstatic love of Krsna is the highest goal of life and that spontaneouslove of Krsna is the highest perfection.
                                   PURPORT     Purusartha ("the goal of life") generally refers to religion,
economic development, satisfaction of the senses and, finally,liberation. However, above these four kinds of purusarthas, love ofGodhead stands supreme. It is called parama- purusartha (the supremegoal of life) or purusartha-siromani (the most exalted of allpurusarthas). Lord Krsna is worshiped by regulative devotional service,but the highest perfection of devotional service is spontaneous love ofGodhead.                                   TEXT 25
                   dasya, sakhya, vatsalya, ara ye srngara
                 dasa, sakha, guru, kanta,--`asra ya' yahara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The servant, friend, superior and conjugal lover are the shelters
of the transcendental mellows called dasya, sakhya, vatsalya andsrngara.
                                   TEXT 26
                 `aisvarya-jnana- yukta', `kevala'-bhava ara
                    aisvarya-jnane na pai vrajendra-kumara
                                 TRANSLATION     "There are two kinds of emotion [bhava]. Emotion with an
understanding of the Lord's full opulences is called aisvarya-jnana-yukta, and pure, uncontaminated emotion is called kevala. One cannotachieve shelter at the lotus feet of Krsna, the son of Maharaja Nanda,simply by knowing His opulences.
                                   PURPORT     Vide Madhya-lila, Chapter Nineteen, text 192.                                   TEXT 27                            nayam sukhapo bhagavan
                             dehinam gopika-sutah                           jnaninam catma-bhutanam-                            yatha bhakti-matam iha
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, the son of mother
Yasoda, is accessible to those devotees engaged in spontaneous lovingservice, but He is not as easily accessible to mental speculators, tothose striving for self-realization by severe austerities and penances, or to those who considerthe body the same as the self.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.9.21).                                   TEXT 28                   `atma-bhuta'-sabde kahe `parisada-gana'
               aisvarya-jnane laksmi na paila vrajendra-nandana                                 TRANSLATION
     "The word `atma-bhOta' means `personal associates.' Through the
understanding of opulence, the goddess of fortune could not receive theshelter of Krsna; the son of Nanda Maharaja.
                                   PURPORT     Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, has complete knowledge of Krsna's
opulences, but she could not achieve the association of Krsna by dint ofsuch knowledge. The devotees in Vrndavana, however, actually enjoy theassociation of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 29                   nayam sriyo'nga u nitanta-rateh prasadah
                  svar-yositam nalina-gandha-rucam kuto'nyah
                   rasotsave'sya bhuja-danda-grhita-kantha-
                    labdhasisam ya udagad vraja-sundarinam
                                 TRANSLATION     " `When Lord Sri Krsna was dancing with the gopis in the rasa-lila,
the gopis were embraced by the arms of the Lord. This transcendentalfavor was never bestowed upon the goddess of fortune or the otherconsorts in the spiritual world. Indeed, never was such a favor evenimagined by the most beautiful girls in the heavenly planets, whosebodily luster and aroma resemble those of lotus flowers. And what tospeak of worldly women who are very beautiful according to the materialestimation?'
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.47.60).                                   TEXT 30                   suddha-bhave sakha kare skandhe arohana
                   suddha-bhave vrajesvari karena bandhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "In pure Krsna consciousness, a friend mounts the shoulder of
Krsna, and mother Yasoda binds the Lord.
                                   PURPORT     Suddha-bhava, pure consciousness, is not dependent on an
understanding of the Lord's opulences. Even without such opulences, thedevotee in suddha-bhava is inclined to love Krsna as a friend or son.
                                   TEXT 31                `mora sakha,' `mora putra,'--ei `suddha' mana
                      ataeva suka-vyasa kare prasamsana
                                 TRANSLATION     "In pure Krsna consciousness, without knowledge of the Lord's
opulences, a devotee considers Krsna his friend or son. Therefore thisdevotional attitude is praised even by Sukadeva Gosvami and Vyasadeva,the supreme authority.
                                   TEXT 32
                      ittham satam brahma-sukhanubhutya
                        dasyam gatanam para-daivatena                          mayasritanam nara-darakena                       sakam vijahruh krta-punya-punjah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Those who are engaged in self-realization, appreciating the
Brahman effulgence of the Lord, and those engaged in devotional service,accepting the Supreme Personality of Godhead as master, as well as thosewho are under the clutches of maya, thinking the Lord an ordinaryperson, cannot understand that certain exalted personalities--afteraccumulating volumes of pious activities--are now playing with the Lordin friendship as cowherd boys.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.12.11).                                   TEXT 33                           trayya copanisadbhis ca
                         sankhya-yogais ca satvataih                            upagiyamana-mahatmyam                            harim samanyatatmajam
                                 TRANSLATION     " `When mother Yasoda saw all the universes within the mouth of
Krsna, she was certainly astonished for the time being. Nevertheless,she still considered the Lord her own son, although He is worshiped bygreat personalities who
offer him sacrifices, great saints who understand the greatness of the
Lord by studying the Upanisads, great philosophers who analyticallystudy the universe, great yogis who know him as the all-pervadingSupersoul, and even devotees who accept the Lord as the SupremePersonality of Godhead.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.8.45).
                                   TEXT 34                          nandah kim akarod brahman
                             sreya evam mahodayam                             yasoda va maha-bhaga                          papau yasyah stanam harih
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O brahmana, what pious activities did Nanda Maharaja perform to
receive the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna as his son? And whatpious activities did mother Yasoda perform that made the AbsoluteSupreme Personality of Godhead Krsna call her "mother" and suck herbreasts?'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.8.46).                                   TEXT 35              aisvarya dekhileha `suddhera' nahe aisvarya-jnana
                ataeva aisvarya ha-ite `kevala'-bhava pradhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Even if a pure devotee sees the opulence of Krsna, he does not
accept it. Therefore pure consciousness is more exalted thanconsciousness of the Lord's opulence.
                                   TEXT 36
                     e saba sikhaila more raya-ramananda
                     anargala rasa-vetta prema-sukhananda
                                 TRANSLATION     "Ramananda Raya is extremely aware of transcendental mellows. He is
incessantly absorbed in the happiness of ecstatic love of Krsna. It ishe who has instructed Me all this.
                                   TEXT 37
                     kahana na yaya ramanandera prabhava
                 raya-prasade janilun vrajera `suddha' bhava
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is impossibIe to describe the influence and knowledge of
Ramananda Raya, for only by his mercy have I understood the unalloyedlove of the residents of Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 38
                   damodara-svarupa--`prema-rasa' murtiman
                  yanra sange haila vraja-madhura-rasa-jnana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The transcendental mellow of ecstatic love is personified by
Svarupa Damodara. By his association I have understood Vrndavana'stranscendental mellow of conjugal love.
                                   TEXT 39
                `suddha-prema' vraja-de vira--kama-gandha-hina
                    `krsna-sukha-tatparya',--ei tara cihna
                                 TRANSLATION     "The unalloyed love of the gopis and Srimati Radharani is without
any trace of material lust. The criterion of such transcendental love isthat its only purpose is to satisfy Krsna.
                                   TEXT 40
                     yat te sujata-caranamburuham stanesu
                   bhitah sanaih priya dadhimahi karkasesu                   tenatavim atasi tad vyathate na kim svit                 kurpadibhir bhramati dhir bhavad-ayusam nah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O dearly beloved! Your lotus feet are so soft that we place them
gently on our breasts, fearing that Your feet will be hurt. Our livesrest only in You. Our minds, therefore, are filled with anxiety thatYour tender feet might be wounded by pebbles as You roam about on theforest path.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is spoken by the gopis in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.31.19).                                   TEXT 41                 gopi-ganera suddha-prema aisvarya-jnana-hina
                     premete bhartsana kare ei tara cihna
                                 TRANSLATION     "Obsessed with pure love, without knowledge of opulences, the gopis
sometimes chastised Krsna. That is a symptom of pure ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 42
                      pati-sutan va ya-bhratr-bandhavan
                       ativilanghya te'nty acyutagatah                         gati-vidas tavodgita-mohitah                        kitava yositah kas tyajen nisi
                                 TRANSLATION     " `0 dear Krsna, we gopis have neglected the order of our husbands,
sons, family, brothers and friends and have left their company to cometo You. You know everything about our desires. We have come only becausewe are attracted by the supreme music of Your flute. But You are a greatcheater, for who eIse would give up the company of young girls like usin the dead of night?'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.31.16).                                   TEXT 43                   sarvottama bhajana ei sarva-bhakti jini'
                     ataeva krsna kahe,--`ami tomara rni,
                                 TRANSLATION     "The conjugal love of the gopis is the most exalted devotional
service, surpassing all other methods of bhakti. Therefore Lord Krsna isobliged to say, `My dear gopis, I cannot repay you. Indeed, I am alwaysindebted to you.'
                                   TEXT 44
                       na paraye'ham niravadya-samyujam
                      sva-sadhu-krtyam vibudhayusapi vah                      ya mabhajan durjaya-geha-srnkhalah                     samvrscya tad vah pratiyatu sadhuna
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O gopis, I am not able to repay My debt for your spotless
service, even within a lifetime of Brahma. Your connection with Me isbeyond reproach. You have worshiped Me, cutting off all domestic ties,which are difficult to break. Therefore please let your own gloriousdeeds be your compensation.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.32.22).
                                   TEXT 45                 aisvarya-jnana haite kevala-bhava--pradhana
                     prthivite bhakta nahi uddhava-samana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Completely distinct from love of Krsna in opulence, pure love of
Krsna is on the highest level. On the surface of the world there is nodevotee greater than Uddhava.
                                   TEXT 46
                   tenha yanra pada-dhuli karena prarthana
                    svarupera sange pailun e saba siksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Uddhava desires to take on his head the dust of the gopis' lotus
feet. I have learned about all these transcendental loving affairs ofLord Krsna from Svarupa Damodara.
                                   TEXT 47
                     asam aho carana-renu-jusam aham syam
                    vrndavane kim api gulma-latausadhinam                  ya dustyajam svajanam arya-patham ca hitva                  bhejur mukunda-padavim srutibhir vimrgyam
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The gopis of Vrndavana have given up the association of their
husbands, sons and other family members, who are very difficult to giveup, and they have forsaken the path of chastity to take shelter of thelotus feet of Mukunda, Krsna, which one should search for by Vedicknowledge. Oh, let me be fortunate enough to be one of the bushes,creepers or herbs in Vrndavana because the gopis trample them and blessthem with the dust of their lotus feet.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.47.61) was spoken by Uddhava.
When Uddhava was sent by Krsna to see the condition of the gopis inVrndavana, he stayed there for a few months in their association andalways talked with them about Krsna. Although this greatly pleased thegopis and other residents of Vrajabhumi, Vrndavana, Uddhava saw that thegopis were severely afflicted by their separation from Krsna. Theirhearts were so disturbed that their minds were sometimes deranged.Observing the unalloyed devotion and love of the gopis for Krsna,Uddhava desired to become a creeper, a blade of grass or an herb in
Vrndavana so that sometimes the gopis would trample him and he wouldreceive the dust of their lotus feet on his head.
                                   TEXT 48                  haridasa-thakura--maha-bhaga vata-pradhana
                    prati dina laya tenha tina-laksa nama
                                 TRANSLATION     "Haridasa Thakura, the teacher of the holy name, is among the most
exalted of all devotees. Every day he chants 300,000 holy names of theLord.
                                   TEXT 49
                    namera mahima ami tanra thani sikhilun
                     tanra prasade namera mahima janilun
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have learned about the glories of the Lord's holy name from
Haridasa Thakura, and by his mercy I have understood these glories.
                                  TEXT 50-52
                  acaryaratna acaryanidhi pandita-gadadhara
                 jagadananda, damoda ra, sankara, vakresvara
                     kasisvara, mukunda, vasudeva, murari
                     ara yata bhakta-gana gaude avatari'
                    krsna-nama-prema kaila jagate pracara
                   inha sabara sange krsna-bhakti ye amara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Acaryaratna, Acaryanidhi, Gadadhara Pandita, Jagadananda,
Damodara, Sankara, Vakresvara, Kasisvara, Mukunda, Vasudeva, Murari andmany other devotees have descended in Bengal to preach to everyone theglories of the holy name of Krsna and the value of love for Him. I havelearned from them the meaning of devotional service to Krsna."
                                   TEXT 53
                     bhattera hrdaye drdha abhimana jani,
                    bhangi kari' mahaprabhu kahe eta vani
                                 TRANSLATION     Knowing that Vallabha Bhatta's heart was full of pride, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke these words, hinting at how one can learnabout devotional service.
                                   PURPORT     Vallabha Bhatta was greatly proud of his knowledge in devotional
service, and therefore he wanted to speak about Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu without understanding the Lord's position. The Lord thereforehinted in many ways that if Vallabha Bhatta wanted to know whatdevotional service actually is, he would have to learn from all thedevotees He mentioned, beginning with Advaita Acarya, Lord Nityananda,Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya and Ramananda Raya. As Svarupa Damodara hassaid, if one wants to learn the meaning of Srimad- Bhagavatam, one musttake lessons from a realized soul. One should not proudly think that onecan understand the transcendental loving service of the Lord simply byreading books. One must become a servant of a Vaisnava. As Narottamadasa Thakura has confirmed, chadiya vaisnava-seva nistara payeche keba:one cannot be in a transcendental position unless one very faithfullyserves a pure Vaisnava. One must accept a Vaisnava guru (adau gurv-asrayam), and then by questions and answers one should gradually learnwhat pure devotional service to Krsna is. That is called the paramparasystem.
                                   TEXT 54                "ami se`vaisnava',--bhakti-siddhanta saba jani
                    ami se bhagavata-artha uttama vakhani"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am a great Vaisnava. Having learned all the conclusions of
Vaisnava philosophy, I can understand the meaning of Srimad-Bhagavatamand explain it very well."
                                   TEXT 55
                    bhattera manete ei chila dirgha garva
                    prabhura vacana suni' se ha-ila kharva
                                 TRANSLATION     Such pride had existed for a long time within Vallabha Bhatta's
mind, but as he heard the preaching of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, hispride was cut down.
                                   TEXT 56
                   prabhura mukhe vaisnavata suniya sabara
                  bhattera iccha haila tan-sabare dekhibara
                                 TRANSLATION     When Vallabha Bhatta heard from the mouth of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu about the pure Vaisnavism of all these devotees, heimmediately desired to see them.
                                   TEXT 57
               bhatta kahe,--"e saba vaisnava rahe kon sthane?
                    kon prakare paimu ihan-sabara darsane?
                                 TRANSLATION     Vallabha Bhatta said, "Where do all these Vaisnavas live, and how
can I see them?"
                                   TEXT 58
                  prabhu kahe,--"keha gaude, keha desantare
                     saba asiyache ratha-yatra dekhibare
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "Although some of them live in
Bengal and some in other states, they have all come here to see theRatha-yatra festival.
                                   TEXT 59
                     ihani rahena sabe, vasa--nana-sthane
                      ihani paiba tumi sabara darsane',
                                 TRANSLATION     "At present they are all living here. Their residences are in
various quarters. Here you will get the audience of them all."
                                   TEXT 60
                     tabe bhatta kahe bahu vinaya vacana
                 bahu dainya kari' prabhure kaila nimantrana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter, with great submission and humility, Vallabha Bhatta
invited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to dine at his home.
                                   TEXT 61
                  ara dina saba vaisnava prabhu-sthane aila                     saba-sane mahaprabhu bhatte milaila
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, when all the Vaisnavas came to the abode of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord introduced Vallabha Bhatta to them all.
                                   TEXT 62
                 `vaisnave'ra teja dekhi' bhattera camatkara
                    tan-sabara age bhatta--khadyota-akara
                                 TRANSLATION     He was surprised to see the brilliance of their faces. Indeed,
among them Vallabha Bhatta seemed just like a glowworm.
                                   TEXT 63
                     tabe bhatta bahu maha-prasada anaila
                    gana-saha mahaprabhure bhojana karaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Vallabha Bhatta brought in a great quantity of Lord
Jagannatha's maha-prasada and sumptuously fed Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu and His associates.
                                   TEXT 64
                    paramananda puri-sange sannyasira gana
                      eka-dike vaise saba karite bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the sannyasi associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu headed by
Parama--nanda Puri, sat on one side and thus partook of the prasada.
                                   TEXT 65
                  advaita, nityananda-raya--parsve dui-jana
               madhye mahaprabhu vasila, age-pache bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sat in the midst of the devotees. Advaita
Acarya and Lord Nityananda each sat on one side of the Lord. The otherdevotees sat in front of the Lord and behind Him.                                   TEXT 66
                      gaudera bhakta yata kahite na pari
                      angane vasila saba hana sari sari
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees from Bengal, whom I am unable to count, all sat down
in lines in the courtyard.
                                   TEXT 67
                prabhura bhakta-gana dekhi' bhattera camatkara
                     pratyeke sabara pade kaila namaskara
                                 TRANSLATION     When Vallabha Bhatta saw all the devotees of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, he was greatly surprised, but in devotion he offered hisobeisances at the lotus feet of each and every one of them.
                                   TEXT 68
                  s varupa, jaga dananda, kasisvara, sankara
                    parivesana kare, ara raghava, damodara
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara, Jagadananda, Kasisvara and Sankara, along with
Raghava and Damodara Pandita, took charge of distributing the prasada.
                                   TEXT 69
                   maha-prasada vallabha-bhatta bahu anaila
                   prabhu-saha sannyasi-gana bhojane vasila
                                 TRANSLATION     Vallabha Bhatta had brought a large quantity of maha-prasada
offered to Lord Jagannatha. Thus all the sannyasis sat down to eat withSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 70
                prasada paya vaisnava-gana bale, `hari' `hari'
                 hari hari dhvani uthe saba brahmanda bhari'
                                 TRANSLATION     Accepting the prasada, all the Vaisnavas chanted the holy names
Hari, Hari. The rising vibration of the holy name of Hari filled theentire universe.
                                   TEXT 71
                   mala, candana, guvaka, pana aneka anila
                    saba' puja kari' bhatta anandita haila
                                 TRANSLATION     When all the Vaisnavas had finished eating, Vallabha Bhatta brought
a large quantity of garlands, sandalwood pulp, spices and betel. Heworshiped them very respectfully and became extremely happy.
                                   TEXT 72
                  ratha-yatra-dine prabhu kirtana arambhila
                    purvavat sata sampradaya prthak karila
                                 TRANSLATION     On the day of the car festival, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began the
congregational chanting. As He had done previously, He divided all thedevotees into seven groups.
                                  TEXT 73-74
                  advaita, nityananda, haridasa, vakresvara
                     srivasa, ragha va, pandita-gadadhara
                     sata jana sata-thani karena nartana
                   `hari-bola' bali' prabhu karena bhramana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seven devotees--Advaita, Nityananda, Haridasa Thakura, Vakresvara,
Srivasa Thakura, Raghava Pandita and Gadadhara Pandita--formed sevengroups and began dancing. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, chanting "Hari bol,"wandered from one group to another.
                                   TEXT 75
                      caudda madala baje ucca sankirtana
                   eka eka nartakera preme bhasila bhuvana
                                 TRANSLATION     Fourteen mrdangas resounded with the loud congregational chanting,
and in each group was a dancer whose dance of ecstatic love inundatedthe entire world.
                                   TEXT 76
                   dekhi' vallabha-bhattera haila camatkara
                      anande vihvala nahi apana-sambhala
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing all this, Vallabha Bhatta was completely astonished. He was
overwhelmed by transcendental bliss and lost himself.
                                   TEXT 77
                     tabe mahaprabhu sabara nrtya rakhila
                      purvavat apane nrtya karite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stopped the dancing of the others, and
as He had done previously, He personally began to dance.
                                   TEXT 78
                    prabhura saundarya dekhi ara premodaya
                `ei ta' saksat krsna' bhattera ha-ila niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the beauty of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and the awakening of
His ecstatic love, Vallabha Bhatta concluded, "Here is Lord Krsna,without a doubt."
                                   TEXT 79
                     eta mata ratha-yatra sakale dekhila
                  prabhura caritre bhattera camatkara haila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Vallabha Bhatta witnessed the car festival. He was simply
astonished by the characteristics of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 80
                  yatranantare bhatta yai mahaprabhu-sthane
                      prabhu-carane kichu kaila nivedane                                 TRANSLATION
     One day, after the festival was over, Vallabha Bhatta went to the
abode of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and submitted a request at the lotusfeet of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 81
                  "bhagavatera tika kichu kariyachi likhana
                    apane mahaprabhu yadi karena sravana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have written some commentary on Srtmad-Bhagavatam," he said.
"Would Your Lordship kindly hear it?"
                                   TEXT 82
                 prabhu kahe,--"bhagavatartha bujhite na pari
                    bhagavatartha sunite ami nahi adhikari
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord replied, "I do not understand the meaning of Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Indeed, I am not a suitable person to hear its meaning.
                                   TEXT 83
                    vasi' krsna-nama matra kariye grahane
                   sankhya-nama purna mora nahe ratri-dine
                                 TRANSLATION     "I simply sit and try to chant the holy name of Krsna, and although
I chant all day and night, I nevertheless cannot complete the chantingof my prescribed number of rounds."
                                   TEXT 84
                  bhatta kahe, "krsna-namera artha-vyakhyane
                    vistara kairachi, taha karaha sravane"
                                 TRANSLATION     Vallabha Bhatta said, "I have tried to describe elaborateIy the
meaning of Krsna's holy name. Kindly hear the explanation."
                                   TEXT 85                prabhu kahe,--"krsna-namera bahu artha na mani
               "syama-sundara' `yasoda-nandana,'--ei-matra jani
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied,"I do not accept many
different meanings for the holy name of Krsna. I know only that LordKrsna is Syamasundara and Yasodanandana. That's all I know.
                                   TEXT 86
                             tamala-syamala-tvisi
                          sri- yasoda-sta nandha ye                            krsna-namno rudhir iti                          sarva-sastra- vinirna yah
                                 TRANSLATION     "`The only purport of the holy name of Krsna is that He is dark
blue like a tamala tree and is the son of mother Yasoda. This is theconclusion of all the revealed scriptures.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the Nama-kaumudi                                   TEXT 87                      ei artha ami matra janiye nirdhara
                     ara sarva-arthe mora nahi adhikara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I conclusively know these two names, Syamasundara and
Yasodanandana. I do not understand any other meanings, nor have I thecapacity to understand them."
                                   TEXT 88
                  phalgu-praya bhattera namadi saba-vyakhya
                   sarvajna prabhu jani' tare karena upeksa
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is omniscient. Therefore He could
understand that Vallabha Bhatta's explanations of Krsna's name andSrimadBhagavatam were useless. Therefore He did not care about them.
                                   TEXT 89                      vimana hana bhatta gela nija-ghara
                   prabhu-visaye bhakti kichu ha-ila antara
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu rigidly declined to hear his
explanations, Vallabha Bhatta went home feeling morose. His faith anddevotion to the Lord changed.
                                   TEXT 90
                   tabe bhatta gela pandita-gosanira thani
                      nana mate priti kari' kare asa-yai
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter, Vallabha Bhatta went to the home of Gadadhara Pandita.
He kept coming and going, showing affection in various ways, and thusmaintained a relationship with him.
                                   TEXT 91
                    prabhura upeksaya saba nilacalera jana
                   bhattera vyakhyana kichu na kare sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     Because Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not take VaIlabha Bhatta very
seriously, none of the poople in Jagannatha Puri would hear any of hisexplanations.
                                   TEXT 92
                     lajjita haila bhatta, haila apamane
                     duhkhita hana gela panditera sthane
                                 TRANSLATION     Ashamed, insulted and unhappy, Vallabha Bhatta went to Gadadhara
Pandita.
                                   TEXT 93
                   dainya kari' kahe,--"nilun tomara sarana
                      tumi krpa kari' rakha amara jivana
                                 TRANSLATION     Approaching him with great humiIity, Vallabha Bhatta said, "I have
taken shelter of you, my dear sir. Kindly be merciful to me and save mylife.
                                   TEXT 94
                   krsna-nama-vyakh ya yadi karaha sravana
                    tabe mora lajja-panka haya praksalana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please hear my explanation of the meaning of Lord Krsna's name. In
that way the mud of the shame that has come upon me will be washed off."
                                   TEXT 95
                    sankate padila pandita, karaye samsaya
                  ki karibena,--eko, karite na pare niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Pandita Gosani fell into a dilemma. Be was in such doubt that
he could not decide alone what to do.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not take Vallabha Bhatta very
seriously. Therefore Pandita Gosani, or Gadadhara Gosani, fell intoperplexity. What would be his position if he heard Vallabha Bhatta'sexplanation of Sri Krsna's name? Certainly Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wouldbe displeased. Therefore Gadadhara Pandita Gosani could not make adecision.
                                   TEXT 96                    yadyapi pandita ara na kaila angikara
                    bhatta yai' tabu pade kari' balatkara
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Gadadhara Pandita Gosani did not want to hear it, Vallabha
Bhatta began to read his explanation with great force.
                                   TEXT 97
                   abhijatye pandita karite nare nisedhana
                   "e sankate rakha, krsna la-ilana sarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Because Vallabha Bhatta was a learned brahmana, Gadadhara Pandita
could not forbid him. Thus he began to think of Lord Krsna. "My dearLord Krsna," he requested, "please protect me in this danger. I havetaken shelter of You.
                                   TEXT 98
                     antaryami prabhu janibena mora mana
                 tanre bhaya nahi kichu, `visama' tanra gana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is present in everyone's heart, and He
will certainly know my mind. Therefore I do not fear Him. Hisassociates, however, are extremely critical."
                                   PURPORT     As the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
exists in everyone's heart. Therefore He would know the circumstancesunder which Pandita Gosani agreed to hear Vallabha Bhatta'sexplanations, and certainly He would not be angry. However, theVaisnavas who were always with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu might notunderstand Gadadhara Pandita's inner consciousness, and they mightaccuse him of having compromised with Vallabha Bhatta, despite hishaving been neglected by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Gadadhara PanditaGosani was seriously thinking in this way.
                                   TEXT 99                   yadyapi vicare panditera nahi kichu dosa
                tathapi prabhura gana tanre kare pranaya-rosa
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Gadadhara Pandita Gosani was not in the least at fault,
some of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's devotees showed affectionate angertoward him.
                                   TEXT 100
                 pratyaha vallabha-bhatta aise prabhu-sthane
                     `udgrahadi' praya kare acaryadi-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     Every day, Vallabha Bhatta would come to the place of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu to engage in unnecessary arguments with Advaita Acarya andother great personalities, such as Svarupa Damodara.
                                   TEXT 101                  yei kichu kare bhatta `siddhanta' sthapana
                     sunitei acarya taha karena khandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Whatever conclusions Vallabha Bhatta eagerly presented were refuted
by personalities like Advaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 102
                      acaryadi-age bhatta yabe yabe yaya
                    rajahamsa-madhye yena rahe baka-praya
                                 TRANSLATION     Whenever Vallabha Bhatta entered the society of devotees, headed by
Advaita Acarya, he was like a duck in a society of white swans.
                                   TEXT 103
                       eka-dina bhatta puchila acaryere
                 `jiva-`prakrti' `pati' kari' mana ye krsnere
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Vallabha Bhatta said to Advaita Acarya, "Every living
entity is female [prakrti] and considers Krsna her husband [pati].
                                   TEXT 104
                    pati-vrata hana patira nama nahi laya
                  tomara krsna-nama-laha,--kon dharma haya?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is the duty of a chaste wife, devoted to her husband, not to
utter her husband's name, but all of you chant the name of Krsna. Howcan this be called a religious principle?"
                                   TEXT 105
                 acarya kahe,--"age tomara `dharma' murtiman
                inhare puchaha, inha karibena ihara samadhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya responded, "In front of you is Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, the personification of religious principles. You should askHim, for He will give you the proper answer."                                   TEXT 106
               suni' prabhu kahena,--"tumi na jana dharma-marma
                   svami-ajna pale,--ei pati- vrata-dharma
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "My dear Vallabha
Bhatta, you do not know religious principles. Actually, the first dutyof a chaste woman is to carry out the order of her husband.
                                   TEXT 107
                  patira ajna,--nirantara tanra nama la-ite
                   patira ajna pati-vrata na pare langhite
                                 TRANSLATION     "The order of Krsna is to chant His name incessantIy. Therefore one
who is chaste and adherent to the husband Krsna must chant the Lord'sname, for she cannot deny the husband's order.
                                   TEXT 108
                    ataeva nama laya, namera `phala' paya
                   namera phale krsna-pade `prema' upajaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Following this religious principle, a pure devotee of Lord Krsna
always chants the holy name. As a result of this, he gets the fruit ofecstatic love for Krsna."
                                   TEXT 109
                    suniya vallabha-bhatta haila nirvacana
                    ghare yai' mane duhkhe karena cintana
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Vallabha Bhatta was speechless. He returned home
greatly unhappy and began to consider thus.
                                 TEXT 110-111
                   "nitya amara ei sabhaya haya kaksa-pata
                      eka-dina upare yadi haya mora vat                     tabe sukha haya, ara saba lajja yaya
                    sva-vacana sthapite ami ki kari upaya?
                                 TRANSLATION     "Every day I am defeated in this assembly. If by chance I am one
day victorious, that will be a great source of happiness for me, and allmy shame will go away. But what means shall I adopt to establish mystatements?"
                                   TEXT 112
                   ara dina asi' vasila prabhure namaskari'
                    sabhate kahena kichu mane garva kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day when he came to the assembly of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, he sat down after offering obeisances to the Lord and saidsomething with great pride.
                                   TEXT 113
                "bhagavate svamira vyakhyana kairachi khandana
                    la-ite na pari tanra vyakhyana-vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     "In my commentary on Srimad-Bhagavatam," he said, "I have refuted
the explanations of Sridhara Svami. I cannot accept his explanations.
                                   TEXT 114
                    sei vyakhya karena yahan yei pade ani'
                  eka-vakyata nahi, tate `svami' nahi mani"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Whatever Sridhara Svami reads he explains according to the
circumstances. Therefore he is inconsistent in his explanations andcannot be accepted as an authority."
                                   TEXT 115
                 prabhu hasi' kahe,--"svami na mane yei jana
                     vesyara bhitare tare kariye ganana"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu smilingly replied, "One who does not accept
the svami [husband] as an authority I consider a prostitute."
                                   TEXT 116
                      eta kahi' mahaprabhu mauna dharila
                      suniya sabara mane santosa ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very grave. All the
devotees present derived great satisfaction from hearing this statement.
                                   TEXT 117
                      jagatera hita lagi' gaura-avatara
                       antarera abhimana janena tahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu descended as an incarnation for the benefit
of the entire world. Thus He knew the mind of Vallabha Bhatta very well.
                                   TEXT 118
                    nana avajnane bhatte sodhena bhagavan
                   krsna yaiche khandilena indrera abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     By various hints and refutations, Lord Caitanya, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, corrected Vallabha Bhatta exactly as Krsna hadcut down the false pride of Indra.
                                   PURPORT     Indra, the King of heaven, was very proud of his position.
Therefore when the residents of Vrndavana decided not to perform theindra-yajna but to perform the Govardhana-yajna in accordance with theinstructions of Krsna, Indra, because of his false pride, wanted tochastise the residents of Vrndavana. Thinking himself extremelypowerful, Indra poured incessant rain upon Vrndavana, but Lord Krsnaimmediately cut down his pride by lifting the Govardhana Hill as anumbrella to save the residents of Vrndavana. In this way Krsna provedIndra's power most insignificant in the presence of His own omnipotence.
                                   TEXT 119                   ajna jiva nija-`hite' `ahita' kari' mane
                    garva curna haile, pache ughade nayane                                 TRANSLATION
     An ignorant living being does not recognize his actual profit.
Because of ignorance and material pride, he sometimes considers profit aloss, but when his pride is cut down he can actually see his truebenefit.
                                   TEXT 120
                   ghare asi' ratrye bhatta cintite lagila
                     "purve prayage more maha-krpa kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Returning home that night, Vallabha Bhatta thought, "Previously, at
Prayaga, Lord Caitanya was very kind to me.
                                   TEXT 121
                    svagana-sahite mora manila nimantrana
                   ebe kene prabhura mote phiri' gela mana?
                                 TRANSLATION     "He accepted my invitation with His other devotees, and He was kind
to me. Why has He now changed so much here at Jagannatha Puri?
                                   TEXT 122
                `ami jiti',--ei garva-sunya ha-uka inhara cita
                    isvara-svabhava,--karena sabakara hita
                                 TRANSLATION     "Being very proud of my learning, I am thinking, `Let me become
victorious.' Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, however, is trying to purify me bynullifying this faIse pride, for a characteristic of the SupremePersonality of Godhead is that He acts for everyone's welfare.
                                   TEXT 123
                       apana janaite ami kari abhimana
                    se garva khandaite mora karena apamana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am falsely proud, advertising myself as a learned scholar.
Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu insults me just to favor me by cuttingdown this false pride.                                   TEXT 124
                 amara `hita' karena,--iho ami mani `duhkha'
                 krsnera upare kaila yena indra maha-murkha"
                                 TRANSLATION     "He is actually acting for my benefit, although I interpret His
actions as insults. This is exactly like the incident in which LordKrsna cut down Indra, the great, puffed-up fool, to correct him."
                                   TEXT 125
                    eta cinti' prate asi' prabhura carane
                    dainya kari' stuti kari' la-ila sarane
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking in this way, Vallabha Bhatta approached Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu the next morning, and in great humility, offering manyprayers, he sought shelter and surrendered at the lotus feet of theLord.
                                   TEXT 126
                    "ami ajna jiva,--ajnocita karma kailun
                  tomara age murkha ami panditya prakasilun
                                 TRANSLATION     Vallabha Bhatta admitted, "I am a great fool, and indeed I have
acted like a fool by trying to demonstrate to You my learning.
                                   TEXT 127
                    tumi--isvara, nijocita kroa ye karila
                     apamana kari' sarva garva khandaila
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, You are the Supreme PersonaIity of Godhead. You have
showed mercy to me in a way just befitting Your position by insulting meto cut down all my false pride.
                                   TEXT 128
                   ami--ajna, `hita'-sthane mani `apamane'
                    indra yena krsnera ninda karila ajnane                                 TRANSLATION
     "I am an ignorant fool, for I interpret as an insult what is meant
for my benefit, just like King Indra, who out of ignorance tried tosurpass Krsna, the Supreme Lord.
                                   TEXT 129
                   tomara kroa-anjane ebe garva-andhya gela
                    tumi eta krpa kaila,--ebe jnana' haila
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, You have cured the blindness of my false pride by
smearing my eyes with the ointment of Your mercy. You have bestowed somuch mercy upon me that my ignorance is now gone.
                                   TEXT 130
                     aparadha kainu, ksama, la-inu sarana
                    krpa kari' mora mathe dharaha carana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, I have committed offenses. Please excuse me. I seek
shelter of You. Please be merciful unto me by placing Your lotus feet onmy head."
                                   TEXT 131
                prabhu kahe--"tumi `pandita' `maha-bhagavata'
                   dui-guna yahan, tahan nahi garva-parvata
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "You are both a greatly learned
scholar and a great devotee. Wherever there are two such attributes,there cannot be a mountain of false pride.
                                   TEXT 132
                    sridhara-svami nindi' nija-tika kara!
                sridhara-svami nahi mana',--eta `garva' dhara!
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have dared criticize Sridhara Svami, and you have begun your
own commentary on Srimad-Bhagavatam, not accepting his authority. Thatis your false pride.                                   TEXT 133
                   sridhara-svami-prasade `bhagavata' jani
                 jagad-guru sridhara-svami `guru' kari' mani
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sridhara Svami is the spiritual master of the entire world because
by his mercy we can understand Srimad-Bhagavatam. I therefore accept himas a spiritual master.
                                   TEXT 134
                    sridhara-upare garve ye kichu likhibe
                  `artha-vyasta' likhana sei, loke na manibe
                                 TRANSLATION     "Whatever you might write due to false pride, trying to surpass
Sridhara Svami, would carry a contrary purport. Therefore no one wouldpay attention to it.
                                   PURPORT     Srimad-Bhagavatam has many tikas, or commentaries, following the
parampara system, but Sridhara Svami's is first. The commentaries of allthe other acaryas follow his. The parampara system does not allow one todeviate from the commentaries of the previous acaryas. By depending uponthe previous acaryas, one can write beautiful commentaries. However, onecannot defy the previous acaryas. The false pride that makes one thinkthat he can write better than the previous acaryas will make one'scomments faulty. At the present moment it has become fashionable foreveryone to write in his own way, but such writing is never accepted byserious devotees. Because of false pride, every scholar and philosopherwants to exhibit his learning by interpreting the sastras, especiallyBhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, in his own way. This system ofcommenting in one's own way is fully condemned by Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. Therefore He says, `artha-vyasta' likhana sei. Commentarieswritten according to one's own philosophical way are never accepted; noone will appreciate such commentaries on the revealed scriptures.
                                   TEXT 135                      sridharera anugata ye kare likhana
                     saba loka manya kari' karibe grahana
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who comments on Srimad-Bhagavatam following in the footsteps
of Sridhara Svami will be honored and accepted by everyone.                                   TEXT 136
                   sridharanugata kara bhagavata-vyakhyana
                     abhimana chadi' bhaja krsna bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     "Put forth your explanation of Srimad-Bhagavatam following in the
footsteps of Sridhara Svami. Giving up your false pride, worship theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
                                   TEXT 137
                    aparadha chadi' kara krsna-sankirtana
                       acirat pabe tabe krsnera carana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Abandoning your offenses, chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, the
holy names of the Lord. Then very soon you will achieve shelter at thelotus feet of Krsna."
                                   TEXT 138
                   bhatta kahe,--"yadi more ha-ila prasanna
                    eka-dina punah mora mana' nimantrana"
                                 TRANSLATION     Vallabha Bhatta Acarya requested Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "If You
are actually pleased with me, please accept my invitation once again."
                                   TEXT 139
                      prabhu avatirna haila jagat tarite
                     manilena nimantrana, tare sukha dite
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who had descended to deliver the entire
universe, accepted the invitation of Vallabha Bhatta just to give himhappiness.
                                   TEXT 140
                   jagatera `hita' ha-uka--ei prabhura mana
                     danda kari' kare tara hrdaya sodhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is always eager to see everyone in the
material world happy. Therefore sometimes He chastises someone just topurify his heart.
                                   TEXT 141
                   svagana-sahita prabhura nimantrana kaila
                     mahaprabhu tare tabe prasanna ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Vallabha Bhatta invited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His
associates, the Lord was very pleased with him.
                                   TEXT 142
                   jagadananda-panditera suddha gadha bhava
                   satyabhama-praya prema `vamya-svabhava'
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita's pure ecstatic love for Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was very deep. It can be compared to the love of Satyabhama,who always quarreled with Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 143
                  bara-bara pranaya kalaha kare prabhu-sane
                        anyonye khatmati cale dui-jane
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita was accustomed to provoking Ioving quarrels
with the Lord. There was always some disagreement between them.
                                   TEXT 144
                    gadadhara-panditera suddha gadha bhava
                   rukmini-devira yaiche `daksina-svabhava'
                                 TRANSLATION     Gadadhara Pandita's pure ecstatic love for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was also very deep. It was Iike that of Rukminidevi, who was aIwaysespecially submissive to Krsna.
                                   TEXT 145
                tanra pranaya-rosa dekhite prabhura iccha haya                    aisvarya-jnane tanra rosa nahi upajaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sometimes desired to see Gadadhara
Pandita's affectionate anger, but because of knowledge of the Lord'sopulences, his anger was never invoked.
                                   PURPORT     joking with Rukminidevi in Dvaraka, Krsna once advised her to
accept another husband because He thought Himself unfit for her.Rukminidevi, however, unable to understand His joking words, took themvery seriously and immediately fell to the ground in fear of separationfrom Him. In the pastimes of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, JagadanandaPandita was always in disagreement with the Lord like Satyabhama,whereas Gadadhara Pandita was always awed by the Lord's opulence and wastherefore submissive to the Lord under all circumstances.
                                   TEXT 146                    ei laksya pana prabhu kaila rosabhasa
                     suni' panditera citte upajila trasa
                                 TRANSLATION     For this purpose Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sometimes showed His
apparent anger. Hearing of this anger inspired great fear in the heartof Gadadhara Pandita.
                                   TEXT 147
                     purve yena krsna yadi parihasa kaila
                      suni' rukminira mane trasa upajila
                                 TRANSLATION     Previously, in krsna-lila, when Lord Krsna wanted to joke with
Rukminidevi, she took His words seriously, and fear awoke within hermind.
                                   TEXT 148
                   vallabha-bhattera ha ya vatsalya-upasana
                    bala-gopala-mantre tenho karena sevana
                                 TRANSLATION     Vallabha Bhatta was accustomed to worshiping the Lord as child
Krsna. Therefore he had been initiated into the Bala-gopala mantra andwas thus worshiping the Lord.                                   TEXT 149
                     panditera sane tara mana phiri` gela
                      kisora-gopala-upasana ya mana dila
                                 TRANSLATION     In the association of Gadadhara Pandita, his mind was converted,
and he dedicated his mind to worshiping Kisora-gopala, Krsna as a youngboy.
                                   TEXT 150
                    panditera thani cahe mantradi sikhite
                   pandita kahe,--"ei karma nahe ama haite
                                 TRANSLATION     Vallabha Bhatta wanted to be initiated by Gadadhara Pandita, but
Gadadhara Pandita refused, saying, "The work of acting as a spiritualmaster is not possible for me.
                                   TEXT 151
                  ami--paratantra, amara prabhu--gauracandra
                   tanra ajna vina ami na ha-i `svatantra'
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am completely dependent. My Lord is Gauracandra, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. I cannot do anything independently, without His order.
                                   TEXT 152
                       tumi ye amara thani kara agamana
                      tahatei prabhu more dena olahana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Vallabha Bhatta, your coming to me is not appreciated by
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Therefore He sometimes speaks to chastise me."
                                 TEXT 153-154
                      ei-mata bhattera katheka dina gela
                    sese yadi prabhu tare suprasanna haila
                      nimantranera dine pandite bolaila
                    svarupa, jagadananda, govinde pathaila                                 TRANSLATION
     Some days passed, and when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, finaIly pleased
with Vallabha Bhatta, accepted his invitation, the Lord sent SvarupaDamodara, Jagadananda Pandita and Govinda to call for Gadadhara Pandita.
                                   TEXT 155
                    pathe panditere svarupa kahena vacana
                   "pariksite prabhu tomare kaila upeksana
                                 TRANSLATION     On the way, Svarupa Damodara said to Gadadhara Pandita, "Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to test you. Therefore He neglected you.
                                   TEXT 156
                    tumi kene asi' tanre na dila olahana?
                    bhita-praya hana kanhe karila sahana?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Why did you not retaliate by reproaching Him? Why did you
fearfully tolerate His criticism?"
                                   TEXT 157
             pandita kahena,--prabhu svatantra sarvajna-siromani
                  tanra sane `hatha' kari,--bhala nahi mani
                                 TRANSLATION     Gadadhara Pandita said, "Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is completely
independent. He is the topmost omniscient personality. It would not lookwell for me to talk to Him as if His equal.
                                   TEXT 158
                     yei kahe, sei sahi nija-sire dhari'
                    apane karibena krpa guna-dosa vicari"'
                                 TRANSLATION     "I can tolerate whatever He says, bearing it upon my head. He will
automatically be merciful to me after considering my faults andattributes."                                   TEXT 159
                    eta bali' pandita prabhura sthane aila
                     rodana kariya prabhura carane padila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Gadadhara Pandita went to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and fell down crying at the lotus feet of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 160
                      isat hasiya prabhu kaila alingana
                     sabare sunana kahena madhura vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Smiling slightly, the Lord embraced him and spoke sweet words so
that others would also hear.
                                   TEXT 161
                      "ami calailun toma, tumi na calila
                    krodhe kichu na kahila, sakala sahila
                                 TRANSLATION     "I wanted to agitate you," the Lord said, "but you did not become
agitated. Indeed, you could not say anything angry. Instead, youtolerated everything.
                                   TEXT 162
                     amara bhangite tomara mana na calila
                      sudrdha sarala-bhave amare kinila"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Your mind was not disturbed by My tricks. Rather, you stayed fixed
in your simplicity. In this way you have purchased Me."
                                   TEXT 163
                     panditera bhava-mudra kahana na yaya
                   `gadadhara-prana-natha' nama haila yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     No one can describe the characteristics and ecstatic love of
Gadadhara Pandita. Therefore another name for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu isGadadhara-prananatha, "the life and soul of Gadadhara Pandita."
                                   TEXT 164
                   pandite prabhura prasada kahana na yaya
                   `gadaira gauranga' bali' yanre loke gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     No one can say how merciful the Lord is to Gadadhara Pandita, but
people know the Lord as Gadaira Gaura, "the Lord Gauranga of GadadharaPandita."
                                   TEXT 165
                   caitanya-prabhura lila ke bujhite pare?
                   eka-lilaya vahe gangara sata sata dhare
                                 TRANSLATION     No one can understand the pastimes of Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu. They
are like the Ganges, for hundreds and thousands of branches flow fromeven one of His activities.
                                   TEXT 166
                    panditera saujanya, brahman yata-guna
                    drdha prema-mudra loke karila khyapana
                                 TRANSLATION     Gadadhara Pandita is celebrated all over the world for his gentle
behavior, his brahminical attributes and his steady Iove for SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 167
                    abhimana-panka dhuna bhattere sodhila
                       sei-dvara ara saba loke sikhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord purified Vallabha Bhatta by cleansing him of the mud of
false pride. By such activities the Lord also instructed others.
                                   TEXT 168                  antare `anugraha,' bahye `upeksara praya'
                      bahyartha yei laya, sei nasa yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was actually always merciful within His
heart, but He was sometimes externally negligent of His devotees. Weshould not be preoccupied with His external feature, however, for if wedo so we shall be vanquished.
                                   TEXT 169
                  nigudha caitanya-lila bujhite ka'ra sakti?
                  sei bujhe, gauracandre yanra drdha bhakti
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are very deep. Who can
understand them? Only one who has firm, deep devotion to His lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 170
                 dinantare pandita kaila prabhura nimantrana
                   prabhu tahan bhiksa kaila lana nija-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     Another day, Gadadhara Pandita invited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to
dinner. The Lord took prasada at his home with His personal associates.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu acted as a very merciful well-wisher toward VallabhaBhatta by externally neglecting him in many ways to purify him of hisfalse pride in being a learned scholar. The Lord neglected Gadadharapandita for a few days because of his associating with Vallabha Bhatta.Actually He was not at all displeased with Gadadhara Pandita. Indeed,because Gadadhara Pandita is the personal potency of Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu, there is no chance of the Lord's being dissatisfied withhim. However, a person who is too attracted to externals cannotunderstand the deep meaning of these dealings of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. If one therefore becomes disrespectful to Gadadhara Pandita,he will surely be vanquished.
                                   TEXT 171                  tahani vallabha-bhatta prabhura ajna laila
               pandita-thani purva-prarthita saba siddhi haila
                                 TRANSLATION     There Vallabha Bhatta took permission from Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and his desire to be initiated by Gadadhara Pandita was thusfulfilled.
                                   TEXT 172
                   ei ta' kahilun vallabha-bhattera milana
                    yahara sravane paya gaura-prema-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have thus explained the Lord's meeting with Vallabha Bhatta. By
hearing of this incident, one can achieve the treasure of love for SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 173
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Srt Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Seventh Chapter, describing the meeting of Vallabha Bhattawith Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                Chapter Eight
                     Ramacandra Puri Criticizes the Lord     The following summary of the Eighth Chapter is given by Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. This chapter describesthe history of the Lord's dealings with Ramacandra Puri. AlthoughRamacandra Puri was one of the disciples of Madhavendra Puri, he wasinfluenced by dry Mayavadis, and therefore he criticized MadhavendraPuri. Therefore Madhavendra Puri accused him of being an offender andrejected him. Because Ramacandra Puri had been rejected by his spiritualmaster, he became concerned only with finding faults in others andadvising them according to dry Mayavada philosophy. For this reason hewas not very respectful to the Vaisnavas, and later he became so fallenthat he began criticizing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for His eating.Hearing his criticisms, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu reduced His eating, butafter Ramacandra Puri left Jagannatha Puri, the Lord resumed His usualbehavior.
                                    TEXT 1                          tam vande krsna-caitanyam
                           ramacandra-puri-bha yat                            laukikaharatah svam yo                            bhiksannam samakocayat
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
who reduced His eating due to fear of the criticism of Ramacandra Puri.
                                    TEXT 2
                 jaya jaya sri-caitanya karuna-sindhu-avatara
                     brahma-sivadika bhaje carana yanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the incarnation of the
ocean of mercy. His lotus feet are worshiped by demigods like LordBrahma and Lord Siva.
                                    TEXT 3
                     jaya jaya avadhuta-candra nityananda
                    jagat bandhila yenha diya prema-phanda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Nityananda Prabhu, the greatest of mendicants, who
bound the entire world with a knot of ecstatic love for God.
                                    TEXT 4
                       jaya jaya advaita isvara avatara
                      krsna avatari' kaila jagat-nistara
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Advaita Prabhu, the incarnation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He induced Krsna to descend and thus deliveredthe entire world.
                                    TEXT 5
                     jaya jaya srivasadi yata bhakta-gana
                 sri-krsna-caitanya prabhu--yanra prana-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to all the devotees, headed by Srivasa Thakura. Sri
Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu is their life and soul.
                                    TEXT 6
                    ei-mata gauracandra nija-bhakta-sange
                   nilacale krida kare krsna-prema-tarange
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, at Jagannatha Puri, performed His
various pastimes with His own devotees in the waves of love for Krsna.
                                    TEXT 7
                    hena-kale ramacandra-puri-gosani aila
                    paramananda-purire ara prabhure milila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then a sannyasi named Ramacandra Puri Gosani came to see
Paramananda Puri and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 8
                    paramananda-puri kaila carana vandana
                    puri-gosani kaila tanre drdha alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     Paramananda Puri offered respects at the feet of Ramacandra Puri,
and Ramacandra Puri strongly embraced him.
                                   PURPORT     Because Ramacandra Puri was a disciple of Madhavendra Puri, both
Paramananda Puri and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu offered him respectfulobeisances. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments thatalthough Ramacandra Puri was naturally very envious and although he wasagainst the principles of Vaisnavism--or, in other words, against theprinciples of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotees--common people nevertheless addressed him as Gosvami or Gosani because hewas superficially in the renounced order and dressed like a sannyasi. Inthe modern age the title gosvami is used by a caste of grhasthas, butformerly it was not. Rupa Gosvami and Sanatana Gosvami, for example,were called gosvami because they were in the renounced order. Similarly,because Paramananda Puri was a sannyasi, he was called Puri Gosvami. Bycareful scrutiny, therefore, one will find that gosvami is not the titlefor a certain caste; rather, it is properly the title for a person inthe renounced order.                                    TEXT 9
                     mahaprabhu kaila tanre dandavat nati
                    alingana kari' tenho kaila krsna-smrti
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu also offered obeisances unto Ramacandra
Puri, who then embraced Him and thus remembered Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu offered obeisances to Ramacandra Puri in
consideration of his being a disciple of Srila Madhavendra Puri, thespiritual master of His own spiritual master, Isvara Puri. When aVaisnava sannyasi meets another Vaisnava sannyasi, they both rememberKrsna. Even Mayavadi sannyasis generally remember Narayana, who is alsoKrsna, by saying om namo bhagavate narayana or namo narayana. Thus it isthe duty of a sannyasi to remember Krsna. According to smrti-sastra, asannyasi does not offer obeisances or blessings to anyone. it is said,sannyasi nirasir nirnamaskriyah: a sannyasi should not offer anyoneblessings or obeisances.
                                   TEXT 10                   tina-jane istha-gosthi kaila kata-ksana
                  jagadananda-pandita tanre kaila nimantrana
                                 TRANSLATION     The three of them talked about Krsna for some time, and then
Jagadananda came and extended an invitation to Ramacandra Puri.
                                   TEXT 11
                  jagannathera prasada anila bhiksara lagiya
                 yathesta bhiksa karila tenho nindara lagiya
                                 TRANSLATION     A large quantity of the remnants of food from Lord Jagannatha was
brought in for distribution. Ramacandra Puri ate sumptuously, and thenhe wanted to find faults in Jagadananda Pandita.
                                   TEXT 12
                 bhiksa kari' kahe puri,--"suna, jagadananda
                    avasesa prasada tumi karaha bhaksana"
                                 TRANSLATION     After finishing the meal, Ramacandra Puri requested,"My dear
Jagadananda, please listen. You eat the food that is left."
                                   TEXT 13
                     agraha kariya tanre vasi' khaoyaila
                     apane agraha kari' parivesana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     With great eagerness Ramacandra Puri seated Jagadananda Pandita and
personally served him prasada.
                                   TEXT 14
                     agraha kariya punah punah khaoyaila
                      acamana kaile ninda karite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Encouraging him again and again, Ramacandra Puri fed him
sumptuously, but when Jagadananda had washed his hands and mouth,Ramacandra Puri began criticizing him.
                                   TEXT 15
                  "suni, caitanya-gana kare bahuta bhaksana
                  `satya' sei vakya,--saksat dekhilun ekhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have heard," he said,"that the followers of Caitanya Mahaprabhu
eat more than necessary. Now I have directly seen that this is true.
                                   TEXT 16
                   sannyasire eta khaoyana kare dharma nasa
               vairagi hana eta khaya, vairagyera nahi `bhasa"'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Feeding a sannyasi too much breaks his regulative principles, for
when a sannyasi eats too much, his renunciation is destroyed."
                                   TEXT 17
                     ei ta' svabhava tanra agraha kariya
                    piche ninda kare, age bahuta khaoyana                                 TRANSLATION
     The characteristic of Ramacandra Puri was that first he would
induce someone to eat more than necessary and then he would criticizehim.
                                   TEXT 18
                   purve yabe madhavendra karena antardhana
                    ramacandra-puri tabe aila tanra sthana
                                 TRANSLATION     Formerly, when Madhavendra Puri was at the last stage of his life,
Ramacandra Puri came to where he was staying.
                                   TEXT 19
                    puri-gosani kare krsna-nama-sankirtana
                   `mathura na painu' bali' karena krandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Madhavendra Puri was chanting the holy name of Krsna, and sometimes
he would cry, "O my Lord, I did not get shelter at Mathura."
                                   TEXT 20
                      ramacandra-puri tabe upadese tanre
                   sisya hana guruke kahe, bhaya nahi kare
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Ramacandra Puri was so foolish that he fearlessly dared to
instruct his spiritual master.
                                   TEXT 21
                   "tumi--purna-brahmananda, karaha smarana
                     brahmavit hana kene karaha rodana?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "If you are in full transcendental bliss," he said,"you should now
remember only Brahman. Why are you crying?"
                                   PURPORT     As stated in Bhagavad-gita, brahma-bhutah prasannatma: a Brahman
realized person is always happy. Na socati na kanksati: he neitherlaments nor aspires for anything. Not knowing why Madhavendra Puri was
crying, Ramacandra Puri tried to become his advisor. Thus he committed agreat offense, for a disciple should never try to instruct his spiritualmaster.
                                   TEXT 22                    suni' madhavendra-mane krodha upajila
                `dura, dura, papistha' bali' bhartsana karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this instruction, Madhavendra Puri, greatly angry, rebuked
him by saying,"Get out, you sinful rascal!
                                   PURPORT     Ramacandra Puri could not understand that his spiritual master,
Madhavendra Puri, was feeling transcendental separation. His lamentationwas not material. Rather, it proceeded from the highest stage ofecstatic love of Krsna. When he was crying in separation, "I could notachieve Krsna! I could not reach Mathura!" this was not ordinarymaterial lamentation. Ramacandra Puri was not sufficiently expert tounderstand the feelings of Madhavendra Puri, but nevertheless he thoughthimself very advanced. Therefore, regarding Madhavendra Puri'sexpressions as ordinary material lamentation, he advised him to rememberBrahman because he was latently an impersonalist. Madhavendra Puriunderstood Ramacandra Puri's position as a great fool and thereforeimmediately rebuked him. Such a reprimand from the spiritual master iscertainly for the betterment of the disciple.
                                   TEXT 23                     `krsna na painu, na painu `mathura'
                    apana-duhkhe maron--ei dite aila jvala
                                 TRANSLATION     "O my Lord Krsna, I could not reach You, nor could I reach Your
abode, Mathura. I am dying in my unhappiness, and now this rascal hascome to give me more pain.
                                   TEXT 24
                  more mukha na dekhabi tui, yao yathi-tathi
                    tore dekhi' maile mora habe asad-gati
                                 TRANSLATION     "Don't show your face to me! Go anywhere else you like. If I die
seeing your face, I shall not achieve the destination of my life.                                   TEXT 25
                   krsna na painu muni maron apanara duhkhe
                    more `brahma' upadese ei chara murkhe"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am dying without achieving the shelter of Krsna, and therefore I
am greatly unhappy. Now this condemned foolish rascaI has come toinstruct me about Brahman."
                                   TEXT 26
                 ei ye sri-madhavendra sri-pada upeksa karila
                     sei aparadhe inhara `vasana, janmila
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramacandra Puri was thus denounced by Madhavendra Puri. Due to his
offense, gradually material desire appeared within him.
                                   PURPORT     The word vasana ("material desires") refers to dry speculative
knowledge. Such speculative knowledge is only material. As confirmed inSrimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.4), a person without devotional service whosimply wants to know things (kevala-bodha-labdhaye) gains only dryspeculative knowledge but no spiritual profit. This is also confirmed inthe Bhakti-sandarbha (111), wherein it is said:     jivan-mukta api punar     yanti samsara- vasanam     yady acintya-maha-saktau     bhagavaty aparadhinah"Even though one is liberated in this life, if one offends the SupremePersonality of Godhead he falls down in the midst of material desires,of which dry speculation about spiritual realization is one.,,     In his Laghu-tosani commentary on Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.2.32), JivaGosvami says;     jivan-mukta api punar     bandhanam yanti karmabhih     yady acintya-maha-saktau     bhagavaty aparadhinah "Even if one is liberated in this life, hebecomes addicted to material desires because of offenses to the SupremePersonality of Godhead."     A similar quotation from one of the Puranas also appears in theVisnu-bhakti- can droda ya:     jivan-muktah prapadyante     kvacit samsara-vasanam     yogino na vilipyante     karmabhir bhagavat-parah"Even liberated souls sometimes fall down to material desires, but thosewho fully engaged in devotional service to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead are not affected by such desires."     These are references from authoritative revealed scriptures. If one
becomes an offender to his spiritual master or the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, he falls down to the material platform to merely speculate.
                                   TEXT 27                 suska-brahma-jnani, nahi krsnera `sambandha'
                   sarva loka ninda kare, nindate nirbandha
                                 TRANSLATION     One who is attached to dry speculative knowledge has no
relationship with Krsna. His occupation is criticizing Vaisnavas. Thushe is situated in criticism.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura has explained in his
Anubhasya that the word nirbandha indicates that Ramacandra Puri had asteady desire to criticize others. Impersonalist Mayavadis who have norelationship with Krsna, who cannot take to devotional service and whosimply engage in material arguments to understand Brahman regarddevotional service to Krsna as karma-kanda, or fruitive activities.According to them, devotional service to Krsna is but another means forattaining dharma, artha, kama and moksa. Therefore they criticize thedevotees for engaging in material activities. They think that devotionalservice is maya and that Krsna or Visnu is also maya. Therefore they arecalled Mayavadis. Such a mentality awakens in a person who is anoffender to Krsna and His devotees.
                                   TEXT 28                   isvara-puri gosani kare sri-pada-sevana
                     svahaste karena mala-mutradi marjana
                                 TRANSLATION     Isvara Puri, the spiritual master of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
performed service to Madhavendra Puri, cleaning up his stool and urinewith his own hand.
                                   TEXT 29
                     nirantara krsna-nama karaya smarana
                    krsna-nama, krsna-lila sunaya anuksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Isvara Puri was always chanting the holy name and pastimes of Lord
Krsna for Madhavendra Puri to hear. In this way he helped MadhavendraPuri remember the holy name and pastimes of Lord Krsna at the time ofdeath.                                   TEXT 30
                     tusta hana puri tanre kaila alingana
                 vara dila--`krsne tomara ha-uka prema-dhana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Pleased with Isvara Puri, Madhavendra Puri embraced him and gave
him the benediction that he would be a great devotee and lover of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 31
                   sei haite isvara-puri--`premera sagara'
                    ramacandra-puri haila sarva-nindakara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Isvara Puri became like an ocean of ecstatic love for Krsna,
whereas Ramacandra Puri became a dry speculator and a critic of everyoneelse.
                                   TEXT 32
                  mahad-anugraha-nigrahera `saksi' dui-jane
                       ei dui-dvare sikhaila jaga-jane
                                 TRANSLATION     Isvara Puri received the blessing of Madhavendra Puri, whereas
Ramacandra Puri received a rebuke from him. Therefore these two persons,Isvara Puri and Ramacandra Puri, are examples of the objects of a greatpersonality's benediction and punishment. Madhavendra Puri instructedthe entire world by presenting these two examples.
                                   TEXT 33
                   jagad-guru madhavendra kari' prema dana
                    ei sloka padi' tenho kaila antardhana
                                 TRANSLATION     His Divine Grace Madhavendra Puri, the spiritual master of the
entire world, thus distributed ecstatic love for Krsna. While passingaway from the material world, he chanted the following verse.
                                   TEXT 34
                          ayi dina-dayardra natha he
                         mathura-natha kadavalok yase                          hrdayam tvad-aloka-kataram
                       dayita bhramyati kim karomy aham
                                 TRANSLATION     "O my Lord! O most merciful master! O master of Mathura! When shalI
I see You again? Because of my not seeing You, my agitated heart hasbecome unsteady. O most beloved one, what shall I do now?"
                                   TEXT 35
                      ei sloke krsna-prema kare upadesa
                     krsnera virahe bhaktera bhava-visesa
                                 TRANSLATION     In this verse Madhavendra Puri instructs how to achieve ecstatic
love for Krsna. By feeling separation from Krsna, one becomesspiritually situated.
                                   TEXT 36
                    prthivite ropana kari' gela premankura
                   sei premankurera vrksa--caitanya-thakura
                                 TRANSLATION     Madhavendra Puri sowed the seed of ecstatic love for Krsna within
this material world and then departed. That seed later became a greattree in the form of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 37
                    prastave kahilun puri-gosanira niryana
                       yei iha sune, sei bada bhagyavan
                                 TRANSLATION     I have incidentally described the passing away of Madhavendra Puri.
Anyone who hears this must be considered very fortunate.
                                   TEXT 38
                    ramacandra-puri aiche rahila nilacale
                   virakta svabhava, kabhu rahe kona sthale
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Ramacandra Puri stayed at Jagannatha Puri. As customary for
those in the renounced order, he would sometimes stay someplace and thengo away.
                                   TEXT 39
                   animantrana bhiksa kare, nahika nirnaya
                   anyera bhiksara sthitira layena niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     There was no certainty of where Ramacandra Puri would take his
meal, for he would do so even uninvited. Nevertheless, he was veryparticular to keep account of how others were taking their meals.
                                   TEXT 40
                   prabhura nimantrane lage kaudi cari pana
                   kabhu kasisvara, govinda khana tina jana
                                 TRANSLATION     To invite Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wouId cost 320 kaudis [small
conchshells]. This would provide lunch for three people, including SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu and sometimes Kasisvara and Govinda.
                                   TEXT 41
                    pratyaha prabhura bhiksa iti-uti haya
                    keha yadi mulya ane, cari-pana-nirnaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Every day the Lord wouId take His meal at a different place, and if
someone was prepared to pay for a meal, the price was fixed at only fourpanas.
                                   TEXT 42
                prabhura sthiti, riti, bhiksa, sayana, prayana
                     ramacandra-puri kare sarvanusandhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramacandra Puri concerned himself with gathering all sorts of
information about how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was situated, includingHis regulative principles, His lunch, His sleep and His movements.
                                   TEXT 43                     prabhura yateka guna sparsite narila
                   chidra cahi' bule, kanha chidra na paila
                                 TRANSLATION     Because Ramacandra Puri was interested only in finding faults, he
could not understand the transcendental qualities of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. His only concern was finding faults, but still he could notfind any.
                                   TEXT 44
                    `sannyasi hana kare mistanna bhaksana
                    ei bhoge haya kaiche indriya-varana'?
                                 TRANSLATION     At last he found a fault."How can a person in the renounced order
eat so many sweetmeats?" he said. "If one eats sweets, controlling thesenses is very difficult."
                                   TEXT 45
                    ei ninda kari' kahe sarva-loka-sthane
                  prabhure dekhiteha avasya aise prati-dine
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Ramacandra Puri blasphemed Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
before everyone, but nevertheless he would regularly come to see theLord every day.
                                   TEXT 46
                prabhu guru-buddhye karena sambhrama, sammana
                    tenho chidra cahi' bule,--ei tara kama
                                 TRANSLATION     When they met, the Lord would offer him respectful obeisances,
considering him a Godbrother of His spiritual master. Ramacandra Puri'sbusiness, however, was to search for faults in the Lord.
                                   TEXT 47
                    yata ninda kare taha prabhu saba jane
                     tathapi adara kaie bada-i sambhrame
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu knew that Ramacandra Purt was criticizing
Him before everyone, but whenever Ramacandra Puri came to see Him, theLord offered him respects with great attention.
                                   TEXT 48
                   eka-dina pratah-kale aila prabhura ghara
                     pipilika dekhi' kichu kahena uttara
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Ramacandra Puri came in the morning to the abode of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Seeing many ants, he said something to criticizethe Lord.
                                   TEXT 49
                       "ratrav atra aiksavam asit, tena
                     pipilikah sancaranti aho! viraktanam                      sannyasinam iyam indriya-lalaseti                           bruvann utthaya gatah."
                                 TRANSLATION     "Last night there was sugar candy here," he said. "Therefore ants
are wandering about. Alas, this renounced sannyasi is attached to suchsense gratification!" After speaking in this way, he got up and left.
                                   TEXT 50
                 prabhu paramparaya ninda kairachena sravana
                    ebe saksat sunilena `kalpita' nindana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had heard rumors about Ramacandra Puri's
blasphemy. Now He directly heard his fanciful accusations.
                                   PURPORT     Ramacandra Puri could find no faults in the character of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for He is situated in a transcendental position asthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ants are generally found everywhere,but when Ramacandra Puri saw ants crawling in the abode of the Lord, hetook for granted that they must have been there because CaitanyaMahaprabhu had been eating sweetmeats. He thus discovered imaginaryfaults in the Lord and then left.
                                   TEXT 51                       sahajei pipilika sarvatra bedaya
                       tahate tarka uthana dosa lagaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Ants generally crawl about here, there and everywhere, but
Ramacandra Puri, looking for imaginary faults, criticized Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu by alleging that there had been sweetmeats in His room.
                                   TEXT 52
                    suni' taha prabhura sankoca-bhaya mane
                      govinde bolana kichu kahena vacane
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing this criticism, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was doubtful
and apprehensive. Therefore He called Govinda and instructed him asfollows.
                                   TEXT 53
                    "aji haite bhiksa amara ei ta' niyama
               pinda-bhogera eka cauthi, panca-gandara vyanjana
                                 TRANSLATION     "From today on it will be a rule that I shall accept only one-
fourth of a pot of Lord Jagannatha's prasada and five gandas worth ofvegetables.
                                   TEXT 54
                      iha ba-i adhika ara kichu na aniba
                      adhika anile ama etha na dekhiba"
                                 TRANSLATION     "If you bring any more than this, you will not see Me here
anymore."
                                   TEXT 55                     sakala vaisnave govinda kahe ei vat
                  suni' sabara mathe yaiche haila vajraghata
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda relayed this message to all the devotees. When they heard
it, they felt as if their heads had been struck by thunderbolts.                                   TEXT 56
                   ramacandra-purike sabaya deya tiraskara
                    `ei papistha asi' prana la-ila sabara'
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees condemned Ramacandra Puri, saying,"This sinful man
has come here and taken our lives."
                                  TEXT 57-58
                     sei-dina eka-vipra kaila nimantrana
                   eka-cauthi bhata, panca-gandara vyanjana
                       ei-matra govinda kaila angikara
                    mathaya gha mare vipra, kare hahakara
                                 TRANSLATION     That day, a brahmana extended an invitation to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. When Govinda accepted only five gandas worth of vegetablesand a fourth of a pot of rice, the brahmana, in great despair, struckhis head with his hand and cried, "Alas! Alas!"
                                   TEXT 59
                   sei bhata-vyanjana prabhu ardheka khaila
                     ye kichu rahila, taha govinda paila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ate only half of the rice and vegetables,
and whatever remained was taken by Govinda.
                                   TEXT 60
                  ardhasana karena prabhu, govinda ardhasana
                    saba bhakta-gana tabe chadila bholana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus both Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Govinda ate only half the
food they needed. Because of this, all the other devotees gave upeating.
                                   TEXT 61
                   govinda-kasisvare prabhu kaila ajnapana                   `dunhe anyatra magi' kara udara bharana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered Govinda and Kasisvara,"You may both
take alms elsewhere to fill your bellies."
                                   TEXT 62
                      ei-rupa maha-duhkhe dina kata gela
                    suni, ramacandra-puri prabhu-pasa aila
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, some days passed in great unhappiness. Hearing of all
this, Ramacandra Puri went to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 63
                  pranama kari' prabhu kaila carana vandana
                     prabhure kahaye kichu hasiya vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu offered His obeisances to Ramacandra Puri,
worshiping his feet. Then Ramacandra Puri smiled and spoke to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 64
                  "sannyasira dharma nahe `indriya-tarpana'
                    yaiche taiche kare matra udara bharana
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramacandra Puri advised, "It is not the business of a sannyasi to
gratify his senses. He should fill his belIy some way or other.
                                   TEXT 65
                  tomare ksina dekhi, suni,--kara ardhasana
                 ei `suska-vairagya' nahe sannyasira `dharma'
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have heard that You have cut Your eating in half. Indeed, I see
that You are skinny. Such dry renunciation is also not the religion of asannyasi.
                                   TEXT 66               yatha-yogya udara bhare, na kare `visaya' bhoga
                    sannyasira tabe siddha haya jnana-yoga
                                 TRANSLATION     "A sannyasi eats as much as necessary to maintain his body, but he
does not enjoy satisfying his senses materially. Thus a sannyasi becomesperfect in his spiritual advancement in knowledge.
                                  TEXT 67-68
                            natyasnato'pi yogo'sti
                            na caikantam anasnatah
                            na catisvapna-silasya
                            jagrato naiva carjuna
                            yuktahara- viharas ya
                            yukta-cestasya karmasu                          yukta-s vapna vabodhas ya                            yogo bhavati duhkhaha"
                                 TRANSLATION     "`My dear Arjuna, one cannot perform mystic yoga if he eats more
than necessary or needlessly fasts, sleeps and dreams too much or doesnot sleep enough. One should eat and enjoy his senses as much asnecessary, one should properly endeavor to execute his duties, and oneshould regulate his sleep and wakefulness. Thus one can become freedfrom material pains by executing mystic yoga."'
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Bhagavad-gita (6.16-17).                                   TEXT 69                prabhu kahe,--"ajna balaka mui `sisya' tomara
                     more siksa deha;,--ei bhagya amara',
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then humbly submitted,"I am just like an
ignorant boy and am like your disciple. It is My great fortune that youare instructing Me."
                                   TEXT 70
                     eta suni' ramacandra-puri uthi' gela
               bhakta-gana ardhasana kare,--puri gosani sunila                                 TRANSLATION
     Hearing this, Ramacandra Puri got up and left. He also heard from
various sources that all the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wereeating half as much as usual.
                                   TEXT 71
                  ara dina bhakta-gana-saha paramananda-puri
                   prabhu-pase nivedila dainya-vinaya kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, Paramananda Puri and other devotees approached Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu with great humility and submission.
                                   TEXT 72
                    "ramacandra-puri haya ninduka-svabhava
                    tara bole anna chadi' kiba habe labha?
                                 TRANSLATION     Paramananda Puri said, "My Godbrother Ramacandra Puri is by nature
a bad critic. If You give up eating because of his words, what will bethe profit?
                                   TEXT 73
                   purira svabhava,--yathesta ahara karana
                   ye na khaya, tare khaoyaya yatana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is the nature of Ramacandra Puri that first he lets one eat as
much as desired, and if one does not eat more than necessary, with greatattention he makes him eat more.
                                   TEXT 74
                      khaoyana punah tare karaye nindana
                   `eta anna khao,--tomara kata ache dhana?
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this way he induces one to eat more than necessary, and then he
directly criticizes him, saying,`You eat so much. How much money do youhave in your treasury?                                   TEXT 75
                  sannyasike eta khaoyana kara dharma nasa!
                   ataeva janinu,--tomara kichu nahi bhasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Also, by inducing sannyasis to eat so much, you spoil their
religious principles. Therefore I can understand that you have noadvancement.'
                                   TEXT 76
                    ke kaiche vyavahare, keba kaiche khaya
                      ei anusandhana tenho karaya sadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is Ramacandra Puri's business to inquire always about how
others are eating and conducting their daily affairs.
                                   TEXT 77
                    sastre yei dui dharma kairache varjana
                      sei karma nirantara inhara karana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The two kinds of activity rejected in the revealed scriptures
constitute his daily affairs.
                                   TEXT 78
                           para-s vabha va-karmani
                           na prasamsen na garhayet                           visvam ekatmakam pasyan                             prakrtya purusena ca
                                 TRANSLATION     "`One should see that because of the meeting of material nature and
the living entity, the universe is acting uniformly. Thus one shouldneither praise nor criticize the characteristics or activities ofothers.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.28.1) was spoken by Lord
Krsna to Uddhava.
                                   TEXT 79                  tara madhye purva-vidhi `prasamsa' chadiya
                  para-vidhi `ninda' kare `balistha' janiya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Of the two rules, Ramacandra Puri obeys the first by abandoning
praise, but although he knows that the second is more prominent, heneglects it by criticizing others.
                                   PURPORT     The above-mentioned verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam gives two
injunctions. The first, called purva-vidhi, is that one should notpraise, and the second, para- vidhi, is that one should not criticize.As will be apparent from the following verse, the injunction againstpraise is less important than the injunction against blasphemy. Oneshould carefully observe the para-vidhi, although one may neglect thepurva-vidhi. Thus the actual injunction is that one may praise butshould not criticize. This is called slesokti, or a statement having twomeanings. Ramacandra Puri, however, acted in just the opposite way, forhe neglected the para-vidhi but strictly observed the purva-vidhi. Sincehe avoided following the principle of not criticizing, Ramacandra Puribroke both the rules.
                                   TEXT 80                   purva-parayor madhye para-vidhir balavan                                 TRANSLATION     "`Between the former rule and the latter rule, the latter is more
important.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the nyaya literatures.                                   TEXT 81                  yahan guna sata ache, taha na kare grahana
                     guna-madhye chale kare dosa-aropana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Even where there are hundreds of good qualities, a critic does not
consider them. Rather, he attempts by some trick to point out a fault inthose attributes.
                                   TEXT 82
                    inhara svabhava ihan karite na yuyaya
                    tathapi kahiye kichu marma-duhkha paya                                 TRANSLATION
     "One should not, therefore, follow the principles of Ramacandra
Puri. Nevertheless, I have to say something against him because he ismaking our hearts unhappy.
                                   TEXT 83
                     inhara vacane kene anna tyaga kara?
                purvavat nimantrana mana;,--sabara bola dhara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Why have you given up proper eating due to the criticism of
Ramacandra Puri? Please accept invitations as before. This is therequest of us all.',
                                   TEXT 84
                  prabhu kahe,--"sabe kene purire kara rosa?
                 `sahaja' dharma kahe tenho, tanra kiba dosa?
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "Why are all of you angry at
Ramacandra Puri? He is expounding the natural principles of sannyasalife. Why are you accusing him?
                                   TEXT 85
                   yati hana jihva-lampatya--atyanta anyaya
               yatira dharma,--prana rakhite ahara-matra khaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "For a sannyasi to indulge in satisfying the tongue is a great
offense. The duty of a sannyasi is to eat onIy as much as needed to keepbody and soul together."
                                   TEXT 86
                  tabe sabe meli' prabhure bahu yatna kaila
                     sabara agrahe prabhu ardheka rakhila
                                 TRANSLATION     When they all requested very fervently that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
take a full meal, He still would not do so. Instead, He responded totheir request by accepting half as much as usual.                                   TEXT 87
                   dui-pana kaudi lage prabhura nimantrane
                    kabhu dui-jana bhokta, kabhu tina-jane
                                 TRANSLATION     The cost for the food needed to invite Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was
fixed at two panas of kaudis [160 conchshells], and that food would betaken by two men and sometimes three.
                                   TEXT 88
                   abhojyanna vipra yadi karena nimantrana
                   prasada-mulya la-ite lage kaudi dui-pana
                                 TRANSLATION     When a brahmana at whose home an invitation could not be accepted
invited the Lord, he would pay two panas of conchshells to purchase theprasada.
                                   TEXT 89
                     bhojyanna vipra yadi nimantrana kare
                  kichu `prasada' ane, kichu paka kare ghare
                                 TRANSLATION     When a brahmana at whose home an invitation could be accepted
invited Him, the brahmana would purchase part of the prasada and cookthe rest at home.
                                  TEXT 90-91
                 pandita-gosani, bhagavan-acarya, sarvabhauma
                    nimantranera dine yadi kare nimantrana
                   tan-sabara icchaya prabhu karena bhojana
               tahan prabhura svatantrya nai, yaiche tanra mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Even on a day when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was invited to dine by
others, if Gadadhara Pandita, Bhagavan Acarya or Sarvabhauma Bhattacaryainvited Him, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had no independence. He wouldaccept their invitations as they desired.                                   TEXT 92
                  bhakta-gane sukha dite prabhura `avatara'
                  yahan yaiche yogya, tahan karena vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu actually descended to give happiness to the
devotees. Thus He behaved in whatever way fit the time andcircumstances.
                                   TEXT 93
                    kabhu laukika riti,--yena `itara' jana
                 kabhu svatantra, karena `aisvarya' prakatana
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of His full independence, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sometimes
behaved like a common man and sometimes manifested His godly opulence.
                                   TEXT 94
                  kabhu ramacandra-purira haya bhrtya-praya
                    kabhu tare nahi mane, dekhe trna-praya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sometimes accepted Ramacandra Puri as His
master and considered Himself a servant, and sometimes the Lord, notcaring for him, would see him as being just like a straw.
                                   TEXT 95
                  isvara-caritra prabhura--buddhira agocara
                     yabe yei karena, sei saba--manohara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu behaved exactly like the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, beyond the restriction of anyone's intelligence.Whatever He liked He did, but all His activities were very beautiful.
                                   TEXT 96
                       ei-mata ramacandra-puri nilacale
                    dina kata rahi' gela `tirtha' karibare
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Ramacandra Puri stayed for some days at Nilacala [Jagannatha
Puri]. Then he left to visit various holy places of pilgrimage.
                                   TEXT 97
                   tenho gele prabhura gana haila harasita
                     sirera pathara yena padila acambita
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees considered Ramacandra Puri to be like a great burden
on their heads. When he left Jagannatha Puri, everyone felt extremelyhappy, as if a great stone burden had suddenly fallen from their headsto the ground.
                                   TEXT 98
               svacchande nimantrana, prabhura kirtana-nartana
                    svacchande karena sabe prasada bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     After his departure, everything was happy once again. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu accepted invitations as usual and led congregational chantingand dancing. Everyone else also accepted prasada without hindrances.
                                   TEXT 99
                     guru upeksa kaile, aiche phala haya
                    krame isvara-paryanta aparadhe thekaya
                                 TRANSLATION     If one's spiritual master rejects him, one becomes so fallen that
he, like Ramacandra Puri, commits offenses even to the SupremePersonality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 100
               yadyapi guru-buddhye prabhu tara dosa na la-ila
                     tara phala-dvara loke siksa karaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu did not consider the offenses of Ramacandra
Puri, for the Lord considered him His spiritual master. However, hischaracter instructed everyone about the result of offending thespirituaI master.                                   TEXT 101
                     caitanya-caritra--yena amrtera pura
                      sunite sravane mane lagaye madhura
                                 TRANSLATION     The character of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is full of nectar. Hearing
about it is pleasing to the ear and mind.
                                   TEXT 102
                    caitanya-caritra likhi, suna eka-mane
                     anayase pabe prema sri-krsna-carane
                                 TRANSLATION     I write about the character of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. O readers,
please hear with attention, for thus you will easily receive ecstaticlove for the lotus feet of Lord Sri Krsna.
                                   TEXT 103
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, aIways
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Eighth Chapter, describing how the Lord reduced His eatingin fear of the criticism of Ramacandra Puri.
                                 Chapter Nine
                   The Deliverance of Gopinatha Pattanayaka     This Ninth Chapter is summarized as follows. Gopinatha Pattanayaka,
the son of Bhavananda Raya, was engaged in the service of thegovernment, but he misappropriated some funds from the treasury.Therefore the bada-jana, the eldest son of King Prataparudra, orderedthat he be punished by death. Thus Gopinatha Pattanayaka was raised onthe canga to be killed, but by the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu hewas delivered. Moreover, he was even promoted to a higher post.
                                    TEXT 1                          agan ya-dhanya-caitan ya-
                           gananam prema- van ya ya                          ninye'dhanya-jana-svanta-                            maruh sasvad anupatam
                                 TRANSLATION     The innumerable, glorious followers of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
brought a constant flood to the desertlike hearts of the unfortunatewith an inundation of ecstatic love.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-krsna-caitanya dayamaya
                      jaya jaya nityananda karuna-hrdaya
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the most merciful
incarnation! All glories to Lord Nityananda, whose heart is alwayscompassionate!
                                    TEXT 3
                      jayadvaitacarya jaya jaya dayamaya
                     jaya gaura-bhakta-gana saba rasamaya
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Advaita Acarya, who is very merciful! All glories to
the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who are always overwhelmed bytranscendental bliss!
                                    TEXT 4
                     ei-mata mahaprabhu bhakta-gana-sange
                    nilacale vasa karena krsna-prema-range
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lived at Nilacala [Jagannatha Puri]
with His personal devotees, always merged in ecstatic love for Krsna.
                                    TEXT 5
                      antare-bahire krsna-viraha-taranga
                  nana-bhave vyakula prabhura mana ara anga
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu always felt waves of separation from Krsna,
externally and internally. His mind and body were agitated by variousspiritual transformations.
                                    TEXT 6
                   dine nrtya-kirtana, jagannatha-darasana
                    ratrye raya-svarupa-sane rasa-asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     During the day He chanted, danced and saw Lord Jagannatha in the
temple. At night He tasted transcendental bliss in the company ofRamananda Raya and Svarupa Damodara.
                                    TEXT 7
                    trijagatera loka asi' karena darasana
                    yei dekhe, sei paya krsna-prema-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     People from the three worlds used to come visit Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Anyone who saw Him received the transcendental treasure oflove for Krsna.
                                    TEXT 8
                    manusyera vese deva-gandharva-kinnara
                     sapta-patalera yata daitya visadhara
                                 TRANSLATION     The inhabitants of the seven higher planetary systems--including
the demigods, the Gandharvas and the Kinnaras--and the inhabitants ofthe seven lower planetary systems [Patalaloka], including the demons andserpentine living entities, all visited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in thedress of human beings.
                                    TEXT 9
                   sapta-dvipe nava-khande vaise yata jana
                    nana-vese asi' kare prabhura darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Dressed in different ways, people from the seven islands and nine
khandas visited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.                                   TEXT 10
                  prahlada, bali, vyasa, suka adi muni-gana
                    asi' prabhu dekhi' preme haya acetana
                                 TRANSLATION     Prahlada Maharaja, Bali Maharaja, Vyasadeva, Sukadeva Gosvami and
other great sages came to visit Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Upon seeingHim, they became unconscious in ecstatic love for Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     According to the opinion of some historians, prahlada Maharaja was
born in Treta-yuga in the city of Mulatana in the state of Punjab. Hewas born of Hiranyakasipu, a king of the dynasty of Kasyapa. PrahladaMaharaja was a great devotee of Lord Visnu, but his father was very muchagainst Visnu. Because the father and son thus differed in theirconsciousness, the demon father inflicted all kinds of bodily pain uponPrahlada. When this torture became intolerable, the Supreme Lordappeared as Nrsimhadeva and killed the great demon Hiranyakasipu.     Bali Maharaja was the grandson of Prahlada Maharaja. The son ofPrahlada Maharaja was Virocana, and his son was known as Bali. Appearingas Vamana and begging Bali Maharaja for three feet of land, the Lordtook possession of the entire three worlds. Thus Bali Maharaja became agreat devotee of Lord Vamana. Bali Maharaja had one hundred sons, ofwhom Maharaja Bana was the eldest and most famous.     Vyasadeva was the son of the great sage Parasara. Other names forhim are Satyavateya and Krsna-dvaipayana Badarayana Muni. As one of theauthorities on the Vedas, he divided the original Veda, for convenience,into four divisions--Sama, Yajur, Rg and Atharva. He is the author ofeighteen Puranas as well as the theosophical thesis Brahma-sutra and itsnatural commentary, Srimad- Bhagavatam. He belongs to the Brahma-sampradaya and is a direct disciple of Narada Muni.     Sukadeva Gosvami is the son of Vyasadeva. He was a brahmacari fullyconscious of Brahman realization, but later he became a great devotee ofLord Krsna. He narrated Srimad-Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit.
                                   TEXT 11                     bahire phukare loka, darsana na pana
                   `krsna kaha' balena prabhu bahire asiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Being unable to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the populace outside
His room would make a tumultuous sound. Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuwould go outside and tell them,"Chant Hare Krsna."
                                   TEXT 12
                    prabhura darsane saba loka preme bhase
                      ei-mata yaya prabhura ratri-divase                                 TRANSLATION
     All kinds of people would come to see the Lord, and upon seeing Him
they would be overwhelmed with ecstatic love for Krsna. In this way SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu passed His days and nights.
                                   TEXT 13
                     eka-dina loka asi' prabhure nivedila
                    gopinathere `bada jana' cange cadaila
                                 TRANSLATION     One day people suddenly came to Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
informed Him, "Gopinatha Pattanayaka, the son of Bhavananda Raya, hasbeen condemned to death by the bada-jana, the eldest son of the King,and has been raised on the canga.
                                   PURPORT     The canga was a device for killing a condemned person. It consisted
of a raised platform on which the condemned was made to stand.Underneath the platform, there were stationary upright swords. Thecondemned man would be pushed down onto the swords, and in this way hewould die. For some reason, Gopinatha Pattanayaka had been condemned todeath and had therefore been raised upon the canga.
                                   TEXT 14                     tale khadga pati' tare upare daribe
                   prabhu raksa karena yabe, tabe nistaribe
                                 TRANSLATION     "He has placed swords beneath the pIatform," they said,"and will
throw Gopinatha upon them. O Lord, only if You protect him will he besaved.
                                   TEXT 15
                    savamse tomara sevaka--bhavananda-raya
                  tanra putra--tomara sevake rakhite yuyaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Bhavananda Raya and his entire family are your servants. Therefore
it is quite fitting for You to save the son of Bhavananda Raya."
                                   TEXT 16                   prabhu kahe,--`raja kene karaye tadana?'
                       tabe sei loka kahe saba vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired, "Why is the King chastising him?"
Thereupon the people described the entire incident.
                                   TEXT 17
                  "gopinatha-pa tta na yaka--ramananda-bhai
                      sarva-kala haya tenha raja-visayi
                                 TRANSLATION     They said,"Gopinatha Pattanayaka, the brother of Ramananda Raya,
has always been a treasurer for the government.
                                   TEXT 18
                     `malajathya-dandapa\e' tara adhikara
                   sadhi' padi' ani' dravya dila raja-dvara
                                 TRANSLATION     "He served in the place known as Malajathya Dandapata, soliciting
and collecting money there and depositing it in the government treasury.
                                   TEXT 19
                   dui-laksa kahana tara thani baki ha-ila
                    dui-laksa kahana kaudi raja ta' magila
                                 TRANSLATION     nas of conchshells was due from him. Therefore the King demanded
this sum.
                                   TEXT 20
                tenha kahe,--"sthula-dravya nahi ye gani' diba
                    krame-krame veci' kini' dravya bhariba
                                 TRANSLATION     "Gopinatha Pattanayaka replied,`There is no money I can immediately
give you in cash. Please give me time. Gradually I shall purchase andsell my gross goods and in this way fill your treasury.                                   TEXT 21
                   ghoda dasa-bara haya, laha' mulya kari",
                    eta bali' ghoda ane raja-dvare dhari'
                                 TRANSLATION     " `There are ten to twelve good horses. Take them immediately for a
proper price.' After saying this, he brought all the horses to the doorof the King.
                                   TEXT 22
                   eka raja-putra ghodara mulya bhala jane
                     tare pathaila raja patra-mitra sane
                                 TRANSLATION     "One of the princes knew how to estimate the price of horses very
well. Thus the King sent for him to come with his ministers and friends.
                                   TEXT 23
                      sei rala-putra mulya kare ghatana
                    gopinathera krodha haila mulya suniya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The prince, however, purposely gave a reduced estimate for the
value of the horses. When Gopinatha Pattanayaka heard the price quoted,he was very angry.
                                   TEXT 24
                  sei raja-putrera svabhava,--griva phiraya
                     urdhva-mukhe bara-bara iti-uti caya
                                 TRANSLATION     "That prince had a personal idiosyncrasy of turning his neck and
facing the sky, looking here and there again and again.
                                   TEXT 25
                     tare ninda kari' kahe sagarva vacane
                     raja krpa kare tate bhaya nahi mane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Gopinatha Pattanayaka criticized the prince. He was unafraid of
the prince because the King was very kind toward him.
                                   TEXT 26
                `amara ghoda griva na phiraya urdhve nahi caya
                  tate ghodara mulya ghati karite na yuyaya'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Gopinatha Pattanayaka said, `My horses never turn their necks or
look upward. Therefore the price for them should not be reduced.'
                                   TEXT 27
                     suni' rajaputra-mane krodha upajila
                     rajara thani yai' bahu lagani karila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Hearing this criticism, the prince became very angry. Going before
the King, he made some false allegations against Gopinatha Pattanayaka.
                                   TEXT 28
                   "kaudi nahi dibe ei, bedaya chadma kari'
                  ajna deha yadi,--`cange cadana la-i kaudi'
                                 TRANSLATION     " `This Gopinatha Pattanayaka,' he said,`is unwilling to pay the
money due. Instead, he is squandering it under some pretext. If youissue an order, I can put him on the canga and thus realize the money.'
                                   TEXT 29
                    raja bale,--"yei bhala, sei kara yaya
                     ye upaye kaudi pai, kara se upa-ya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The King replied, `You can adopt whatever means you think best.
Any device by which you can somehow or other realize the money is allright.'
                                   TEXT 30
                      raja-putra asi' tare cange cadaila
                 khadaga-upare phelaite tale khadaga patila"                                 TRANSLATION
     "Thus the prince went back, raised Gopinatha Pattanayaka onto the
platform of the canga and spread swords below upon which to throw him."
                                   TEXT 31
                  suni' prabhu kahe kichu kari' pranaya-rosa
                   "raja-kaudi dite nare, rajara kiba dosa?
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing this explanation, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied
with affectionate anger. "Gopinatha Pattanayaka does not want to paydues to the King," the Lord said."How then is the King at fault inpunishing him?
                                   TEXT 32
                  raja-bilat sadhi' kha ya, nahi raja-bhaya
                      dari-natuyare diya kare nana vyaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Gopinatha Pattanayaka is in charge of collecting money on behalf
of the government, but he misappropriates it. Not fearing the King, hesquanders it to see dancing girls.
                                   TEXT 33
                      yei catura, sei kuruka raja-visaya
                 raja-dravya sodhi' paya, tara karuka vyaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "If one is intelligent, let him perform service to the government,
and after paying the government, he can spend whatever money is left."
                                   TEXT 34
                        hena-kale ara loka aila dhana
                   `vaninathadi savamse lana gela bandhiya'
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time another person came there in great haste, bringing the
news that Vaninatha Raya and his entire family had been arrested.                                   TEXT 35
               prabhu kahe,--"raja apane lekhara dravya la-iba
                   ami--virakta sannyasi, tahe ki kariba?"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "The King must personally realize the
dues. I am but a sannyasi, a member of the renounced order. What can Ido?"
                                   TEXT 36
                   tabe svarupadi yata prabhura bhakta-gana
                     prabhura carane sabe kaila nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     Then all the devotees, headed by Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, fell at
the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and submitted the followingplea.
                                   TEXT 37
                "ramananda-rayera gosthi, saba--tomara `dasa'
                       tomara ucita nahe aichana udasa"
                                 TRANSLATION     "All the members of Ramananda Raya's family are Your eternal
servants. Now they are in danger. It is not befitting for You to beindifferent to them in this way."
                                   TEXT 38
                    suni' mahaprabhu kahe sakrodha vacane
                   "more ajna deha' sabe, yana raja-sthane!
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke in an angry mood.
"You want to order Me to go to the King," He said.
                                   TEXT 39
                    toma-sabara ei mata,--raja-thani yana
                      kaudi magi' lan muni ancala patiya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Your opinion is that I should go to the King's palace and spread
My cloth to beg money from him.
                                   TEXT 40
                  panca-gandara patra haya sannyasi brahmana
                    magile va kene dibe dui-laksa kahana?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Of course, a sannyasi or brahmana may beg for up to five gandas,
but why should he be granted the inappropriate sum of 200,000 kahanas ofconchshells?"
                                   TEXT 41
                        hena-kale ara loka aila dhana
                   khadegara upare gopinathe diteche dariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Then another person came with the news that Gopinatha had already
been set up to be thrown upon the points of the swords.
                                   TEXT 42
                  suni' prabhura gana prabhure kare anunaya
              prabhu kahe,--"ami bhiksuka, ama haite kichu naya
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this news, all the devotees again appealed to the Lord, but
the Lord replied,"I am a beggar. It is impossible for Me to do anythingabout this.
                                   TEXT 43
                   tate raksa karite yadi haya sabara mane
                    sabe meli' janaha jagannathera carane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore if you want to save him, you should all pray together at
the lotus feet of Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 44
                 isvara jagannatha,--yanra hate sarva `artha'
                   kartum akartum anyatha karite samartha"                                 TRANSLATION
     "Lord Jagannatha is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He
possesses all potencies. Therefore He is able to act freely and can doand undo whatever He likes."
                                   TEXT 45
                      ihan yadi mahaprabhu eteka kahila
                     haricandana-patra yai' rajare kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied in this way, an officer named
Haricandana Patra went to the King and spoke with him.
                                   TEXT 46
                    "gopinatha-pattanayaka--sevaka tomara
                     sevakera prana-danda nahe vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     "After all," he said, "Gopinatha Pattanayaka is your faithful
servant. To condemn a servant to death is not good behavior.
                                   TEXT 47
                     visesa tahara thani kaudi baki haya
                   prana nile kiba labha? nija dhana-ksaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "His only fault is that he owes some money to the government. If he
is killed, however, what profit will there be? The government will bethe loser, for it will not get the money.
                                   TEXT 48
                  yathartha mulye ghoda laha, yeba baki haya
                  krame krame dibe, vyartha prana kene laya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "It would be better to take the horses for a proper price and let
him gradually repay the balance. Why are you killing him unnecessarily?"
                                   TEXT 49                      raja kahe,--"ei vat ami nahi jani
                   prana kene la-iba, tara dravya cahi ami
                                 TRANSLATION     The King answered in surprise,"I did not know about all this. Why
should his life be taken? I only want the money from him.
                                   TEXT 50
                     tumi yai' kara tahan sarva samadhana
                   dravya yaiche aise, ara rahe tara prana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Go there and adjust everything. I want only the payment, not his
life."
                                   TEXT 51
                     tabe haricandana asi' janare kahila
                     cange haite gopinathe sighra namaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Haricandana then returned and informed the prince of the King's
desire, and immediately Gopinatha Pattanayaka was taken down from thecanga.
                                   TEXT 52
                    `dravya deha' raja mage--upaya puchila
                `yathartha-mulye ghoda laha', tenha ta' kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then he was told that the King demanded the money due him and asked
what means he wouId adopt to pay it. "Kindly take my horses," hereplied, "for a proper price.
                                   TEXT 53
                    `krame krame dimu, ara yata kichu pari
                    avicare prana laha,--ki balite pari?'
                                 TRANSLATION     "I shall gradually pay the balance as I can. Without consideration,
however, you were going to take my life. What can I say?"                                   TEXT 54
                 yathartha mulya kari' tabe saba ghoda la-ila
                  ara dravyera muddati kari' ghare pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then the government took all the horses for a proper price, a time
was set for payment of the balance, and Gopinatha Pattanayaka wasreleased.
                                   TEXT 55
                    etha prabhu sei manusyere prasna kaila
                  "vaninatha ki kare, yabe bandhiya anila?"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired from the messenger, "What was
Vaninatha doing when he was arrested and brought there?"
                                   TEXT 56
                 se kahe--"vaninatha nirbhaye laya krsna-nama
                    `hare krsna, hare krsna' kahe avisrama
                                 TRANSLATION     The messenger replied,"He was fearlessly, incessantly chanting the
mahamantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
                                   TEXT 57
                    sankhya lagi' dui-hate angulite lekha
                   sahasradi purna haile, ange kate rekha"
                                 TRANSLATION     "He counted the chants on the fingers of both hands, and affer he
had finished chanting one thousand times, he would make a mark on hisbody."
                                   TEXT 58
                    suni' mahaprabhu ha-ila parama ananda
                 ke bujhite pare gaurera krpa-chanda-bandha?                                 TRANSLATION
     Hearing this news, the Lord was very pleased. Who can understand
the mercy of the Lord upon His devotee?
                                   TEXT 59
                   hena-kale kasi-misra aila prabhu-sthane
                    prabhu tanre kahe kichu sodvega-vacane
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time Kasi Misra came to the residence of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and the Lord talked with him with some agitation.
                                   TEXT 60
                      "ihan rahite nari, yamu alalanatha
                     nana upadrava ihan, na pai soyatha"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I cannot stay here any longer," the Lord said."I shall go to
Alalanatha. There are too many disturbances here, and I cannot get anyrest.
                                   TEXT 61
                  bhavananda-rayera gosthi kare raja-visaya
                   nana-prakare kare tara raja-dravya vyaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "All the family members of Bhavananda Raya are engaged in
government service, but they spend the government's revenue in variousways.
                                   TEXT 62
                     rajara ki dosa raja nija-dravya caya
                     dite nare dravya, danda amare janaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "What is the fault on the part of the King? He wants the
government's money. However, when they are punished for failing to paythe government its due, they come to Me to release them.
                                   TEXT 63                      raja gopinathe yadi cange cadaila
                       cari-bare loke asi' more janaila
                                 TRANSLATION     "When the King put Gopinatha Pattanayaka on the canga, messengers
came four times to inform Me about the incident.
                                   TEXT 64
                      bhiksuka sannyasi ami nirjana-vasi
                  amaya duhkha deya, nija-duhkha kahi' asi'
                                 TRANSLATION     "As a beggar sannyasi, a mendicant, I wish to live alone in a
solitary place, but these people come to tell Me about their unhappinessand disturb Me.
                                   TEXT 65
                      aji tare jagannatha karila raksana
                  kali ke rakhibe, yadi na dibe raja-dhana?
                                 TRANSLATION     "Jagannatha has saved him once from death today, but if tomorrow he
again does not pay what he owes the treasury, who will give himprotection?
                                   PURPORT     The Supreme Personality of Godhead will certainly protect a devotee
who does something sinful accidentally. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.30-31):     api cet suduracaro     bhajate mam ananya-bhak     sadhur eva sa mantavyah     samyag vyavasito hi sah     ksipram bhavati dharmatma     sasvac-chantim nigacchati     kaunteya pratijanihi     na me bhaktah pranasyati"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged indevotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he isproperly situated. He quickly becomes righteous and attains lastingpeace. O son of Kunti, declare it boldly that My devotee neverperishes." However, if a devotee or so-called devotee purposefullycommits sinful activities continually in the hope that Krsna will givehim protection, Krsna will not protect him. Therefore Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu said, kali ke rakhibe, yadi na dibe raja-dhana?: "Jagannathahas saved Gopinatha Pattanayaka from being killed by the King today, but
if he commits the same offense again, who will give him protection?" SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu thus warns all such foolish devotees that Jagannathawill not protect them if they continue to commit offenses.
                                   TEXT 66                    visayira varta suni' ksubdha haya mana
                     tate ihan rahi' mora nahi prayojana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "If we hear about the activities of materialistic persons, our
minds become agitated. There is no need for Me to stay here and bedisturbed in that way."
                                   TEXT 67
                   kasi-misra kahe prabhura dhariya carane
                     "tumi kene ei vate ksobha kara mane?
                                 TRANSLATION     Kasi Misra caught hold of the Lord's lotus feet and said, "Why
should You be agitated by these affairs?
                                   TEXT 68
                  sannyasi virakta tomara ka-sane sambandha?
                 vyavahara lagi' toma bhaje, sei jnana-andha
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are a renounced sannyasi. What connections do You have? One
who worships You for some material purpose is blind to all knowledge."
                                   PURPORT     Becoming a devotee of the Lord to serve material purposes is a
great mistake. Many people become showbottle devotees for materialprofits. indeed materialistic persons sometimes take to professionaldevotional service and keep Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,as a means of livelihood. None of this, however, is approved. In thebook known as Sapta-sati, as mentioned by Srila BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Thakura, one can discover how a person worshiping the goddessDurga begs her for different varieties of material profit. Suchactivities are very popular among people in general, but they are theattempts of foolish, blind people (sei jnana-andha).     A materialist does not actually know why one should become adevotee. A devotee's only concern is to satisfy the Supreme Personalityof Godhead. Pure devotional service is defined by Srila Rupa Gosvami:     an yabhilasita-sunyam-     jnana-karmady-anavrtam
     anukulyena krsnanu-     silanam bhaktir uttamaOne should be completely free from all material desires and should serveKrsna simply to please Him. When people become interested in their ownsense gratification (bhukti mukti siddhi kami), some of them desire toenjoy the material world to the fullest extent, some of them desire tobe liberated and merge into the existence of Brahman, and others want toperform magic through mystic power and thus become incarnations of God.These are all against the principles of devotional service. One must befree from all material desires. The desire of the impersonalist to mergeinto the existence of Brahman is also material because such animpersonalist wants to gratify his senses by merging into the existenceof Krsna instead of serving His lotus feet. Even if such a person mergesinto the Brahman effulgence, he falls down again into materialexistence. As stated in Srimad- Bhagavatam (10.2.32):     aruhya krcchrena param padam tatah     patanty adho'nadrta-yusmad-anghrayahBecause Mayavadi philosophers have no information regarding thetranscendental service of the Lord, even after attaining liberation frommaterial activities and merging in the Brahman effulgence, they mustcome down again to this material world.
                                   TEXT 69                  tomara bhajana-phale tomate `prema-dhana'
                  visaya lagi' tomaya bhaje, sei murkha jana
                                 TRANSLATION     Kasi Misra continued, "If one engages in devotional service for
Your satisfaction, this will result in his increasingly awakening hisdormant love for You. But if one engages in Your devotional service formaterial purposes, he should be considered a number-one fool.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that there are
many materialistic persons who become preachers, gurus, religionists orphilosophers only for the sake of maintaining a high standard of livingand sense gratification for themselves and their families. Sometimesthey adopt the dress of a sannyasi or preacher. They train some of theirfamily members as lawyers and continually seek help from a high court toacquire riches on the plea of maintaining temples. Although such personsmay call themselves preachers, live in Vrndavana or Navadvipa, and alsoprint many religious books, it is all for the same purpose, namely toearn a living to maintain their wives and children. They may alsoprofessionally recite the Bhagavatam or other scriptures, worship theDeity in the temple and initiate disciples. Making a show of devotionalparaphernalia, they may also collect money from the public and use it tocure the disease of some family member or near relative. Sometimes theybecome babajis or collect money on the plea of worshiping the poor, whomthey call daridra-narayana, or for social and political upliftment. Thusthey spread a network of business schemes to collect money for sensegratification by cheating people in general who have no knowledge of
pure devotional service. Such cheaters cannot understand that byoffering devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, onecan be elevated to a position of eternal servitude to the Lord, which iseven greater than the position of Brahma and other demigods.Unfortunately, fools have no understanding of the perpetual pleasure ofdevotional service.
                                   TEXT 70                    toma lagi' ramananda rajya tyaga kaila
                     toma lagi' sanatana `visaya' chadila
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is only for Your sake that Ramananda Raya resigned from the
governorship of South India and Sanatana Gosvami gave up his post asminister.
                                   TEXT 71
                     toma lagi' raghunatha sakala chadila
                     hethaya tahara pita visaya pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is for Your sake that Raghunatha dasa gave up all his famiIy
relationships. His father sent money and men here to serve him.
                                   TEXT 72
                      tomara carana-krpa hanache tahare
                chatre magi' khaya, `visa ya' sparsa nahi kare
                                 TRANSLATION     "However, because he has received the mercy of Your lotus feet, he
does not even accept his father's money. Instead he eats by begging almsfrom centers for the distribution of food.
                                   TEXT 73
                     ramanandera bhai gopinatha-mahasaya
                  toma haite visaya-vancha, tara iccha naya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Gopinatha Pattanayaka is a good gentleman. He does not desire
material benefits from You.                                   TEXT 74
                    tara duhkha dekhi' tara sevakadi-gana
                    tomare janaila,--yate `ananya-sarana'
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is not Gopinatha who sent all those men so that You would
release him from his plight. Rather, his friends and servants, seeinghis distressed condition, informed You because they all knew thatGopinatha is a soul surrendered unto You.
                                   TEXT 75
                sei `suddha-bhakta;, ye toma bhaje toma lagi'
                    apanara sukha-duhkhe haya bhoga-bhogi'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Gopinatha Pattanayaka is a pure devotee who worships You only for
Your satisfaction. He does not care about his personal happiness ordistress, for that is the business of a materialist.
                                   TEXT 76
                     tomara anukampa cahe, bhaje anuksana
                       acirat mile tanre tomara carana
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who engages in Your devotional service twenty-four hours a
day, desiring only Your mercy, will very soon attain shelter at Yourlotus feet.
                                   TEXT 77
                        tat te'nukampam susamiksamano
                        bhunjana evatma-krtam vipakam                     hrd-vag-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te                      jiveta yo mukti-pade sa daya-bhak
                                 TRANSLATION     " `One who seeks Your compassion and thus tolerates all kinds of
adverse conditions due to the karma of his past deeds, who engagesalways in Your devotional service with his mind, words and body, and whoalways offers obeisances unto You is certainly a bona fide candidate forbecoming Your unalloyed devotee.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.8).
                                  TEXT 78
                 etha tumi vasi' raha, kene yabe alalanatha?
                       keha toma na sunabe visayira vat
                                 TRANSLATION     "Kindly stay here at Jagannatha Puri. Why should You go to
Alalanatha? Henceforward, no one will approach You about materialaffairs."
                                   TEXT 79
                    yadi va tomara tare rakhite haya mana
                     aji ye rakhila, sei karibe raksana"
                                 TRANSLATION     Finally Kasi Misra told the Lord, "If You want to give protection
to Gopinatha, then Lord Jagannatha, who protected him today, will alsoprotect him in the future."
                                   TEXT 80
                    eta bali' kasi-misra gela sva-mandire
                   madhyahne prataparudra aila tanra ghare
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Kasi Misra left the abode of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and returned to his own temple. At noon King Prataparudracame to Kasi Misra's home.
                                   TEXT 81
                       prataparudrera eka achaye niyame
                     yata dina rahe tenha sri-purusottame
                                 TRANSLATION     As long as King Prataparudra stayed in his capital, Purusottama, he
performed one regular duty.
                                   TEXT 82
                    nitya asi' kare misrera pada samvahana
                    jagannatha-sevara kare bhiyana sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     He would come daily to the house of Kasi Misra to massage his lotus
feet. The King would also hear from him about how opulently LordJagannatha was served.
                                   TEXT 83
                    raja misrera carana yabe capite lagila
                    tabe misra tanre kichu bhangite kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the King began pressing his lotus feet, Kasi Misra informed
him about something through hints.
                                   TEXT 84
                       "deva, suna ara eka aparupa vat!
                mahaprabhu ksetra chadi' yabena alalanatha.i"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear King," he said,"please hear one uncommon item of news. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu wants to leave Jagannatha Puri and go toAlalanatha."
                                   TEXT 85
                   suni raja duhkhi haila, puchilena karana
                     tabe misra kahe tanre saba vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     When the King heard that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was going to
Alalanatha, he was very unhappy and inquired about the reason. Then KasiMisra informed him of all the details.
                                   TEXT 86
                  "gopinatha-pattanayake yabe cange cadaila
                    tara sevaka saba asi' prabhure kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     "When Gopinatha Pattanayaka was lifted onto the canga," he said,
"all his servants went to inform Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 87                   suniya ksobhita haila mahaprabhura mana
                   krodhe gopinathe kaila bahuta bhartsana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Hearing about this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was extremely sorry at
heart, and in anger He chastised Gopinatha Pattanayaka.
                                   TEXT 88
                      `ajitendriya hana kare raja-visaya
                    nana asat-pathe kare raja-dravya vyaya
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Because he is mad after sense gratification,' the Lord said, `he
acts as a government servant but spends the government's revenue forvarious sinful activities.
                                   TEXT 89
                     brahmasva-adhika ei haya raja-dhana
                     taha hari' bhoga kare maha-papi jana
                                 TRANSLATION     "`The revenue of the government is more sacred than the property of
a brahmana. One who misappropriates the government's money and uses itto enjoy sense gratification is most sinful.
                                   TEXT 90
                     rajara vartana khaya, ara curi kare
                     raja-dandya haya sei sastrera vicare
                                 TRANSLATION     "`One who serves the government but misappropriates the
government's revenue is liable to be punished by the king. That is theverdict of all revealed scriptures.
                                   TEXT 91
                    nija-kaudi mage, raja nahi kare danda
                  raja--maha-dharmika, ei haya papi bhanda.i
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The King wanted his revenue paid and did not want to enforce
punishment. Therefore the King is certainly very religious. ButGopinatha Pattanayaka is a great cheat.
                                   TEXT 92
                       raja-kadi na deya, amare phukare
                     ei maha-duhkha ihan ke sahite pare?
                                 TRANSLATION     " `He does not pay the revenue to the King, but he wants My help
for release. This is a greatly sinful affair. I cannot tolerate it here.
                                   TEXT 93
                    alalanatha yai' tahan niscinte rahimu
                    visayira bhala manda varta na sunimu"'
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Therefore I shall leave Jagannatha Puri and go to Alalanatha,
where I shall live peacefully and not hear about all these affairs ofmaterialistic people."'
                                   TEXT 94
                     eta suni' kahe raja pana mane vyatha
                 "saba dravya chadon, yadi prabhu rahena etha
                                 TRANSLATION     When King Prataparudra heard all these details, he felt great pain
in his mind."I shall give up all that is due from GopinathaPattanayaka," he said,"if Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stays here atJagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 95
                    eka-ksana prabhura yadi paiye darasana
                     koti-cintamani-labha nahe tara sama
                                 TRANSLATION     "If even for a moment I could get an interview with Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, I would not care for the profit of millions ofcintamani stones.
                                   TEXT 96                   kon chara padartha ei dui-laksa kahana?
                  prana-rajya karon prabhu-pade nirmanchana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I do not care about this small sum of 200,000 kahanas. Not to
speak of this, I would indeed sacrifice everything at the lotus feet ofthe Lord, including my life and kingdom."
                                   TEXT 97
               misra kahe, "kaudi chadiba,--nahe prabhura mana
                    tara duhkha paya,--ei na yaya sahana"
                                 TRANSLATION     Kasi Misra hinted to the King, "It is not the Lord's desire that
you forfeit the payment. He is unhappy only because the whole family istroubled."
                                   TEXT 98
                    raja kahe,--"tare ami duhkha nahi diye
                   cange cada, khadge dara,--ami na janiye
                                 TRANSLATION     The King replied,"I have no desire to give pain to Gopinatha
Pattanayaka and his family, nor did I know about his being lifted on thecanga to be thrown on the swords and killed.
                                   TEXT 99
                   purusottama-janare tenha kaila parihasa
                    sei `jana' tare dekhaila mithya trasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "He sneered at Purusottama Jana. Therefore the prince tried to
scare him as a punishment.
                                   TEXT 100
                   tumi yaha, prabhure rakhaha yatna kari'
                      ei mui tahare chadinu saba kaudi"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Go personally to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and keep Him at
Jagannatha Puri with great attention. I shall excuse GopinathaPattanayaka from all his debts."
                                   TEXT 101
               misra kahe, "kaudi chadiba,--nahe prabhura mane
                  kaudi chadile prabhu kadacit duhkha mane"
                                 TRANSLATION     Kasi Misra said, "Excusing Gopinatha Pattanayaka of all his debts
will not make the Lord happy, for that is not His intention."
                                   TEXT 102
                  raja kahe, "kaudi chadimu,--iha na kahiba
                    sahaje mora priya ta'ra,--iha janaiba
                                 TRANSLATION     The King said, "I shall absolve Gopinatha Pattanayaka of all his
debts, but don't speak of this to the Lord. Simply let Him know that allthe family members of Bhavananda Raya and Gopinatha Pattanayaka arenaturally my dear friends.
                                   TEXT 103
                     bhavananda-raya--amara pujya-garvita
                    tanra putra-gane amara sahajei prita"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Bhavananda Raya is worthy of my worship and respect. Therefore I
am always naturally affectionate to his sons."
                                   TEXT 104
                  eta bali' misre namaskari' raja ghare gela
                     gopinathe `bada janaya' dakiya anila
                                 TRANSLATION     After offering obeisances to Kasi Misra, the King returned to his
palace and called for both Gopinatha and the eldest prince.
                                   TEXT 105
                   raja kahe,--"saba kaudi tomare chadilun                  sei malajathya danda pata tomare ta' dilun
                                 TRANSLATION     The King told Gopinatha Pattanayaka,"You are excused for all the
money you owe the treasury, and the place known as Malajathya Dandapatais again given to you for collections.
                                   TEXT 106
                     ara bara aiche na khaiha raja-dhana
                   aji haite dilun tomaya dviguna vartana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Do not again misappropriate the revenue of the government. In case
you think your salary insufficient, henceforward it will be doubled."
                                   TEXT 107
                     eta bali' `neta-dhati' tare paraila
                  "prabhu-ajna lana yaha, vidaya toma dila"
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, the King appointed him by offering him a silken
wrapper for his body. "Go to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu," he said."Aftertaking permission from Him, go to your home. I bid you farewell. Now youmay go."
                                   TEXT 108
                   paramarthe prabhura krpa, seha rahu dure
                     ananta tahara phala, ke balite pare?
                                 TRANSLATION     By the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, one can certainly become
spiritually advanced. Indeed, no one can estimate the results of Hismercy.
                                   TEXT 109
                  `rajya-visaya'-phala ei--kroara `abhase'!
                      tahara ganana karo mane nahi aise!
                                 TRANSLATION     Gopinatha Pattanayaka achieved the result of kingly opulence due to
but a glimpse of the Lord's mercy. Therefore no one can calculate thefull value of His mercy.
                                   TEXT 110
                     kahan cange cadana laya dhana-prana!
                    kahan saba chadi' sei rajyadi-pradana!
                                 TRANSLATION     Gopinatha Pattanayaka was lifted onto the canga to be killed, and
all his money was taken away, but instead his debts were excused, and hewas appointed collector in the same place.
                                   TEXT 111
                kahan sarvasva veci' laya, deya na yaya kaudi!
                  kahan dviguna vartana, paraya neta-dhadi!
                                 TRANSLATION     On one hand Gopinatha Pattanayaka was unable to clear his debt even
by selling all his possessions, but on the other his salary was doubled,and he was honored with the silken wrapper.
                                   TEXT 112
                   prabhura iccha nahi, tare kaudi chadaibe
                  dviguna vartana kari' punah `visaya' dibe
                                 TRANSLATION     It was not the desire of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu that Gopinatha
Pattanayaka be excused of his debt to the government, nor was it Hisdesire that his salary be doubled or that he be reappointed collector atthe same place.
                                   TEXT 113
                   tathapi tara sevaka asi' kaila nivedana
                  tate ksubdha haila yabe mahaprabhura mana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Gopinatha Pattanayaka's servant went to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and informed the Lord of his plight, the Lord was somewhatagitated and dissatisfied.                                   TEXT 114
                   visaya-sukha dite prabhura nahi manobala
                   nivedana-prabhaveha tabu phale eta phala
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord had no intention to award His devotee the happiness of
material opulence, yet simply because of His being informed, such agreat result was obtained.
                                   TEXT 115
                   ke kahite pare gaurera ascarya svabhava?
                   brahma-siva adi yanra na paya antarbhava
                                 TRANSLATION     No one can estimate the wonderful characteristics of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Even Lord Brahma and Lord Siva cannot understand theintentions of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 116
                     etha kasi-misra asi' prabhura carane
                      rajara caritra saba kaila nivedane
                                 TRANSLATION     Kasi Misra went to Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu and informed Him in
detail of all the King's intentions.
                                   TEXT 117
                  prabhu kahe,--"kasi-misra, ki tumi karila?
                     raja-pratigraha tumi ama' karaila?"
                                 TRANSLATION     Upon hearing about Kasi Misra's tactics with the King, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu said,"Kasi Misra, what have you done? You have made Meindirectly take help from the King."
                                   PURPORT     When the King heard the details of Gopinatha Pattanayaka's
unfortunate condemnation, he was induced to excuse his debt, inparticular because he felt that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very sorryabout this incident. The Lord did not like the idea that the moneyforfeited to Gopinatha Pattanayaka was indirectly a contribution to Him.Therefore He immediately protested.                                   TEXT 118
                  misra kahe,--"suna, prabhu, rajara vacane
                        akapate raja ei kaila nivedane
                                 TRANSLATION     Kasi Misra said,"My dear Lord, the King has done this without
reservations. Kindly hear his statement.
                                   TEXT 119
                 `prabhu yena nahi janena,--raja amara lagiya
                    dui-laksa kahana kaudi dileka chadiya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The King said,`Speak to the Lord in such a way that He will not
think,"For My sake the King has forfeited 200,000 kahanas of kaudis."
                                   PURPORT     The kaudi is like an American cent or Japanese yen. In the old
medium of exchange, the first unit of currency was a small conchshellcalled a kaudi. Four kaudis made one ganda, twenty gandas made one pana,and sixteen panas made one kahana. Gopinatha Pattanayaka owed thegovernment 200,000 kahanas. The King absolved him of this debt,reappointed him to his post and doubled his salary.
                                   TEXT 120                   bhavanandera putra saba--mora priyatama
                      inha-sabakare ami dekhi atma-sama
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Inform Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that all the sons of Bhavananda
Raya are especially dear to me. I consider them like members of myfamily.
                                   TEXT 121
                       ataeva yahan yahan dei adhikara
                  khaya, piye, lute, vilaya, na karon vicara
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Therefore I have appointed them collectors in various places, and
although they spend the government's money, eat, drink, plunder anddistribute it as they like, I do not take them very seriously.                                   TEXT 122
                     rajamahindara `raja, kainu rama-raya
                    ye khaila, yeba dila, nahi lekha-daya
                                 TRANSLATION     "`I made Ramananda Raya the governor of Rajamahendri. There is
practically no account of whatever money he took and distributed in thatposition.
                                   PURPORT     Near Rajamahendri is a famous railway station. Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati notes that the present Rajamahendri City islocated on the northern bank of the Godavari. At the time when RamanandaRaya was governor, however, the state capital, which was known asVidyanagara or Vidyapura, was located on the southern side of theGodavari, at the confluence of the Godavari and the sea. That was thepart of the country which at that time was known as Rajamahendri. Northof Kalinga-desa is Utkalinga, or the state of Orissa. The capital ofsouthern Orissa was known as Rajamahendri, but now the location ofRajamahendri has changed.
                                   TEXT 123                      gopinatha ei-mata `visaya' kariya
                     dui-cari-laksa kahana rahe ta' khana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Having been appointed collector, Gopinatha, in the same way,
also generally spends two to four hundred thousand kahanas as he likes.
                                   TEXT 124
                  kichu deya, kichu na deya, na kari vicara
                  jana'-sahita apritye duhkha paila ei-bara
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Gopinatha Pattanayaka would collect some and pay some, spending
it at will, but I would not consider this very seriously. This time,however, he was put in trouble because of a misunderstanding with theprince.
                                   TEXT 125
                     jana' eta kaila,--iha mui nahi janon
                   bhavanandera putra-sabe atma-sama manon                                 TRANSLATION
     " `The prince created this situation without my knowledge, but
actually I consider all the sons of Bhavananda Raya to be like myrelatives.
                                   TEXT 126
                   tanha lagi' dravya chadi'--iha mat jane
                     `sahajei mora priti haya taha-sane"'
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Because of my intimate relationship with them, I have absolved
Gopinatha Pattanayaka of all his debts. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu does notknow this fact. Whatever I have done is because of my intimaterelationship with the family of Bhavananda Raya."'
                                   TEXT 127
                     suniya rajara vinaya prabhura ananda
                     hena-kale aila tatha raya bhavananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Having heard from Kasi Misra all these statements concerning the
King's mentality, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very happy. At that time,Bhavananda Raya also arrived there.
                                   TEXT 128
                    panca-putra-sahite asi' padila carane
                      uthana prabhu tanre kaila alingane
                                 TRANSLATION     Bhavananda Raya, along with his five sons, fell at the lotus feet
of Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who lifted him up and embraced him.
                                   TEXT 129
                       ramananda-raya adi sabai milila
                      bhavananda-raya tabe balite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Ramananda Raya, all his brothers, and their father met Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Then Bhavananda Raya began speaking.                                   TEXT 130
                      "tomara kinkara ei saba mora kula
                   e vipade rakhi' prabhu, punah nila mula
                                 TRANSLATION     "All these members of my family," he said,"are Your eternal
servants. You have saved us from this great danger. Therefore You havepurchased us for a proper price.
                                   TEXT 131
                      bhakta-vatsalya ebe prakata karila
                   purve yena panca-pandave vipade ta-rila"
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have now demonstrated Your love for Your devotees, just as
when You previously saved the five Pandavas from great danger."
                                   TEXT 132
                  `netadhati'-mathe gopinatha carane padila
                      rajara krpa-vrttanta sakala kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Gopinatha Pattanayaka, his head covered with the silken wrapper,
feIl at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and described indetail the King's mercy toward him.
                                   TEXT 133
                 "baki-kaudi bada, ara dviguna vartana kaila
                   punah `visaya' diya `neta-dhati' paraila
                                 TRANSLATION     "The King has excused me for the balance due," he said."He has
reappointed me to my post by honoring me with this silken cloth and hasdoubled my salary.
                                   TEXT 134
                   kahan cangera upara sei marana-pramada!
                  kahan `neta-dhati' punah,--e-saba prasada!
                                 TRANSLATION     "I was lifted upon the canga to be killed, but on the contrary I
was honored with this silken cloth. This is all Your mercy.
                                   TEXT 135
                  cangera upare tomara carana dhyana kailun
                   carana-smarana-prabhave ei phala pailun
                                 TRANSLATION     "On the canga I began meditating upon Your lotus feet, and the
power of that remembrance has yielded all these results.
                                   TEXT 136
                      loke camatkara mora e saba dekhiya
                       prasamse tomara krpa-mahima gana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Struck with wonder by my affairs, the populace is glorifying the
greatness of Your mercy.
                                   TEXT 137
                kintu tomara smaranera nahe ei `mukhya-phala'
                   `phalabhasa` ei,--yate `visaya' cancala
                                 TRANSLATION     "However, my Lord, these are not the principal results of
meditating upon Your lotus feet. Material opulence is very flickering.Therefore it is simply a glimpse of the result of Your mercy.
                                   PURPORT     One can achieve the highest perfection of life simply by meditating
upon the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Generally people areconcerned with the four religious principles, namely religion, materialopulence, sense gratification and liberation. However, as indicated inSrimad-Bhagavatam (dharmah projjhita- kaitavo'tra), success in thesefour kinds of material and spiritual gain are not the true results ofdevotional service. The true result of devotional service is the actualdevelopment of one's dormant love for Krsna in every circumstance. Bythe mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Gopinatha Pattanayaka couldunderstand that the material benefits he had achieved were not theultimate result of meditating upon His lotus feet. The true result comeswhen one is detached from material opulences. Therefore GopinathaPattanayaka prayed to the Lord for such detachment.
                                   TEXT 138                    rama-raye, vaninathe kaila `nirvisaya'
                     sei kroa mote nahi, yate aiche haya!
                                 TRANSLATION     "Your real mercy has been granted to Ramananda Raya and Vaninatha
Raya, for You have detached them from all material opulence. I thinkthat I have not been favored by such mercy.
                                   TEXT 139
                  suddha kroa kara, gosani, ghucaha `visaya,
                   nirvinna ha-inu, mote `visaya' na haya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Kindly bestow upon me Your pure mercy so that I may also become
renounced. I am no longer interested in material enjoyment."
                                   TEXT 140
                prabhu kahe,--sannyasi yabe ha-iba panca-jana
                   kutumba-bahulya tomara ke kare bharana?
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "If you all adopt the renounced order
and lose interest in dealing with pounds, shillings and pence, who willtake charge of maintaining your large family?
                                   TEXT 141
                     maha-visaya kara, kiba virakta udasa
                   janme-janme tumi panca--mora `nija-dasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Whether you are involved in material activities or become
completely renounced, you five brothers are all My eternal servants,birth after birth.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that one should
remember that he is eternally a servant of Krsna. Whether one is engagedin material activity involving pounds, shillings and pence or is in therenounced order, he should always think that he is an eternal servant ofGod, for that is the real position of the living being. Taking sannyasaand dealing in pounds, shillings and pence are both external affairs.One should always consider how to please and satisfy Krsna. Thus even ifone is involved in great material affairs, he will not become attached.
As soon as one forgets that he is an eternal servant of Krsna, hebecomes involved in material attachments. However, if one is alwaysconscious that Krsna is always the supreme master and that he is aneternal servant of Krsna, he is a liberated person in any condition.Entangling material activities will not affect him.
                                   TEXT 142                     kintu mora kariha eka `ajna' palana
                  `vyaya na kariha kichu rajara mula-dhana'
                                 TRANSLATION     "However, just obey one order from Me. Do not spend any of the
King's revenue.
                                   PURPORT     When a person forgets his position as an eternal servant of Krsna,
he commits many sinful activities, but one who maintains his position asan eternal servant of Krsna cannot deviate from the path of morality,religion and ethics. At the present, people all over the world,especially in India, have forgotten their relationship with the SupremePersonality of Godhead and His eternal servants. Therefore theprinciples of morality, religion and ethics have almost disappeared.This situation is most unprofitable for human society. Thereforeeveryone should try to accept Krsna consciousness and follow theprinciples of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 143                 rajara mula-dhana diya ye kichu labhya haya
                   sei dhana kariha nana dharme-karme vyaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "First you should pay the revenue due the King, and then you may
spend the balance for religious and fruitive activities.
                                   TEXT 144
                  asad-vyaya na kariha,--yate dui-loka yaya"
                       eta bali' sabakare dilena vidaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Don't spend a farthing for sinful activities for which you will be
the loser both in this life and the next." After saying this, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu bade them farewell.
                                   TEXT 145                 rayera ghare prabhura `krpa-vivarta' kahila
                    bhakta-vatsalya-guna yate vyakta haila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was spoken of in the
family of Bhavananda Raya. That mercy was clearly demonstrated, althoughit appeared to be something different.
                                   PURPORT     The result of advancement in spiritual knowledge is not material
improvement, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu advised Gopinatha Pattanayakahow to use material opulence without incurring reactions to sinful life.From this advice, it appeared that the Lord encouraged GopinathaPattanayaka to enhance his material condition. Actually, however, He didnot. In fact, this was but a manifestation of His great affection forHis devotee.
                                   TEXT 146                   sabaya alingiya prabhu vidaya yabe dila
                   hari-dhvani kari' saba bhakta uthi' gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu embraced them all and bade them farewell.
Then all the devotees got up and left, loudly chanting the holy name ofHari.
                                   TEXT 147
                 prabhura kroa dekhi' sabara haila camatkara
                    tahara bujhite nare prabhura vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the extraordinary mercy the Lord granted to the family of
Bhavananda Raya, everyone was struck with wonder. They could notunderstand the behavior of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 148
                      tara sabe yadi krpa karite sadhila
                  `ama' haite kichu nahe--prabhu tabe kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Indeed, when all the devotees had requested the Lord to bestow His
mercy upon Gopinatha Pattanayaka, the Lord had replied that He could donothing.                                   PURPORT
     When a person is sinful, he loses both the chance for spiritual
advancement and the chance for material opulence. If one enjoys thematerial world for sense gratification, he is certainly doomed.Advancement in material opulence is not the direct mercy of the SupremePersonality of Godhead; nevertheless, it indicates the indirect mercy ofthe Lord, for even a person too attached to material prosperity cangradually be detached and raised to the spiritual platform. Then he canoffer causeless, purified service to the Lord. When Sri Caitanya said,ama haite kichu nahe ("It is not My business to do anything"), He setthe ideal example for a person in the renounced order. If a sannyasitakes the side of a visayi, a person engaged in mater al activities, hischaracter will be criticized. A person in the renounced order should nottake interest in material activities, but if he does so out of affectionfor a particular person, that should be considered his special mercy.
                                   TEXT 149                     gopinathera ninda, ara apana-nirveda
                   ei-matra kahila--ihara na bujhibe bheda
                                 TRANSLATION     I have simply described the chastisement of Gopinatha Pattanayaka
and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's indifference. But the deep meaning of thisbehavior is very difficult to understand.
                                   TEXT 150
                   kasi-misre na sadhila, rajare na sadhila
                    udyoga vina mahaprabhu eta phala dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave so much to Gopinatha Pattanayaka
without directly making requests of either Kasi Misra or the King.
                                   TEXT 151
                     caitanya-caritra ei parama gambhira
                   sei bujhe tanra pade yanra mana `dhira'
                                 TRANSLATION     The intentions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are so deep that one can
understand them only if he has complete faith in service to the lotusfeet of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 152                   yei ihan sune prabhura vatsalya-prakasa
                  prema-bhakti paya, tanra vipada yaya nasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Whether or not one understands it, if one hears of this incident
concerning Gopinatha Pattanayaka's activities and Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu's causeless mercy upon him, certainly he will be promoted tothe platform of ecstatic love for the Lord, and for him all dangers willbe nullified.
                                   TEXT 153
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha pade yara asa
                    sri-caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Ninth Chapter, describing the deliverance of GopinathaPattanayaka and the manifestation of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'scauseless mercy to His devotee.
                                 Chapter Ten
          Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Accepts Prasada from the Devotees     The following summary of Chapter Ten is given by Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. Before the Ratha-yatra ceremony,all the devotees from Bengal started for Jagannatha Puri as usual.Raghava Pandita brought with him various kinds of food for Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. The food had been cooked by his sister, whose name wasDamayanti, and the stock was generally known as raghavera jhali.Makaradhvaja Kara, an inhabitant of Panihati who accompanied RaghavaPandita, was the secretary in charge of accounting for the raghaverajhali, the bags of food carried by Raghava Pandita.     The day when all the devotees arrived at Jagannatha Puri, LordGovinda was enjoying sporting pastimes in the water of Narendra-sarovara. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu also enjoyed the ceremony in the waterwith His devotees. As previously, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed thecleansing ceremony at Gundica and chanted the famous verse jagamohana-pari-munda yau. After kirtana ended, He distributed prasada to all thedevotees and also took some Himself. Then He lay down at the door of theGambhira to take rest. Somehow or other Govinda came by and massaged Hisfeet. Govinda could not go out that day, however, and therefore he wasunable to accept prasada. From the character of Govinda it is to belearned that we may sometimes commit offenses for the service of the
Lord, but not for sense gratification.     Govinda, the personal servant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, inducedthe Lord to eat all the food delivered by the devotees of Bengal for Hisservice. All the Vaisnavas used to invite Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu totheir homes. The Lord accepted the invitation of Caitanya dasa, the sonof Sivananda Sena, and ate rice and yogurt there.
                                    TEXT 1                          vande sri-krsna-caitanyam
                            bhak tanugraha-kataram
                            yena kenapi santustam
                           bhakta-dattena sraddhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who is always pleased to accept anything given with faithand love by His devotees and is always ready to bestow mercy upon them.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nityananda
                  jaya-dvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord
Nityananda Prabhu! All glories to Advaitacandra! All glories to all thedevotees of Lord Caitanya!
                                    TEXT 3
                   varsantare saba bhakta prabhure dekhite
                      parama-anande sabe nilacala yaite
                                 TRANSLATION     The next year, all the devotees were very pleased to go to
Jagannatha Puri [Nilacala] to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 4
                   advaitacarya-gosa ni--sarva- agra-gan ya
                acaryaratna, acaryanidhi, srivasa adi dhan ya
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya Gosani led the party from Bengal. He was followed by
Acaryaratna, Acaryanidhi, Srivasa Thakura and other glorious devotees.
                                    TEXT 5
                      yadyapi prabhura ajna gaude rahite
                   tathapi nityananda preme calila dekhite
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had ordered Lord Nityananda to stay in
Bengal, but nevertheless, because of ecstatic love, Lord Nityananda alsowent to see Him.
                                    TEXT 6
                   anuragera laksana ei,--`vidhi' nahi mane
                    tanra ajna bhange tanra sangera karane
                                 TRANSLATION     Indeed, it is a symptom of real affection that one breaks the order
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not caring for the regulativeprinciples, to associate with Him.
                                    TEXT 7
                   rase yaiche ghara yaite gopire ajna dila
                   tanra ajna bhangi' tanra sange se rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     During the rasa dance, Krsna asked all the gopis to return home,
but the gopis neglected His order and stayed there for His association.
                                    TEXT 8
                     ajna-palane krsnera yaiche paritosa
                   preme ajna bhangile haya koti-sukha-posa
                                 TRANSLATION     If one carries out Krsna's order, Krsna is certainly pleased, but
if one sometimes breaks His order due to ecstatic love, that gives Himmillions of times greater happiness.
                                  TEXT 9-11
                   vasudeva-datta, murari-gupta, gangadasa               sriman-sena, sriman-pandita, akincana krsnadasa
                  murari, garuda-pandita, buddhimanta-khanna
                    sanjaya-purusottama, pandita-bhagavan
                    suklambara, nrsimhananda ara yata jana
                      sabai calila, nama na yaya likhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Vasudeva Datta, Murari Gupta, Gangadasa, Sriman Sena, Sriman
Pandita, Akincana Krsnadasa, Murari Gupta, Garuda Pandita, BuddhimantaKhan, Sanjaya Purusottama, Bhagavan Pandita, Suklambara Brahmacari,Nrsimhananda Brahmacari and many others joined together to go toJagannatha Puri. It would be impossible to mention the names of themall.
                                   TEXT 12
                    kulina-grami, khanda-vasi milila asiya
                      sivananda-sena calila sabare lana
                                 TRANSLATION     The inhabitants of Kulina-grama and Khanda also came and joined.
Sivananda Sena took the leadership and thus started taking care of themall.
                                   TEXT 13
                      raghava-pandita cale jhali salaiya
                     damayanti yata dravya diyache kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghava Pandita came with bags full of food prepared very nicely by
his sister, Damayanti.
                                   TEXT 14
               nana apurva bhaksya-dravya prabhura yogya bhoga
                     vatsareka prabhu yaha karena upayoga
                                 TRANSLATION     Damayanti made varieties of unparalleled food just suitable for
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to eat. The Lord ate it continually for oneyear.
                                  TEXT 15-16                 amra-kasandi, ada-kasandi jhala-kasandi nama
                     nembu-ada amra-koli vividha vidhana
                    amsi, ama-khanda, tailamra, ama-satta
                    yatna kari' gunda kari' purana sukuta
                                 TRANSLATION     These are the names of some of the pickles and condiments in the
bags of Raghava Pandita: amra-kasandi, ada-kasandi, jhala-kasandi,nembu-ada, amra-koli, amsi, ama-khanda, tailamra and ama-satta. Withgreat attention, Damayanti also made dried bitter vegetables into apowder.
                                   TEXT 17
                    `sukuta' bali' avajna na kariha citte
               sukutaya ye sukha prabhura, taha nahe pancamrte
                                 TRANSLATION     Do not neglect sukuta because it is a bitter preparation. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu derived more happiness from eating this sukuta thanfrom drinking pancamrta [a preparation of milk, sugar, ghee, honey andcurd].
                                   TEXT 18
                   bhava-grahi mahaprabhu sneha-matra laya
                    sukuta pata kasandite maha-sukha paya
                                 TRANSLATION     Since Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, He extracts the purpose from everything. He acceptedDamayanti's affection for Him, and therefore He derived great pleasureeven from the dried bitter leaves of sukuta and from kasandi [a sourcondiment].
                                   TEXT 19
                `manusya'-buddhi dama yanti kare prabhura paya
                   guru-bhojane udare kabhu'ama' hana yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of her natural love for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Damayanti
considered the Lord an ordinary human being. Therefore she thought thatHe would become sick by overeating and there would be mucus within Hisabdomen.                                   PURPORT
     Because of pure love, the devotees of Krsna in Goloka Vrndavana,
Vrajabhumi, loved Krsna as an ordinary human being like them. Yetalthough they considered Krsna one of them, their love for Krsna knew nobounds. Similarly, because of extreme love, devotees like RaghavaPandita and his sister, Damayanti, thought of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asa human being, but their love for Him was boundless. By overeating, anordinary human being becomes prone to a disease called amla- pitta,which is a product of indigestion characterized by acidity of thestomach. Damayanti thought that such a condition would afflict SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 20                     sukuta khaile sei ama ha-ibeka nasa
                     ei sneha mane bhavi' prabhura ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of sincere affection, she thought that eating this sukuta
would cure the Lord's disease. Considering these affectionate thoughtsof Damayanti, the Lord was very pleased.
                                   TEXT 21
                     priyena sangrathya vipaksa-sannidhav
                        upahitam vaksasi pivara-stani                      srajam na kacid vijahau jalavilam                      vasanti hi premni guna na vastuni
                                 TRANSLATION     "A dear lover strung a garland and placed it on the shoulder of his
beloved in the presence of her co-wives. She had raised breasts and wasvery beautiful, yet although the garland was tainted with mud, she didnot reject it, for its value lay not in material things but in love."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse from the Kiratarjuniya by Bharavi.                                   TEXT 22                    dhaniya-mauharira tandula gunda kariya
                      nadu bandhiyache cini-paka kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Damayanti powdered coriander and anise seeds, cooked them with
sugar and made them into small sweetmeats that were shaped like smallballs.                                   TEXT 23
                    sunthi-khanda nadu, ara ama-pitta-hara
                prthak prthak bandhi' vastrera kuthali bhitara
                                 TRANSLATION     She made balls of sweetmeats with dried ginger to remove mucus
caused by too much bile. She put all these preparations separately intosmall cloth bags.
                                   TEXT 24
                   koli-sunthi, koli-curna, koli-khanda ara
                    kata nama la-iba, sata-prakara `acara'
                                 TRANSLATION     She made a hundred varieties of condiments and pickles. She also
made koli-sunthi, koli-curna, koli-khanda and many other preparations.How many should I name?
                                   TEXT 25
                  narikela-khanda nadu, ara nadu ganga-jala
                   cira-sthayi khanda-vikara karila sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     She made many sweetmeats shaped like balls. Some were made with
powdered coconut, and others looked as white as the water of the Ganges.In this way she made many varieties of long-lasting sugar confections.
                                   TEXT 26
                    cira-sthayi ksira-sara, mandadi-vikara
                       amrta-karpura adi aneka prakara
                                 TRANSLATION     She made long-lasting cheese, many varieties of sweetmeats with
milk and cream, and many other varied preparations, such as amrta-karpura.
                                   TEXT 27
                    salikacuti-dhanyera `atapa' cida kari'
                   nutana-vastrera bada kuthali saba bhari'                                 TRANSLATION
     She made flat rice from fine, un boiled, sali paddy and filled a
large bag made of new cloth.
                                   TEXT 28
                   kateka cida hudum kari' ghrtete bhajiya
                     cini-pake nadu kaila karpuradi diya
                                 TRANSLATION     She made some of the flat rice into puffed rice, fried it in ghee,
cooked it in sugar juice, mixed in some camphor and rolled it intoballs.
                                  TEXT 29-30
                   sali-dhanyera tandula-bhaja curna kariya
                    ghrta-sikta curna kaila cini-paka diya
                 karpura, marica, la vanga, elaci, rasa vasa
                     curna diya nadu kaila parama suvasa
                                 TRANSLATION     She powdered fried grains of fine rice, moistened the powder with
ghee and cooked it in a solution of sugar. Then she added camphor, blackpepper, cloves, cardamom and other spices and rolled it into balls thatwere very palatable and aromatic.
                                   TEXT 31
                  sali-dhanyera kha-i punah ghrtete bhajiya
                     cini-paka ukhda kaila karpuradi diya
                                 TRANSLATION     She took parched rice from fine paddy, fried it in ghee, cooked it
in a sugar solution, mixed in some camphor and thus made a preparationcalled ukhda or mudki.
                                   TEXT 32
                     phutkalai curna kari' ghrte bhajaila
                     cini-pake karpuradi diya nadu kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Another variety of sweet was made with fused peas that were
powdered, fried in ghee and then cooked in sugar juice. Camphor wasmixed in, and then the sweet was rolled into a ball.
                                   TEXT 33
                      kahite na jani nama e-janme yahara
                  aiche nana bhaksya-dravya sahasra-prakara
                                 TRANSLATION     I could not mention the names of all these wonderful eatables, even
in a lifetime. Damayanti made hundreds and thousands of varieties.
                                   TEXT 34
                     raghavera ajna, ara karena damayanti
                    dunhara prabhute sneha parama-bhakati
                                 TRANSLATION     Damayanti made all these preparations following the order of her
brother, Raghava Pandita. Both of them had unlimited affection for SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu and were advanced in devotional service.
                                   TEXT 35
                     ganga-mrttika ani' vastrete chaniya
                    panpadi kariya dila gandha-dravya diya
                                 TRANSLATION     Damayanti took earth from the Ganges, dried it, powdered it,
strained it through a fine cloth, mixed in aromatic ingredients androlled it into small balls.
                                   TEXT 36
                      patala mrt-patre sandhanadi bhari'
                    ara saba vastu bhare vastrera kuthali
                                 TRANSLATION     The condiments and similar items were put into thin earthen pots,
and everything else was put into small cloth bags.
                                   TEXT 37
                   samanya jhali haite dviguna jhali kaila                      paripati kari' saba jhali bharaila
                                 TRANSLATION     From small bags Damayanti made bags that were twice as large. Then
with great attention she filled all the large ones with the small ones.
                                   TEXT 38
                   jhali bandhi' mohara dila agraha kariya
                     tina bojhari jhali vahe krama kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     She then wrapped and sealed each and every bag with great
attention. The bags were carried by three bearers, one after another.
                                   TEXT 39
                      sanksepe kahilun ei jhalira vicara
                   `ragha vera jhali' bali' vikhyati yahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have briefly described the bags that have become famous as
raghavera jhali.
                                   TEXT 40
                  jhalira upara `munsiba' makaradhvaja-kara
                     prana-rupe jhali rakhe hana tatpara
                                 TRANSLATION     The superintendent for all those bags was Makaradhvaja Kara, who
kept them with great attention like his very life.
                                   TEXT 41
                     ei-mate vaisnava saba nilacale aila
                     daive jagannathera se dina jala-lila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus all the Vaisnavas from Bengal went to Jagannatha Puri. By
chance, they arrived on the day when Lord Jagannatha performs pastimesin the water.
                                   TEXT 42                   narendrera jale `govinda' naukate cadiya
                    jala-krida kare saba bhakta-gana lana
                                 TRANSLATION     Boarding a boat in the waters of Narendra-sarovara, Lord Govinda
performed His water pastimes with all the devotees.
                                   TEXT 43
                    sei-kale mahaprabhu bhakta-gana-sange
                    narendre aila dekhite jala-keli-range
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu arrived with His personal associates
to see the jubilant pastimes of Lord Jagannatha in the Narendra-sarovara.
                                   TEXT 44
                    sei-kale aila saba gaudera bhakta-gana
                    narendrete prabhu-sange ha-ila milana
                                 TRANSLATION     At the same time, all the devotees from Bengal arrived at the lake
and had a great meeting with the Lord.
                                   TEXT 45
                    bhakta-gana pade asi' prabhura carane
                     uthana prabhu sabare kaila alingane
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees immediately fell at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and the Lord lifted and embraced every one of them.
                                   TEXT 46
                    gaudiya-sampradaya saba karena kirtana
                    prabhura milane uthe premera krandana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Gaudiya-sampradaya, consisting of all the devotees from Bengal,
began congregational chanting. When they met the Lord, they began to cryloudly in ecstatic love.                                   TEXT 47
                  jala-krida, vadya, gita, nartana, kirtana
                      maha-kolahala tire, salile khelana
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of the pastimes in the water, there was great jubilation on
the shore, with music, singing, chanting, dancing and tumultuous crying.
                                   TEXT 48
                     gaudiya-sankirtane ara rodana miliya
                    maha-kolahala haila brahmanda bhariya
                                 TRANSLATION     The chanting and crying of the Gaudiya Vaisnavas mixed and created
a tumultuous sound vibration that filled the entire universe.
                                   TEXT 49
                    saba bhakta lana prabhu namilena jale
                     saba lana jala-krida karena kutuhale
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu entered the water with His devotees and
began His pastimes with them in great jubilation.
                                   TEXT 50
                    prabhura ei jala-krida dasa- vrndavana
               `caitanya-mangale' vistari' kariyachena varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     In his Caitanya-mangala [now known as Caitanya-bhagavata],
Vrndavana dasa Thakura has given a detailed description of theactivities the Lord performed in the water.
                                   TEXT 51
                      punah ihan varnile punarukti haya
                   vyartha likhana haya, ara grantha badaya
                                 TRANSLATION     There is no use describing here the activities of the Lord again.
It would simply be repetitious and would increase the size of this book.
                                   TEXT 52
                     jala-lila kari' govinda calila alaya
                     nija-gana lana prabhu gela devalaya
                                 TRANSLATION     After concluding His pastimes in the water, Lord Govinda returned
to His residence. Then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the temple,taking all His devotees with Him.
                                   PURPORT     The Deity referred to herein as Govinda is the vijaya-vigraha in
the temple of Jagannatha. When there is a need to take Jagannathasomewhere, the vijaya- vigraha is taken because the body of Jagannathais very heavy. The vijaya-vigraha in the Jagannatha temple is known asGovinda. For the pastimes in the Narendrasarovara, the vijaya-vigrahawas carried there instead of Lord Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 53                   jagannatha dekhi' punah nija-ghare aila
                     prasada anana bhakta-gane khaoyaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to His residence after
visiting the temple of Jagannatha, He asked for a large quantity of LordJagannatha's prasada, which He then distributed among His devotees sothat they could eat sumptuously.
                                   TEXT 54
                    ista-gosthi saba lana kata-ksana kaila
                    nija nija purva-vasaya sabaya pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     After talking with all the devotees for some time, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu asked them to occupy the individual residences in which theyhad lived the previous year.
                                   TEXT 55
                    govinda-thani raghava jhali samarpila
                  bhojana-grhera kone jhali govinda rakhila                                 TRANSLATION
     Raghava Pandita delivered the bags of eatables to Govinda, who kept
them in a corner of the dining room.
                                   TEXT 56
                      purva-vatsarera jhali ajada kariya
                    dravya bharibare rakhe anya grhe lana
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda thoroughly emptied the bags from the previous year and kept
them in another room to fill them with other goods.
                                   TEXT 57
                      ara dina mahaprabhu nija-gana lana
                    jagannatha dekhilena sayyotthane yana
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went with His personal
devotees to see Lord Jagannatha when Lord Jagannatha arose early in themorning.
                                   TEXT 58
                    beda-sankirtana ta-han arambha karila
                      sata-sampradaya tabe gaite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     After seeing Lord Jagannatha, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began His
allencompassing sankirtana. He formed seven groups, which then began tochant.
                                   PURPORT     For an explanation of the beda-sankirtana, one may refer to Madhya-
lila, Chapter Eleven, verses 215-238.
                                   TEXT 59                     sata-sampradaye nrtya kare sata jana
                    advaita acarya, ara prabhu-nityananda
                                 TRANSLATION     In each of the seven groups was a principal dancer like Advaita
Acarya and Lord Nityananda.                                   TEXT 60
                  vakresvara, acyutananda, pan dita-srivasa
                     satyaraja-khanna, ara narahari-dasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The dancers in the other groups were Vakresvara Pandita,
Acyutananda, Pandita Srivasa, Satyaraja Khan and Narahari dasa.
                                   TEXT 61
                    sata-sampradaye prabhu karena bhramana
                 `mora sampradaye prabhu'--aiche sabara mana
                                 TRANSLATION     As Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu walked from one group to another
inspecting them, the men in each group thought,"The Lord is within ourgroup."
                                   TEXT 62
                      sankirtana-kolahale akasa bhedila
                      saba jagannatha-vasi dekhite aila
                                 TRANSLATION     The congregational chanting made a tumultuous roar that filled the
sky. All the inhabitants of Jagannatha Puri came to see the kirtana.
                                   TEXT 63
                     raja asi' dure dekhe nija-gana lana
                     raja-patni saba dekhe attali cadiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Accompanied by his personal staff, the King also came there and
watched from a distance, and all the queens watched from the elevatedparts of the palace.
                                   TEXT 64
                     kirtana-atope prthivi kare talamala
                   `hari-dhvani' kare loka, haila kolahala
                                 TRANSLATION     Due to the forceful vibration of kirtana, the entire world began
trembling. When everyone chanted the holy name, they made a tumultuoussound.
                                   TEXT 65
                      ei-mata kata-ksana karaila kirtana
                    apane nacite tabe prabhura haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way the Lord had congregational chanting performed for some
time, and then He Himself desired to dance.
                                   TEXT 66
                   sata-dike sata-samprada ya gaya, bajaya
                    madhye maha-premavese nace gaura-raya
                                 TRANSLATION     The seven groups began chanting and beating their drums in seven
directions, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began dancing in the center ingreat ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 67
                   udiya-pada mahaprabhura mane smrti haila
                      svarupere sei pada gaite ajna dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu remembered a line in the Orissan language
and ordered Svarupa Damodara to sing it.
                                   TEXT 68
                         "jagamohana-pari-munda yau"                                 TRANSLATION     "Let my head fall at the feet of Jagannatha in the kirtana hall
known as Jagamohana."
                                   TEXT 69
                      ei pade nrtya karena parama-avese
                 saba-loka caudike prabhura prema-jale bhase                                 TRANSLATION
     Simply because of this line, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was dancing in
greatly ecstatic love. People all around Him floated in the water of Histears.
                                   TEXT 70
                   `bol `bol' balena prabhu sri-bahu tuliya
                     hari-dhvani kare loka anande bhasiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Raising His two arms, the Lord said, "Chant! Chant!" Floating in
transcendental bliss, the people responded by chanting the holy name ofHari.
                                   TEXT 71
                   prabhu padi' murcha yaya, svasa nahi ara
                     acambite uthe prabhu kariya hunkara
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord fell to the ground unconscious, not even breathing. Then
suddenly He stood up, making a loud sound.
                                   TEXT 72
                     saghana pulaka,--yena simulera taru
                   kabhu praphullita anga, kabhu haya saru
                                 TRANSLATION     The hairs on His body constantly stood up like the thorns on a
simula tree. Sometimes His body was swollen and sometimes lean and thin.
                                   TEXT 73
                  prati roma-kupe haya prasveda, raktodgama
                  jaja' `gaga' `pari' `mumu'--gadgada vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     He bled and perspired from every pore of His body. His voice
faltered. Unable to say the line properly, He uttered only, "jaja gagapari mumu."                                   TEXT 74
                    eka eka danta yena prthak prthak nade
                  aiche nade danta,--yena bhume khasi' pade
                                 TRANSLATION     All His teeth shook, as if each were separate from the others.
Indeed, they seemed about to fall to the ground.
                                   TEXT 75
                    ksane ksane bade prabhura ananda-avesa
                    trtiya prahara ha-ila, nrtya nahe sesa
                                 TRANSLATION     His transcendental bliss increased at every moment. Therefore even
by midafternoon the dancing had not ended.
                                   TEXT 76
                      saba lokera uthalila ananda-sagara
                      saba loka pasarila deha-atma-ghara
                                 TRANSLATION     The ocean of transcendental bliss overflowed, and everyone present
forgot his body, mind and home.
                                   TEXT 77
                     tabe nityananda prabhu srjila upaya
                     krame-krame kirtaniya rakhila sabaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Lord Nityananda found a way to end the kirtana. He gradually
stopped all the chanters.
                                   TEXT 78
                     svarupera sange matra eka sampradaya
                    svarupera sange seha manda-svara gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus only one group continued chanting with Svarupa Damodara, and
they chanted very softly.                                   TEXT 79
                  kolahala nahi, prabhura kichu bahya haila
                     tabe nityananda sabara srama janaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When there was no longer a tumultuous sound, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu returned to consciousness. Then Nityananda Prabhu informedHim of the fatigue of the chanters and dancers.
                                   TEXT 80
                  bhakta-srama jani' kaila kirtana samapana
                     saba lana asi' kaila samudre snapana
                                 TRANSLATION     Understanding the fatigue of the devotees, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
stopped the congregational chanting. Then He bathed in the sea,accompanied by them all.
                                   TEXT 81
                    saba lana prabhu kaila prasada bhojana
                       sabare vidaya dila karite sayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took prasada with all of them and then
asked them to return to their dwellings and take rest.
                                   TEXT 82
                     gambhirara dvare karena apane sayana
                      govinda asiya kare pada-samvahana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lay down at the door of the Gambhira, and
Govinda came there to massage His legs.
                                  TEXT 83-84
                     sarva-kala ache ei sudrdha `niyama'
                   `prabhu yadi prasada pana karena sayana
                      govinda asiya kare pada-samvahana
                  tabe yai' prabhura `sesa' karena bhojana'                                 TRANSLATION
     It was a steady, long-standing rule that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
would lie down to rest after lunch and Govinda would come to massage Hislegs. Then Govinda would honor the remnants of food left by Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 85
                  saba dvara yudi' prabhu kariyachena sayana
                  bhitare yaite nare, govinda kare nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     This time when the Lord lay down, He occupied the entire doorway.
Govinda could not enter the room, and therefore he made the followingrequest.
                                   TEXT 86
                   `eka-pasa hao, more deha' bhitara yaite'
                   prabhu kahe,--`sakti nahi anga calaite'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Kindly turn on one side. Let me pass to enter the room." However,
the Lord replied,"I don't have the strength to move My body."
                                   TEXT 87
                    bara bara govinda kahe eka-dik ha-ite
                    prabhu kahe,--`anga ami nari calaite'
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda made his request again and again, but the Lord replied,"I
cannot move My body."
                                   TEXT 88
                 govinda kahe,--`karite cahi pada-samvahana'
            prabhu kahe,--`kara va na kara, yei laya tomara mana,
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda repeatedly requested, "I want to massage Your legs," but
the Lord said, "Do it or don't do it. It depends upon your mind."                                   TEXT 89
                   tabe govinda bahirvasa tanra upare diya
                   bhitara-ghare gela mahaprabhure langhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Govinda spread the Lord's wrapper over the Lord's body and in
this way entered the room by crossing over Him.
                                   TEXT 90
                   pada-samvahana kaila, kati-prstha capila
                   madhura-mardane prabhura parisrama gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda massaged the Lord's legs as usual. He pressed the Lord's
waist and back very softly, and thus all the Lord's fatigue went away.
                                   TEXT 91
                sukhe nidra haila prabhura, govinda cape anga
                  danda-dui ba-i prabhura haila nidra-bhanga
                                 TRANSLATION     As Govinda stroked His body, the Lord slept very nicely for about
forty-five minutes, and then His sleep broke.
                                   TEXT 92
                   govinde dekhiya prabhu bale kruddha hana
                      `aji kene eta-ksana achis vasiya?
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw Govinda sitting by His side, He
was somewhat angry."Why have you been sitting here for so long today?"the Lord asked.
                                   TEXT 93
                mora nidra haile kene na gela prasada khaite?'
                govinda kahe--`dvare suila, yaite nahi pathe'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Why didn't you go to take your meal after I fell asleep?" the Lord
asked. Govinda replied,"You were lying down, blocking the door, andthere was no way to go."
                                   TEXT 94
                   prabhu kahe,--`bhitare tabe aila kemane?
                 taiche kene prasada laite na kaila gamane!'
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord asked, "How did you enter the room? Why didn't you go out
to take your lunch in the same way?"
                                   TEXT 95
                 govinda kahe mane--"amara `seva' se `niyama'
                     aparadha ha-uka, kiba narake gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda mentally replied, "My duty is to serve, even if I have to
commit offenses or go to hell.
                                   TEXT 96
                    `seva' lagi' koti `aparadha' nahi gani
                   sva-nimitta `aparadhabhase' bhaya mani"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I would not mind committing hundreds and thousands of offenses for
the service of the Lord, but I greatly fear committing even a glimpse ofan offense for my own self."
                                   TEXT 97
                      eta saba mane kari' govinda rahila
                    prabhu ye puchila, tara uttara na dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thinking in this way, Govinda kept silent. He did not reply to the
Lord's inquiry.
                                   TEXT 98
                pratyaha prabhura nidraya yana prasada la-ite
                    se divasera srama dekhi' lagila capite                                 TRANSLATION
     It was Govinda's practice to go take lunch when the Lord was
asleep. On that day, however, seeing the Lord's weariness, Govindacontinued massaging His body.
                                   TEXT 99
                      yaiteha patha nahi, yaibe kemane?
                     maha-aparadha haya prabhura langhane
                                 TRANSLATION     There was no way to go. How could he leave? When he thought of
crossing over the Lord's body, he considered it a great offense.
                                   TEXT 100
                   ei saba haya bhakti-sastra-suksma marma
                    caitanyera krpaya jane ei saba dharma
                                 TRANSLATION     These are some of the finer points of etiquette in devotional
service. Only one who has received the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhucan understand these principles.
                                   PURPORT     Karmis, fruitive workers, cannot understand the finer conclusions
of devotional service because they accept only its ritualistic value butdo not understand how devotional service satisfies the SupremePersonality of Godhead. The karmis view the formalities as a means ofadvancing in religion, economic development, sensual satisfaction andliberation. Although these are only material results of followingreligious principles, the karmis consider them everything. Suchritualistic activities are called karma. Karmis who adopt devotionalservice very loosely and who therefore remain on the platform ofmaterial activities are called prakrta- sahajiyas. They cannotunderstand how pure devotional service is rendered in paternal andconjugal love, for this can be understood only by the special mercybestowed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu upon pure devotees.
                                   TEXT 101                   bhakta-guna prakasite prabhu bada rangi
                      ei saba prakasite kaila eta bhangi
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord is very interested in manifesting the exalted qualities of
His devotees, and that is why He engineered this incident.
                                   TEXT 102
                     sanksepe kahilun ei pari-munda-nrtya
                     adyapiha gaya yaha caitanyera bhrtya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have briefly described Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's dancing in
the hall of the Jagannatha temple. The servants of Srt CaitanyaMahaprabhu sing about this dancing even now.
                                   TEXT 103
                      ei-mata mahaprabhu lana nija-gana
                    gundica-grhera kaila ksalana, marjana
                                 TRANSLATION     Accompanied by His personal associates, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
washed and swept the Gundica temple, cleansing it as usual.
                                   TEXT 104
                    purvavat kaila prabhu kirtana, nartana
                     purvavat totaya kaila vanya-bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord danced and chanted and then enjoyed a picnic in the garden
as He had done before.
                                   TEXT 105
                      purvavat ratha-age karila nartana
                      hera-pancami-yatra kaila darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     As previously, He danced in front of the Jagannatha cart and
observed the festival of Hera-pancami.
                                   TEXT 106
                  cari-masa varsaya rahila saba bhakta-gana
                     janmastami adi yatra kaila darasana                                 TRANSLATION
     All the devotees from Bengal stayed in Jagannatha Puri for the four
months of the rainy season and observed many other ceremonies, such asthe anniversary of Lord Krsna's birth.
                                   TEXT 107
                   purve yadi gauda ha-ite bhakta-gana aila
                 prabhure kichu khaoyaite sabara iccha haila
                                 TRANSLATION     Formerly, when all the devotees had arrived from Bengal, they all
desired to give Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu something to eat.
                                   TEXT 108
                  keha kona prasada ani' deya govinda-thani
                   `iha yena avasya bhaksana karena gosani,
                                 TRANSLATION     Each devotee would bring a certain type of prasada. He would
entrust it to Govinda and request him,"Please arrange that the Lord willsurely eat this prasada."
                                   TEXT 109
                    keha paida, keha nadu, keha pitha-pana
                 bahu-mulya uttama-prasada-prakara yara nana
                                 TRANSLATION     Some brought paida [a coconut preparation], some brought
sweetballs, and some brought cakes and sweet rice. The prasada was ofdifferent varieties, all very costly.
                                   TEXT 110
                   `amuk ei diyache' govinda kare nivedana
                `dhari' rakha' bali' prabhu na karena bhaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda would present the prasada and say to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, "This has been given by such and such devotee." The Lord,however, would not actually eat it. He would simply say, "Keep it instorage."                                   TEXT 111
                   dharite dharite gharera bharila eka kona
                   sata-janera bhaksya yata haila sancayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda kept accumulating the food, and soon it filled a corner of
the room. There was quite enough to feed at least a hundred people.
                                   TEXT 112
                      govindere sabe puche kariya yatana
               `ama-datta prasada prabhure ki karaila bhaksana?
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees asked Govinda with great eagerness, "Have you
given Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu the prasada brought by me?"
                                   TEXT 113
                    kahan kichu kahi' govinda kare vancana
                    ara dina prabhure kahe nirveda-vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     When the devotees questioned Govinda, he had to tell them lies.
Therefore one day he spoke to the Lord in disappointment.
                                   TEXT 114
                       "acaryadi mahasaya kariya yatane
                   tomare khaoyaite vastu dena mora sthane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Many respectable devotees, headed by Advaita Acarya, make a great
endeavor to entrust me with varieties of food for You.
                                   TEXT 115
                    tumi se na khao, tanra puche bara bara
                 kata vancana karimu, kemane amara nistara?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "You do not eat it, but they ask me again and again. How long shall
I go on cheating them? How shall I be freed from this responsibility?"                                   TEXT 116
                 prabhu kahe,--`adi-vasya' duhkha kanhe mane?
                     keba ki diyache, taha anaha ekhane'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "Why are you so foolishly unhappy?
Bring here to Me whatever they have given you."
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura explains that the word adi-vasya refers
to one who has been living with another for a very long time. Govindawas addressed as adi- vasya because he had been living with Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu for a very long time, whereas other devotees, who were mostlynew, would come and go. In effect, the Lord told Govinda, "Since youhave been living with Me for a long time, you should not be foolishlydisappointed in this situation. Bring all the food to Me, and you willsee that i can eat it."
                                   TEXT 117                     eta bali' mahaprabhu vasila bhojane
                   nama dhari' dhari' govinda kare nivedane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sat down to eat. Then Govinda offered Him
the preparations one after another, and as he did so he spoke the nameof the person who had given each one.
                                   TEXT 118
                      "acaryera ei paida, pana-sara-pupi
                     ei amrta-gutika, manda, karpura-kupi
                                 TRANSLATION     "These preparations--paida, sweet rice, cakes made with cream, and
also amrta-gutika, manda and a pot of camphor--have been given byAdvaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 119
                      srivasa-panditera ei aneka prakara
                   pitha, pana, amrta-manda padma-cini ara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Next there are varieties of food--cakes, cream, amrta-manda and
padmacini--given by Srivasa Pandita.
                                   TEXT 120
                        acaryaratnera ei saba upahara
                       acaryanidhira ei, aneka prakara
                                 TRANSLATION     "All these are gifts of Acaryaratna, and these varieties of gifts
are from Acaryanidhi.
                                   TEXT 121
                    vasudeva-dattera ei murari-guptera ara
                   buddhimanta-khannera ei vividha prakara
                                 TRANSLATION     "And all these varieties of food have been given by Vasudeva Datta,
Murari Gupta and Buddhimanta Khan.
                                   TEXT 122
                 sriman-sena, sriman-pandita, acarya-nandana
                      tan-sabara datta ei karaha bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     "These are gifts given by Sriman Sena, Sriman Pandita and Acarya
Nandana. Please eat them all.
                                   TEXT 123
                       kulina-gramera ei age dekha yata
                      khanda-vasi lokera ei dekha tata"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Here are the preparations made by the inhabitants of Kulina-grama,
and these have been made by the inhabitants of Khanda."
                                   TEXT 124
                  aiche sabara nama lana prabhura age dhare
                    santusta hana prabhu saba bhojana kare
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, Govinda gave everyone's name as he put the food before
the Lord. Being very satisfied, the Lord began to eat it all.
                                 TEXT 125-126
                    yadyapi masekera vasi mukuta narikela
                        amrta-gutikadi, panadi sakala
                   tathapi nutana-praya saba dravyera svada
                   `vasi' visvada nahe sei prabhura prasada
                                 TRANSLATION     The hard sweets made of coconut, mukuta narikela, the sweetbalIs,
the many kinds of sweet drinks and all the other preparations were atleast a month old, but although they were old, they had not becometasteless or stale. Indeed, they had all stayed fresh. That is the mercyof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 127
                  sata-janera bhaksya prabhu dandeke khaila!
                   `ara kichu ache?' bali' govinde puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     Within a very short time, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ate enough for a
hundred people. Then He asked Govinda, "Is there anything more left?"
                                   TEXT 128
                 govinda bale,--`raghavera jhali matra ache'
                 prabhu kahe,--`aji rahu, taha dekhimu pache'
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda replied,"Now there are only the bags of Raghava." The Lord
said, "Let them remain today. I shall see them later."
                                   TEXT 129
                  ara dina prabhu yadi nibhrte bhojana kaila
                    raghavera jhali khuli' sakala dekhila
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, while taking His lunch in a secluded place, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu opened the bags of Raghava and inspected theircontents one after another.                                   TEXT 130
                   saba dravyera kichu kichu upayoga kaila
                    svadu, sugandhi dekhi' bahu prasamsila
                                 TRANSLATION     He tasted a little of everything they contained and praised it all
for its flavor and aroma.
                                   TEXT 131
                      vatsareka tare ara rakhila dhariya
                    bhojana-kale svarupa parivese khasana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the varieties of the remaining prasada were kept to eat
throughout the year. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ate His lunch, SvarupaDamodara Gosvami would serve it little by little.
                                   TEXT 132
                    kabhu ratri-kale kichu karena upayoga
               bhaktera sraddhara dravya avasya karena upabhoga
                                 TRANSLATION     Sometimes Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would take some of it at night.
The Lord certainly enjoys preparations made with faith and love by Hisdevotees.
                                   PURPORT     Krsna is very pleased with His devotees and their offerings.
Therefore in Bhagavad-gita the Lord says:      patram puspam phalamtoyam     yo me bhaktya prayacchati     tad aham bhakty-upahrtam     asnami pra yatatmana h"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit orwater, I will accept it." (Bg. 9.26) Herein also we find that SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu accepted all this food because it had been offeredby His devotees. Sometimes He would eat it during lunch and sometimes atnight, but He would always think that since His devotees had offered itwith great love and affection, He must eat it.
                                   TEXT 133                     ei-mata mahaprabhu bhakta-gana-sange                    caturmas ya gonaila krsna-katha-range
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spent the entire period of Caturmasya
[the four months of the rainy season] in the happiness of discussingtopics of Krsna with His devotees.
                                   TEXT 134
                    madhye madhye acaryadi kare nimantrana
                   ghare bhata randhe ara vividha vyanjana
                                 TRANSLATION     From time to time, Advaita Acarya and others would invite Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu for home-cooked rice and varieties of vegetables.
                                 TEXT 135-136
                      maricera jhala, ara madhuramla ara
               ada, la vana, lembu, dugdha, dadhi, khanda-sara
                      saka dui-cari, ara sukutara jhola
                       nimba-vartaki, ara bhrsta-patola
                                 TRANSLATION     They offered pungent preparations made with black pepper, sweet-
andsour preparations, ginger, salty preparations, limes, milk, yogurt,cheese, two or four kinds of spinach, soup made with bitter melon,eggplant mixed with nimba flowers, and fried patola.
                                   TEXT 137
                    bhrsta phula-badi, ara mudga-dali-supa
                vividha vyanjana randhe prabhura ruci-anurupa
                                 TRANSLATION     They also offered phula-badi, liquid mung dahl and many vegetables,
all cooked according to the Lord's taste.
                                   TEXT 138
                   jagannathera prasada ane karite misrita
                    kahan eka yayena, kahan ganera sahita
                                 TRANSLATION     They would mix these preparations with the remnants of food from
Lord Jagannatha. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted the invitations,He went sometimes alone and sometimes with His associates.
                                   TEXT 139
                  acaryaratna, acaryanidhi, nandana, raghava
                     srivasa-adi yata bhakta, vipra saba
                                 TRANSLATION     Devotees like Acaryaratna, Acaryanidhi, Nandana Acarya, Raghava
Pandita and Srivasa were all of the brahmana caste.
                                 TEXT 140-141
                     ei-mata nimantrana karena yatna kari
                   vasude va, gadadhara-dasa, gupta-murari
                   kulina-grami, khanda-vasi, ara yata jana
                  jagannathera prasada ani' kare nimantrana
                                 TRANSLATION     They wouId extend invitations to the Lord. Vasudeva Datta,
Gadadhara dasa, Murari Gupta, the inhabitants of Kulina-grama and Khandaand many other devotees who were not brahmanas by caste would purchasefood offered to Lord Jagannatha and then extend invitations to SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     The inhabitants of Kulina-grama, such as Satyaraja Khan and
Ramananda Vasu, were not brahmanas by caste, nor were the inhabitants ofKhanda, such as Mukunda dasa, Narahari dasa and Raghunandana. Thereforethey would purchase prasada from the market where the remnants of LordJagannatha's food was sold and then extend invitations to Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, whereas Acaryaratna, Acaryanidhi and others who werebrahmanas by caste would cook at home when they invited the Lord.Caitanya Mahaprabhu observed the etiquette then current in society byaccepting only prasada cooked by members of the brahmana caste, but onprinciple He accepted invitations from His devotees, regardless ofwhether they were brahmanas by caste.
                                   TEXT 142                    sivananda-senera suna nimantranakhyana
                sivanandera bada-putrera `caitanya-dasa' nama
                                 TRANSLATION     Now hear about the invitation Sivananda Sena extended to the Lord.
His eldest son was named Caitanya dasa.
                                   TEXT 143
                     prabhure milaite tanre sangei anila
                    milaile, prabhu tanra nama ta' puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sivananda brought his son, Caitanya dasa, to be introduced to
the Lord, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired about his name.
                                   TEXT 144
                  `caitanya-dasa' nama suni' kahe gaura-raya
                   `kiba nama dharanacha, bujhana na yaya'
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord heard that his name was Caitanya dasa, He said, "What
kind of name have you given him? It is very difficult to understand."
                                   TEXT 145
                  sena kahe,--`ye janilun, sei nama dharila'
                   eta bali' mahaprabhure nimantrana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena replied, "He has kept the name that appeared to me
from within." Then he invited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for lunch.
                                   TEXT 146
                    lagannathera bahu-mulya prasada anaila
                    bhakta-gane lana prabhu bhojane vasila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena had bought very costly remnants of Lord Jagannatha's
food. He brought it in and offered it to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, whosat down to accept the prasada with His associates.
                                   TEXT 147
                  sivanandera gaurave prabhu karila bhojana
                 ati-guru-bhojane prabhura prasanna nahe mana                                 TRANSLATION
     Because of Sivananda Sena's glories, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ate
all kinds of prasada to honor his request. However, the Lord ate morethan necessary, and therefore His mind was dissatisfied.
                                   TEXT 148
                   ara dina caitanya-dasa kaila nimantrana
                   prabhura `abhista' bujhi' anila vyanjana
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, Caitanya dasa, the son of Sivananda Sena, extended an
invitation to the Lord. He could understand the Lord's mind, however,and therefore he arranged for a different kind of food.
                                   TEXT 149
                  dadhi, lembu, ada, ara phula-bada, lavana
                 samagri dekhiya prabhura prasanna haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     He offered yogurt, limes, ginger, soft bada and salt. Seeing all
these arrangements, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very pleased.
                                   PURPORT     By the grace of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Caitanya dasa understood
the Lord's mind. Therefore he arranged for food that would counteractthe heavy meal the Lord had eaten the previous day.     Later in life, Caitanya dasa became a very learned Sanskrit scholarand wrote many books. Among these books, his commentary on Krsna-karnamrta is very famous. There is another book called Caitanya-caritamrta, which is a work of Sanskrit poetry. it is said that this wasalso composed by him.
                                   TEXT 150                   prabhu kahe,--"ei balaka amara mata jane
                    santusta ha-ilan ami ihara nimantrane"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said,"This boy knows My mind. Therefore I
am very satisfied to keep his invitation."
                                   TEXT 151
                     eta bali' dadhi-bhata karila bhojana                    caitanya-dasere dila ucchista-bhajana
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, the Lord ate the rice mixed with yogurt and
offered Caitanya dasa the remnants of His food.
                                   TEXT 152
                      cari-masa ei-mata nimantrane yaya
                    kona kona vaisnava `divasa' nahi paya
                                 TRANSLATION     The four months of Caturmasya passed in this manner, with the Lord
accepting invitations from His devotees. Because of a heavy schedule ofinvitations, however, some of the Vaisnavas could not get an open day onwhich to invite the Lord.
                                   TEXT 153
                  gadadhara-pandita, bhattacarya sarvabhauma
                   inha sabara ache bhiksara divasa-niyama
                                 TRANSLATION     Gadadhara Pandita and Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya had fixed dates on
which Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would accept their invitations everymonth.
                                 TEXT 154-155
                    gopinathacarya, jagadananda, kasisvara
               bhaga van, ramabha dracarya, sankara, vakresvara
                  madhye madhye ghara-bhate kare nimantrana
                   anyera nimantrane prasade kaudi dui-pana
                                 TRANSLATION     Gopinatha Acarya, Jagadananda, Kasisvara, Bhagavan,
Ramabhadracarya, Sankara and Vakresvara, who were all brahmanas,extended invitations to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and offered Him foodcooked at home, whereas other devotees would pay two panas of smallconchshelIs to purchase Jagannatha's prasada and then invite the Lord.
                                   TEXT 156
                 prathame achila `nirbandha' kaudi cari-pana
                  ramacandra-puri-bha ye ghataila nimantrana                                 TRANSLATION
     At first the cost of Jagannatha prasada for an invitation was four
panas of conchshells, but when Ramacandra Puri was there, the price wascut in half.
                                   TEXT 157
                  cari-masa rahi' gaudera bhakte vidaya dila
                    nilacalera sangi bhakta sangei rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees who came from Bengal stayed with Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu for four consecutive months, and then the Lord bade themfarewell. After the Bengali devotees departed, the devotees who were theLord's constant companions at Jagannatha Puri stayed with the Lord.
                                   TEXT 158
                  ei ta' kahilun prabhura bhiksa-nimantrana
                   bhakta-datta vastu yaiche kaila asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted
invitations and how He accepted and tasted the prasada offered by Hisdevotees.
                                   TEXT 159
                     tara madhye raghavera jhali-vivarana
                    tara madh ye pari-munda-nrtya-kathana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the midst of that narration are descriptions of Raghava
Pandita's bags of food and the dancing in the temple of Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 160
                   sraddha kari' sune yei caitanyera katha
                     caitanya-carane prema paibe sarvatha
                                 TRANSLATION     One who hears about the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with
faith and love will certainly attain ecstatic love for the lotus feet ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu without fail.                                   TEXT 161
                     sunite amrta-sama judaya karna-mana
                       sei bhagyavan, yei kare asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     Narrations of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's activities are just like
nectar to hear. Indeed, they satisfy both the ears and mind. One whotastes the nectar of these activities is certainly very fortunate.
                                   TEXT 162
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Tenth Chapter, describing how Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhutasted the prasada offered by His devotees.
                                Chapter Eleven
                       The Passing of Haridasa Thakura     The summary of the chapter is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura
in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya as follows. In this chapter, Brahma HaridasaThakura gave up his body with the consent of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,and the Lord Himself personally performed the funeral ceremony andcarried the body to the sea. He personally entombed the body, covered itwith sand, and erected a platform on the site. After taking bath in thesea, He personally begged prasada of Jagannatha from shopkeepers anddistributed prasada to the assembled devotees.
                                    TEXT 1                             namami haridasam tam
                         caitanyam tam ca tat-prabhum                          samsthitam api yan-murtim                           svanke krtva nanarta yah
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Haridasa Thakura and his
master, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who danced with the body of HaridasaThakura on His lap.
                                    TEXT 2
                     jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya dayamaya
                    jayadvaita-priya nityananda-priya jaya
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is very merciful
and who is very dear to Advaita Acarya and Lord Nityananda.
                                    TEXT 3
                      jaya srinivasesvara haridasa-natha
                   jaya gadadhara-priya svarupa-prana-natha
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to the master of Srinivasa Thakura! All glories to the
master of Haridasa Thakura! All glories to the dear master of GadadharaPandita! All glories to the master of the life of Svarupa Damodara!
                                    TEXT 4
                    jaya kasi-priya jagadananda-pranesvara
                      jaya rupa-sanatana-raghunathesvara
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Sri Caitanya, who is very dear to Kasi Misra.
He is the Lord of the life of Jagadananda and the Lord of Rupa Gosvami,Sanatana Gosvami and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.
                                    TEXT 5
                    jaya gaura-deha krsna svayam bhagavan
                   krpa kari' deha' prabhu, nija-pada-dana
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to the transcendental form of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
who is Krsna Himself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. My dear Lord,kindly give me shelter at Your lotus feet by Your causeless mercy.
                                    TEXT 6                 jaya nityananda-candra jaya caitanyera prana
                    tomara caranaravinde bhakti deha' dana
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Nityananda, who is the life and soul of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. My dear Lord, kindly give me engagement indevotional service at Your lotus feet.
                                    TEXT 7
                    jaya jayadvaita-candra caitanyera arya
                   sva-carane bhakti deha' jayadvaitacarya
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Advaita Acarya, who is treated by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu as superior due to His age and respectability. Please give meengagement in devotional service at Your lotus feet.
                                    TEXT 8
                  jaya gaura-bhakta-gana,--gaura yanra prana
                   saba bhakta mili' more bhakti deha' dana
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to all the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for the
Lord is their life and soul. All of you, kindly bestow devotionalservice upon me.
                                    TEXT 9
                    jaya rupa, sanatana, jiva, raghunatha
                    raghunatha, gopala,--chaya mora natha
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Rupa Gosvami, Sanatana Gosvami, Jiva Gosvami,
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami, and Gopala BhattaGosvami, the six Gosvamis of Vrndavana. They are all my masters.
                                   TEXT 10
                   e-saba prasade likhi caitanya-lila-guna
                    yaiche taiche likhi, kari apana pavana
                                 TRANSLATION     I am writing this narration of the pastimes and attributes of the
Lord by the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His associates. I donot know how to write properly, but I am purifying myself by writingthis description.
                                   TEXT 11
                      ei-mata mahaprabhura nilacale vasa
                    sange bhakta-gana lana kirtana-vilasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus resided at Jagannatha Puri with His
personal devotees and enjoyed the congregational chanting of the HareKrsna mahamantra.
                                   TEXT 12
                     dine nrtya-kirtana, isvara-darasana
                    ratrye raya-svarupa-sane rasa-asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the daytime Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu engaged in dancing and
chanting and in seeing the temple of Lord Jagannatha. At night, in thecompany of His most confidential devotees, such as Ramananda Raya andSvarupa Damodara Gosvami, He tasted the nectar of the transcendentalmellows of Lord Sri Krsna's pastimes.
                                   TEXT 13
                     ei-mata mahaprabhura sukhe kala yaya
                     krsnera viraha-vikara ange nana haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu very happily passed His days in this way at
Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri. Feeling separation from Krsna, He exhibitedmany transcendental symptoms all over His body.
                                   TEXT 14
                    dine dine bade vikara, ratrye atisaya
                  cinta, udvega, pralapadi yata sastre kaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Day after day the symptoms increased, and at night they increased
even more. All these symptoms, such as transcendental anxiety,agitation, and talking like a madman, were present, just as they are
described in the sastras.
                                   TEXT 15
                      svarupa gosani, ara ramananda-raya
                    ratri-dine kare donhe prabhura sahaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya, the chief assistants
in Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes, remained with Him both day andnight.
                                   TEXT 16
                      eka-dina govinda maha-prasada lana
                       haridase dite gela anandita hana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Govinda, the personal servant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
went in great jubilation to deliver the remnats of Lord Jagannatha'sfood to Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 17
                  dekhe,--haridasa thakura kariyache sayana
                   manda manda kariteche sankhya-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Govinda came to Haridasa, he saw that Haridasa Thakura was
lying on his back and chanting his rounds very slowly.
                                   TEXT 18
                  govinda kahe,--`utha asi' karaha bhojana'
                     haridasa kahe,--aji karimu langhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please rise and take your maha-prasada," Govinda sald. Haridasa
Thakura replied,"Today I shall observe fasting.
                                   TEXT 19
                  sankhya-kirtana pure nahi, ke-mate khaiba?
                   maha-prasada aniyacha, ke-mate upeksiba?                                 TRANSLATION
     "I have not finished chating my regular number of rounds. How,
then, can I eat? But you have brought maha-prasada, and how can Ineglect it?"
                                   TEXT 20
                    eta bali' maha-prasada karila vandana
                     eka ranca lana tara karila bhaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Saying this, he offered prayers to the maha-prasada, took a little
portion, and ate it.
                                   PURPORT     Maha-prasada is nondifferent from Krsna. Therefore, instead of
eating maha- prasada, one should honor it. It is said here, karilavandana, "he offiered prayers." When taking maha-prasada, one should notconsider the food ordinary preparations. Prasada means favor. One shouldconsider maha-prasada a favor of Krsna. As stated by Srila BhaktivinodaThakura, krsna bada dayamaya karibare jihva jaya svaprasada-anna dilabhai. Krsna is very kind. In this material world we are all veryattached to tasting various types of food. Therefore, Krsna eats manynice varieties of food and offers the food back to the devotees, so thatnot only are one's demands for various tastes satisfied, but by eatingprasada he makes advancement in spiritual life. Therefore, we shouldnever consider ordinary food on an equal level with maha-prasada.
                                   TEXT 21                     ara dina mahaprabhu tanra thani aila
                  sustha hao, haridasa--bali' tanre puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     The next day, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Haridasa's place and
inquired from him, "Haridasa, are you well?"
                                   TEXT 22
                     namaskara kari' tenho kaila nivedana
                 sarira sustha haya mora, asustha buddhi-mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa offered his obeisaces to the Lord and replied, "My body is
all right, but my mind and intelligence are not well."                                   TEXT 23
                prabhu kahe,--`kon vyadhi, kaha ta' nirnaya?'
                   tenho kahe,--`sankhya-kirtana na puraya'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu further inquired from Haridasa, "Can you
ascertain what your disease is?" Haridasa Thakura replied, "My diseaseis that I cannot complete my rounds."
                                   PURPORT     If one cannot complete the fixed number of rounds he is assigned,
he should be considered to be in a diseased condition of spiritual life.Srila Haridasa Thakura is called namacarya. Of course, we cannot imitateHaridasa Thakura, but everyone must chant a prescribed number of rounds.In our Krsna consciousness movement we have fixed sixteen rounds as theminimum so that the Westerners will not feel burdened. These sixteenrounds must be chanted, and chanted loudly, so that one can hear himselfand others.
                                   TEXT 24               prabhu kahe,--"vrddha ha-ila `sankhya' alpa kara
                 siddha-deha tumi, sadhane agraha kene kara?
                                 TRANSLATION     "Now that you have become old," the Lord said, "you may reduce the
number of rounds you chant daily. You are already liberated, andtherefore you need not follow the regulative principles very strictly.
                                   PURPORT     Unless one has come to the platform of spontaneous love of God, he
must follow the regulative principles. Thakura Haridasa was the livingexample of how to follow the regulative principles. Similarly,Raghunatha dasa Gosvami was also such a living example. In the Sad-gosvamy-astaka it is stated: sankhya-purvaka- nama-gana-natibhihkalavasanikrtau. The Gosvamis, especially Raghunatha dasa Gosvami,strictly followed all the regulative principles. The first regulativeprinciple is that one must chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra loudlyenough so that he can hear himself, and one must vow to chant a fixednumber of rounds. Not only was Raghunatha dasa Gosvami chanting a fixednumber of rounds, but he had also taken a vow to bow down many times andoffer obeisances to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 25                      loka nistarite ei tomara `avatara'
                      namera mahima loke karila pracara                                 TRANSLATION
     "Your role in this incarnation is to deliver the people in general.
You have sufficiently preached the glories of the holy name in thisworld."
                                   PURPORT     Haridasa Thakura is known as namacarya because it is he who
preached the glories of chanting hari-nama, the holy name of God. Byusing the words tomara avatara ("your incarnation"), Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu confirms that Haridasa Thakura is the incarnation of LordBrahma. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that advanceddevotees help the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His mission and thatsuch devotees or personal associates incarnate by the will of theSupreme Lord. The Supreme Lord incarnates by His own will, and, by Hiswill, competent devotees also incarnate to help Him in His mission.Haridasa Thakura is thus the incarnation of Lord Brahma, and otherdevotees are likewise incarnations who help in the prosecution of theLord's mission.
                                   TEXT 26                   ebe alpa sankhya kari' kara sankirtana"
                  haridasa kahe,--"suna mora satya nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord concluded,"Now, therefore, please reduce the fixed number
of times you chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra." Haridasa Thakurareplied, "Kindly hear my real plea.
                                   TEXT 27
                     hina-jati janma mora nindya-kalevara
                      hina-karme rata muni adhama pamara
                                 TRANSLATION     "I was born in an inferior family, and my body is most abominable.
I always engage in low work. Therefore, I am the lowest, most condemnedof men.
                                   TEXT 28
                     adrsya, asprsya more angikara kaila
                 raurava ha-ite kadi' more vaikunthe cadaila
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am unseeable and untouchable, but You have accepted me as Your
servant. This means that You have delivered me from a hellish conditionand raised me to the Vaikuntha platform.
                                   TEXT 29
                     svatantra isvara tumi hao icchamaya
                     jagat nacao, yare yaiche iccha haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, You are the fully independent Personality of
Godhead. You act by Your own free will. You cause the whole world todance and act as You like.
                                   TEXT 30
                      aneka nacaila more prasada kariya
                 viprera sraddha-patra khainu `mleccha' hana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, by Your mercy You have made me dance in many ways.
For example, I was offered the sraddha-patra that should have beenoffered to first-class brahmanas. I ate from it even though I was bornin a family of meateaters.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, in his Anubhasya, quotes
from the Visnu-smrti in reference to sraddha-patra.     brahmanapasada hy ete     kathitah pankti-dusakah     etan vivarjayed yatnat     sraddha-karmani panditahAccording to this verse, if one is born in a brahmana family but doesnot behave according to brahminical standards, he should not be offeredthe sraddha-patra, which is prasada offered to the forefathers. AdvaitaAcarya offered the sraddha- patra to Haridasa Thakura, not to a brahmanawho had been born in a brahmana family. Although Haridasa Thakura wasborn in the family of meateaters, because he was an advanced devotee hewas shown more respect than a first-class brahmana.
                                   TEXT 31                     eka vancha haya mora bahu dina haite
                     lila samvaribe tumi--laya mora citte
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have had one desire for a very long time. I think that quite
soon, my Lord, You will bring to a close Your pastimes within thismaterial world.
                                   TEXT 32
                    sei lila prabhu more kabhu na dekhaiba
                        apanara age mora sarira padiba
                                 TRANSLATION     "I wish that You not show me this closing chapter of Your pastimes.
Before that time comes, kindly let my body fall down in Your presence.
                                   TEXT 33
                     hrdaye dharimu tomara kamala carana
                      nayane dekhimu tomara canda vadana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I wish to catch Your lotuslike feet upon my heart and see Your
moonlike face.
                                   TEXT 34
                jihvaya uccarimu tomara `krsna-caitanya'-nama
                     ei-mata mora iccha,--chadimu parana
                                 TRANSLATION     "With my tongue I shall chant Your holy name, `Sri Krsna Caitanya!'
That is my desire. Kindly let me give up my body in this way.
                                   TEXT 35
                    mora ei iccha yadi tomara prasade haya
                       ei nivedana mora kara, dayamaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "O most merciful Lord, if by Your mercy it is possible, kindly
grant my desire.
                                   TEXT 36
                      ei nica deha mora paduka tava age
                     ei vancha-siddhi mora tomatei lage"                                 TRANSLATION
     "Let this lowborn body fall down before You. You can make possible
this perfection of all my desires."
                                   TEXT 37
                   prabhu kahe,--"haridasa, ye tumi magibe
                      krsna krpamaya taha avasya karibe
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "My dear Haridasa, Krsna is so
merciful that He must execute whatever you want.
                                   TEXT 38
                  kintu amara ye kichu sukha, saba toma lana
                   tomara yogya nahe,--yabe amare chadiya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "But whatever happiness is Mine is all due to your association. It
is not fitting for you to go away and leave Me aside."
                                   TEXT 39
               carane dhari' kahe haridasa,--"na kariha `maya'
                   avasya mo-adhame, prabhu, kara ei `daya'
                                 TRANSLATION     Catching the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Haridasa
Thakura said, "My Lord, do not create an illusion! Although I am sofallen, You must certainly show me this mercy!
                                   TEXT 40
                       mora siromani kata kata mahasaya
                    tomara lilara sahaya koti-bhakta haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord, there are many respectable personalities, millions of
devotees, who are fit to sit on my head. They are all helpful in Yourpastimes.
                                   TEXT 41                      ama-hena yadi eka kita mari' gela
                eka pipilika maile prthvira kahan hani haila?
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord, if an insignificant insect like me dies, what is the
loss? If an ant dies, where is the loss to the material world?
                                   TEXT 42
              `bhakata-vatsala' prabhu, tumi, mui `bhaktabhasa'
                     avasya purabe, prabhu, mora ei asa"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord, You are always affectionate to Your devotees. I am just
an imitation devotee, but nevertheless I wish that You fulfill mydesire. That is my expectation."
                                   TEXT 43
                     madhyahna karite prabhu calila apane
                     isvara dekhiya kali dibena darasane
                                 TRANSLATION     Because He had to perform His noon duties, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
got up to leave, but it was settled that the following day, after He sawLord Jagannatha, He would return to visit Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 44
                     tabe mahaprabhu tanre kari' alingana
                    madhyahna karite samudre karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     After embracing him, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu left to perform His
noon duties and went to the sea to take His bath.
                                   TEXT 45
                  pratah-kale isvara dekhi' saba bhakta lana
                     haridase dekhite aila sighra kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     The next morning, after visiting the Jagannatha temple, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, accompanied by all His other devotees, came hastilyto see Haridasa Thakura.                                   TEXT 46
                      haridasera age asi' dila darasana
                haridasa vandila prabhura ara vaisnava-carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and the other devotees came before Haridasa
Thakura, who offered his respects to the lotus feet of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu and all the Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 47
                   prabhu kahe,--`haridasa, kaha samacara'
                   haridasa kahe,--`prabhu, ye krpa tomara'
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired, "My dear Haridasa, what is
the news?" Haridasa Thakura replied, "My Lord, whatever mercy You canbestow upon me."
                                   TEXT 48
                   angane arambhila prabhu maha-sankirtana
                   vakresvara-pandita tahan karena nartana
                                 TRANSLATION     Upon hearing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu immediately began great
congregational chanting in the courtyard. Vakresvara Pandita was thechief dancer.
                                   TEXT 49
                    svarupa-gosani adi yata prabhura gana
                     haridase bedi' kare nama-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     Headed by Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, all the devotees of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu surrounded Haridasa Thakura and began congregationaIchanting.
                                   TEXT 50
                    ramananda, sarvabhauma, sabara agrete
                     haridasera guna prabhu lagila kahite                                 TRANSLATION
     In front of all the great devotees like Ramananda Raya and
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to describe theholy attributes of Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 51
               haridasera guna kahite prabhu ha-ila panca-mukha
                    kahite kahite prabhura bade maha-sukha
                                 TRANSLATION     As He described the transcendental attributes of Haridasa Thakura,
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu seemed to possess five mouths. The more Hedescribed, the more His great happiness increased.
                                   TEXT 52
                   haridasera gune sabara vismita haya mana
                     sarva-bhakta vande haridasera carana
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing of the transcendental qualities of Haridasa Thakura,
all the devotees present were struck with wonder. They all offered theirrespectful obeisances to the lotus feet of Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 53
                     haridasa nijagrete prabhure vasaila
                   nija-netra--dui bhrnga--mukha-padme dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura made Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sit down in front of
him, and then he fixed his eyes, like two bumblebees, on the lotus faceof the Lord.
                                   TEXT 54
                   sva-hrdaye ani' dharila prabhura carana
                    sarva-bhakta-pada-renu mastaka-bhusana
                                 TRANSLATION     He held the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu on his heart and
then took the dust of the feet of all the devotees present and put it onhis head.                                   TEXT 55
                 `sri-krsna-caitanya' sabda balena bara bara
                 prabhu-mukha-madhuri piye, netre jala-dhara
                                 TRANSLATION     He began to chant the holy name of Sri Krsna Caitanya again and
again. As he drank the sweetness of the face of the Lord, tearsconstantly glided down from his eyes.
                                   TEXT 56
                  `sri-krsna-caitanya' sabda karite uccarana
                     namera sahita prana kaila utkramana
                                 TRANSLATION     While chanting the holy name of Sri Krsna Caitanya, he gave up his
air of life and left his body.
                                   TEXT 57
                maha-yogesvara-praya dekhi' svacchande marana
                   `bhismera niryana' sabara ha-ila smarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the wonderful death of Haridasa Thakura by his own will,
which was just like a great mystic yogi's, everyone remembered thepassing away of Bhisma.
                                   TEXT 58
                   `hari' `krsna'-sabde sabe kare kolahala
                     premanande mahaprabhu ha-ila vihvala
                                 TRANSLATION     There was a tumultuous noise as they all chanted the holy names
"Hari" and "Krsna." Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became overwhelmed withecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 59
                   haridasera tanu prabhu kole laila uthana
                     angane nacena prabhu premavista hana                                 TRANSLATION
     The Lord raised the body of Haridasa Thakura and placed it on His
lap. Then He began to dance in the courtyard in great ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 60
                    prabhura avese avasa sarva-bhakta-gana
                     premavese sabe nace, karena kirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's ecstatic love, all the
devotees were helpless, and in ecstatic love they also began to danceand chant congregationally.
                                   TEXT 61
                    ei-mate nrtya prabhu kaila kata-ksana
                  svarupa-gosani prabhure karaila savadhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu danced for some time, and then Svarupa
Damodara Gosvami informed Him of other rituaIs for the body of ThakuraHaridasa.
                                   TEXT 62
                     haridasa-thakure tabe vimane cadana
                    samudre lana gela tabe kirtana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     The body of Haridasa Thakura was then raised onto a carrier that
resembled an airship and taken to the sea, accompanied by congregationalchanting.
                                   TEXT 63
                  age mahaprabhu calena nrtya karite karite
                pache nrtya kare vakresvara bhakta-gana-sathe
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu danced in front of the procession, and
Vakresvara Pandita, along with the other devotees, chanted and dancedbehind Him.                                   TEXT 64
                     haridase samudra-jale snana karaila
               prabhu kahe,--"samudra ei `maha-tirtha' ha-ila"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu bathed the body of Haridasa Thakura in the
sea and then declared, "From this day on, this sea has become a greatpilgrimage site."
                                   TEXT 65
                     haridasera padodaka piye bhakta-gana
                     haridasera ange dila prasada-candana
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone drank the water that had touched the lotus feet of
Haridasa Thakura, and then they smeared remnants of Lord Jagannatha'ssandalwood pulp over Haridasa Thakura's body.
                                   TEXT 66
                   dora, kadara, prasada, vastra ange dila
                      valukara garta kari' tahe soyaila
                                 TRANSLATION     After a hole was dug in the sand, the body of Haridasa Thakura was
placed in it. Remnants from Lord Jagannatha, such as His silken ropes,sandalwood pulp, food and cloth, were placed on the body.
                                   TEXT 67
                     cari-dike bhakta-gana karena kirtana
                   vakresvara-pandita karena anande nartana
                                 TRANSLATION     All around the body, the devotees performed congregational
chanting, and Vakresvara Pandita danced in jubilation.
                                   TEXT 68
                    `hari-bola' `hari-bola' bale gauraraya
                     apani sri-haste valu dila tanra gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     With His transcendental hands, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personaIly
covered the body of Haridasa Thakura with sand, chanting "Hari bol! Haribol!"
                                   TEXT 69
                    tanre valu diya upare pinda bandhaila
                      caudike pindera maha avarana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     They covered the body of Haridasa Thakura with sand and then
constructed a platform upon the site. The platform was protected allaround by fencing.
                                   TEXT 70
                   taha bedi' prabhu kaila kirtana, nartana
                     hari-dhvani-kolahale bharila bhuvana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu danced and chanted all around the platform,
and as the holy name of Hari roared tumultuously, the whole universebecame filled with the vibration.
                                   TEXT 71
                    tabe mahaprabhu saba bhakta-gana-sange
                     samudre karila snana-jala-keli range
                                 TRANSLATION     After sankirtana, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bathed in the sea with
His devotees, swimming and playing in the water in great jubilation.
                                   TEXT 72
                  haridase pradaksina kari' aila simha-dvare
                     hari-kirtana-kolahala sakala nagare
                                 TRANSLATION     After circumambulating the tomb of Haridasa Thakura, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu went to the Simha-dvara gate of the Jagannatha temple. The
whole city chanted in congregation, and the tumultuous sound vibrated
all over the city.                                   TEXT 73
                    simha-dvare asi' prabhu pasarira thani
                     ancala patiya prasada magila tathai
                                 TRANSLATION     Approaching the Simha-dvara gate, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spread
His cloth and began to beg prasada from all the shopkeepers there.
                                   TEXT 74
                     `haridasa-thakurera mahotsavera tare
                    prasada magiye bhiksa deha' ta' amare'
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am begging prasada for a festival honoring the passing away of
Haridasa Thakura," the Lord said. "Please give Me alms."
                                   TEXT 75
                      suniya pasari saba cangada uthana
                     prasada dite ase tara anandita hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, all the shopkeepers immediately came forward with big
baskets of prasada, which they jubilantly delivered to Lord Caitanya.
                                   TEXT 76
                      svarupa-gosani pasarike nisedhila
                      cangada lana pasari pasare vasila
                                 TRANSLATION     However, Svarupa Damodara stopped them, and the shopkeepers
returned to their shops and sat down with their baskets.
                                   TEXT 77
                    svarupa-gosani prabhure ghara pathaila
                  cari vaisnava, cari pichada sange rakhila
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara sent Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu back to His
residence, and kept with him four Vaisnavas and four servant carriers.                                   TEXT 78
                    svarupa-gosani kahilena saba pasarire
                  eka eka dravyera eka eka punja deha' more
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara sald to all the shopkeepers, "Deliver to me four
palmfuls of prasada from each and every item."
                                   TEXT 79
                     ei-mate nana prasada bojha bandhana
                     lana aila cari janera mastake cadana
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way varieties of prasada were collected, then packed up in
different loads and carried on the heads of the four servants.
                                   TEXT 80
                     vaninatha pattanayaka prasada anila
                      kasi-misra aneka prasada pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Not only did Svarupa Damodara Gosvami bring prasada, but Vaninatha
Pattanayaka, as well as Kasi Misra, sent large quantities.
                                   TEXT 81
                    saba vaisnave prabhu vasaila sari sari
                     apane parivese prabhu lana jana cari
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu made all the devotees sit in rows and
personally began to distribute the prasada, assisted by four other men.
                                   TEXT 82
                     mahaprabhura sri-haste alpa na aise
                  eka eka pate panca-janara bhaksya parivese
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was not accustomed to taking prasada in
small quantities. He therefore put on each plate what at least five mencould eat.
                                   TEXT 83
                 svarupa kahe,--"prabhu, vasi' karaha darsana
                      ami inha-saba lana kari parivesana
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami requested Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "Please
sit down and watch. With these men to help me, I shall distribute theprasada."
                                   TEXT 84
                  svarupa, jagadananda, kasisvara, sa nkara
                     cari-jana parivesana kare nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     The four men--Svarupa, Jagadananda, Kasisvara and Sankara--
distributed the prasada continuously.
                                   TEXT 85
                    prabhu na khaile keha na kare bholana
                   prabhure se dine kasi-misrera nimantrana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees who sat down would not accept the prasada as long
as the Lord had not eaten. On that day, however, Kasi Misra had extendedan invitation to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 86
                      apane kasi-misra aila prasada lana
                    prabhure bhiksa karaila agraha kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore Kasi Misra personally went there and delivered prasada to
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with great attention and made Him eat.
                                   TEXT 87
                   puri-bharatira sange prabhu bhiksa kaila                     sakala vaisnava tabe bhojana karila
                                 TRANSLATION     With Paramananda Puri and Brahmananda Bharati, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu sat down and accepted the prasada. When He began to eat, sodid all the Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 88
                    akantha purana sabaya karaila bhojana
                    deha' deha' bali' prabhu balena vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone was filled up to the neck because Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
kept telling the distributors, "Give them more! Give them more!"
                                   TEXT 89
                      bhojana kariya sabe kaila acamana
                     sabare paraila prabhu malya-candana
                                 TRANSLATION     After all the devotees finished accepting prasada and had washed
their hands and mouths, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu decorated each of themwith a flower garland and sandalwood pulp.
                                   TEXT 90
                   premavista hana prabhu karena vara-dana
                     suni' bhakta-ganera judaya manaskama
                                 TRANSLATION     Overwhelmed with ecstatic love, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu offered a
benediction to all the devotees, which all the devotees heard with greatsatisfaction.
                                  TEXT 91-93
                   "haridasera vijayotsava ye kaila darsana
                    ye ihan nrtya kaila, ye kaila kirtana
                      ye tanre valuka dite karila gamana
                    tara madhye mahotsave ye kaila bhojana
                    acire ha-ibe ta-sabara `krsna-prapti'
                     haridasa-darasane haya aiche `sakti'                                 TRANSLATION
     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave this benediction: "Anyone who has seen
the festival of Sri Haridasa Thakura's passing away, anyone who haschanted and danced here, anyone who has offered sand on the body ofHaridasa Thakura and anyone who has joined this festival to partake ofthe prasada will achieve the favor of Krsna very soon. There is suchwonderful power in seeing Haridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 94
                    kroa kari' krsna more diyachila sanga
                 svatantra krsnera iccha,--kaila sanga-bhanga
                                 TRANSLATION     "Being merciful upon Me, Krsna gave Me the association of Haridasa
Thakura. Being independent in His desires, He has now broken thatassociation.
                                   TEXT 95
                     haridasera iccha yabe ha-ila calite
                      amara sakati tanre narila rakhite
                                 TRANSLATION     "When Haridasa Thakura wanted to leave this material world, it was
not within My power to detain him.
                                   TEXT 96
                   iccha-matre kaila nija-prana niskramana
                     purve yena suniyachi bhismera marana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Simply by his will, Haridasa Thakura could give up his life and go
away, exactly like Bhisma, who previously died simply by his own desire,as we have heard from sastra.
                                   TEXT 97
                     haridasa achila prthivira `siromani'
                     taha vina ratna-sunya ha-ila medini
                                 TRANSLATION     "Haridasa Thakura was the crown jewel on the head of this world;
without him, this world is now bereft of its valuable jewel."
                                   TEXT 98
                 jaya jaya haridasa' bali' kara hari-dhvani"
                      eta bali' mahaprabhu nacena apani
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then told everyone, "Say `All glories to
Haridasa Thakura!' and chant the holy name of Hari." Saying this, Hepersonally began to dance.
                                   TEXT 99
                     sabe gaya,--"laya jaya jaya haridasa
                    namera mahima yenha karila praka-s'a"
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone began to chant, "All glories to Haridasa Thakura, who
revealed the importance of chanting the holy name of the Lord!"
                                   TEXT 100
                   tabe mahaprabhu saba bhakte vidaya dila
                      harsa-visade prabhu visrama karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bid farewell to all the
devotees, and He Himself, with mixed feelings of happiness and distress,took rest.
                                   TEXT 101
                       ei ta' kahilun haridasera vijaya
                    yahara sravane krsne drdha-bhakti haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have spoken about the victorious passing away of Haridasa
Thakura. Anyone who hears this narration will certainly fix his mindfirmly in devotional service to Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     At Purusottama-ksetra, or Jagannatha Puri, there is a temple of
Tota-gopinatha. If one goes from there to the sea, he can discover thetomb of Haridasa Thakura still existing. Every year on the date of
Ananta-caturdasi there is a festival to commemorate the passing away ofHaridasa Thakura. At the same place, three Deities of Nityananda, KrsnaCaitanya and Advaita Prabhu were established about one hundred yearsago. A gentleman named Bhramaravara from Kendrapada in the province ofOrissa contributed funds to establish these Deities in the temple. Themanagement of the temple was under the Tota-gopinatha gosvamis.     This temple was later sold to someone else, and this party is nowmaintaining the seva-puja of the temple. Near this temple and the tombof Haridasa Thakura, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura constructed a smallhouse, called Bhakti-kuti. In the Bengali year 1329, Purusottama-matha,a branch of the Gaudiya Matha, was established there. in the Bhakti-ratnakara it is stated:     srinivasa sighra samudrera kule gela     haridasa-thakurera samadhi dekhila     bhumite padiya kaila pranati vistara     bhagavata-gana sri-samadhi-sannidhane     srinivase sthira kaila sasneha-vacane     punah srinivasa sri-samadhi pranamiya     ye vilapa kaila, ta sunile drave hiya"Srinivasa Thakura quickly ran to the seashore. When he saw the tomb ofHaridasa Thakura, he immediately fell down offering prayers and almostfainted. The devotees present there pacified him with very sweet andaffectionate words, and Srinivasa again offered his obeisances to thetomb. Hearing of the separation that Srinivasa expressed in hislamentation at the tomb of Haridasa Thakura makes one's heart melt."
                                   TEXT 102                    caitanyera bhakta-vatsalya ihatei jani
                   bhakta-vancha purna kaila nyasi-siromani
                                 TRANSLATION     From the incident of Haridasa Thakura's passing away and the great
care Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took in commemorating it, one canunderstand just how affectionate He is toward His devotees. Although Heis the topmost of all sannyasis, He fully satisfied the desire ofHaridasa Thakura.
                                   TEXT 103
                    sesa-kale dila tanre darsana-sparsana
                     tanre kole kari' kaila apane nartana
                                 TRANSLATION     At the last stage of Haridasa Thakura's life, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu gave him His company and allowed him to touch Him.Thereafter, He took the body of Thakura Haridasa on His lap andpersonally danced with it.                                   TEXT 104
                    apane sri-haste krpaya tanre valu dila
                     apane prasada magi' mahotsava kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Out of His causeless mercy He personally covered the body of
Haridasa Thakura with sand and personally begged alms from theshopkeepers. Then
He conducted a great festival to celebrate the passing away of Haridasa
Thakura.
                                   TEXT 105                    maha-bhagavata haridasa--parama-vidvan
                     e saubhagya lagi' age karila prayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Haridasa Thakura was not only the topmost devotee of the Lord, but
also a great and learned scholar. It was his great fortune that hepassed away before Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     Haridasa Thakura is mentioned here as the most learned scholar,
parama-vid- van. Actually, the most important science to know is thescience of getting out of the clutches of material existence. Anyone whoknows this science must be considered the greatest learned person.Anyone who knows the temporary situation of this material world and isexpert in achieving a permanent situation in the spiritual world, whoknows that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is beyond the jurisdictionof our experimental knowledge, is understood to be the most learnedscholar. Haridasa Thakura knew this science perfectly. Therefore, he isdescribed in this connection as parama-vidvan. He personally preachedthe importance of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, which is approvedby the revealed scriptures. As stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.5.24):     iti pumsarpita visnau     bhaktis cen nava-laksana     kriyeta bhagavaty addha     tan manye'dhitam uttamamThere are nine different processes of devotional service to Krsna, themost important being sravanam kirtanam--hearing and chanting. HaridasaThakura knew this science very well, and he can therefore be called,technically, sarva-sastradhiti. Anyone who has learned the essence ofall the Vedic scripture is to be known as a first-class educated person,with full knowledge of all sastra.
                                   TEXT 106                      caitanya-caritra ei amrtera sindhu
                     karna-mana trpta kare yara eka bindu                                 TRANSLATION
     The life and characteristics of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are exactly
like an ocean of nectar, one drop of which can please the mind and ear.
                                   TEXT 107
                    bhava-sindhu taribare ache yara citta
                   sraddha kari' suna sei caitanya-caritra
                                 TRANSLATION     Anyone who desires to cross over the ocean of nescience, please
hear with great faith the life and characteristics of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 108
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsndasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Eleventh Chapter, describing the passing of HaridasaThakura.
                                Chapter Twelve
           The Loving Dealings Between Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu     A summary of the Twelfth Chapter is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya as follows. This chapter discussesthe transformations of ecstatic love that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuexhibited day and night. The devotees from Bengal again journeyed toJagannatha Puri to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. As usual, the leader wasSivananda Sena, who traveled with his wife and children. Becausearrangements were delayed en route and Lord Nityananda did not have asuitable place to reside, He became somewhat disturbed. Thus He becamevery angry with Sivananda Sena, who was in charge of the affairs of theparty, and kicked him in loving anger. Sivananda Sena felt highlyfavored to have been kicked by Nityananda Prabhu, but his nephewSrikanta Sena became upset and therefore left their company. He met SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri before the rest of the partyarrived.     That year a devotee named Paramesvara dasa Modaka also went with
his family to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri. Thedevotees often invited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to eat with them. Whenthe Lord bade them all farewell, He talked very pleasingly with them.The year before, Jagadananda Pandita had been sent to Sacimata withprasada and cloth. This year he returned to Puri with a big pot offloral-scented oil to massage the Lord's head. The Lord, however, wouldnot accept the oil, and because of His refusal, Jagadananda Panditabroke the pot in front of Him and began to fast. The Lord tried topacify him and asked Jagadananda Pandita to cook for Him. JagadanandaPandita became so pleased when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted hiscooking that he broke his fast.
                                    TEXT 1                           sruyatam sruyatam nityam
                             giyatam giyatam muda
                         cintyatam cintyatam bhaktas
                            caitan ya -caritamrtam
                                 TRANSLATION     Odevotees, may the transcendental life and characteristics of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu be always heard, chanted and meditated upon withgreat happiness.
                                    TEXT 2
                     jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya dayamaya
                    jaya jaya nityananda krpa-sindhu jaya
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is all-merciful! All
glories to Nityananda Prabhu, who is an ocean of mercy!
                                    TEXT 3
                     jayadvaita-candra jaya karuna-sagara
                    jaya gaura-bhakta-gana krpa-purnantara
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Advaita Acarya, who is also an ocean of mercy! All
glories to all the devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, whose hearts arealways filled with mercy!
                                    TEXT 4
                     atahpara mahaprabhura visanna-antara                     krsnera viyoga-dasa sphure nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     The mind of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was always morose because of a
continuously manifested feeling of separation from Krsna.
                                    TEXT 5
                  `haha krsna prana-natha vrajendra-nandana!
                    kahan yana kahan pana, murali-vadana!'
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord would cry,"O My Lord Krsna, My life and soul! O son of
Maharaja Nanda, where shall I go? Where shall I attain You? O SupremePersonality who plays with Your flute to Your mouth!"
                                    TEXT 6
                     ratri-dina ei dasa svasti nahi mane
                  kaste ratri gonaya svarupa-ramananda-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     This was His situation day ad night. Unable to find peace of mind,
He passed His nights with great difficulty in the company of SvarupaDamodara and Ramananda Raya.
                                    TEXT 7
                  etha gauda-dese prabhura yata bhakta-gana
                     prabhu dekhibare sabe karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Meanwhile, all the devotees journeyed from their homes in Bengal to
see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 8
                       sivananda-sena ara acarya-gosani
                    navadvipe saba bhakta haila eka thani
                                 TRANSLATION     Headed by Sivananda Sena, Advaita Acarya and others, all the
devotees assembled in Navadvipa.                                    TEXT 9
                    kulina-grama-vasi ara yata khanda-vasi
                      ekatra milila saba navadvipe asi'
                                 TRANSLATION     The inhabitants of Kulina-grama and Khanda village also assembled
at Navadvipa.
                                   TEXT 10
                     nityananda-prabhure yadyapi ajna nai
                    tathapi dekhite calena caitanya-gosani
                                 TRANSLATION     Because Nityananda Prabhu was preaching in Bengal, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had ordered Him not to come to Jagannatha Puri. That year,however, He went with the rest of the party to see the Lord.
                                   TEXT 11
                     srivasadi cari bhai, sangete malin i
                      acaryaratnera sange tanhara grhini
                                 TRANSLATION     Srivasa Thakura was also there with his three brothers and his
wife, Malini. Acaryaratna was similarly accompanied by his wife.
                                   TEXT 12
                     sivananda-patni cale tina-putra lana
                      raghava-pandita cale jhali sajana
                                 TRANSLATION     The wife of Sivananda Sena also came, along with their three sons.
Raghava Pandita joined them, carrying his famous bags of food.
                                   TEXT 13
                   datta, gupta, vidyanidhi, ara yata jana
                      dui-tina sata bhakta karila gamana
                                 TRANSLATION     Vasudeva Datta, Murari Gupta, Vidyanidhi and many other devotees
went to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. All together, they numbered two orthree hundred.
                                   TEXT 14
                     sacimata dekhi' sabe tanra ajna lana
                      anande calila krsna-kirtana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees first saw Sacimata and took her permission. Then, in
great happiness, they started for Jagannatha Puri, congregationallychanting the holy name of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 15
                     sivananda-sena kare ghati-samadhana
                     sabare palana kari' sukhe lana yana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena managed the payment of tolls at different places.
Maintaining everyone, he guided all the devotees in great happiness.
                                   PURPORT     Chati refers to the different toll booths used by the Zamindars to
collect taxes in each state. Generally, this tax was collected tomaintain the roads governed by the various Zamindars. Since the devoteesfrom Bengal were going to Jagannatha Puri, they had to pass through manysuch toll booths. Sivananda Sena was in charge of paying the tolls.
                                   TEXT 16                  sabara saba karya karena, dena vasa-sthana
                    sivananda jane udiya-pathera sandhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena took care of everyone and gave each devotee places
to stay. He knew all the paths leading to Orissa.
                                   TEXT 17
                     eka-dina saba loka ghatiyale rakhila
                     saba chadana sivananda ekala rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     One day when the party was being checked by a toll collector, the
devotees were allowed to pass, and Sivananda Sena remained behind aloneto pay the taxes.
                                   TEXT 18
                  sabe giya rahila grama-bhitara vrksa-tale
                     sivananda vina vasa-sthana nahi mile
                                 TRANSLATION     The party went into a village and waited beneath a tree because no
one but Sivananda Sena could arrange for their residential quarters.
                                   TEXT 19
                    nityananda-prabhu bhokhe vyakula hana
                       sivananda gali pade vasa na pana
                                 TRANSLATION     Nityananda Prabhu meanwhile became very hungry and upset. Because
He had not yet obtained a suitable residence, He began calling SivanandaSena ill names.
                                   TEXT 20
                  `tina putra maruka sivara, ekhana na aila
                  bhokhe mari' genu, more vasa na deoyaila'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sivananda Sena has not arranged for My residence," He
complained,"and I am so hungry I could die. Because he has not come, Icurse his three sons to die."
                                   TEXT 21
                    suni' sivanandera patni kandite lagila
                     hena-kale sivananda ghati haite aila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this curse, Sivananda Sena's wife began to cry. Just then,
Sivananda returned from the toll station.
                                   TEXT 22
                    sivanandera patnitanre kahena kandiya                   `putre sapa dichena gosani vasa na pana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Crying, his wife informed him,"Lord Nityananda has cursed our sons
to die because His quarters have not been provided."
                                   TEXT 23
                   tenho kahe,--"bauli, kene maris kandiya?
                  maruka amara tina putra tanra balai lana"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena replied,"You crazy woman! Why are you needlessly
crying? Let my three sons die for all the inconvenience we have causedNityananda Prabhu."
                                   TEXT 24
                     eta bali' prabhu-pase gela sivananda
                  uthi' tanre lathi maila prabhu nityananda
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sivananda Sena went to Nityananda Prabhu, who
then stood up and kicked him.
                                   TEXT 25
                    anandita haila sivai pada-prahara pana
                   sighra vasa-ghara kaila gauda-ghare giya
                                 TRANSLATION     Very pleased at being kicked, Sivananda Sena quickly arranged for a
milkman's house to be the Lord's residence.
                                   TEXT 26
                   carane dhariya prabhure vasaya lana gela
                      vasa diya hrsta hana kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena touched the lotus feet of Nityananda Prabhu and led
Him to His residence. After giving the Lord His quarters, SivanandaSena, being very pleased, spoke as follows.                                   TEXT 27
                    "aji more bhrtya kari' angikara kaila
                  yemana aparadha bhrtyera, yogya phala dila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Today You have accepted me as Your servant and have properly
punished me for my offense.
                                   TEXT 28
                 `sasti'-chale krpa kara,--e tomara `karuna'
                   trijagate tomara caritra bujhe kon jana?
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, Your chastising me is Your causeless mercy. Who
within the three worlds can understand Your real character?
                                   TEXT 29
                   brahmara durlabha tomara sri-carana-renu
                  hena carana-sparsa paila mora adhama tanu
                                 TRANSLATION     "The dust of Your lotus feet is not attainable even by Lord Brahma,
yet Your lotus feet have touched my wretched body.
                                   TEXT 30
                  aji mora saphala haila janma, kula, karma
                 aji painu krsna-bhakti, artha, kama, dharma"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Today my birth, my family and my activities have all become
successful. Today I have achieved the fulfillment of religiousprinciples, economic development, satisfaction of the senses andultimately devotional service to Lord Krsna."
                                   TEXT 31
                   suni' nityananda-prabhura anandita mana
                     uthi' sivanande kaila prema-alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Lord Nityananda heard this, He was very happy. He rose and
embraced Sivananda Sena in great love.
                                   TEXT 32
                      anandita sivananda kare samadhana
                     acaryadi-vaisnavere dila vasa-sthana
                                 TRANSLATION     Being very pleased by Nityananda Prabhu's behavior, Sivananda Sena
began to arrange residential quarters for all the Vaisnavas, headed byAdvaita Acarya.
                                   TEXT 33
                 nityananda-prabhura saba caritra--`viparita'
                   kruddha hana lathi mari' kare tara hita
                                 TRANSLATION     One of Sri Nityananda Prabhu's characteristics is His contradictory
nature. When He becomes angry and kicks someone, it is actually to hisbenefit.
                                   TEXT 34
                   sivanandera bhagina,--srikanta-sena nama
                      mamara agocare kahe kari' abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena's nephew, Srikanta, the son of his sister, felt
offended, and he commented on the matter when his uncle was absent.
                                   TEXT 35
                  "caitanyera parisada mora matulera khyati
                 `thakurali' karena gosani, tanre mare lathi"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My uncle is well known as one of the associates of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, but Lord Nityanada Prabhu asserts His superiority by kickinghim."
                                   TEXT 36
                  eta bali' srikanta, balaka age cali' yana                  sanga chadi' age gela mahaprabhura sthana
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Srikanta, who was only a boy, left the group and
traveled on alone to the residence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 37
                     petangi-gaya kare dandavat-namaskara
                 govinda kahe,--`srikanta, age petangi utara'
                                 TRANSLATION     When Srikanta offered obeisances to the Lord, he was still wearing
his shirt and coat. Therefore Govinda toId him, "My dear Srikanta, firsttake off these garments."
                                   PURPORT     One is forbidden to enter the Deity room or offer anything to the
Deity while wearing a shirt or coat. in the tantras it is said:vastrenavrta-dehas tu     yo narah pranamed dharim     svitri bhavati mudhatma     sapta janmani bhavini"Anyone who offers respects and obeisances to the Deity while wearinggarments on the upper portion of his body is condemned to be a leper forseven births."
                                   TEXT 38              prabhu kahe,--"srikanta asiyache pana mano-duhkha
                  kichu na baliha, karuka, yate ihara sukha"
                                 TRANSLATION     As Govinda was warning Srikanta, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
said,"Don't bother him. Let Srikanta do whatever he likes, for he hascome here in a distressed state of mind."
                                   TEXT 39
                      vaisnavera samacara gosani puchila
                     eke eke sabara nama srikanta janaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired from Srikanta about all the
Vaisnavas, and the boy informed the Lord about them, naming them oneafter another.                                   TEXT 40
               `duhkha pana asiyache'--ei prabhura vakya suni'
                    lanila `sarvajna prabhu'--eta anumani'
                                 TRANSLATION     When Srikanta Sena heard the Lord say,"He is distressed," he could
understand that the Lord is omniscient.
                                   TEXT 41
                    sivanande lathi marila,--iha na kahila
                     etha saba vaisnava-gana asiya milila
                                 TRANSLATION     As he described the Vaisnavas, therefore, he did not mention Lord
Nitya--nanda's kicking Sivananda Sena. Meanwhile, all the devoteesarrived and went to meet the Lord.
                                   TEXT 42
                     purvavat prabhu kaila sabara milana
                stri-saba dura ha-ite kaila prabhura darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu received them all, just as He had in
previous years. The women, however, saw the Lord from a distance.
                                   TEXT 43
                     vasa-ghara purvavat sabare deoyaila
                      mahaprasada-bhojane sabare bolaila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord again arranged for the residential quarters of all the
devotees and thereafter called them to partake of the remnants of foodoffered to Lord Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 44
                    sivananda tina-putre gosanire milaila
                  sivananda-sambandhe sabaya bahu-krpa kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sivananda Sena introduced his three sons to Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Because they were his sons, the Lord showed the boys greatmercy.
                                   TEXT 45
                    chota-putre dekhi' prabhu nama puchila
                     `paramananda-dasa,-nama sena janaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya asked the youngest son's name, and Sivananda Sena
informed the Lord that his name was Paramananda dasa.
                                  TEXT 46-47
                   purve yabe sivananda prabhu-sthane aila
                     tabe mahaprabhu tanre kahite lagila
                       "e-bara tomara yei ha-ibe kumara
                    `puri-dasa' bali' nama dhariha tahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Once before when Sivananda Sena had visited Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
at His residence, the Lord had told him, "When this son is born, givehim the name Puri dasa."
“Caitanya-caritamrita – Antya Lila ” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Summary: Caitanya-caritamrita is the biography of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
written by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami in the 16
th century, now published
with elaborate translations and commentaries in English by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami. The multi-volume Caitanya-caritamrita is dividedinto three sections, Adi Lila, Madhya Lila, and Antya Lila, representingthe beginning, middle, and concluding pastimes of Lord ChaitanyaMahaprabhu. This file comprises the text of the several volumes thatmake up the Antya Lila section.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluationcopy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyrightinformation intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Caitanya Caritamrita” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1975-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .
                                   TEXT 48
                    tabe mayera garbhe haya sei ta' kumara
                    sivananda ghare gele, janma haila tara
                                 TRANSLATION     The son was in the womb of his wife, and when he returned home the
son was born.
                                   TEXT 49
                prabhu-ajnaya dharila nama--`paramananda-dasa'
                   `puri-dasa' kari' prabhu karena upahasa
                                 TRANSLATION     The child was named Paramananda dasa in accordance with the Lord's
order, and the Lord jokingly called him Puri dasa.
                                   TEXT 50
                      sivananda yabe sei balake milaila
                    mahaprabhu padangustha tara mukhe dila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sivananda Sena introduced the child to Srt Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, the Lord put His toe in the child's mouth.
                                   PURPORT     In this connection one may refer to Antya-lila, Chapter Sixteen,
verses 65-75, for information about the later manifestations of theLord's mercy.
                                   TEXT 51                   sivanandera bhagya-sindhu ke paibe para?
                  yanra saba gosthike prabhu kahe `apanara'                                 TRANSLATION
     No one can cross over the ocean of Sivananda Sena's good fortune,
for the Lord considered Sivananda's whole family His own.
                                   TEXT 52
                     tabe saba bhakta lana karila bhojana
                      govindere ajna dila kari' acamana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord ate lunch in the company of all the other devotees, and
after washing His hands and mouth He gave an order to Govinda.
                                   TEXT 53
                 "sivanandera `prakrti', putra--yavat ethaya
                     amara avasesa-patra tara yena paya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "As long as Sivananda Sena's wife and children stay in Jagannatha
Puri," He said, "they must be given the remnants of My food."
                                   TEXT 54
                 nadiya-vasi modaka, tara nama--`paramesvara'
                modaka vece, prabhura vatira nikata tara ghara
                                 TRANSLATION     There was a resident of Nadia named Paramesvara, who was a
confectioner living near the home of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 55
                balaka-kale prabhu tara ghare bara bara ya'na
                dugdha, khanda modaka deya, prabhu taha kha'na
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord was a boy, He would visit the house of Paramesvara
Modaka again and again. The confectioner would supply the Lord milk andsweetmeats, and the Lord would eat them.
                                   TEXT 56
                  prabhu-visaye sneha tara balaka-kala haite                    se vatsara seha aila prabhure dekhite
                                 TRANSLATION     Paramesvara Modaka had been affectionate toward the Lord since His
childhood, and he was one of those who came that year to see the Lord atJagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 57
                   `paramesvara muni' bali' dandavat kaila
                   tare dekhi' prabhu prite tahare puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     When he offered his obeisances to the Lord, he said, "I am the same
Paramesvara." Upon seeing him, the Lord asked him questions with greataffection.
                                   TEXT 58
                 `paramesvara kusala hao, bhala haila, aila,
               `mukundara mata asiyache;, seha prabhure kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said,"Paramesvara, may you be blessed. It
is very good that you have come here." Paramesvara then informed theLord, "Mukundara Mata has also come."
                                   TEXT 59
               mukundara matara nama suni' prabhu sankoca haila
                     tathapi tahara prite kichu na balila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing the name of Mukundara Mata, Lord Caitanya hesitated, but
because of affection for Paramesvara, He did not say anything.
                                   PURPORT     A sannyasi is restricted from even hearing a woman's name, and Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu conducted Himself very strictly in His vow.Paramesvara informed the Lord that his wife, Mukundara Mata, had comewith him. He should not have mentioned her, and therefore the Lordhesitated for a moment, but due to His affection for Paramesvara, He didnot say anything. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had known Paramesvara Modakasince His childhood, and therefore Paramesvara did not think twice aboutinforming the Lord of his wife's arrival.                                   TEXT 60
                   prasraya-pagala suddha-vaidagdhi na jane
                   antare sukhi haila prabhu tara sei gune
                                 TRANSLATION     An intimate relationship sometimes makes a person overstep formal
etiquette. Thus Paramesvara actually pleased the Lord in His heart byhis simple and affectionate behavior.
                                   PURPORT     Prasraya means affection, humility, faith, a demand for some
special concession, or indulgence in such a concession. pagala meansimpudence, arrogance, and influence. Vaidagdhi means cunningness, humor,beauty, expertise, learning, tricky behavior, and indications.
                                   TEXT 61                      purvavat saba lana gundica-marjana
                      ratha-age purvavat karila nartana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees engaged in the cleansing ceremony of the Gundica
temple and danced in front of the Ratha-yatra chariot, just as they haddone in the past.
                                   TEXT 62
                     caturmasya saba yatra kaila darasana
                  malini-prabhrti prabhure kaila nimantrana
                                 TRANSLATION     For four consecutive months, the devotees observed all the
festivals. The wives, such as Malini, extended invitations for lunch toSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 63
                prabhura priya nana dravya aniyache desa haite
                  sei vyanjana kari' bhiksa dena ghara-bhate
                                 TRANSLATION     From Bengal the devotees had brought varieties of Bengali food that
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu liked. They also cooked various grains andvegetables in their homes and offered them to the Lord.                                   TEXT 64
                    dine nana krida kare lana bhakta-gana
                  ratrye krsna-vicchede prabhu karena rodana
                                 TRANSLATION     During the day, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu engaged in various
activities with His devotees, but at night He felt great separation fromKrsna and used to cry.
                                   TEXT 65
                     ei-mata nana-lilaya caturmasya gela
                    gauda-dese yaite tabe bhakte ajna dila
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way the Lord spent the four months of the rainy season in
various pastimes, and then He ordered the Bengali devotees to return totheir homes.
                                   TEXT 66
                  saba bhakta karena mahaprabhura nimantrana
                  sarva-bhakte kahena prabhu madhura vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees from Bengal would regularly invite Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu for lunch, and the Lord would speak to them in very sweetwords.
                                   TEXT 67
                     "prati-varse aisa sabe amare dekhite
                       asite yaite duhkha pao bahu-mate
                                 TRANSLATION     "All of you come to see Me every year," the Lord said. "To come
here and then return must certainly give you great trouble.
                                   TEXT 68
                   toma-sabara duhkha jani' cahi nisedhite
                   toma-sabara sanga-sukhe lobha bade citte
                                 TRANSLATION     "I would like to forbid you to do this, but I enjoy your company so
much that My desire for your association only increases.
                                   TEXT 69
                     nityanande ajna dilun gaudete rahite
                      ajna langhi' aila, ki pari balite?
                                 TRANSLATION     "I ordered Sri Nityananda Prabhu not to leave Bengal, but He has
transgressed My order and come to see Me. What can I say?
                                   TEXT 70
                     ailena acarya-gosani more krpa kari'
                    prema-rne baddha ami, sudhite na pari
                                 TRANSLATION     "Out of His causeless mercy upon Me, Advaita Acarya has also come
here. I am indebted to Him for His affectionate behavior. This debt isimpossible for Metoliquidate.
                                   TEXT 71
                    mora lagi' s tri-putra -grhadi chadiya
                   nana durgama patha langhi' aisena dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "All My devotees come here just for Me. Leaving aside their homes
and families, they travel by very difficult paths to come here in greathaste.
                                   TEXT 72
                        ami ei nilacale rahi ye vasiya
                    parisrama nahi mora toma sabara lagiya
                                 TRANSLATION     "There is no fatigue or trouble for Me, for I stay here at
Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri, and do not move at all. This is the favor ofall of you.
                                   TEXT 73
                    sannyasi manusa mora, nahi kona dhana                      ki diya tomara rna karimu sodhana?
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am a mendicant and have no money. How can I clear My debt for
the favor you have shown Me?
                                   TEXT 74
                   deha-matra dhana tomaya kailun samarpana
                   tahan vikai, yahan vecite tomara mana,,
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have only this body, and therefore I surrender it unto you. Now,
if you wish, you may sell it anywhere you like. It is your property."
                                   TEXT 75
                   prabhura vacane sabara dravi-bhuta mana
                      ajhora-nayane sabe karena krandana
                                 TRANSLATION     When all the devotees heard these sweet words of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, their hearts melted, and they began to shed incessant tears.
                                   TEXT 76
                   prabhu sabara gala dhari' karena rodana
                    kandite kandite sabaya kaila alingana
                                 TRANSLATION     Catching hold of His devotees, the Lord embraced them all and began
to cry and cry.
                                   TEXT 77
                       sabai rahila, keha calite narila
                       ara dina panca-sata ei-mate gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Unable to leave, everyone remained there, and five to seven more
days thus passed by.
                                   TEXT 78                   advaita avadhuta kichu kahe prabhu-paya
                       "sahaje tomara gune jagat vikaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Prabhu and Lord Nityananda Prabhu submitted these words at
the lotus feet of the Lord: "The entire world is naturally obligated toYou for Your transcendental attributes.
                                   TEXT 79
                  abara tate bandha'--aiche krpa-vakya-dore
                    toma chadi' keba kahan yaibare pare?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Yet You bind Your devotees again with Your sweet words. Under
these circumstances, who can go anywhere?"
                                   TEXT 80
                     tabe prabhu sabakare prabodha kariya
                       sabare vidaya dila susthira hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu peacefully calmed them all and bade
each of them farewell.
                                   TEXT 81
                 nityanande kahila--"tumi na asiha bara-bara
                      tathai amara sanga ha-ibe tomara"
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord specifically advised Nityananda Prabhu, "You should not
come here again and again. You will have My association in Bengal."
                                   TEXT 82
                     cale saba bhakta-gana rodana kariya
                     mahaprabhu rahila ghare visanna hana
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began their journey crying,
while the Lord remained morosely at His residence.                                   TEXT 83
                    nija-krpa-gune prabhu bandhila sabare
                    mahaprabhura krpa-rna ke sodhite pare?
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord bound everyone by His transcendental mercy. Who can repay
his debt for the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu?
                                   TEXT 84
                  yare yaiche nacaya prabhu svatantra isvara
                    tate tanre chadi' loka yaya desantara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the fully independent Personality of
Godhead and makes everyone dance as He likes. Leaving His company,therefore, all the devotees returned to their homes in different partsof the country.
                                   TEXT 85
                      kasthera putali yena kuhake nacaya
                     isvara-caritra kichu bujhana na yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     As a wooden doll dances to the will of a puppeteer, everything is
accomplished by the will of the Lord. Who can understand thecharacteristics of the Supreme Personality of Godhead?
                                   TEXT 86
                    purva-varse jagadananda `ai dekhibare
                     prabhu-ajna lana aila nadiya-nagare
                                 TRANSLATION     The previous year, Jagadananda Pandita, following the Lord's order,
had returned to the city of Nadia to see Sacimata.
                                   TEXT 87
                       aira carana yai' karila vandana
                  jagannathera vastra-prasada kaila nivedana
                                 TRANSLATION     When he arrived, he offered prayers at her lotus feet and then
offered her the cloth and prasada of Lord Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 88
                     prabhura name matare dandavat kaila
                     prabhura vinati-stuti matare kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     He offered obeisances to Sacimata in the name of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and informed her of all the Lord's submissive prayers to her.
                                   TEXT 89
                     jagadanande pana mata anandita mane
                  tenho prabhura katha kahe, sune ratri-dine
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda's coming pleased mother Saci very much. As he talked of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, she listened day and night.
                                   TEXT 90
                   jagadananda kahe,--"mata, kona kona dine
                    tomara etha asi' prabhu karena bhojane
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita said, "My dear mother, sometimes the Lord comes
here and eats all the food you have offered.
                                   TEXT 91
                      bhojana kariya kahe anandita hana
                      mata aji khaoyaila akantha puriya
                                 TRANSLATION     "After eating the food, the Lord says, `Today, mother has fed Me up
to My neck.
                                   TEXT 92
                    ami yai' bhojana kari--mata nahi jane
                 saksate khai ami' tenho `svapna' hena mane"
                                 TRANSLATION     " `I go there and eat the food My mother offers, but she cannot
understand that I am eating it directly. She thinks that this is adream."'
                                   TEXT 93
                   mata kahe,--"kata randhi uttama vyanjana
                   nimani ihan khaya,--iccha haya mora mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sacimata said,"I wish Nimai would eat all the nice vegetables I
cook. That is my desire.
                                   TEXT 94
                    nimani khanache,--aiche haya mora mana
                  pache jnana haya,--muni dekhinu `svapana"'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sometimes I think that Nimai has eaten them, but afterwards I
think that I was only dreaming."
                                   TEXT 95
                      ei-mata jagadananda sacimata-sane
                    caitanyera sukha-katha kahe ratri-dine
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, Jagadananda Pandita and mother Saci talked day and
night about the happiness of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 96
                      nadiyara bhakta-gane sabare milila
                     jagadanande pana sabe anandita haila
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita met all the other devotees in Nadia. They were
all very happy to have him present.
                                   TEXT 97
                     acarya milite tabe gela jagadananda
                     jagadanande pana haila acarya ananda                                 TRANSLATION
     Jagadanada Pandita thereafter went to meet Advaita Acarya, who also
was very happy to have him.
                                   TEXT 98
                   vasudeva, murari-gupta jagadanande pana
                    anande rakhila ghare, na dena chadiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Vasudeva Datta and Murari Gupta were so pleased to see Jagadananda
Pandita that they kept him at their homes and would not allow him toleave.
                                   TEXT 99
                   caitanyera marma-katha sune tanra mukhe
                    apana pasare sabe caitanya-katha-sukhe
                                 TRANSLATION     They heard confidential narrations about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
from the mouth of Jagadananda Pandita and forgot themselves in the greathappiness of hearing about the Lord.
                                   TEXT 100
                   jagadananda milite yaya yei bhakta-ghare
                      sei sei bhakta sukhe apana pasare
                                 TRANSLATION     Whenever Jagadananda Pandita went to visit a devotee's house, that
devotee immediately forgot himself in great happiness.
                                   TEXT 101
                  caitanyera prema-patra jagadananda dhanya
                    yare mile sei mane,--`pailun caitanya'
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Jagadananda Pandita! He is so favored by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu that anyone who meets him thinks, "Now I have gottenthe association of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu directly."                                   TEXT 102
                       sivananda-sena-grhe yana rahila
                   `candanadi' taila tahan eka-matra kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita stayed at Sivananda Sena's house for some time,
and they prepared about sixteen seers of scented sandalwood oil.
                                   TEXT 103
                     sugandhi kariya taila gagari bhariya
                       nilacale lana aila yatana kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     They filled a large earthen pot with the aromatic oil, and with
great care Jagadananda Pandita brought it to Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 104
                    govindera thani taila dhariya rakhila
                   "prabhu-ange diha' taila" govinde kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     This oil was placed in the care of Govinda, and Jagadananda
requested him, "Please rub this oil on the body of the Lord."
                                   TEXT 105
                   tabe prabhu-thani govinda kaila nivedana
                   `jagadananda candanadi-taila aniyachena
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda therefore told Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "Jagadananda
Pandita has brought some scented sandalwood oil.
                                   TEXT 106
                   tanra iccha,--prabhu alpa mastake lagaya
                  pitta-vayu-vyadhi-prakopa santa hana yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is his desire that Your Lordship apply a little of this oil on
Your head so that blood pressure due to bile and air will beconsiderably diminished.                                   TEXT 107
                   eka-kalasa sugandhi taila gaudete kariya
                      ihan aniyache bahu yatana kariya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "He prepared a large jug of it in Bengal, and with great care he
has brought it here."
                                   TEXT 108
                prabhu kahe,--"sannyasira nahi taile adhikara
                   tahate sugandhi taila,--parama dhikkara!
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord replied, "A sannyasi has no use for oil, especially
perfumed oil such as this. Take it out immediately."
                                   PURPORT     According to Raghunandana Bhattacarya, the spokesman for the smarta
regulative principles:     pratah-snane vrate sraddhe     dvadasyam grahane tatha     madya-lepa-samam tailam-     tasmat tailam vivarjayet"If one who has taken a vow smears oil on his body while bathing in themorning, while observing a ritualistic ceremony like the sraddhaceremony, or on dvadasi day, he may as well pour wine over his body.Therefore, oil should be rejected." This word vrata (vow) is sometimesunderstood to refer to the sannyasa-vrata. Raghunandana Bhattacarya hasalso said in his book Tithi-tattva:     ghrtam ca sarsapam tailam     yat tailam puspa-vasitam     adustam pakva-tailam ca     tailabhyange ca nityasahThis means that clarified butter (ghee), mustard oil, floral oil andboiled oil may be used only by grhasthas, householders.
                                   TEXT 109                   jagannathe deha' taila,--dipa yena jvale
                     tara parisrama haiba parama-saphale"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Deliver this oil to the temple of Jagannatha, where it may be
burned in the lamps. In this way, Jagadananda's labor to manufacture theoil will be perfectly successful."                                   TEXT 110
                    ei katha govinda jagadanandere kahila
                 mauna kari' rahila pandita, kichu na kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Govinda informed Jagadananda Pandita of this message,
Jagadananda remained silent, not saying even a word.
                                   TEXT 111
                   dina dasa gele govinda janaila ara-bara
                panditera iccha,--`taila prabhu kare angikara'
                                 TRANSLATION     When ten days had passed, Govinda again told Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, "It is the desire of Jagadananda Pandita that Your Lordshipaccept the oil."
                                   TEXT 112
                   suni' prabhu kahe kichu sakrodha vacana
                     mardaniya eka rakha karite mardana!
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord heard this, He angrily said, "Why not keep a masseur
to massage Me?
                                   TEXT 113
                    ei sukha lagi' ami karilun sannyasa.i
                  amara `sarva-nasa'--toma-sabara `parihasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Have I taken sanyasa for such happiness? Accepting this oil would
bring My ruination, and all of you would laugh.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu declared Himself a strict sannyasi. A
sannyasi is not supposed to take help from anyone. Retaining a masseurto give Him massages would indicate His dependence on others. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to follow very strictly the principle of notaccepting anyone's help for His bodily comfort.                                   TEXT 114
                    pathe yaite taila-gandha mora yei pabe
                      `dari sannyasi' kari' amare kahibe
                                 TRANSLATION     "If someone passing on the road smelled this oil on My head, he
would think Me a dari sannyasi, a tantric sannyasi who keeps women."
                                   TEXT 115
                   suni prabhura vakya govinda mauna karila
                  pratah-kale jagadananda prabhu-sthane aila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing these words of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Govinda remained
silent. The next morning, Jagadananda went to see the Lord.
                                   TEXT 116
               prabhu kahe,--"pandita, taila anila gauda ha-ite
                   ami ta' sannyasi,--taila na pari la-ite
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said to Jagadananda Pandita, "My dear
Pandita, you have brought Me some oil from Bengal, but since I am in therenounced order, I cannot accept it.
                                   TEXT 117
                    jagannathe deha' lana dipa yena jvale
                     tomara sakala srama ha-ibe saphale"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Deliver the oil to the temple of Jagannatha so that it may be
burned in the lamps. Thus your labor in preparing the oil will befruitful."
                                   TEXT 118
                  pandita kahe,--`ke tomare kahe mithya vani
                    ami gauda haite taila kabhu nahi ani'
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita replied, "Who tells You all these false
stories? I never brought any oil from Bengal."
                                   TEXT 119
                   eta bali' ghara haite taila-kalasa lana
                    prabhura age anginate phelila bhangiya
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Jagadananda Pandita took the jug of oil from the
room and threw it down before Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in the courtyardand broke it.
                                   TEXT 120
                   taila bhangi' sei pathe nija-ghara giya
                      suiya rahila ghare kapata khiliya
                                 TRANSLATION     After breaking the jug, Jagadananda Pandita returned to his
residence, bolted the door and lay down.
                                   TEXT 121
                    trtiya divase prabhu tanra dvare yana
                    `uthaha' pandita'--kari' kahena dakiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Three days later, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the door of his
room and said, "My dear Jagadananda Pandita, please get up.
                                   TEXT 122
                    `aji bhiksa diba amaya kariya randhane
                      madhyahne asiba, ebe yai darasane,
                                 TRANSLATION     "I want you personally to cook My lunch today. I am going now to
see the Lord in the temple. I shall return at noon."
                                   TEXT 123
                    eta bali' prabhu gela, pandita uthila
                  snana kari' nana vyanjana randhana karila                                 TRANSLATION
     After Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sald this and left, Jagadananda
Pandita got up from his bed, bathed, and began to cook varieties ofvegetables.
                                   TEXT 124
                     madhyahna kariya prabhu aila bhojane
                      pada praksalana kari' dilena asane
                                 TRANSLATION     After finishing His noontime ritualistic duties, the Lord arrived
for lunch. Jagadananda Pandita washed the Lord's feet and gave the Lorda sitting place.
                                   TEXT 125
                    saghrta salyanna kala-pate stupa kaila
                 kalara donga bhari' vyanjana caudike dharila
                                 TRANSLATION     He had cooked fine rice, mixed it with ghee and piled it high on a
banana leaf. There were also varieties of vegetables, placed all aroundin pots made of banana tree bark.
                                   TEXT 126
                       anna-vyanjanopari tulasi-manjari
                    jagannathera pitha-pana age ane dhari'
                                 TRANSLATION     On the rice and vegetables were tulasi flowers, and in front of the
Lord were cakes, sweet rice and other prasada of Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 127
               prabhu kahe,--"dvitiya-pate bada' anna-vyanjana
                    tomaya amaya aji ekatra kariba bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord said, "Spread another leaf with a helping of rice and
vegetables so that today you and I may take lunch together."
                                   TEXT 128                 hasta tuli' rahena prabhu, na karena bhojana
                   tabe pandita kahena kichu saprema vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu kept His hands raised and would not accept
the prasada until Jagadananda Pandita, with great affection and love,spoke the following words.
                                   TEXT 129
                    "apane prasada laha, pache muni la-imu
                     tomara agraha ami kemane khandimu?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please first take prasada Yourself, and I shall eat later. I shall
not refuse Your request."
                                   TEXT 130
                     tabe mahaprabhu sukhe bhojane vasila
                     vyanjanera svada pana kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     In great happiness, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then accepted the
lunch. When He had tasted the vegetables, He again began to speak.
                                   TEXT 131
                    "krodhavesera pakera haya aiche svada!
                    ei ta' janiye tomaya krsnera `prasada'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Even when you cook in an angry mood," He said, "the food is very
tasteful. This shows how pleased Krsna is with you.
                                   TEXT 132
                      apane khaibe krsna, tahara lagiya
                    tomara haste paka karaya uttama kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because He will personally eat the food, Krsna makes you cook so
nicely.                                   TEXT 133
                    aiche amrta-anna krsne kara samarpana
                    tomara bhagyera sima ke kare varnana?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "You offer such nectarean rice to Krsna. Who can estimate the limit
of your fortune?"
                                   TEXT 134
                  pandita kahe,--"ye khaibe, sei paka-karta
                    ami-saba--kevala-matra samagri-aharta"
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita replied, "He who will eat has cooked this. As
far as I am concerned, I simply collect the ingredients."
                                   TEXT 135
                  punah punah pandita nana vyanjana parivese
                 bhaye kichu na balena prabhu, khayena harise
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadanada Pandita continued to offer the Lord varieties of
vegetables. Out of fear, the Lord said nothing, but continued eatinghappily.
                                   TEXT 136
                    agraha kariya pandita karaila bhojana
                    ara dina haite bhojana haila dasa-guna
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita eagerly forced the Lord to eat so much that He
ate ten times more than on other days.
                                   TEXT 137
                     bara-bara prabhu uthite karena mana
                      sei-kale pandita parivese vyanjana
                                 TRANSLATION     Again and again when the Lord wished to get up, Jagadananda Pandita
would feed Him more vegetables.
                                   TEXT 138
                  kichu balite narena prabhu, khayena tarase
                     na khaile jagadananda karibe upavase
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu dared not forbid him to feed Him more. He
just continued eating, fearful that Jagadananda would fast if Hestopped.
                                   TEXT 139
                   tabe prabhu kahena kari' vinaya-sammana
                   `dasa-guna khaoyaila ebe kara samadhana'
                                 TRANSLATION     At last the Lord respecffully submitted, "My dear Jagadananda, you
have already made Me eat ten times more than I am used to. Now, pleasestop."
                                   TEXT 140
                     tabe mahaprabhu uthi' kaila acamana
                   pandita anila, mukhavasa, malya, candana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stood up and washed His hands and mouth,
while Jagadananda pandita brought spices, a garland, and sandalwoodpulp.
                                   TEXT 141
                   candanadi lana prabhu vasila sei sthane
                     `amara age aji tumi karaha bhojane'
                                 TRANSLATION     Accepting the sandalwood pulp and garland, the Lord sat down and
said, "Now, in front of Me, you must eat."
                                   TEXT 142
                  pandita kahe,--"prabhu yai' karuna visrama                   mui, ebe la-iba prasada kari' samadhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda replied, "My Lord, You go take rest. I shall take
prasada after I finish making some arrangements.
                                   TEXT 143
                   rasuira karya kairache ramai, raghunatha
                 inha sabaya dite cahi kichu vyanjana-bhata"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Ramai Pandita and Raghunatha Bhatta did the cooking, and I want to
give them some rice and vegetables."
                                   TEXT 144
                 prabhu kahena,--"govinda, tumi ihani rahiba
                     pandita bhojana kaile, amare kahiba"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then told Govinda, "You remain here. When
the Pandita has taken his food, come inform Me.
                                   TEXT 145
                      eta kahi' mahaprabhu karila gamana
                    govindere pandita kichu kahena vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     After Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had said this and left, Jagadananda
Pandita spoke to Govinda.
                                   TEXT 146
                   "tumi sighra yaha karite pada-samvahane
                    kahiha,--`pandita ebe vasila bhojane'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Go quickly and massage the Lord's feet," he said. "You may tell
Him, `The Pandita has just sat down to take his meal.'
                                   TEXT 147                    tomare prabhura `sesa' rakhimu dhariya
                    prabhu nidra gele, tumi khaiha asiya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I shall keep some remnants of the Lord's food for you. When He is
asleep, come and take your portion."
                                   TEXT 148
                    ramai, nandai ara govinda, raghunatha
                 sabare bantiya dila prabhura vyanjana-bhata
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita thus distributed remnants of the Lord's food to
Ramai, Nandai, Govinda and Raghunatha Bhatta.
                                   TEXT 149
                     apane prabhura `sesa' karila bhojana
                     tabe govindere prabhu pathaila punah
                                 TRANSLATION     He also personally ate the remnants of food leff by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Then the Lord again sent Govinda.
                                   TEXT 150
                 "dekha,--jagadananda prasada paya ki na paya
                      sighra asi' samacara kahibe amaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord told him, "Go see whether Jagadananda Pandita is eating.
Then quickly return and let Me know."
                                   TEXT 151
                 govinda asi' dekhi' kahila panditera bhojana
                    tabe mahaprabhu svastye karila sayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing that Jagadananda Pandita was indeed eating, Govinda informed
the Lord, who then became peaceful and went to sleep.
                                   TEXT 152                   jagadanande-prabhute prema cale ei-mate
                    satyabhama-krsne yaiche suni bhagavate
                                 TRANSLATION     The affectionate loving exchages between Jagadananda Pandita and
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued in this manner, exactly like theexchanges between Satyabhama and Lord Krsna related in Srimad-Bhagavatam.
                                   TEXT 153
                  jagadanandera saubhagyera ke kahibe sima?
                   jagadanandera saubhagyera tenha se upama
                                 TRANSLATION     Who can estimate the limit of Jagadananda Pandita's fortune? He
himself is the example of his own great fortune.
                                   TEXT 154
                 jagadanandera `nrema-vivarta' sune yei jana
                   premera `svarupa' jane, paya prema-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Anyone who hears about the loving exchanges between Jagadananda
Pandita and Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu, or who reads Jagadananda's bookPremavivarta, can understand what love is. Moreover, he achievesecstatic love of Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     The word vivarta means accepting something to be the opposite of
what it appears. Here, Jagadananda Pandita appeared very angry, but thisanger was a manifestation of his great love for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Prema-vivarta is also the name of a book written by Jagadananda Pandita.Therefore the author of Caitanya-caritamrta, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami,uses the words prema-vivarta to refer to one who reads the book or hearsabout Jagadananda Pandita's relationships with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.In either case, such a person very soon achieves love of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 155                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Twelfth Chapter, describing Jagadananda Pandita's lovingdealings with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                               Chapter Thirteen
       Pastimes with Jagadananda Pandita and Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura gives the following summary of the
Thirteenth Chapter in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. Thinking Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu to be uncomfortable sleeping on bark of plantain trees,Jagadananda made a pillow and quilt for Him. The Lord, however, did notaccept them. Then Svarupa Damodara Gosvami made another pillow and quiltfrom finely shredded plantain leaves, and after strongly objecting, theLord accepted them. With the permission of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,Jagadananda Pandita went to Vrndavana, where he discussed manydevotional subjects with Sanatana Gosvami. There was also a discussionabout Mukunda Sarasvati's garment. When Jagadananda returned toJagannatha Puri, he presented Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu some gifts fromSanatana Gosvami, and the incident of the pilu fruit took place.     Once, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became ecstatic upon hearing thesongs of a deva-dasi. Unaware of who was singing, He ran toward herthrough thorny bushes, but when Govinda informed the Lord that it was awoman singing, He immediately stopped. By this incident, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu instructed everyone that sannyasis and Vaisnavas should nothear women singing.     When Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami left Varanasi on his way toJagannatha Puri after completing his education, he met Ramadasa VisvasaPandita. Visvasa Pandita was very proud of his education, and being animpersonalist, he was not well received by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Apartial study of the life of Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami comprises the endof this chapter.
                                    TEXT 1                         krsna- vicch eda-ja ta-rtya
                            ksine capi manas-tanu                          dadhate phullatam bhavair                           yasya tam gauram asraye
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me take shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Gauracandra. His mind
became exhausted and His body very thin from the pain of separation fromKrsna, but when He felt ecstatic love for the Lord, He again becamefully developed.                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Nityananda
Prabhu! All glories to Advaita Acarya! And alI glories to the devoteesof the Lord!
                                    TEXT 3
                    hena-mate mahaprabhu jagadananda-sange
                      nana-mate asvadaya premera tarange
                                 TRANSLATION     In the company of Jagadananda Pandita, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
would taste various transcendental relationships of pure love.
                                    TEXT 4
                    krsna-vicchede duhkhe ksina mana-kaya
                   bhavavese prabhu kabhu praphullita haya
                                 TRANSLATION     The unhappiness of separation from Krsna exhausted the Lord's mind
and reduced the structure of His body, but when He felt emotions ofecstatic love, He again became developed and healthy.
                                    TEXT 5
                   kalara saralate, sayana, ati ksina kaya
                     saralate hada lage, vyatha haya gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Because He was very thin, when He lay down to rest on the dry bark
of plantain trees, it caused Him pain in His bones.
                                    TEXT 6
                   dekhi' saba bhakta-gana maha-duhkha paya
                    sahite nare jagadananda, srjila upaya
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees felt very unhappy to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
in pain. Indeed, they could not tolerate it. Then Jagadananda Panditadevised a remedy.
                                    TEXT 7
                   suksma vastra ani' gaurika diya rangaila
                       simulira tula diya taha puraila
                                 TRANSLATION     He acquired some fine cloth and colored it with red oxide. Then he
filled it with cotton from a simula tree.
                                    TEXT 8
                     eka tuli-balisa govindera hate dila
                   `prabhure soyaiha ihaya'--tahare kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way he made a quilt and a pillow, which he then gave to
Govinda, saying, "Ask the Lord to lie on this."
                                    TEXT 9
                      svarupa-gosanike kahe jagadananda
                   `aji apane yana prabhure karaiha sayana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda said to Svarupa Damodara Gosvami,"Today please
personally persuade Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to lie down on the bed."
                                   TEXT 10
                     sayanera kale svarupa tahani rahila
                 tuli-balisa dekhi' prabhu krodhavista ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     When it was time for the Lord to go to bed, Svarupa Damodara stayed
nearby, but when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw the quilt and pillow, Hewas immediately very angry.
                                   TEXT 11
                 govindere puchena,--`iha karaila kon jana?'
                 jagadanandera nama suni' sankoca haila mana                                 TRANSLATION
     The Lord inquired from Govinda,"Who has made this?" When Govinda
named Jagadananda Pandita, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was somewhat fearful.
                                   TEXT 12
                     govindere kahi' sei tuli dura kaila
                      kalara sarala-upara sayana karila
                                 TRANSLATION     After asking Govinda to put aside the quilt and pillow, the Lord
lay down on the dry plantain bark.
                                   TEXT 13
                svarupa kahe,--`tomara iccha, ki kahite pari?
                  sayya upeksile pandita duhkha pabe bhari'
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara said to the Lord, "I cannot contradict Your
supreme will, my Lord, but if You do not accept the bedding, JagadanandaPandita will feel great unhappiness."
                                   TEXT 14
                   prabhu kahena,--"khata eka anaha padite
                   jagadananda cahe amaya visaya bhunjaite
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "You should bring a bedstead here
for Me to lie on. Jagadananda wants Me to enjoy material happiness.
                                   TEXT 15
                     sannyasi manusa amara bhumite sayana
                   amare khata-tuli-balisa mastaka-mundana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am in the renounced order, and therefore I must lie on the
floor. For Me to use a bedstead, quilt or pillow would be veryshameful."
                                   TEXT 16                      svarupa-gosani asi' pandite kahila
                   suni' jagadananda mane maha-duhkha paila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Svarupa Damodara returned and related all these incidents,
Jagadananda Pandita felt very unhappy.
                                   TEXT 17
                      svarupa-gosani tabe srjila prakara
                       kadalira suska-patra anila apara
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Svarupa Damodara Gosvami devised another method. First he
secured a large quantity of dry banana leaves.
                                   TEXT 18
                   nakhe ciri' ciri' taha ati suksma kaila
                   prabhura bahirvasa duite se saba bharila
                                 TRANSLATION     He then tore the leaves into very fine fibers with his nails and
filled two of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's outer garments with the fibers.
                                   TEXT 19
                        ei-mata dui kaila odana-padane
                      angikara kaila prabhu aneka yatane
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, Svarupa Damodara made some bedding and a pillow, and
after much endeavor by the devotees, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu acceptedthem.
                                   TEXT 20
                tate sayana karena prabhu,--dekhi' sabe sukhi
                jagadananda--bhitare krodha bahire maha-duhkhi
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone was happy to see the Lord lie down on that bed, but
Jagadananda was inwardly angry, and externally he appeared very unhappy.                                   TEXT 21
                  purve jagadanandera iccha vrndavana yaite
                  prabhu ajna na dena tanre, na pare calite
                                 TRANSLATION     Formerly, when Jagadananda Pandita had desired to go to Vrndavana,
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had not given His permission, and therefore hecould not go.
                                   TEXT 22
                   bhitarera krodha-duhkha prakasa na kaila
                   mathura yaite prabhu-sthane ajna magila
                                 TRANSLATION     Now, concealing his anger and unhappiness, Jagadananda Pandita
again asked Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for permission to go to Mathura.
                                   TEXT 23
               prabhu kahe,--"mathura yaiba amaya krodha kari'
                   amaya dosa lagana tumi ha-iba bhikhari"
                                 TRANSLATION     With great affection, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "If you are
angry with Me when you go to Mathura, you will merely become a beggarand criticize Me."
                                   TEXT 24
                   jagadananda kahe prabhura dhariya carana
                   "purva haite iccha mora yaite vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     Grasping the Lord's feet, Jagadananda Pandita then said, "For a
long time I have desired to go to Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 25
                     prabhu-ajna nahi, tate na pari yaite
                    ebe ajna deha;, avasya yaimu niscite"
                                 TRANSLATION     "I could not go without Your Lordship's permission. Now You must
give me permission, and I shall certainly go there."
                                   TEXT 26
                 prabhu prite tanra gamana na karena angikara
                   tenho prabhura thani ajna mage bara bara
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of affection for Jagadananda Pandita, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu would not permit him to depart, but Jagadananda Panditarepeatedly insisted that the Lord give him permission to go.
                                   TEXT 27
                   svarupa-gosanire pandita kaila nivedana
                    "purva haite vrndavana yaite mora mana
                                 TRANSLATION     He then submitted a plea to Svarupa Damodara Gosvami. "For a very
long time," he said, "I have wanted to go to Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 28
                     prabhu-ajna vina tahan yaite na pari
                  ebe ajna na dena more, `krodhe yaha' bali
                                 TRANSLATION     "I cannot go there, however, without the Lord's permission, which
at present He denies me. He says, `You are going because you are angryat Me.'
                                   TEXT 29
                      sahajei mora tahan yaite mana haya
                    prabhu-ajna lana deha', kariye vinaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Naturally I have a desire to go to Vrndavana; therefore please
humbly request Him to grant His permission."
                                   TEXT 30
                   tabe svarupa-gosani kahe prabhura carane
                  "jagadanandera iccha bada yaite vrndavane                                 TRANSLATION
     Thereafter, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami submitted this appeal at the
lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. "Jagadananda Pandita intenselydesires to go to Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 31
                    tomara thani ajna tenho mage bara bara
                  ajna deha',--mathura dekhi' aise eka-bara
                                 TRANSLATION     "He begs for Your permission again and again. Therefore, please
permit him to go to Mathura and then return.
                                   TEXT 32
                     aire dekhite yaiche gauda-dese yaya
                    taiche eka-bara vrndavana dekhi' aya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "You permitted him to go see mother Saci in Bengal, and You may
similarly permit him to go see Vrndavana and then return here."
                                   TEXT 33
                    svarupa-gosanira bole prabhu ajna dila
                      jagadanande bolana tanre sikhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     At the request of Svarupa Damodara, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu granted
Jagadananda Pandita permission to go. The Lord sent for him andinstructed him as follows.
                                   TEXT 34
                  "varanasi paryanta svacchande yaiba pathe
                     age savadhane yaiba ksatriyadi-sathe
                                 TRANSLATION     "You may go as far as Varanasi without encountering disturbances,
but beyond Varanasi you should be very careful to traveI on the path inthe company of the ksatriyas.
                                   PURPORT     The path from Varanasi to Vrndavana was infested with robbers, and
therefore in those days there were ksatriyas to protect travelers.
                                   TEXT 35                 kevala gaudiya paile `batapada' kari' bandhe
                   saba luti' bandhi' rakhe, yaite virodhe
                                 TRANSLATION     "As soon as the plunderers on the road see a Bengali traveling
alone, they take everything from him, arrest him and do not let him go.
                                   PURPORT     Bengalis are generally not very stout or strong. Therefore when a
lone Bengali traverses the roads of Bihar, the plunderers on the roadcapture him, rob all his belongings and kidnap him for their ownservice. According to one opinion, the rogues of Bihar know very wellthat Bengalis are intelligent; therefore these thieves generally forcethe Bengalis into service requiring intelligence and do not allow themto leave.
                                   TEXT 36                     mathura gele sanatana-sangei rahiba
                    mathurara svami sabera carana vandiba
                                 TRANSLATION     "When you reach Mathura, you should remain with Sanatana Gosvami
and offer respecfful obeisances to the feet of all the leading menthere.
                                   TEXT 37
                   dure rahi' bhakti kariha sange na rahiba
                     tan-sabara acara-cesta la-ite nariba
                                 TRANSLATION     "Do not mix freely with the residents of Mathura; show them respect
from a distance. Because you are on a different platform of devotionalservice, you cannot adopt their behavior and practices.
                                   PURPORT     The residents of Vrndavana and Mathura are devotees of Krsna in
parental affection, and their feelings always conflict with the opinionsof smarta- brahmanas. Devotees who worship Krsna in opulence cannotunderstand the parental devotional feelings of the residents of Mathuraand Vrndavana, who follow the path of spontaneous love. Devotees on theplatform of vidhi-marga (regulative devotional principles) may
misunderstand the activities of those on the platform of raga-marga(devotional service in spontaneous love). Therefore Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu instructed Jagadananda Pandita to remain apart from theresidents of Vrndavana, who were spontaneous devotees, so as not tobecome disrespectful toward them.
                                   TEXT 38                     sanatana-sange kariha vana darasana
                    sanatanera sanga na chadiba eka-ksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Visit all twelve forests of Vrndavana in the company of Sanatana
Gosvami. Do not leave his association for even a moment.
                                   TEXT 39
                   sighra asiha, tahan na rahiha cira-kala
                    govardhane na cadiha dekhite `gopala'
                                 TRANSLATION     "You should remain in Vrndavana for only a short time and then
return here as soon as possible. Also, do not climb Govardhana Hill tosee the Gopala Deity.
                                   PURPORT     In his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura advises
that one avoid remaining in Vrndavana for a very long time. As thesaying goes, "Familiarity breeds contempt." If one stays in Vrndavanafor many days, he may fail to maintain proper respect for itsinhabitants. Therefore those who have not attained the stage ofspontaneous love for Krsna should not live in Vrndavana very long. It isbetter for them to make short visits. One should also avoid climbingGovardhana Hill to see the Gopala Deity. Since Govardhana Hill itself isidentical with Gopala, one should not step on the hill or touch it withhis feet. One may see Gopala when He goes elsewhere.
                                   TEXT 40                       amiha asitechi,--kahiha sanatane
                  amara tare eka-sthana yena kare vrndavane"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Inform Sanatana Gosvami that I am coming to Vrndavana for a second
time and that he should therefore arrange a place for Me to stay."
                                   TEXT 41                     eta bali' jagadanande kaila alingana
                  jagadananda calila prabhura vandiya carana
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, the Lord embraced Jagadananda Pandita, who then
worshiped the Lord's lotus feet and started for Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 42
                      saba bhakta-gana-thani ajna magila
                     vana-pathe cali' cali' varanasi aila
                                 TRANSLATION     He took permission from all the devotees and then departed.
Traveling on the forest path, he soon reached Varanasi.
                                   TEXT 43
                 tapana-misra, candrasekhara,--donhare milila
                  tanra thani prabhura katha sakala-i sunila
                                 TRANSLATION     When he met Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara in Varanasi, they both
heard from him about topics concerning Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 44
                        mathurate asi' milila sanatane
                     dui-janera sange dunhe anandita mane
                                 TRANSLATION     Finally Jagadananda Pandita reached Mathura, where he met Sanatana
Gosvami. T hey were very pleased to see each other.
                                   TEXT 45
                 sanatana karaila tanre dvadasa vana darasana
                     gokule rahila dunhe dekhi' mahavana
                                 TRANSLATION     After Sanatana Gosvami had taken Jagadananda to see all twelve
forests of Vrndavana, concluding with Mahavana, they both remained inGokula.                                   TEXT 46
                   sanatanera gophate dunhe rahe eka-thani
                      pandita paka karena devalaye yai'
                                 TRANSLATION     They stayed in Sanatana Gosvami's cave, but Jagadananda Pandita
would go cook for himself at a nearby temple.
                                   TEXT 47
                     sanatana bhiksa karena yai' mahavane
                    kabhu devalaye, kabhu brahmana-sadane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami would beg alms from door to door in the vicinity
of Mahavana. Sometimes he would go to a temple and sometimes to abrahmana's house.
                                   TEXT 48
                      sanatana panditera kare samadhana
                      mahavane dena ani' magi' anna-pana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami attended to all of Jagadananda Pandita's needs. He
begged in the area of Mahavana and brought Jagadananda all kinds ofthings to eat and drink.
                                   TEXT 49
                     eka-dina sanatane pandita nimantrila
                     nitya-krtya kari' tenha paka cadaila
                                 TRANSLATION     One day Jagadananda Pandita, having invited Sanatana to the nearby
temple for lunch, finished his routine duties and began to cook.
                                   TEXT 50
                 `mukunda sarasvati' nama sannyasi maha-jane
                      eka bahirvasa tenho dila sanatane
                                 TRANSLATION     Previously, a great sannyasi named Mukunda Sarasvati had given
Sanatana Gosvami an outer garment.
                                   TEXT 51
                     sanatana sei vastra mastake bandhiya
                    lagadanandera vasa-dvare vasila asiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami was wearing this cloth bound about his head when
he came to Jagadananda Pandita's door and sat down.
                                   TEXT 52
                ratula vastra dekhi' pandita premavista ha-ila
                 `mahaprabhura prasada' jani' tanhare puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     Assuming the reddish cloth to be a gift from Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Jagadananda Pandita was overwhelmed with ecstatic love. Thus hequestioned Sanatana Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 53
                     "kahan paila tumi ei ratula vasana?"
                   `mukunda-sarasvati' dila,--kahe sanatana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Where did you get that reddish cloth on your head?" Jagadananda
asked. Sanatana Gosvami replied, "Mukunda Sarasvati gave it to me."
                                   TEXT 54
                     suni' panditera mane krodha upajila
                     bhatera handi hate lana marite aila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Jagadananda Pandita was immediately very angry and
took a cooking pot in his hand, intending to beat Sanatana Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 55
                     sanatana tanre lani' lajjita ha-ila
                  balite lagila pandita handi culate dharila                                 TRANSLATION
     Sanatana Gosvami, however, knew Jagadananda Pandita very well and
was consequently somewhat ashamed. Jagadananda therefore left thecooking pot on the stove and spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 56
                   "tumi mahaprabhura hao parsada-pradhana
                    toma-sama mahaprabhura priya nahi ana
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are one of the chief associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Indeed, no one is dearer to Him than you.
                                   TEXT 57
                    anya sannyasira vastra tumi dhara sire
                     kon aiche haya,--iha pare sahibare?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Still, you have bound your head with a cloth given to you by
another sannyasi. Who can tolerate such behavior?"
                                   TEXT 58
                   sanatana kahe--"sadhu pandita-mahasa ya!
                     toma-sama caitanyera priya keha naya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami said, "My dear Jagadananda Pandita, you are a
greatly learned saint. No one is dearer to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thanyou.
                                   TEXT 59
                      aiche caitanya-nistha yogya tomate
                    tumi na dekhaile iha sikhiba ke-mate?
                                 TRANSLATION     "This faith in Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fits you quite well. Unless
you demonstrate it, how could I learn such faith?
                                   TEXT 60                    yaha dekhibare vastra mastake bandhila
                    sei apurva prema ei pratyaksa dekhila
                                 TRANSLATION     "My purpose in binding my head with the cloth has now been
fulfilled because I have personally seen your uncommon Iove for SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 61
                  rakta-vastra `vaisnavera' parite na yuyaya
                     kona pravasire dimu, ki kaya uhaya?
                                 TRANSLATION     "This saffron cloth is unfit for a Vaisnava to wear; therefore I
have no use for it. I shalI give it to a stranger."
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments on this incident
as follows: Vaisnavas are all liberated persons, unattached to anythingmaterial. Therefore a Vaisnava need not accept the dress of a sannyasito prove his exalted position. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted therenounced order from a sannyasi of the Mayavada school. Present-dayVaisnava sannyasis, however, never think that by accepting the dress ofthe sannyasa order they have become equal to Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Infact, a Vaisnava accepts the sannyasa order to remain an eternal servantof his spiritual master. He accepts the sannyasa order knowing that heis unequal to his spiritual master, who is a paramahamsa, and he thinksthat he is unfit to dress like a paramahamsa. Therefore a Vaisnavaaccepts sannyasa out of humility, not out of pride.     Sanatana Gosvami had adopted the dress of a paramahamsa; thereforeit was inappropriate for him to wear the saffron cloth on his head.However, a Vaisnava sannyasi does not think himself fit to imitate thedress of a paramahamsa Vaisnava. According to the principles set down bySri Caitanya Mahaprabhu (trnad api sunicena), one should always thinkhimself in the lowest stage, not on the level of a paramahamsa Vaisnava.Thus a Vaisnava will sometimes accept the sannyasa order just to keephimself below the level of a paramahamsa Vaisnava. This is theinstruction of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura.
                                   TEXT 62                  paka kari' jagadananda caitanya samarpila
                      dui-jana vasi' tabe prasada paila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Jagadananda Pandita finished cooking, he offered the food to
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Then he and Sanatana Gosvami sat down and atethe prasada.                                   TEXT 63
                      prasada pai anyonye kaila alingana
                    caitanya-virahe dunhe karila krandana
                                 TRANSLATION     After eating the prasada, they embraced each other and cried due to
separation from Lord Caitanya.
                                   TEXT 64
                      ei-mata masa dui rahila vrndavane
                    caitanya-viraha-duhkha na yaya sahane
                                 TRANSLATION     They passed two months in Vrndavana in this way. Finally they could
no longer tolerate the unhappiness of separation from Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 65
                     mahaprabhura sandesa kahila sanatane
                  `amiha asitechi, rahite kariha eka-sthane'
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita therefore gave Sanatana Gosvami the message
from the Lord: "I am also coming to Vrndavana; please arrange a placefor Me to stay."
                                   TEXT 66
                     jagadananda-pandita tabe ajna magila
                   sanatana prabhure kichu bheta-vastu dila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sanatana Gosvami granted permission for Jagadananda to return
to Jagannatha Puri, he gave Jagadananda some gifts for Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 67
                   rasa-sthalira valu ara govardhanera sila
                    suska pakka pilu-phala ara gunja-mala                                 TRANSLATION
     The gifts consisted of some sand from the site of the rasa-lila, a
stone from Govardhana Hill, dry ripened pilu fruits and a garland ofsmall conchshells.
                                   TEXT 68
                     jagadananda-pandita calila saba lana
                   vyakula haila sanatana tanre vidaya diya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Jagadananda Pandita, bearing all these gifts, started on his
journey. Sanatana Gosvami, however, was very agitated after bidding himfarewell.
                                   TEXT 69
                  prabhura nimitta eka-sthana mane vicarila
                    dvadasaditya-tilaya eka `matha' paila
                                 TRANSLATION     Soon afterward, Sanatana Gosvami selected a place where Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu could stay while in Vrndavana. It was a tempIe inthe highlands named Dvadasaditya-tila.
                                  TEXT 70                  sei sthana rakhila gosani samskara kariya
                   mathera age rakhila eka chauni bandhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sanatana Gosvami kept the temple very clean and in good repair. In
front of it he erected a small hut.
                                   TEXT 71
                    sighra cali' nilacale gela jagadananda
                    bhakta saha gosani haila parama ananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Meanwhile, traveling very quickly, Jagadananda Pandita soon arrived
in Jagannatha Puri, much to the joy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Hisdevotees.
                                   TEXT 72                     prabhura carana vandi' sabare milila
                    mahaprabhu tanre drdha alingana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     After offering prayers at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, Jagadananda Pandita greeted everyone. Then the Lord embracedJagadananda very strongly.
                                   TEXT 73
                    sanatanera name pandita dandavat kaila
                   rasa-sthalira dhuli adi saba bheta dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita also offered obeisances to the Lord on behalf
of Sanatana Gosvami. Then he gave the Lord the dust from the site of therasa dance and the other gifts.
                                   TEXT 74
                  saba dravya rakhilena, pilu dilena bantiya
                 `vrndavanera phala' bali' khaila hrsta hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu kept all the gifts except the pilu fruits,
which He distributed to the devotees. Because the fruits were fromVrndavana, everyone ate them with great happiness.
                                   TEXT 75
                       ye keha jane, anti cusite lagila
                    ye na jane gaudiya pilu cavana khaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Those devotees who were familiar with pilu fruits sucked on the
seeds, but the Bengali devotees who did not know what they were chewedthe seeds and swallowed them.
                                   TEXT 76
                   mukhe tara jhala gela, jihva kare jvala
                    vrndavanera `pilu' khaite ei eka lila
                                 TRANSLATION     The hot chili-like taste burned the tongues of those who chewed the
seeds. The eating of piIu fruits from Vrndavana was a pastime for SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 77
                     jagadanandera agamane sabara ullasa
                       ei-mate nilacale prabhura vilasa
                                 TRANSLATION     When Jagadananda Pandita returned from Vrndavana, everyone was
jubilant. Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu enjoyed His pastimes whileresiding at Jagannatha Puri.
                                   TEXT 78
                     eka-dina prabhu yamesvara-tota yaite
                       sei-kale deva-dasi lagila gaite
                                 TRANSLATION     One day when the Lord was going to the temple of Yamesvara, a
female singer began to sing in the Jagannatha temple.
                                   TEXT 79
                     gujjari-ragini lana sumadhura-svare
                   `gita-govinda'-pada gaya jaga-mana hare
                                 TRANSLATION     She sang a gujjari tune in a very sweet voice, and because the
subject was Jayadeva Gosvami's Gita-govinda, the song attracted theattention of the entire world.
                                   TEXT 80
                    dure gana suni' prabhura ha-ila avesa
                    stri, purusa, ke gaya,--na jane visesa
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing the song from a distance, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
immediately became ecstatic. He did not know whether it was a man or awoman singing.
                                   TEXT 81                      tare milibare prabhu avese dhaila
                   pathe `sijera badi' haya, phutiya calila
                                 TRANSLATION     As the Lord ran in ecstasy to meet the singer, thorny hedges
pricked His body.
                                   TEXT 82
                     ange kanta lagila, kichu na janila.
                   aste-vyaste govinda tanra pachete dhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda ran very quickly behind the Lord, who did not feel any pain
from the pricking of the thorns.
                                   TEXT 83
                   dhana yayena prabhu, stri ache alpa dure
                 stri gaya' bali' govinda prabhure kaila kole
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was running very rapidly, and the girl was
only a short distance away. Just then Govinda caught the Lord in hisarms and cried, "It is a woman singing!"
                                   TEXT 84
                    stri-nama suni' prabhura bahya ha-ila
                      punarapi sei pathe bahudi' calila
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as He heard the word "woman," the Lord became externally
conscious and turned back.
                                   TEXT 85
                  prabhu kahe,--"govinda, aji rakhila jivana
                    stri-parasa haile amara ha-ita marana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Govinda," He said, "you have saved My life. If I had
touched the body of a woman, I would certainly have died.                                   TEXT 86
                       e-rna sodhite ami narimu tomara"
              govinda kahe,--jagannatha rakhena mui kon chara'?
                                 TRANSLATION     "I shall never be able to repay My debt to you." Govinda replied,
"Lord Jagannatha has saved You. I am insignificant."
                                   TEXT 87
                  prabhu kahe,--"govinda, mora sange rahiba
                  yahan tahan mora raksaya savadhana ha-iba"
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "My dear Govinda, you should stay
with Me always. There is danger anywere and everywhere; therefore youshouId protect Me very carefully."
                                   TEXT 88
                   eta bali' leuti' prabhu gela nija-sthane
                    suni' maha-bhaya ha-ila svarupadi-mane
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned home. When
Svarupa Gosvami and His other attendants heard about the incident, theywere very af raid.
                                   TEXT 89
                etha tapana-misra-putra raghunatha-bhattacarya
                  prabhure dekhite calila chadi' sarva karya
                                 TRANSLATION     During this time, Raghunatha Bhattacarya, the son of Tapana Misra,
gave up all his duties and left home, intending to meet Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 90
                   kasi haite calila tenho gauda-patha diya
                     sange sevaka cale tanra jhali vahiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Accompanied by one servant carrying his baggage, Raghunatha Bhatta
started from Varanasi and traveled along the path leading throughBengal.
                                   TEXT 91
                      pathe tare milila visvasa-ramadasa
                visvasa-khanara kayastha tenho rajara visvasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In Bengal he met Ramadasa Visvasa, who belonged to the kayastha
caste. He was one of the king's secretaries.
                                   PURPORT     The word visvasa-khanara kayastha indicates a secretary or clerk
belonging to the kayastha caste. Kayasthas were usually secretaries tokings, governors or other important persons. It is said that anyoneworking in the government secretariat at this time was a kayastha.
                                   TEXT 92              sarva -sastre pra vina, ka vya -prakasa-adh yapaka
                     parama-vaisnava, raghunatha-upasaka
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramadasa Visvasa was very Iearned in all the revealed scriptures.
He was a teacher of the famous book Kavya-prakasa and was known as anadvanced devotee and worshiper of Raghunatha [Lord Ramacandra].
                                   PURPORT     Commenting on the word parama-vaisnava, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura
says that anyone who desires to merge into the existence of the Lordcannot be a pure Vaisnava, but because Ramadasa Visvasa was a greatdevotee of Lord Ramacandra, he was almost a Vaisnava. In those days, noone could distinguish between a pure Vaisnava and a pseudo Vaisnava.Therefore Ramadasa Visvasa was known as a Vaisnava because he worshipedLord Ramacandra.
                                   TEXT 93                   asta-prahara rama-nama japena ratri-dine
                   sarva tyaji' calila jagannatha-darasane
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramadasa had renounced everything and was going to see Lord
Jagannatha. While traveling, he chanted the holy name of Lord Ramatwenty-four hours a day.                                   TEXT 94
                   raghunatha-bhattera sane pathete milila
                   bhattera jhali mathe kari' vahiya calila
                                 TRANSLATION     When he met Raghunatha Bhatta on the way, he took Raghunatha's
baggage on his head and carried it.
                                   TEXT 95
                     nana seva kari' kare pada-samvahana
                    tate raghunathera haya sankucita mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramadasa served Raghunatha Bhatta in various ways, even massaging
his legs. Raghunatha Bhatta felt some hesitation in accepting all thisservice.
                                   TEXT 96
                   "tumi bada loka, pandita, maha-bhagavate
                    seva na kariha, sukhe cala mora sathe"
                                 TRANSLATION     "You are a respectable gentleman, a learned scholar and a great
devotee," he said. "Please do not try to serve me. Just come with me ina happy mood."
                                   TEXT 97
                      ramadasa kahe,--"ami sudra adhama!
                   `brahmanera seva',--ei mora nija-dharma
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramadasa replied, "I am a sudra, a fallen soul. To serve a brahmana
is my duty and religious principle.
                                   TEXT 98
                   sankoca na kara tumi, ami--tomara `dasa'
                   tomara seva karile haya hrdaye ullasa,,
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore please do not be hesitant. I am your servant, and when I
serve you my heart becomes jubilant."
                                   TEXT 99
                    eta bali' jhali vahena, karena sevane
                 raghunathera taraka-mantra lapena ratri-dine
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Ramadasa carried the baggage of Raghunatha Bhatta and served
him sincerely. He constantly chanted the holy name of Lord Ramacandraday and night.
                                   TEXT 100
                       ei-mate raghunatha aila nilacale
                     prabhura carane yana milila kutuhale
                                 TRANSLATION     Traveling in this way, Raghunatha Bhatta soon arrived at Jagannatha
Puri. There, with great delight, he met Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and fellat His lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 101
                  danda-paranama kari' bhatta padila carane
                   prabhu `raghunatha' jani kaila alingane
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha Bhatta fell stralght as a rod at the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Then the Lord embraced him, knowing well who hewas.
                                   TEXT 102
                     misra ara sekharera dandavat janaila
                     mahaprabhu tan-sabara varta puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha offered respecfful obeisances to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
on behalf of Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara, and the Lord also inquiredabout them.
                                   TEXT 103                  "bhala ha-ila aila, dekha `kamala-locana'
                    aji amara etha kariba prasada bhojana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is very good that you have come here," the Lord said. "Now go
see the lotus-eyed Lord Jagannatha. Today you will accept prasada hereat My place."
                                   TEXT 104
                      govindere kahi' eka vasa deoyaila
                      svarupadi bhakta-gana-sane milaila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord asked Govinda to arrange for Raghunatha Bhatta's
accomodations and then introduced him to all the devotees, headed bySvarupa Damodara Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 105
                    ei-mata prabhu-sange rahila asta-masa
                   dine dine prabhura krpaya badaye ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Raghunatha Bhatta lived with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
continuously for eight months, and by the Lord's mercy he feIt increasedtranscendental happiness every day.
                                   TEXT 106
                 madhye madhye mahaprabhura karena nimantrana
                   ghara-bhata karena, ara vividha vyanjana
                                 TRANSLATION     He would periodically cook rice with various vegetables and invite
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to his home.
                                   TEXT 107
                     raghunatha-bhatta--pake ati sunipuna
                      yei randhe, sei haya amrtera sama
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha Bhatta was an expert cook. Whatever he prepared tasted
just like nectar.                                   TEXT 108
                     parama santose prabhu karena bhojana
                  prabhura avasista-patra bhattera bhaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would accept with great satisfaction all
the food he prepared. After the Lord was satisfied, Raghunatha Bhattawould eat His remnants.
                                   TEXT 109
                    ramadasa yadi prathama prabhure milila
                    mahaprabhu adhika tanre krpa na karila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Ramadasa Visvasa met Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Lord did not
show him any special mercy, although this was their first meeting.
                                   TEXT 110
                     antare mumuksu tenho, vidya-garvavan
                 sarva-citta-jnata prabhu--sarvajna bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     Within his heart, Ramadasa Visvasa was an impersonalist who desired
to merge into the existence of the Lord, and he was very proud of hislearning. Being the omniscient Supreme Personality of Godhead, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu can understand the heart of everyone, and thus Heknew all these things.
                                   TEXT 111
                      ramadasa kaila tabe nilacale vasa
                pattanayaka-gosthike padaya `kavya-praka-s'a'
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramadasa Visvasa then took up residence in Jagannatha Puri and
taught the Kavya-prakasa to the Pattanayaka family [the descendants ofBhavananda Raya].
                                   TEXT 112
                  asta-masa rahi' prabhu bhatte vidaya dila                   `vivaha na kariha' bali' nisedha karila
                                 TRANSLATION     After eight months, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade farewell to
Raghunatha Bhatta, the Lord flatly forbade him to marry. "Do not marry,"the Lord said.
                                   PURPORT     Raghunatha Bhattacarya had become a greatly advanced devotee while
still unmarried. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu could see this, and thereforeHe advised him not to begin the process of material sense gratification.Marriage is a concession for people who are unable to control theirsenses. Raghunatha, however, being an advanced devotee of Krsna,naturally had no desire for sense gratification. Therefore Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu advised him not to enter the bondage of marriage. Generally aperson cannot make much advancement in spiritual consciousness if he ismarried. He becomes attached to his family and is prone to sensegratification. Thus his spiritual advancement is very slow or almostnil.
                                   TEXT 113                    vrddha mata-pitara yai' karaha sevana
                    vaisnava-pasa bhagavata kara adhyayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said to Raghunatha Bhatta, "When you return
home, serve your aged father and mother, who are devotees, and try tostudy Srimad-Bhagavatam from a pure Vaisnava who has realized God."
                                   PURPORT     One should note how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, advised Raghunatha Bhattacarya to learn Srimad-Bhagavatam. He advised him to understand Srimad-Bhagavatam not fromprofessional men but from a real bhagavata, devotee. He also advisedRaghunatha Bhatta to serve his mother and father because they were bothHis devotees. Anyone who wishes to advance in Krsna consciousness musttry to serve the devotees of Krsna. As Narottama dasa Thakura says,chadiya vaisnava-seva nistara payeche keba: "Without serving a self-realized Vaisnava, no one has ever been released from the materialisticway of life." Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would have never advisedRaghunatha Bhatta to serve ordinary parents, but since his parents wereVaisnavas, the Lord advised him to serve them.     One might ask "Why shouldn't ordinary parents be served?" As statedin Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.18):     gurur na sa syat svajano na sa syat     pita na sa syaj janani na sa syat     daivam na tat syat na patis ca sa syan     na mocayed yah samupeta-mrtyum"One who cannot deliver his dependent from the path of birth and death
should never become a spiritual master, a relative, a father or mother,or a worshipable demigod, nor should such a person become a husband."Everyone naturally gets a father and mother at the time of birth, butthe real father and mother are they who can release their offspring fromthe clutches of imminent death. This is possible only for parentsadvanced in Krsna consciousness. Therefore any parents who cannotenlighten their offspring in Krsna consciousness cannot be accepted as areal father and mother. The following verse from the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.200) confirms the uselessness of serving ordinary parents:     laukiki vaidiki vapi     ya kriya kriyate mune     hari-sevan ukula iva     sa karya bhaktim icchata "One should perform only those activities--either worldly or prescribed by Vedic rules and regulations--which arefavorable for the cultivation of Krsna consciousness."     Concerning the study of Srimad-Bhagavatam, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuclearly advises that one avoid hearing from a non-Vaisnava professionalreciter. In this connection Sanatana Gosvami quotes a verse from thePadma Purana:     a vaisna va-mukhodg irnam     putam hari-kathamrtam     sravanam naiva kartavyam-     sarpocchistam yatha payah"No one should hear or take lessons from a person who is not a Vaisnava.Even if he speaks about Krsna, such a lesson should not be accepted, forit is like milk touched by the lips of a serpent." Nowadays it isfashionable to observe Bhagavata-saptaha and hear Srimad-Bhagavatam frompersons who are anything but advanced devotees or self-realized souls.There are even many Mayavadis who read Srimad-Bhagavatam to throngs ofpeople. Many Mayavadis have recently begun reciting Srimad-Bhagavatam inVrndavana, and because they can present the Bhagavatam with wordjugglery, twisting the meaning by grammatical tricks, materialisticpersons who go to Vrndavana as a matter of spiritual fashion like tohear them. All this is clearly forbidden by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Weshould note carefully that since these Mayavadis cannot personally knowthe meaning of Srimad-Bhagavatam, they can never deliver others byreciting it. On the other hand, an advanced devotee of the Lord is freefrom material bondage. He personifies the Srimad-Bhagavatam in life andaction. Therefore we advise that anyone who wants to learn the Srimad-Bhagavatam must approach such a realized soul.
                                   TEXT 114                      punarapi eka-bara asiha nilacale,,
                    eta bali' kantha-mala dila tanra gale
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu concluded, "Come again to Nilacala
[Jagannatha Puri]." After saying this, the Lord put His own neck beadson Raghunatha Bhatta's neck.                                   TEXT 115
                   alingana kari' prabhu vidaya tanre dila
                    preme gara gara bhatta kandite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Then the Lord embraced him and bade him farewell. Overwhelmed with
ecstatic love, Raghunatha Bhatta began to cry due to imminent separationfrom Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 116
                     svarupa-adi bhakta-thani ajna magiya
                   varanasi aila bhatta prabhura ajna pana
                                 TRANSLATION     After taking permission from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabh u and all the
devotees, headed by Svarupa Damodara, Raghunatha Bhatta returned toVaranasi.
                                   TEXT 117
                  cari-vatsara ghare pita-matara seva kaila
                   vaisnava-pandita-thani bhagavata padila
                                 TRANSLATION     In accordance with the instructions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he
continuously rendered service to his mother and father for four years.He also regularly studied the Srimad-Bhagavatam from a self-realizedVaisnava.
                                   TEXT 118
                      pita-mata kasi paile udasina hana
                   punah prabhura thani aila grhadi chadiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Then his parents died at Kasi [Varanasi], and he became detached.
He therefore returned to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, giving up allrelationships with his home.
                                   TEXT 119
                     purvavat asta-masa prabhu-pasa chila
                    asta-masa rahi' punah prabhu ajna dila                                 TRANSLATION
     As previously, Raghunatha remained continuously with Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu for eight months. Then the Lord gave him the following order.
                                   TEXT 120
                  "amara ajnaya, raghunatha, yaha vrndavane
                     tahan yana raha rupa-sanatana-sthane
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Raghunatha, go to Vrndavana, following My instructions,
and place yourself under the care of Rupa and Sanatana Gosvamis.
                                   TEXT 121
                     bhagavata pada, sada laha krsna-nama
                     acire karibena krpa krsna bhagavan"
                                 TRANSLATION     "In Vrndavana you should chant the Hare Krsna mantra twenty-four
hours a day and read Srtmad-Bhagavatam continuously. Krsna, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, will very soon bestow His mercy upon you."
                                   TEXT 122
                    eta bali' prabhu tanre alingana kaila
                   prabhura kroate krsna-preme matta haila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu embraced Raghunatha
Bhatta, and by the Lord's mercy Raghunatha was enlivened with ecstaticlove for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 123
                    caudda-hata jagannathera tulasira mala
                     chuta-pana-vida mahotsave panachila
                                 TRANSLATION     At a festival Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had been given some unspiced
betel and a garland of tulasi leaves fourteen cubits long. The garlandhad been worn by Lord Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 124                    sei mala, chuta pana prabhu tanre dila
                    `ista-deva' kari' mala dhariya rakhila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave the garland and betel to Raghunatha
Bhatta, who accepted them as a worshipable Deity, preserving them verycarefully.
                                   TEXT 125
                   prabhura thani ajna lana gela vrndavane
                       asraya karila asi' rupa-sanatane
                                 TRANSLATION     Taking permission from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Raghunatha Bhatta
then departed for Vrndavana. When he arrived there, he put himself underthe care of Rupa and Sanatana Gosvamis.
                                   TEXT 126
                rupa-gosanira sabhaya karena bhagavata-pathana
                   bhagavata padite preme aulaya tanra mana
                                 TRANSLATION     When reciting Srimad-Bhagavatam in the company of ROpa and
Sanatana, Raghunatha Bhatta would be overwhelmed with ecstatic Iove forKrsna.
                                   TEXT 127
                     asru, kampa, gadgada prabhura krpate
                   netra kantha rodhe baspa, na pare padite
                                 TRANSLATION     By the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he experienced the
symptoms of ecstatic love--tears, trembling, and faltering of the voice.His eyes filled with tears, his throat became choked, and thus he couldnot recite SrimadBhagavatam.
                                   TEXT 128
                    pika-svara-kantha, tate ragera vibhaga
                   eka-sloka padite phiraya tina-cari raga
                                 TRANSLATION     His voice was as sweet as a cuckoo's, and he would recite each
verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam in three or four tunes. Thus his recitationswere very sweet to hear.
                                   TEXT 129
                  krsnera saundarya-madhurya yabe pade, sune
                     premete vihvala tabe, kichui na jane
                                 TRANSLATION     When he recited or heard about the beauty and sweetness of Krsna,
he would be overwhelmed with ecstatic Iove and become obIivious toeverything.
                                   TEXT 130
                     govinda-carane kaila atma-samarpana
                   govinda-caranaravinda--yanra prana-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Raghunatha Bhatta surrendered fully at the lotus feet of Lord
Govinda, and those lotus feet became his life and soul.
                                   TEXT 131
                  nija sisye kahi' govindera mandira karaila
                vamsi, makara, kundaladi `bhusana' kari' dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Subsequently Raghunatha Bhatta ordered his disciples to construct a
temple for Govinda. He prepared various ornaments for Govinda, includinga flute and earrings shaped like sharks.
                                   TEXT 132
                    gramya-varta na sune, na kahe jihvaya
                    krsna-katha-pujadite asta-prahara yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha Bhatta would neither hear nor speak about anything of
the material world. He would simply discuss Krsna and worship the Lordday and night.
                                   TEXT 133                    vaisnavera nindya-karma nahi pade kane
                   sabe krsna bhajana kare,--ei-matra jane
                                 TRANSLATION     He would not listen to blasphemy of a Vaisnava, nor would he listen
to talk of a Vaisnava's misbehavior. He knew only that everyone wasengaged in Krsna's service; he did not understand anything else.
                                   PURPORT     Raghunatha Bhatta never did anything harmful to a Vaisnava. In
other words, he was never inattentive in the service of the Lord, nordid he ever violate the rules and regulations of a pure Vaisnava. It isthe duty of a Vaisnava acarya to prevent his disciples and followersfrom violating the principles of Vaisnava behavior. He should alwaysadvise them to strictly follow the regulative principles, which willprotect them from falling down. Although a Vaisnava preacher maysometimes criticize others, Raghunatha Bhatta avoided this. Even ifanother Vaisnava was actually at fault, Raghunatha Bhatta would notcriticize him; he saw only that everyone was engaged in Krsna's service.That is the position of a maha--bhagavata. Actually, even if one isserving maya, in a higher sense he is also a servant of Krsna. Becausemaya is the servant of Krsna, anyone serving maya serves Krsnaindirectly. Therefore it is said:     keha mane, keha na mane, saba tanra dasa     ye na mane, tara haya sei pape nasa"Some accept Him, whereas others do not, yet everyone is His servant.One who does not accept Him, however, will be ruined by his sinfulactivities." (Cc. Adi. 6.85)
                                   TEXT 134                    mahaprabhura datta mala mananera kale
                     prasada-kadara saha bandhi lena gale
                                 TRANSLATION     When Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami was absorbed in remembrance of Lord
Krsna, he would take the tulasi garland and the prasada of LordJagannatha given to him by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, bind them togetherand wear them on his neck.
                                   TEXT 135
                   mahaprabhura kroaya krsna-prema anargala
                   ei ta' kahilun tate caitanya-kroa-phala
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described the powerful mercy of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, by which Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami remained constantlyoverwheImed with ecstatic love for Krsna.
                                 TEXT 136-137
                    jagadanandera kahilun vrndavana-gamana
                     tara madhye deva-dasira gana-sravana
                   mahaprabhura raghunathe krpa-prema-phala
                   eka-paricchede tina katha kahilun sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     In this chapter I have spoken about three topics: Jagadananda
Pandita's visit to Vrndavana, Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu's listening to thesong of the deva-dasi at the temple of Jagannatha, and how RaghunathaBhatta Gosvami achieved ecstatic love of Krsna by the mercy of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 138
                    ye ei-sakala katha sune sraddha kari'
                    tanre krsna-prema-dhana dena gaurahari
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu [Gaurahari] bestows ecstatic love for Krsna
upon anyone who hears aIl these topics with faith and love.
                                   TEXT 139
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Thirteenth Chapter, describing jagadananda pandita's visitto Vrndavana, the Lord's hearing the song of the deva-dasi, andRaghunatha Bhatta Gosvami's achieving love of krsna.
                               Chapter Fourteen
       Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's Feelings of Separation from Krsna     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura gives the following summary of the
Fourteenth Chapter of Antya-lila. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's feelings ofseparation from Krsna resulted in highly elevated transcendentalmadness. When He was standing near the Garuda-stambha and praying toLord Jagannatha, a woman from Orissa put her foot on the Lord's shoulderin her great eagerness to see Lord Jagannatha. Govinda chastised her forthis, but Caitanya Mahaprabhu praised her eagerness. When CaitanyaMahaprabhu went to the temple of Lord Jagannatha, He was absorbed inecstatic love and saw only Krsna. As soon as He perceived this woman,however, His external consciousness immediately returned, and He sawJagannatha, Baladeva and Subhadra. Caitanya Mahaprabhu also saw Krsna ina dream, and He was overwhelmed with ecstatic love. When He could nolonger see Krsna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu compared Himself to a yogi anddescribed how that yogi was seeing Vrndavana. Sometimes all thetranscendental ecstatic symptoms were manifest in Him. One night,Govinda and Svarupa Damodara noticed that although the three doors tothe Lord's room were closed and locked, the Lord was not present inside.Seeing this, Svarupa Damodara and the other devotees went outside andsaw the Lord lying unconscious by the gate known as Simha-dvara. Hisbody had become unusually long, and the joints of His bones were loose.The devotees gradually brought Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu back to Hissenses by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, and then they took Him back toHis residence. Once Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu mistook Cataka-parvata forGovardhana-parvata. As He ran toward it, He became stunned, and then theeight ecstatic transformations appeared in His body due to great lovefor Krsna. At that time all the devotees chanted the Hare Krsna mantrato pacify Him.
                                    TEXT 1                          krsna-viccheda- vibhrantya
                             manasa vapusa dhiya
                         yad yad vyadhatta gaurangas
                           tal-lesah kathyate'dhuna
                                 TRANSLATION     I shall now describe a very small portion of the activities
performed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with His mind, intelligence andbody when He was bewildered by strong feelings of separation from Krsna.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya svayam bhagavan
                   jaya jaya gauracandra bhakta-gana-prana
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead! All glories to Lord Gauracandra, the life and soul of Hisdevotees.                                    TEXT 3
                     jaya jaya nityananda caitanya-jivana
                     jayadvaitacarya jaya gaura-priyatama
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Nityanada, who is Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's
very life. And all glories to Advaita Acarya, who is extremely dear toSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 4
                  jaya svarupa, srivasadi prabhu-bhakta-gana
                   sakti deha',--kari yena caitanya-varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Svarupa Damodara and the devotees, headed by Srivasa
Thakura. Please give me the strength to describe the character of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 5
                     prabhura virahonmada-bhava gambhira
                  bujhite na pare keha, yadyapi haya `dhira'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's emotion of transcendental madness in
separation from Krsna is very deep and mysterious. Even though one isvery advanced and learned, he cannot understand it.
                                    TEXT 6
                    bujhite na pari yaha, varnite ke pare?
                 sei bujhe, varne, caitanya sakti dena yanre
                                 TRANSLATION     How can one describe unfathomable subject matters? It is possible
only if Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gives him the capability.
                                    TEXT 7
                      svarupa-gosani ara raghunatha-dasa
                       ei duira kadacate e-lila prakasa                                 TRANSLATION
     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami recorded all
these transcendental activities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in theirnotebooks.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's transcendental feelings of separation
from Krsna and His consequent madness are not at all understandable by aperson on the material platform. Nonetheless, a so-called party ofdevotees named nadiya-nagari has sprung up and introduced the worship ofVisnupriya. This certainly indicates their ignorance concerning SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes. In the opinion of BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Thakura, such worship is a product of the imagination. Manyother methods of worshiping Caitanya Mahaprabhu have also beenintroduced, but they have all been rejected by stalwart devotees likeBhaktivinoda Thakura. The groups practicing such unauthorized worshiphave been listed by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura:     aula, baula, kartabhaja, neda, dara vesa, sani     sahajiya, sakhibheki, smarta, jata-gosani     ativadi, cu dadhari, gauranga-nagariSvarupa Damodara Gosvami and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami witnessed CaitanyaMahaprabhu's activities firsthand, and they recorded them in twonotebooks. Therefore, without reference to these notebooks, one cannotunderstand the activities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Anyone inventingsome new method for worshiping Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is certainlyunable to understand the Lord's pastimes, for he is bereft of the realprocess of approaching the Lord.
                                    TEXT 8                    se-kale e-dui rahena mahaprabhura pase
                    ara saba kadaca-karta rahena dura-dese
                                 TRANSLATION     In those days, Svarupa Damodara and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami lived
with Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu, whereas all other commentators lived faraway from Him.
                                   PURPORT     Besides Svarupa Damodara and Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, there were
many others who also recorded Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's activities.Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura believes that the people of theworld would benefit greatly if such notes were available. It is a mostunfortunate situation for human society that none of these notebooks arestill extant.
                                    TEXT 9                      ksane ksane anubhavi' ei dui-jana
                   sanksepe bahulye karena kadaca-granthana                                 TRANSLATION
     These two great personalities [SvarOpa Damodara and Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami] recorded the activities of Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu moment bymoment. They described these activities briefly as well as elaboratelyin their notebooks.
                                   PURPORT     For future reference, we should remember that Svarupa Damodara
Gosvami recorded the pastimes briefly, whereas Raghunatha dasa Gosvamirecorded them elaborately. These two great personalities simply recordedthe facts; they did not create any descriptive literary embellishments.
                                   TEXT 10               svarupa--`sutra-karta', raghunatha--`vrttikara'
                   tara bahulya varni--panji-tika-vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara wrote short codes, whereas Raghunatha dasa Gosvami
wrote elaborate descriptions. I shall now describe Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu's activities more elaborately, as if fluffing out compressedcotton.
                                   PURPORT     panji-tika means further explanations of a subject. Writing such
explanations is likened to the process of fluffing out cotton.
                                   TEXT 11                   tate visvasa kari' suna bhavera varnana
                   ha-ibe bhavera jnana, paiba prema-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Please hear faithfully this description of Caitanya Mahaprabhu's
ecstatic emotions. Thus you will come to know of His ecstatic love, andultimately you will achieve love of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 12
                  krsna mathuraya gele, gopira ye dasa haila
                   krsna-vicchede prabhura se dasa upalila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt separation from Krsna, His
condition exactly corresponded to the condition of the gopis inVrndavana after Krsna's departure for Mathura.                                   TEXT 13
                    uddhava-darsane yaiche radhara vilapa
                 krame krame haila prabhura se unmada-vilapa
                                 TRANSLATION     The lamentation of Srimati Radharani when Uddhava visited Vrndavana
gradually became a feature of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's transcendentalmadness.
                                   TEXT 14
                   radhikara bhave prabhura sada `abhimana'
                     sei bhave apanake haya `radha'-jnana
                                 TRANSLATION     Srimati Radharani's emotions after seeing Uddhava exactly
correspond to those of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He always conceived ofHimself in Her position and sometimes thought that He was SrimatiRadharani Herself.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura explains that the purport
of the word abhimana, or "self-conception," is that Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu thought Himself to be in the position of Srimati Radharaniand was always ready to render service in that way. Although SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu is Krsna Himself, He assumed the complexion andemotions of Srimati Radharani and remained in that status. He neverassumed the complexion or status of Lord Krsna. Of course, Krsna wantedto experience the role of Srimati Radharani; that is the original causeof His assuming the body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Therefore pureVaisnavas never disturb Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's conception of beingSrimati Radharani.     Unfortunately, at the present time a group of so-called devoteesmaintain that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the enjoyer and that they areenjoyers as well. They have actually deviated from devotional service tothe Lord. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu manifested Himself to show thatcultivation of love for Krsna in separation is the easiest way ofsuccess for all living entities. Despite this fact, there are sometheosophists who declare that because Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is theSupreme Personality of Godhead, such cultivation is easy for Him butdifficult for the living entity and that one can therefore approachKrsna in any way he likes. To nullify this idea, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhudemonstrated practically how one can achieve love of Krsna by adoptingSrimati Radharani's mood in separation from Krsna.
                                   TEXT 15                    divyonmade aiche haya, ki iha vismaya?
                   adhirudha-bhave divyonmada-pralapa haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Such is the state of transcendental madness. Why is it difficult to
understand? When one is highly elevated in love of Krsna, he becomestranscendentally mad and talks like a madman.
                                   TEXT 16
                             etasya mohanakhyasya
                            gatim kamapy upeyusah                           bhramabha kapi vaicitri                             divyonmada itiryate                          udghurna-citra-ja lpadyas                            tad-bheda bahavo matah
                                 TRANSLATION     "When the ecstatic emotion of enchantment gradually progresses, it
becomes similar to bewilderment. Then one reaches the stage ofastonishment [vaicitri], which awakens transcendental madness. Udghurnaand citra-jalpa are two among the many divisions of transcendentalmadness."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from the Ujjvala-nilamani (Sthayibhava-
prakarana, 190).
                                   TEXT 17                    eka-dina mahaprabhu kariyachena sayana
                    krsna rasa-lila kare,--dekhila svapana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day while He was resting, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu dreamed He
saw Krsna performing His rasa dance.
                                   TEXT 18
                   tribhanga-sundara-deha, murali- va dana
                     pitambara, vana-mala, madana-mohana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw Lord Krsna standing with His beautiful
body curved in three places, holding His flute to His lips. Wearingyellow garments and garlands of forest flowers, He was enchanting evento Cupid.                                   TEXT 19
                   mandali-bandhe gopi-gana karena nartana
                  madh ye radha-saha nace vrajendra-nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     The gopis were dancing in a circle, and in the middle of that
circle, Krsna, the son of Maharaja Nanda, danced with Radharani.
                                   TEXT 20
                     dekhi' prabhu sei rase avista haila
                   `vrndavane krsna painu'--ei jnana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was overwhelmed with the
transcendental mellow of the rasa dance, and He thought,"Now I am withKrsna in Vrndavana."
                                   TEXT 21
                   prabhura vilamba dekhi' govinda jagaila
               jagile `svapna'-jnana haila, prabhu duhkhi haila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Govinda saw that the Lord had not yet risen, he awakened Him.
Understanding that He had only been dreaming, the Lord was somewhatunhappy.
                                   TEXT 22
                    dehabhyase nitya-krtya kari' samapana
                     kale yai' kaila jagannatha darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed His customary daily duties, and
at the usual time He went to see Lord Jagannatha in the temple.
                                   TEXT 23
                   yavat kala darsana karena garudera pache
                  prabhura age darsana kare loka lakhe lakhe
                                 TRANSLATION     As He viewed Lord Jagannatha from behind the Garuda column,
hundreds and thousands of people in front of Him were seeing the Deity.
                                   TEXT 24
                     udiya eka stri bhide darsana na pana
                garude cadi' dekhe prabhura skandhe pada diya
                                 TRANSLATION     Suddenly, a woman from Orissa, unable to see Lord Jagannatha
because of the crowd, climbed the column of Garuda, placing her foot onSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's shoulder.
                                   TEXT 25
                  dekhiya govinda aste-vyaste strike varjila
                    tare namaite prabhu govinde nisedhila
                                 TRANSLATION     When he saw this, Caitanya Mahaprabhu's personal secretary,
Govinda, hastily got her down from her position. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, however, chastised him for this.
                                   PURPORT     Because Garuda is the carrier of Lord Visnu, he is the supreme
Vaisnava. Therefore to touch his body with one's feet or to climb thecolumn of Garuda is certainly a vaisnava-aparadha, an offense to aVaisnava. The woman was also offensive to Krsna by putting her foot onthe shoulder of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Seeing all these offenses,Govinda very hastily made her get down.
                                   TEXT 26                    `adi-vasya' ei strire na kara varjana
                     karuka yathesta jagannatha darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said to Govinda, "O adi-vasya [uncivilized
man], do not forbid this woman to climb the Garuda-stambha. Let her seeLord Jagannatha to her satisfaction."
                                   PURPORT     For an explanation of the word adi-vasya, refer to Antya-lila,
Chapter Ten, verse
                                   TEXT 27                     aste-vyaste sei nari bhumete namila
                   mahaprabhure dekhi' tanra carana vandila
                                 TRANSLATION     When the woman came to her senses, however, she quickly climbed
back down to the ground and, seeing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, immediatelybegged at His lotus feet for forgiveness.
                                   TEXT 28
                    tara arti dekhi' prabhu kahite lagila
                     "eta arti jagannatha more nahi dila!
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the woman's eagerness, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "Lord
Jagannatha has not bestowed so much eagerness upon Me.
                                   PURPORT     The woman was so eager to see Lord Jagannatha that she forgot she
was offending the feet of a Vaisnava by climbing the column of Garuda.She also neglected to consider that by putting her foot on the shoulderof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, she offended the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. These are both grievous offenses that displease the SupremeLord and Vaisnavas. She was so eager to see Lord Jagannatha, however,that she committed all these offenses obliviously. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu praised her eagerness; He regretted that Lord Jagannatha hadnot bestowed such great eagerness upon Him.
                                   TEXT 29                   jagannathe avista ihara tanu-mana-prane
                  mora skandhe pada diyache, taho nahi jane
                                 TRANSLATION     "She has fully absorbed her body, mind and life in Lord Jagannatha.
Therefore she was unaware that she was putting her foot on My shoulder.
                                   TEXT 30
                     aho bhagyavati ei, vandi ihara paya
                   ihara prasade aiche arti amara va haya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Alas! How fortunate this woman is! I pray at her feet that she
favor Me with her great eagerness to see Lord Jagannatha."                                   TEXT 31
                  purve asi' yabe kaila jagannatha darasana
                  jagannathe dekhe--saksat vrajendra-nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     Just previously, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had been seeing Lord
Jagannatha as the son of Maharaja Nanda, Krsna, in person.
                                   TEXT 32
                   svapnera darsanavese tad-rupa haila mana
                   yahan tahan dekhe sarvatra murali-vadana
                                 TRANSLATION     Becoming fully absorbed in that vision, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had
assumed the mood of the gopis, so much so that everywhere He looked Hesaw Krsna standing with His flute to His lips.
                                   TEXT 33                 ebe yadi strire dekhi' prabhura bahya haila
                jagannatha-subhadra-balaramera svarupa dekhila
                                 TRANSLATION     After seeing the woman, the Lord's external consciousness returned,
and He saw the original Deity forms of Lord Jagannatha, Subhadra andLord Balarama.
                                   TEXT 34
                   kuruksetre dekhi' krsne aiche haila mana
                  `kahan kuruksetre ailana, kahan vrndavana'
                                 TRANSLATION     When He saw the Deities, Lord Caitanya thought He was seeing Krsna
in Kuruksetra. He wondered, "Have I come to Kuruksetra? Where isVrndavana?"
                                   TEXT 35
                   prapta-ratna harana aiche vyagra ha-ila
                      visanna hana prabhu nija-vasa aila
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya grew very agitated, like a person who has just lost a
recently acquired jewel. Then He became very morose and returned home.
                                   TEXT 36
                  bhumira upara vasi' nija-nakhe bhumi likhe
                    asru-ganga netre vahe, kichui na dekhe
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu sat down on the ground and began to mark it
with His nails. He was blinded by tears, which flowed from His eyes likethe Ganges.
                                   TEXT 37
                   `pailun vrndavana-natha, punah harailun
                    ke mora nileka krsna? kahan mui ainu'?
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said,"I found Krsna, the Lord of Vrndavana,
but I have lost Him again. Who has taken My Krsna? Where have I come?"
                                   PURPORT     These are the feelings of Srimati Radharani. First Lord Caitanya
felt that He had been taken to Vrndavana, where He saw Krsna's rasadance with the gopis. Then He was brought to Kuruksetra to see LordJagannatha, His sister (Subhadra) and Lord Balarama. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu lost Vrndavana and Krsna, the master of Vrndavana. At thistime, Caitanya Mahaprabhu experienced divyonmada, transcendental madnessin separation from Krsna. At Kuruksetra, Krsna displays His opulence,whereas in Vrndavana He is in His original position. Krsna never goeseven a step away from Vrndavana; therefore Kuruksetra is less importantfor the gopis than Vrndavana.     Although devotees who worship Krsna in opulence (His Vaikunthaaspect) may prefer to see Lord Krsna at Kuruksetra along with Subhadraand Balarama, the gopis want to see Krsna in Vrndavana, performing therasa dance with Srimati Radharani. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu showed bypractical example how one can cultivate the mood of Radharani and theother gopis in separation from Krsna. Devotees absorbed in this mood donot like to see Krsna anywhere else but Vrndavana. Therefore SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu lamented, "I found Krsna in Vrndavana, and now ihave again lost Him and come to Kuruksetra." Unless one is a very highlyadvanced devotee, he cannot understand these intricate feelings. Theauthor of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, however, has tried to explain thisdivyon- mada as far as possible, and it is our duty simply to appreciateit as far as possible. Therefore the author has made the followingrequest in verse 11:     tate visvasa kari' suna bhavera varnana     ha-ibe bhavera jnana, paiba prema-dhana"My dear readers, simply try to hear this description with faith and
love. That will help you to understand transcendental ecstasy, and atlast you will achieve love of Godhead very easily."
                                   TEXT 38                   svapnavese preme prabhura gara gara mana
                     bahya haile haya--yena haraila dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu dreamed of the rasa dance, He was
fully absorbed in transcendental bliss, but when His dream broke, Hethought He had lost a precious jewel.
                                   TEXT 39                   unmattera praya prabhu karena gana-nrtya
                  dehera svabhave karena snana-bhojana-krtya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would chant and dance, always absorbed
in the bliss of transcendental madness. He carried out the necessitiesof the body, such as eating and bathing, merely out of habit.
                                   TEXT 40
                      ratri haile svarupa-ramanande lana
                       apana manera bhava kahe ughadiya
                                 TRANSLATION     At night, Lord Caitanya would reveal to Svarupa Damodara and
Ramananda Raya the ecstatic feelings of His mind.
                                   TEXT 41
                       prapta-pranastacyuta-vitta atma
                        yayau visadojjhita-deha-gehah                         grhita-kapalika-dharmako me                     vrnda vanam sendri ya-sis ya- vrndah
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "At first My mind somehow achieved
the treasure of Krsna, but it again lost Him. Therefore it gave up Mybody and home because of lamentation and accepted the religiousprinciples of a kapalika-yogi. Then My mind went to Vrndavana with itsdisciples, My senses.,,
                                   PURPORT     This verse is clearly metaphorical.
                                   TEXT 42                   prapta-ratna harana, tara guna sanariya,
                          mahaprabhu santape vihvala             raya-svarupera kantha dhari;, kahe `haha hari hari',                         dhairya gela, ha-ila capala
                                 TRANSLATION     Having lost His acquired gem, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became
overwhelmed with lamentation by remembering its attributes. Then,grasping the
necks of Ramananda Raya and Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, He cried,"Alas,
where is My Lord Hari? Where is Hari?" Finally He became restless andlost all patience.
                                   TEXT 43                       "suna, bandhava, krsnera madhuri
                yara lobhe mora mana, chadi' loka-veda-dharma,                          yogi hana ha-ila bhikhari
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friends," He sald,"please hear of Krsna's sweetness.
Because of a great desire for that sweetness, My mind has given up aIlsocial and Vedic religious principles and taken to the profession ofbegging, exactly like a mystic yogi.
                                   TEXT 44
                  krsna-lila-mandala, suddha sankha-kundala,
                           gadiyache suka karikara               sei kundala kane pari', trsna-lau-thali dhari',                           asa-jhuli kandhera upara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The ring of Krsna's rasa-lila, manufactured by Sukadeva Gosvami,
the most auspicious craftsman, is as pure as an earring made from aconchshell. The yogi of My mind is wearing that earring upon his ear.From a gourd he has carved out the bowl of My aspirations, and he hastaken the bag of My expectations on his shoulder.
                                   TEXT 45
              cinta-kantha udhi gaya, dhuli-vibhuti-malina-kaya,
                         `haha krsna' pralapa-uttara                 udvega dvadasa hate, lobhera jhulani mathe,
                          bhiksabhave ksina kalevara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The yogi of My mind wears the torn quilt of anxiety on his dirty
body, which is covered with dust and ashes. His only words are,`Alas!Krsna!' He wears twelve bangles of distress on his wrist and a turban ofgreed on his head. Because he has not eaten anything, he is very thin.
                                   TEXT 46
                vyasa, sukadi yogi-gana, krsna atma niranjana,
                          vraje tanra yata lila-gana                 bhagavatadi sastra-gane, kariyache varnane,                           sei tarja pade anuksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The great yogi of My mind always studies the poetry and
discussions of Lord Krsna's Vrndavana pastimes. In the Srimad-Bhagavatamand other scriptures, great saintly yogis like Vyasadeva and SukadevaGosvami have described Lord Krsna as the Supersoul, beyond all materialcontamination.
                                   TEXT 47
              dasendriye sisya kari', `maha-baula' nama dhari',
                           sisya lana karila gamana                mora deha sva-sadana, visaya-bhoga maha-dhana,                          saba chadi' gela vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The mystic yogi of My mind has assumed the name Mahabaula and made
disciples of My ten senses. Thus My mind has gone to Vrndavana, leavingaside the home of My body and the great treasure of material enjoyment.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu compares His mind to one of the mystic
yogis known as baula, who makes at least ten disciples.
                                   TEXT 48                 vrndavane praja-gana, yata sthavara-jangama,
                          vrksa-lata grhastha-asrame                 tara ghare bhiksatana, phala-mula-patrasana,                           ei vrtti kare sisya-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     "In Vrndavana, he goes from door to door begging alms with all his
disciples. He begs from both the moving and the inert inhabitants--thecitizens, the trees and the creepers. In this way he lives on fruits,roots and leaves.
                                   TEXT 49
                krsna-guna-rupa -rasa, gan dha, sabda, parasa,
                          se sudha asvade gopi-gana                ta-sabara grasa-sese, ani' pancendriya sisye,                          se bhiksaya rakhena jivana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The gopis of Vrajabhumi always taste the nectar of Krsna's
attributes, His beauty, His sweetness, His aroma, the sound of His fluteand the touch of His body. My mind's five disciples, the senses ofperception, gather the remnants of that nectar from the gopis and bringthem to the yogi of My mind. The senses maintain their lives by eatingthose remnants.
                                   TEXT 50
              sunya-kunja-mandapa-kone, yogabhyasa krsna-dhyane,
                          tahan rahe lana sisya-gana                  krsna atma niranjana, saksat dekhite mana,                          dhyane ratri kare jagarana
                                 TRANSLATION     "There is a soIitary garden where Krsna enjoys His pastimes, and in
one corner of a pavilion in that garden, the yogi of My mind, along withhis disciples, practices mystic yoga. Wanting to see Krsna directly,this yogi remains awake throughout the night, meditating on Krsna who isthe Supersoul, uncontaminated by the three modes of nature.
                                   TEXT 51
                  mana krsna-viyogi, duhkhe mana haila yogi,
                           se viyoge dasa dasa haya                  se dasaya vyakula hana, mana gela palana,                           sunya mora sarira alaya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "When My mind lost the association of Krsna and could no longer see
Him, he became depressed and took up mystic yoga. In the void ofseparation from Krsna, he experienced ten transcendentaltransformations. Agitated by these transformations, My mind fled,leaving My body, his place of residence, empty. Thus I am completely intrance."                                   PURPORT
     ln this verse, the outward activities of the kapalika mendicants
have been described, but not their actual life. The kapalika mendicantsare tantric materialists who carry skulls in their hands. They are notVaisnavas and have nothing to do with spiritual life. Therefore they areuntouchable. Only an outward comparison has been made between the mindand their activities, but their behavior should never be imitated.
                                   TEXT 52                     krsnera viyoge gopira dasa dasa haya
                      sei dasa dasa haya prabhura udaya
                                 TRANSLATION     When the gopis felt separation from Krsna, they experienced ten
kinds of bodily transformations. These same symptoms appeared on thebody of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 53
                            cintatra jagarodvegau
                             tanavam malinangata                            pralapo vyadhir unmado                            moho mrtyur dasa dasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "The ten bodily transformations resulting from separation from
Krsna are anxiety, wakefulness, mental agitation, thinness,uncleanliness, talking like a madman, disease, madness, illusion anddeath."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is part of a description of Srimati Radharani's
different traits from Ujjvala-nilamani by Srila Rupa Gosvami. In thisbook, he elaborately explains the ten symptoms as follows.     Cinta. As stated in the Hamsaduta:     yada yato gopi-hrdaya-madano nanda-sadanan     mukundo gandinyas tanayam anurundhan madhu-purim     tadamanksic cinta-sariti ghana-ghurnaparicayair     agadhayam vadhamaya-payasi radha virahini"At the request of Akrura, Krsna and Balarama left the house of NandaMaharaja for Mathura. At that time, Srimati Radharani's mind wasdisrupted, and She became almost mad because of extreme separation fromKrsna. She experienced great mental pain and agitation, which caused Herto drown in mental speculation in the river of anxiety. She thought,`Now I am going to die, and when I die, Krsna will surely come back tosee Me again. But when He hears of My death from the people ofVrndavana, He will certainly be very unhappy. Therefore I shall not
die."' This is the explanation of the word cinta.     jagara. As stated in the Padyavali:     yah pasyanti priyam svapne     dhanyastah sakhi yositah     asmakam tu gate krsne     gata nidrapi vairiniThinking Herself very unfortunate, Srimati Radharani addressed Her verydear friend Visakha, "My dear friend, if I could see Krsna in My dreams,i would certainly be glorified for My great fortune. But what can I do?Sleep also plays mischievously with Me. Indeed, it has become My enemy.Therefore I have not slept since the departure of Krsna."     Udvega. This word is also explained in the Hamsaduta as follows:     mano me ha kastam jvalati kim aham hanta karavai     na param navaram sumukhi kalayam yasya jaladheh     iyam vande murdhna sapadi tam upayam kathaya me     paramrsye yasmad dhrti-kanikayapi ksani-kayaSrimati Radharani addressed Lalita, "My dear beautiful-faced Lalita, Icannot express how My heart is burning. It is a great, unfathomableocean of anxiety. Still, I wish to offer My obeisances at your lotusfeet. What shall I do? Please consider My condition and advise Me how ican become peaceful. That is My desire.,,     Tanava is described as follows:     udancad- vaktrambhoruha-vikrtir antah-kulasita     sadaharabhava-glapita-kucakoka yadu-pate     visusyanti radha tava viraha-tapad anudinam     nidaghe kuly eva krasima-paripakam prathayatiWhen Uddhava returned to Mathura after visiting Vrndavana, Lord Krsnainquired from him about Radharani and Visakha. Uddhava replied asfollows: "Consider the condition of the gopis! Srimati Radharaniespecially is in a very painful condition because of separation fromYou. She has grown skinny, and Her bodily luster is almost gone. Herheart is immersed in pain, and because She has given up eating, Herbreast has become black, as if diseased. Because of separation from You,all the gopis, especially Radharani, appear like dried-up water holesunder the scorching heat of the sun."     Malina-angata is described as follows:     hima- visara-visirnambhoja-tulyanana-srih     khara-marud-aparajyad-bandhu-jivopamausth i     agha-hara sarad-arkottapitendivaraksi     tava viraha-vipatti-mlapitasid visakhaUddhava said to Krsna, "O most auspicious Krsna, please hear me. Thetribulation caused by Your absence has made Visakha languid. Her lipstremble like trees in a strong wind. Her beautiful face is like a lotusflower that has withered under the snow, and Her eyes are like lotuspetals scorched by the heat of the autumn sun."     pralapa is explained in Lalita-madhava as follows:     kva nanda-kula-candramah kva sikhi-candra-kalankrtih     kva manda-murali-ravah kva nu surendra-nila-dyutih     kva rasa-rasa-tandavi kva sakhi jiva-raksausadhir     nidhir mama suhrttamah kva tava hanta ha dhig-vidhihThis is Srimati Radharani's lamentation for Her beloved Krsna, who wasaway from home. A woman whose husband has left home and gone to aforeign land is called prosita-bhartrka. Lamenting for Krsna in the sameway as such a woman laments for her husband, Srimati Radharani said, "My
dear friend, where is the glory of the family of Maharaja Nanda, whowears a half-moon ornament on His head? Where is Krsna, whose hue islike that of the indranila jewel and who plays so nicely on His flute?Where is your friend, the best of all men, so expert in dancing in thecircle of the rasa dance? Where is He who is the real medicine to saveMe from dying of heart disease? I must condemn Providence, for he hascaused Me so many tribulations by separating Me from Krsna."     Vyadhi is also described in Lalita-madhava:     uttapi puta-pakato'pi garala-gramad api ksobhano     dambholer api duhsahah katur alam hrn-magna-sulyad api     tivrah praudha-visucikani-cayato'py uccair mamayam bali     marmany adya bhinatti gokula-pater vislesa-janma jvarahBeing greatly afflicted by the pain of separation from Krsna, SrimatiRadharani said, "My dear Lalita, kindly hear Me. I cannot bear sufferingthe fever of separation from Krsna, nor can I explain it to you. It issomething like gold melting in an earthen box. This fever produces moredistress than poison, and it is more piercing than a thunderbolt. Isuffer exactly like someone almost dead from cholera. To be giving Me somuch pain, this fever must be very strong indeed."     Unmada is explained as follows:     bhramati bhavana-garbhe nirnimittam hasanti     prathayati tava vartam cetanacetanesu     luthati ca bhuvi radha kampitangi murare     visama-viraha-khedodgari- vibhranta-cittaUddhava said to Krsna, "My dear Krsna, all the gopis are so afflicted byYour absence that they have become almost mad. O Murari, at home SrimatiRadharani laughs unnecessarily and, like a madwoman, inquires about Youfrom every entity without distinction, even from the stones. She rollson the ground, unable to bear the agony of Your absence."     Moha is explained as follows:     nirundhe dainyabdhim harati guru-cinta paribhavam     vilumpaty unmadam sthagayati balad baspa-laharim     idanim kamsare kuvalaya-drsah kevalam idam-     vidhatte sacivyam tava viraha-murccha-sahacariLalita wrote Krsna the following letter on Srimati Radharani's behalf:"My dear Krsna, separation from You has greatly agitated SrimatiRadharani's mind, and She has fallen unconscious on the ground. O enemyof Kamsa, You have now become a first-class politician, and thereforeYou can supposedly give relief to everyone. Therefore please considerthe plight of Srimati Radharani, or very soon You will hear of Herdeath. Maybe at that time You will lament, although now You arejubilant."      Mrtyu is explained in the Hamsaduta:     aye rasa-krida-rasika mama sakhyam nava-nava     pura baddha yena pranaya-lahari hanta gahana     sa cen muktapeksas tvam asi dhig imam tulasakalam     yad etasya nasa-nihitam idam adyapi calatiIn the following letter, Lalita chastised Krsna for staying in Mathura:"Simply by dancing in the circle of the rasa dance, You attractedSrimati Radharani's love. Why are You now so indifferent to my dearfriend Radharani? She is lying nearly unconscious, thinking of Yourpastimes. I shall determine whether She is alive by putting a cottonswab under Her nostrils, and if She is still living, I shall chastiseHer."                                   TEXT 54
                   ei dasa-da\aya prabhu vyakula ratri-dine
                    kabhu kona dasa uthe, sthira nahe mane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was overwhelmed night and day by these ten
ecstatic conditions. Whenever such symptoms arose, His mind becameunsteady.
                                   TEXT 55
                      eta kahi' mahaprabhu mauna karila
                      ramananda-raya sloka padite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     After speaking in this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fell silent.
Then Rama--nanda Raya began to recite various verses.
                                   TEXT 56
                     svarupa-gosani kare krsna-lila gana
                  dui jane kichu kaila prabhura bahya jnana
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya recited verses from Srimad-Bhagavatam, and Svarupa
Damodara Gosvami sang of Krsna's pastimes. In this way, they brought SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu to external consciousness.
                                   TEXT 57
                     ei-mata ardha-ratri kaila niryapana
                  bhitara-prakosthe prabhure karaila sayana
                                 TRANSLATION     After half the night had passed in this way, Ramanada Raya and
Svarupa Damodara Gosvami made Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lie down on Hisbed in the inner room.
                                   TEXT 58
                     ramananda-raya tabe gela nija ghare
                     svarupa-govinda dunhe suilena dvare
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Ramananda Raya returned home, and Svarupa Damodara Gosvami,
along with Govinda, lay down in front of the door to Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu's room.
                                   TEXT 59
                     saba ratri mahaprabhu kare jagarana
                    ucca kari' kahe krsna-nama-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained awake throughout the entire night,
chanting the Hare Krsna mantra very loudly.
                                   TEXT 60
                   sabda na pana svarupa kapata kaila dure
                  tina-dvara deoya ache, prabhu nahi ghare!
                                 TRANSLATION     After some time, SvarOpa Damodara could no longer hear Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu chanting. When he entered the room, he found the three doorslocked, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had gone.
                                   TEXT 61
                   cintita ha-ila sabe prabhure na dekhiya
                     prabhu cahi' bule sabe deuti jvaliya
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees were very anxious when they saw that the Lord was
not in His room. They wandered about searching for Him with a warninglamp.
                                   TEXT 62
                  simha-dvarera uttara-disaya ache eka thani
                   tara madhye padi' achena caitanya-gosani
                                 TRANSLATION     After searching for some time, they came upon Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu lying in a corner by the northern side of the Simha-dvaragate.
                                   TEXT 63                   dekhi' svarupa-gosani-adi anandita haila
                  prabhura dasa dekhi' punah cintite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     At first they were overjoyed to see Him, but when they saw His
condition, all the devotees, headed by Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, werevery anxious.
                                   TEXT 64
                 prabhu padi' achena dirgha hata panca-chaya
                     acetana deha, nasaya svasa nahi vaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was lying unconscious, and His body had
become elongated to five or six cubits [eight or nine feet]. There wasno breath from His nostrils.
                                  TEXT 65-66
                  eka eka hasta-pada--dirgha tina tina-hata
                 asthi-granthi bhinna, carma ache matra tata
                 hasta, pada, griva, kati, asthi sandhi yata
                     eka eka vitasti bhinna hanache tata
                                 TRANSLATION     Each of His arms and legs had become three cubits long; only skin
connected the separated joints. The Lord's body temperature, indicatinglife, was very low. All the joints in His arms, legs, neck and waistwere separated by at least six inches.
                                   TEXT 67
                  carma-matra upare, sandhi ache dirgha hana
                    duhkhita ha-ila sabe prabhure dekhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     It appeared that only skin covered His elongated joints. Seeing the
Lord's condition, all the devotees were very unhappy.
                                   TEXT 68
                   mukhe lala-phena prabhura uttana-nayana
                   dekhiya sakala bhaktera deha chade prana                                 TRANSLATION
     They almost died when they saw Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with His
mouth full of saliva and foam and His eyes turned upward.
                                   TEXT 69
                       svarupa-gosani tabe ucca kariya
                prabhura kane krsna-nama kahe bhakta-gana lana
                                 TRANSLATION     When they saw this, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami and all the other
devotees began to chant the holy name of Krsna very loudly into SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu's ear.
                                   TEXT 70
                     bahu-ksane krsna-nama hrdaye pasila
                   `hari-bola' bali' prabhu garjiya uthila
                                 TRANSLATION     After they chanted in this way for a long time, the holy name of
Krsna entered the heart of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and He suddenlyarose with a loud shout of "Hari bol."
                                   TEXT 71
                       cetana paite asthi-sandhi lagila
                      purva-praya yathavat sarira ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as the Lord returned to external consciousness, all His
joints contracted, and His entire body returned to normal.
                                   TEXT 72
                     ei lila mahaprabhura raghunatha-dasa
                `gauranga-stava-kalpa vrkse' kariyache prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami has described these pastimes
elaborately in his book Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa.
                                   TEXT 73                kvacin misravase vraja-pati-sutasyoru-virahat
         slathac chri-sandhitvad dadhad-adhika-dairghyam bhuja-padoh               luthan bhumau kakva vikala-vikalam gadgada-vaca                rudan sri-gaurango hrdaya udayan mam madayati
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sometimes Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would go to the house of Kasi
Misra. There He would be greatly aggrieved, feeling separation fromKrsna. The joints of His transcendental body would slacken, and His armsand legs would become elongated. Rolling on the ground, the Lord wouldcry out in distress in a faltering voice and weep very sorrowfully. Theappearance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, awakening in my heart, maddensme."
                                   TEXT 74
                  simha-dvare dekhi' prabhura vismaya ha-ila
                     `kanha kara ki'--ei svarupe puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very astonished to find Himself in
front of the Simha-dvara. He asked Svarupa Damodara Gosvami,"Where am I?What am I doing here?"
                                   TEXT 75
                svarupa kahe,--`utha, prabhu, cala nija-ghare
                      tathai tomare saba karimu gocare'
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara said,"My dear Lord, please get up. Let us go to
Your place. There I shall tell You everything that has happened."
                                   TEXT 76
                  eta bali' prabhure dhari' ghare lana gela
                      tanhara avastha saba kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus all the devotees carried Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu back to His
residence. Then they all described to Him what had happened.
                                   TEXT 77
                    suni' mahaprabhu bada haila camatkara                   prabhu kahe,--`kichu smrti nahika amara
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing the description of His condition while lying near the
Simha-dvara, Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu was very astonished. He said, "I donot remember any of these things.
                                   TEXT 78
                    sabe dekhi--haya mora krsna vidyamana
                   vidyut-praya dekha diya haya antardhana'
                                 TRANSLATION     "I can only remember that I saw My Krsna, but only for an instant.
He appeared before Me, and then, like lightning, immediatelydisappeared."
                                   TEXT 79
                  hena-kale jagannathera pani-sankha bajila
                     snana kari' mahaprabhu darasane gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Just then, everyone heard the blowing of the conchshell at the
Jagannatha temple. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu immediately took His bath andwent to see Lord Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 80
                    ei ta' kahilun prabhura adbhuta vikara
                      yahara sravane loke lage camatkara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described the uncommon transformations of the body of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. When people hear about this, they are veryastonished.
                                   TEXT 81
                   loke nahi dekhi aiche, sastre nahi suni
                    hena bhava vyakta kare nyasi-cudamani
                                 TRANSLATION     No one has witnessed such bodily changes elsewhere, nor has anyone
read of them in the revealed scriptures. Yet Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,the supreme sannyasi, exhibited these ecstatic symptoms.
                                   TEXT 82
                      sastra-lokatita yei yei bhava haya
                      itara-lokera tate na haya niscaya
                                 TRANSLATION     These ecstasies are not described in the sastras, and they are
inconceivable to common men. Therefore people in general do not believein them.
                                   TEXT 83
                  raghunatha-dasera sada prabhu-sange sthiti
                    tanra mukhe suni' likhi kariya pratiti
                                 TRANSLATION     Raghunatha dasa Gosvami lived continuously with Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. I am simply recording whatever I have heard from him.Although common men do not believe in these pastimes, I believe in themtotally.
                                   TEXT 84
                      eka-dina mahaprabhu samudre yaite
                     `cataka'-parvata dekhilena acambite
                                 TRANSLATION     One day, while Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu was going to the sea to
bathe, He suddenly saw a sand dune named Cataka-parvata.
                                   TEXT 85
                     govardhana-saila-jnane avista ha-ila
                      parvata-disate prabhu dhana calila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu mistook the sand dune for Govardhana Hill
and ran toward it.
                                   TEXT 86                     hantayam adrir abala hari-dasa-varyo
                    yad rama-krsna-carana-sparasa-pramodah                    manam tanoti saha-go-ganayos tayor yat                    pan iya-su yavasa-kandara-kanda-mulaih
                                 TRANSLATION     "Of all the devotees, this Govardhana Hill is the best! O My
friends, this hill supplies Krsna and Balarama, as well as Their calves,cows and cowherd friends, with all kinds of necessities--water fordrinking, very soft grass, caves, fruits, flowers and vegetables. Inthis way the hill offers respect to the Lord. Being touched by the lotusfeet of Krsna and Balarama, Govardhana Hill appears very jubilant."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.21.18). It was
spoken by the gopis when Lord Krsna and Balarama entered the forest inthe autumn. The gopis spoke among themselves and glorified Krsna andBalarama for Their pastimes.
                                   TEXT 87                    ei sloka padi' prabhu calena vayu-vege
                     govinda dhaila pache, nahi paya lage
                                 TRANSLATION     Reciting this verse, Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu ran toward the sand
dune as fast as the wind. Govinda ran after Him, but he could notapproach Him.
                                   TEXT 88
                     phukara padila, maha-kolahala ha-ila
                      yei yahan chila sei uthiya dhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     First one devotee shouted loudly, and then a tumultuous uproar
arose as all the devotees stood up and began to run after the Lord.
                                   TEXT 89
                   svarupa, jagadananda, pandita-gadadhara
                      ramai, nandai, ara pandita sankara
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, Jagadananda Pandita, Gadadhara Pandita,
Ramai, Nandai and Sankara Pandita are some of the devotees who ran afterSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.                                   TEXT 90
                     puri-bharati-gosani aila sindhu-tire
                  bhagavan-acarya khanja calila dhire dhire
                                 TRANSLATION     Paramananda Puri and Brahmananda Bharati also went toward the
beach, and Bhagavan Acarya, who was lame, followed them very slowly.
                                   TEXT 91
                   prathame calila prabhu,--yena vayu-gati
                 stambha-bhava pathe haila, calite nahi sakti
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was running with the speed of the wind, but
He suddenly became stunned in ecstasy and lost all strength to proceedfurther.
                                   TEXT 92
                     prati-roma-kupe mamsa--vranera akara
                    tara upare romodgama--kadamba-prakara
                                 TRANSLATION     The flesh at each of His pores erupted like pimples, and His hair,
standing on end, appeared like kadamba flowers.
                                   TEXT 93
                   prati-rome prasveda pade rudhirera dhara
                    kanthe gharghara, nahi varnera uccara
                                 TRANSLATION     Blood and perspiration flowed incessantIy from every pore of His
body, and He could not speak a word but simply produced a gargling soundwithin His throat.
                                   TEXT 94
                      dui netre bhari' asru vahaye apara
                    samudre milila yena ganga-yamuna-dhara
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord's eyes filled up and overflowed with unlimited tears, like
the Ganges and Yamuna meeting in the sea.
                                   TEXT 95
                   vaivarnye sankha-praya sveta haila anga
                    tabe kampa uthe,--yena samudre taranga
                                 TRANSLATION     His entire body faded to the color of a white conchshell, and then
He began to quiver, like the waves in the ocean.
                                   TEXT 96
                    kanpite kanpite prabhu bhumete padila
                    tabe ta' govinda prabhura nikate aila
                                 TRANSLATION     While quivering in this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fell down on
the ground. Then Govinda approached Him.
                                   TEXT 97
                     karangera jale kare sarvanga sincana
                      bahirvasa lana kare anga samvijana
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda sprinkled water from a karanga waterpot all over the Lord's
body, and then, taking His own outer garment, he began to fan SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 98
                      svarupadi-gana tahan asiya milila
                    prabhura avastha dekhi' kandite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Svarupa Damodara and the other devotees reached the spot and
saw the condition of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they began to cry.
                                   TEXT 99
                   prabhura ange dekhe asta-sattvika vikara
                   ascarya sattvika dekhi' haila camatkara                                 TRANSLATION
     All eight kinds of transcendental transformations were visible in
the Lord's body. All the devotees were struck with wonder to see such asight.
                                   PURPORT     The eight ecstatic symptoms are the state of being stunned,
perspiration, standing of the hairs on end, faltering of the voice,trembling, fading of the body's color, tears and devastation.
                                   TEXT 100                    ucca sankirtana kare prabhura sravane
                  sitala jale kare prabhura anga sammarjane
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees loudly chanted the Hare Krsna mantra near Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and washed His body with cold water.
                                   TEXT 101
                       ei-mata bahu-bara kirtana karite
                    `hari-bola' bali' prabhu uthe acambite
                                 TRANSLATION     After the devotees had been chanting for a long time, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu suddenly stood up, shouting, "Hari bol!"
                                   TEXT 102
                  sanande sakala vaisnava bale `hari' `hari'
                    uthila mangala-dhvani catur-dik bhari'
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stood up, all the Vaisnavas loudly
chanted, "Hari! Hari!" in great jubiIation. The auspicious sound filledthe alr in all directions.
                                   TEXT 103
                    uthi' mahaprabhu vismita, iti uti caya
                    ye dekhite caya, taha dekhite na paya
                                 TRANSLATION     Astonished, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stood up and began looking here
and there, trying to see something. But He could not catch sight of it.
                                   TEXT 104
                `vaisnava' dekhiya prabhura ardha-bahya ha-ila
                     svarupa-gosanire kichu kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw all the Vaisnavas, He returned to
partial external consciousness and spoke to Svarupa Damodara.
                                   TEXT 105
                    "govardhana haite more ke ihan anila?
                      pana krsnera lila dekhite na paila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "Who has brought Me here from
Govardhana Hill? I was seeing Lord Krsna's pastimes, but now I cannotsee them.
                                   TEXT 106
                      ihan haite aji mui genu govardhane
                  dekhon,--yadi krsna karena godhana-carane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Today I went from here to Govardhana Hill to find out if Krsna
were tending His cows there.
                                   TEXT 107
                     govardhane cadi' krsna bajaila venu
                     govardhanera caudike care saba dhenu
                                 TRANSLATION     "I saw Lord Krsna climbing Govardhana Hill and playing His flute,
surrounded on all sides by grazing cows.
                                   TEXT 108
                     venu-nada suni' aila radha-thakurani
                     saba sakhi-gana-sange kariya sajani                                 TRANSLATION
     "Hearing the vibration of Krsna's flute, Srimati Radharani and all
Her gopi friends came there to meet Him. They were all very nicelydressed.
                                   TEXT 109
                     radha lana krsna pravesila kandarate
                      sakhi-gana kahe more phula uthaite
                                 TRANSLATION     "When Krsna and Srimati Radharani entered a cave together, the
other gopis asked Me to pick some flowers.
                                   TEXT 110
                      hena-kale tumi-saba kolahala kaila
                    tahan haite dhari' more ihan lana aila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Just then, all of you made a tumultuous sound and carried Me from
there to this place.
                                   TEXT 111
                     kene va anila more vrtha duhkha dite
                     pana krsnera lila, na painu dekhite
                                 TRANSLATION     "Why have you brought Me here, causing Me unnecessary pain? I had a
chance to see Krsna's pastimes, but I could not see them."
                                   TEXT 112
                     eta bali' mahaprabhu karena krandana
                   tanra dasa dekhi' vaisnava karena rodana
                                 TRANSLATION     Saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began to weep. When all the
Vaisnavas saw the Lord's condition, they also wept.
                                   TEXT 113
                   hena-kale aila puri, bharati,--dui-jana                  dunhe dekhi' mahaprabhura ha-ila sambhrama
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time, Paramananda Puri and Brahmananda Bharati arrived.
Seeing them, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became somewhat respecfful.
                                   TEXT 114
                 nipatta-bahya ha-ile prabhu dunhare vandila
                   mahaprabhure dui-jana premalingana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to complete external consciousness
and immediately offered prayers to them. Then these two elderlygentlemen both embraced the Lord with loving affection.
                                   TEXT 115
                  prabhu kahe,--`dunhe kene aila eta dure'?
                 puri-gosani kahe,--`tomara nrtya dekhibare'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said to Puri Gosvami and Brahmananda
Bharati, "Why have you both come so far?" Puri Gosvami replied, "Just tosee Your dancing."
                                   TEXT 116
                     lajjita ha-ila prabhu purira vacane
                    samudra-ghata aila saba vaisnava-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     When He heard this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was somewhat ashamed.
Then He went to bathe in the sea with all the Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 117
                     snana kari' mahaprabhu gharete aila
                    saba lana maha-prasada bhojana karila
                                 TRANSLATION     After bathing in the sea, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to His
residence with all the devotees. Then they all lunched on the remnantsof food offered to Lord Jagannatha.                                   TEXT 118
                   ei ta' kahilun prabhura divyonmada-bhava
                     brahmao kahite nare yahara prabhava
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described the transcendental ecstatic emotions of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Even Lord Brahma cannot describe their influence.
                                   TEXT 119
                  `cataka'-giri-gamana-lila raghunatha-dasa
             `gau ranga-sta va -kalpa vrkse' kariyach ena prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In his book Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa, Raghunatha dasa Gosvami has
very vividly described Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu's pastime of runningtoward the Cataka-parvata sand dune.
                                   TEXT 120
                 samioe niladres cataka-giri-rajasya kalanad
                aye gosthe govardhana-giri-patim lokitum itah              vrajann asmity uktva pramada iva dhavann avadhrto               ganaih svair gaurango hrdaya udayan mam madayati
                                 TRANSLATION     "Near Jagannatha Puri was a great sand dune known as Cataka-
parvata. Seeing that hill, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, `Oh, I shall goto the land of
Vraja to see Govardhana Hill.' Then He began running madly toward it,
and alI the Vaisnavas ran after Him. This scene awakens in my heart andmaddens me."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is quoted from the Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa (8).                                   TEXT 121                     ebe prabhu yata kaila alaukika-lila
                   ke varnite pare sei mahaprabhura khela?
                                 TRANSLATION     Who can properly describe all the uncommon pastimes of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu? They are all simply His play.                                   TEXT 122
                      sanksepe kahiya kari dik darasana
                      yei iha sune, paya krsnera carana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have briefly described them just to give an indication of His
transcendental pastimes. Nevertheless, anyone who hears this willcertainly attain the shelter of Lord Krsna's lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 123
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,folIowing in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Fourteenth Chapter, describing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'stranscendental ecstatic emotions and His mistaking Cataka-parvata forGovardhana Hill.
                               Chapter Fifteen
          The Transcendental Madness of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu     The following is a summary of the Fifteenth Chapter of Antya-lila.
After seeing the upala-bhoga ceremony of Lord Jagannatha, Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu once more began to feel ecstatic emotions. When He saw thegarden on the beach by the sea, He again thought that He was inVrndavana, and when He began to think of Krsna engaging in His differentpastimes, transcendental emotions excited Him again. On the night of therasa dance, the gopis, bereaved by Krsna's absence, searched for Krsnafrom one forest to another. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu adopted the sametranscendental thoughts as the gopis and was filled with ecstaticemotion. Svarupa Damodara Gosvami recited a verse from Gita-govinda justsuitable to the Lord's emotions. Caitanya Mahaprabhu then exhibited theecstatic transformations known as bhavodaya, bhava-sandhi, bhava-sabalyaand so on. The Lord experienced all eight kinds of ecstatictransformations, and He relished them very much.
                                    TEXT 1                           durgame krsna-bhavabdhau                             nimagnonmagna-cetasa
                            gaurena harina prema-                            maryada bhuri darsita
                                 TRANSLATION     The ocean of ecstatic love for Krsna is very difficult to
understand, even for such demigods as Lord Brahma. By enacting Hispastimes, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu submerged Himself in that ocean, and His heart was absorbed
in that love. Thus He exhibited in various ways the exalted position oftranscendental love for Krsna.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-krsna-caitanya adhisvara
                     jaya nityananda purnananda-kalevara
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Krsna Caitanya, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead! AIl glories to Lord Nityananda, whose body is always filledwith transcendental bliss!
                                    TEXT 3
                   jayadvaitacarya krsna-caitanya-priyatama
                    jaya srivasa-adi prabhura bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Advaita Acarya, who is very dear to Lord
Caitanya! And all glories to the devotees of the Lord, headed by SrivasaThakura!
                                    TEXT 4
                       ei-mata mahaprabhu ratri-divase
                      atma-sphurti nahi krsna-bhavavese
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu forgot Himself throughout the entire
day and night, being merged in an ocean of ecstatic love for Krsna.
                                    TEXT 5
                 kabhu bhave magna, kabhu ardha-bahya-sphurti
                kabhu bahya-sphurti,--tina rite prabhu-sthiti                                 TRANSLATION
     The Lord would maintain Himself in three kinds of consciousness:
sometimes He merged totally in ecstatic emotion, sometimes He was inpartial external consciousness and sometimes in fuIl externalconsciousness.
                                    TEXT 6
                  snana, darsana, bhojana deha-svabhave haya
                      kumarera caka yena satata phiraya
                                 TRANSLATION     Actually, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was always merged in ecstatic
emotion, but just as a potter's wheel turns without the potter'stouching it, the Lord's bodily activities, like bathing, going to thetemple to see Lord Jagannatha, and taking lunch, went on automatically.
                                    TEXT 7
                  eka-dina karena prabhu jagannatha darasana
                  jagannathe dekhe saksat vrajendra-nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     One day, while Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was looking at Lord
Jagannatha in the temple, Lord Jagannatha appeared to be personally theson of Nanda Maharaja, Sri Krsna.
                                    TEXT 8
                 eka-bare sphure prabhura krsnera panca-guna
                     panca-gune kare pancendriya akarsana
                                 TRANSLATION     When He realized Lord Jagannatha to be Krsna Himself, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's five senses were immediately absorbed in attraction for thefive attributes of Lord Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Krsna's beauty attracted the eyes of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Krsna's singing and the vibration of His flute attracted the Lord'sears, the transcendental fragrance of Krsna's lotus feet attracted Hisnostrils, Krsna's transcendental sweetness attracted His tongue, andKrsna's bodily touch attracted the Lord's sensation of touch. Thus eachof Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's five senses was attracted by one of thefive attributes of Lord Krsna.                                    TEXT 9
                     eka-mana panca-dike panca-guna tane
                     tanatani prabhura mana haila ageyane
                                 TRANSLATION     Just as in a tug-of-war, the single mind of Lord Caitanya was
attracted in five directions by the five transcendental attributes ofLord Krsna. Thus the Lord became unconscious.
                                   TEXT 10
                    hena-kale isvarera upala-bhoga sarila
                   bhakta-gana mahaprabhure ghare lana aila
                                 TRANSLATION     Just then, the upala-bhoga ceremony of Lord Jagannatha concluded,
and the devotees who had accompanied Lord Caitanya to the temple broughtHim back home.
                                   TEXT 11
                    svarupa, ramananda,--ei dui-jana lana
                    vilapa karena dunhara kanthete dhariya
                                 TRANSLATION     That night, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was attended by Svarupa
Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya. Keeping His hands around theirnecks, the Lord began to lament.
                                   TEXT 12
                    krsnera viyoge radhara utkanthita mana
                     visakhare kahe apana utkantha-karana
                                 TRANSLATION     When Srimati Radharani was very agitated due to feeling great
separation from Krsna, She spoke a verse to Visakha explaining the causeof Her great anxiety and restlessness.
                                   TEXT 13
                     sei sloka padi' apane kare manastapa
                  slokera artha sunaya dunhare kariya vilapa                                 TRANSLATION
     Reciting that verse, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu expressed His burning
emotions. Then, with great lamentation, He explained the verse toSvarupa Damodara and Ramananda Raya.
                                   TEXT 14
           saundaryamrta-sindhu-bhanga-lalana-cittadri-sampla vakah
             karnanandi-sanarma-ramya-vacanah kotindu-sitangakah             saurabh yamrta-samplavavrta-iagat piyusa-ramyadharah           sri-gopendra-sutah sa karsati balat pancendriyany ali me
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said:" `Though the hearts of the gopis are
like high-standing hills, they are inundated by the waves of thenectarean ocean of Krsna's beauty. His sweet voice enters their ears andgives them transcendental bliss. The touch of His body is cooler thanmillions and millions of moons My dear friend, that Krsna, who is theson of Nanda Maharaja and whose lips are exactly like nectar, isattracting My five senses by force.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is found in Govinda-lilamrta (8.3).                                   TEXT 15               krsna-rupa-sabda-sparsa, saurabh ya-adhara-rasa,
                         yara madhurya kahana na yaya                dekhi' lobhe panca-jana, eka asva--mora mana,                         cadi' panca panca-dike dhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Sri Krsna's beauty, the sound of His words and the vibration
of His flute, His touch, His fragrance and the taste of His lips arefull of an indescribable sweetness. When all these features attract Myfive senses at once, My senses all ride together on the single horse ofMy mind but want to go in five different directions.
                                   TEXT 16
                     sakhi he, suna mora duhkhera karana
               mora pancendriya-gana, maha-lampata dasyu-gana,                         sabe kahe,--hara' para-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "O My dear friend, please hear the cause of My misery. My five
senses are actually extravagant rogues. They know very well that Krsnais the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but they still want to plunder
Krsna's property.
                                   TEXT 17
                  eka asva eka-ksane, panca panca dike tane,
                           eka mana kon dike yaya?                   eka-kale sabe tne, gela ghodara parane,                           ei duhkha sahana na yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My mind is just like a single horse being ridden by the five
senses of perception, headed by sight. Each sense wants to ride thathorse, and thus they pull My mind in five directions simultaneously. Inwhat direction will it go? If they all pull at one time, certainly thehorse will lose its life. How can I tolerate this atrocity?
                                   TEXT 18
                indriye na kari rosa, inha-sabara kahan dosa,
                         krsna-rupadira maha akarsana                rupadi panca pance tane, gela ghodara parane,                           mora dehe na rahe jivana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, if you say, `Just try to control Your senses,'
what shall I say? I cannot become angry at My senses. Is it their fault?Krsna's beauty, sounds, touch, fragrance and taste are by natureextremely attractive. These five features are attracting My senses, andeach wants to drag My mind in a different direction. Thus the life of Mymind is in great danger, just like a horse ridden in five directions atonce. Thus I am also in danger of dying.
                                   TEXT 19
                 krsna-rupamrta-sindhu, tahara taranga-bindu,
                            eka-bindu jagat dubaya                  trijagate yata nari, tara citta-ucca-giri,                          taha dubai age uthi' dhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The consciousness of each woman within the three worlds is
certainly like a high hill, but the sweetness of Krsna's beauty is likean ocean. Even a drop of water from that ocean can flood the entireworld and submerge all the high hills of consciousness.
                                   TEXT 20                krsnera vacana-madhuri, nana-rasa-narma-dhari,
                         tara anyaya kathana na yaya               jagatera narira kane, madhuri-gune bandhi' tane,                          tanatani kanera prana yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The sweetness of Krsna's joking words plays indescribable havoc
with the hearts of all women. His words bind a woman's ear to thequalities of their sweetness. Thus there is a tug-of-war, and the lifeof the ear departs.
                                   TEXT 21
                  krsna-anga susitala, ki kahimu tara bala,
                         chataya jine kotindu-candana                 sas,aila narira vaksa, taha akarsite daksa,                           akarsaye nari-gana-mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna's transcendental body is so cool that it cannot be compared
even to sandalwood pulp or to millions upon millions of moons. Itexpertly attracts the breasts of all women, which resemble high hills.Indeed, the transcendental body of Krsna attracts the minds of all womenwithin the three worlds.
                                   TEXT 22
               krsnanga--saurabhya-bhara, mrga-mada-mada-hara,
                         nilotpalera hare garva-dhana                  jagat-narira nasa, tara bhitara pate vasa,                           nari-gane kare akarsana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The fragrance of Krsna's body is more maddening than the aroma of
musk, and it surpasses the fragrance of the bluish lotus flower. Itenters the nostrils of all the women of the world and, making a nestthere, thus attracts them.
                                   TEXT 23
                krsnera adharamrta, tate karpura manda-smita,
                        sva-madhurye hare narira mana                 anyatra chadaya lobha, na paile mane ksobha,                        vraja-nari-ganera mula-dhana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna's lips are so sweet when combined with the camphor of His
gentle smile that they attract the minds of all women, forcing them togive up all other attractions. If the sweetness of Krsna's smile isunobtainable, great mental difficulties and lamentation result. Thatsweetness is the only wealth of the gopis of Vrndavana."
                                   TEXT 24
                eta kahi' gaurahari, dui-janara kantha dhari',
                        kahe,--`suna, svarupa-ramaraya               kahan karon, kahan yana, kahan gele krsna pana,                          dunhe more kaha se upaya'
                                 TRANSLATION     After speaking in this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu caught hold of
the necks of Ramananda Raya and Svarupa Damodara. Then the Lord said,"My dear friends, please listen to Me. What shall I do? Where shall Igo? Where can I go to get Krsna? Please, both of you, tell Me how I canfind Him."
                                   TEXT 25
                     ei-mata gaura-prabhu prati dine-dine
                     vilapa karena svarupa-ramananda-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus absorbed in transcendental pain, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
lamented day after day in the company of Svarupa Damodara Gosvami andRamananda Raya.
                                   TEXT 26
                     sei dui-jana prabhure kare asvasana
                    svarupa gaya, raya kare sloka pathana
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara Gosvami would sing appropriate songs, and
Ramananda Raya would recite suitable verses to enhance the ecstatic moodof the Lord. In this way they were able to pacify Him.
                                   TEXT 27
                    karnamrta, vidyapati, sri-gita-govinda
                   ihara sloka-gite prabhura karaya ananda
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord especially liked to hear Bilvamangala Thakura's Krsna-
karnamrta, the poetry of Vidyapati and Sri Gita-govinda by JayadevaGosvami. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt great pleasure in His heart whenHis associates chanted verses from these books.
                                   TEXT 28
                    eka-dina mahaprabhu samudra-tire yaite
                    puspera udyana tatha dekhena acambite
                                 TRANSLATION     One day, while going to the beach by the sea, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu suddenly saw a flower garden.
                                   TEXT 29
                     vrndavana-bhrame tahan pasila dhana
                     premavese bule tahan krsna anvesiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya mistook that garden for Vrndavana and very quickly
entered it. Absorbed in ecstatic love of Krsna, He wandered throughoutthe garden, searching for Him.
                                   TEXT 30
                    rase radha lana krsna antardhana kaila
                    pache sakhi-gana yaiche cahi' bedaila
                                 TRANSLATION     After Krsna disappeared with Radharani during the rasa dance, the
gopis wandered in the forest looking for Him. In the same way, SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu wandered in that garden by the sea.
                                   TEXT 31
                     sei bhavavese prabhu prati-taru-lata
                   sloka padi' padi' cahi' bule yatha tatha
                                 TRANSLATION     Absorbed in the ecstatic mood of the gopis, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
wandered here and there. He began to inquire after Krsna by quotingverses to aIl the trees and creepers.
                                   PURPORT     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then quoted the following three verses from
Srimad- Bhagavatam (10.30.9,7,8).
                                   TEXT 32                     cu ta-priyala-panasasana-kovidara -
                 jamb v-arka-bilva -bakulamra-kadamba-nioah.                    ye'nye parartha-bhavaka yamunopakulah                   samsantu krsna-padavim rahitatmanam nah
                                 TRANSLATION      tree, O arka tree, O bel, bakula and mango! O kadamba tree, O nipa
tree and all other trees living on the bank of the Yamuna for thewelfare of others, please let us know where Krsna has gone. We have lostour minds and are almost dead.
                                   TEXT 33
                            kaccit tulasi kalyani
                            govinda-carana-pri ye                          saha tvali-kulair bibhrad                          drstas te'ti-priyo'cyutah
                                 TRANSLATION     "`O all-auspicious tulasi plant, you are very dear to Govinda's
lotus feet, and He is very dear to you. Have you seen Krsna walking herewearing a garland of your leaves, surrounded by a swarm of bumblebees?
                                   TEXT 34
                           malaty adarsi vah kaccin
                             mallike jati yuthike                           pritim vo janayan yatah                            kara-sparsena madhavah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O plants of malati flowers, mallika flowers, jati and yuthika
flowers, have you seen Krsna passing this way, touching you with Hishand to give you pleasure?"'
                                   TEXT 35
                    amra, panasa, piyala, jambu, kovidara
                     tirtha-vasi sabe, kara para-upakara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued: " `O mango tree, O jackfruit
tree, O piyala, jambu and kovidara trees, you are all inhabitants of aholy place. Therefore kindly act for the welfare of others.
                                   TEXT 36
                   krsna tomara ihan aila, paila darasana?
                     krsnera uddesa kahi' rakhaha jivana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Have you seen Krsna coming this way? Kindly tell us which way He
has gone and save our lives.'
                                   TEXT 37
                      uttara na pana punah kare anumana
                 ei saba--purusa-jati, krsnera sakhara samana
                                 TRANSLATION     "When the trees did not reply, the gopis guessed,`Since all of
these trees belong to the male class, all of them must be friends ofKrsna.
                                   TEXT 38
                     e kene kahibe krsnera uddesa amaya?
                     e--stri-jati lata, amara sakhi-praya
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Why should the trees tell us where Krsna has gone? Let us rather
inquire from the creepers; they are female and therefore are likefriends to us.
                                   TEXT 39
                   avasya kahibe,--panache krsnera darsane
                      eta anumani' puche tulasy-adi-gane
                                 TRANSLATION     " `They will certainly tell us where Krsna has gone, since they
have seen Him personally.' Guessing in this way, the gopis inquired fromthe plants and creepers, headed by tulasi.
                                   TEXT 40                   "tulasi, malati, yuthi, madhavi, mallike
                    tomara priya krsna aila tomara antike?
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O tulasi! O malati! O yuthi, madhavi and mallika! Krsna is very
dear to you. Therefore He must have come near you.
                                   TEXT 41
                     tumi-saba--hao amara sakhira samana
                    krsnoddesa kahi' sabe rakhaha parana"
                                 TRANSLATION     " `You are all just like dear friends to us. Kindly tell us which
way Krsna has gone and save our lives.'
                                   TEXT 42
                     uttara na pana punah bhavena antare
                    `eha--krsna-dasi, bhaye na kahe amare'
                                 TRANSLATION     "When they still received no reply, the gopis thought, `These
plants are all Krsna's maidservants, and out of fear they will not speakto us.'
                                   TEXT 43
                  age mrgi-gana dekhi' krsnanga-gandha pana
                   tara mukha dekhi' puchena nirnaya kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The gopis then came upon a group of she-deer. Smelling the aroma
of Krsna's body and seeing the faces of the deer, the gopis inquiredfrom them to ascertain if Krsna was nearby.
                                   TEXT 44
                   apy ena-patny upagatah priyayeha gatrais
                   tanvan drsam sakhi sunirvrtim acyuto vah                  kantanga-sa nga-kuca-ku nkuma-ra njita yah                   kunda-srajah kula-pater iha vati gandhah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O wife of the deer, Lord Krsna has been embracing His beloved,
and thus the kunkuma powder on Her raised breasts has covered Hisgarland of kunda flowers. The fragrance of this garland is flowing here.O my dear friend, have you seen Krsna passing this way with His dearmostcompanion, increasing the pleasure of the eyes of all of you?'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.30.11).                                   TEXT 45                  "kaha, mrgi, radha-saha sri-krsna sarvatha
                    tomaya sukha dite aila? nahika anyatha
                                 TRANSLATION     "`O dear doe, Sri Krsna is always very pleased to give you
pleasure. Kindly inform us whether He passed this way in the company ofSrimati Radharani. We think They must certainly have come this way.
                                   TEXT 46
                   radha-priya-sakh i amara, nahi bahiranga
                   dura haite jani tara yaiche anga-gandha
                                 TRANSLATION     " `We are not outsiders. Being very dear friends of Srimati
Radharani, we can perceive the bodily fragrance of Krsna from adistance.
                                   TEXT 47
                    radha-anga-sange kuca-kunkuma-bhusita
                    krsna-kunda-mala-gandhe vayu--suvasita
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Krsna has been embracing Srimati Radharani, and the kunkuma
powder on Her breasts has mixed with the garland of kunda flowersdecorating His body. The fragrance of the garland has scented the entireatmosphere.
                                   TEXT 48
                    krsna ihan chadi' gela, ihon--virahini
                     kiba uttara dibe ei--na sune kahini"
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Lord Krsna has left this place, and therefore the deer are
feeling separation. They do not hear our words; therefore how can theyreply?'
                                   TEXT 49
                    age vrksa-gana dekhe puspa-phala-bhare
                      sakha saba padiyache prthivi-upare
                                 TRANSLATION     "The gopis then came upon many trees so laden with fruits and
flowers that their branches bent down to the ground.
                                   TEXT 50
                    krsne dekhi' ei saba karena namaskara
                   krsna-gamana puche tare kariya nirdhara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The gopis thought that because all the trees must have seen Krsna
pass by they were offering respectful obeisances to Him. To be certain,the gopis inquired from the trees.
                                   TEXT 51
                     bahum priyamsa upadhaya grhita-padmo
                    ramanujas tulasikali-kulair madandhaih                     anviyamana iha vas taravah pranamam                    kimvabhinandati caran prana yavalokaih
                                 TRANSLATION     "`O trees, kindly tell us whether Balarama's younger brother,
Krsna, welcomed your obeisances with loving glances as He passed thisway, resting one hand on the shoulder of Srimati Radharani, holding alotus flower in the other, and being followed by a swarm of bumblebeesmaddened by the fragrance of tulasi leaves.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.30.12).                                   TEXT 52                    priya-mukhe bhrnga pade, taha nivarite
                     lila-padma calaite haila anya-citte
                                 TRANSLATION     " `To stop the bumblebees from landing on the face of His beloved,
He whisked them away with the lotus flower in His hand, and thus Hismind was slightly diverted.
                                   TEXT 53
                    tomara praname ki kairachena avadhana?
                    kiba nahi karena, kaha vacana-pramana
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Did He or did He not pay attention while You offered Him
obeisances? Kindly give evidence supporting your words.
                                   TEXT 54
                      krsnera viyoge ei sevaka duhkhita
                    kiba uttara dibe? ihara nahika samvit"
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Separation from Krsna has made these servants very unhappy.
Having lost consciousness, how can they answer us?'
                                   TEXT 55
                       eta bali' age cale yamunara kule
                   dekhe,--tahan krsna haya kadambera tale
                                 TRANSLATION     "Saying this, the gopis stepped onto the beach by the Yamuna River.
There they saw Lord Krsna beneath a kadamba tree.
                                   TEXT 56
                      koti-manmatha-mohana murali-vadana
                    apara saundarye hare jagan-netra-mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Standing there with His flute to His lips, Krsna, who enchants
millions upon millions of Cupids, attracted the eyes and minds of allthe world with His unlimited beauty."
                                   TEXT 57
                  saundarya dekhiya bhume pade murccha pana
                       hena-kale svarupadi milila asiya                                 TRANSLATION
     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw the transcendental beauty of
Krsna, He fell down on the ground unconscious. At that time, all thedevotees, headed by Svar\pa Damodara Gosvami, joined Him in the garden.
                                   TEXT 58
                   purvavat sarvange sattvika-bhava-sakala
                     antare ananda-asvada, bahire vihvala
                                 TRANSLATION     Just as before, they saw all the symptoms of transcendental
ecstatic love manifested in the body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.Although externally He appeared bewildered, He was tastingtranscendental bliss within.
                                   TEXT 59
                      purvavat sabe mili' karaila cetana
                     uthiya caudike prabhu karena darsana
                                 TRANSLATION     Once again all the devotees brought Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu back to
consciousness by a concerted effort. Then the Lord got up and beganwandering here and there, looking all around.
                                   TEXT 60
                  "kahan gela krsna? ekhani painu darasana!
                  tanhara saundarya mora harila netra-mana!
                                 TRANSLATION     Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "Where has My Krsna gone? I saw Him just
now, and His beauty has captured My eyes and mind.
                                   TEXT 61
                     punah kene na dekhiye murali-vadana!
                    tanhara darsana-lobhe bhramaya nayana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Why can't I again see Krsna holding His flute to His lips? My eyes
are wandering in hopes of seeing Him once more."                                   TEXT 62
                      visakhare rdha yaiche sloka kahila
                      sei sloka mahaprabhu padite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then recited the following verse, which was
spoken by Srimati Radharani to Her dear friend Visakha.
                                   TEXT 63
                navmbuda-lasad-dyutir nava-tadin-manolnambarah
             suci tra-murali-sph urac-charad-amanda -candra nanah                mayura-dala-bhusitah subhaga-tara-hara-prabhah                sa me madana-mohanah sakhi tanoti netra-sprhm
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, the luster of Krsna's body is more brilliant than
a newly formed cloud, and His yellow dress is more attractive than newlyarrived lightning. A peacock feather decorates His head, and on His neckhangs a lovely necklace of brilliant pearls. As He holds His charmingflute to His lips, His face looks as beautiful as the full autumn moon.By such beauty, Madanamohana, the enchater of Cupid, is increasing thedesire of my eyes to see Him."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is also found in the Govinda-lilamrta (8.4).                                   TEXT 64               nava-ghana-snigdha- varna, dalitanjana-cikkana,
                           indivara-nindi sukomala                 jini' upamana-gana, hare sabara netra-mana,                          krsna-kanti parama prabala
                                 TRANSLATION     Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued: "Sri Krsna's complexion is as
polished as powdered eye ointment. It surpasses the beauty of a newlyformed cloud and is softer than a blue lotus flower. Indeed, Hiscomplexion is so pleasing that it attracts the eyes and mind ofeveryone, and it is so powerful that it defies all comparison.
                                   TEXT 65
                         kaha, sakhi, ki kari upaya?
                   krsnadbhuta balahaka, mora netra-cataka,                         na dekhi' piyase mari; yaya                                 TRANSLATION
     "My dear friend, please tell me what I should do. Krsna is as
attractive as a wonderful cloud, and My eyes are just like cataka birds,which are dying of thirst because they do not see such a cloud.
                                   TEXT 66
                 saudamini pitambara, sthira nahe nirantara,
                         mukta-hara baka-panti bhala                indra-dhanu sikhi-pakha, upare diyache dekha;,                          ara dhanu vaijayanti-mala
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna's yellow dress looks exactly like restless lightning in the
sky, and the pearl necklace on His neck appears like a line of ducksflying below a cloud. Both the peacock feather on His head and Hisvaijayanti garland [containing flowers of five colors] resemblerainbows.
                                   TEXT 67
                 muralira kala-dhvani, madhura garjana suni;,
                          vrndavane nace mayura-caya               akalanka purna-kala, lavanya-jyotsna jhalamala,                         citra-candrera tahate udaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The luster of Krsna's body is as beautiful as a spotless full moon
that has just risen, and the vibration of His flute sounds exactly likethe sweet thundering of a newly formed cloud. When the peacocks inVrndavana hear that vibration, they all begin to dance.
                                   TEXT 68
                   lilamrta-varisane, since caudda bhuvane'
                          hena megha yabe dekha dila
               durdaiva-jhanjha-pavane, meghe nila anya-sthane,
                          mare cataka, pite na paila
                                 TRANSLATION     "The cloud of Krsna's pastimes is drenching the fourteen worlds
with a shower of nectar. Unfortunately, when that cloud appeared, awhirlwind arose and blew it away from Me. Being unable to see the cloud,the cataka bird of My eyes is almost dead from thirst."                                   TEXT 69
               punah kahe,--`haya haya, pada pada rama-ra-ya',
                         kahe prabhu gadgada akhyane               ramananda pade sloka, suni' prabhura harsa-soka,                        apane prabhu karena vyakhyane
                                 TRANSLATION     In a faltering voice, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu again said, "Alas, go
on reading, Rama Raya." Thus Ramananda Raya began to read a verse. Whilelistening
to this verse, the Lord was sometimes very jubilant and sometimes
overcome by lamentation. Afterwards the Lord personally explained theverse.
                                   TEXT 70
                   viksyalakavrta-mukham tava kundala-sri-
                    ganda-sthaladhara-sudham hasitavalokam                   dattabhayam ca bhuja-danda-yugam vilokya                  vaksah sriyaika-ramanam ca bhavama dasyah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Dear Krsna, by seeing Your beautiful face decorated with tresses
of hair, by seeing the beauty of Your earrings falling on Your cheeks,and by seeing the nectar of Your lips, the beauty of Your smilingglances, Your two arms, which assure complete fearlessness, and Yourbroad chest, whose beauty arouses conjugal attraction, we have simplysurrendered ourselves to becoming Your maidservants.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.29.39) was spoken by
the gopis when they arrived before Krsna for the rasa dance.
                                   TEXT 71               krsna jini' padma-canda, patiyache mukha phanda,
                         tate adhara-madhu-smita cara                vraja-nari asi' asi', phande padi' haya dasi,                         chadi' laja-pati-ghara-dvara
                                 TRANSLATION     "After conquering the moon and the lotus flower, Krsna wished to
capture the doelike gopis. Thus He spread the noose of His beautifulface, and within that noose He placed the bait of His sweet smile tomisguide the gopis. The gopis fell prey to that trap and became Krsna'smaidservants, giving up their homes, families, husbands and prestige.                                   TEXT 72
                      bandhava krsna kare vyadhera acara
                nahi mane dharmadharma, hare nari-mrgi-marma,                            kare nana upaya tahara
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, Krsna acts just like a hunter. This hunter does
not care for piety or impiety; He simply creates many devices to conquerthe cores of the hearts of the doelike gopis.
                                   TEXT 73
                 ganda-sthala jhalamala, nace makara-kundala,
                           sei nrtye hare nari-caya                 sasmita kataksa-bane, ta-sabara hrdaye hane,                         nari-vadhe nahi kichu bhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The earrings dancing on Krsna's cheeks are shaped like sharks, and
they shine very brightly. These dancing earrings attract the minds ofall women. Over and above this, Krsna pierces the hearts of women withthe arrows of His sweetly smiling glances. He is not at all afraid tokill women in this way.
                                   TEXT 74
                ati ucca suvistara, laksmi-srivatsa-alankara,
                          krsnera ye dakatiya vaksa
                vraja-devi laksa laksa, ta-sabara mano-vaksa,
                           hari-dasi karibare daksa
                                 TRANSLATION     "On Krsna's chest are the ornaments of Srivatsa and the mark
indicating the residence of the goddess of fortune. His chest, which isas broad as a plunderer's, attracts thousands upon thousands of damselsof Vraja, conquering their minds and breasts by force. Thus they allbecome maidservants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
                                   TEXT 75
                 sulalita dirghargala, krsnera bhuja-yugala,
                        bhuja nahe,--krsna-sarpa-kaya                 dui saila-chidre paise, narira hrdaye damse,                          mare nari se visa-jvalaya                                 TRANSLATION
     "The two very beautiful arms of Krsna are just like long bolts.
They also resemble the bodies of black snakes that enter the spacebetween the two hill-like breasts of women and bite their hearts. The women then die from theburning poison.
                                   PURPORT     In other words, the gopis become very agitated by lusty desires;
they are burning due to the poisonous bite inflicted by the black snakesof Krsna's beautiful arms.
                                   TEXT 76                 krsna-kara-pada-tala, koti-candra-susitala,
                       jini' karpura-vena-mula-candana                 eka-bara yara sparse, smara-jvala-visa nase,                         yara sparse lubdha nari-mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The combined cooling effect of camphor, roots of khasakhasa and
sandalwood is surpassed by the coolness of Krsna's palms and the solesof His feet, which are cooler and more pleasing than millions uponmillions of moons. If women are touched by them even once, their mindsare enticed, and the burning poison of lusty desire for Krsna isimmediately vanquished."
                                   TEXT 77
                   eteka vilapa kari' premavese gaurahari,
                           ei arthe pade eka sloka                 sei sloka padi' radha, visakhare kahe badha,                            ughadiya hrdayera soka
                                 TRANSLATION     Lamenting in ecstatic love, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then recited
the following verse, which was spoken by Srimati Radharani whileexposing the lamentation of Her heart to Her friend Srimati Visakha.
                                   TEXT 78
                harinmani-kavatika-pratata-hari-vaksah-sthalah
               smararta-taruni-mana h-ka lusa-hari-dor-argalah                sudhamsu-hari-candanotpala-sitabhra-sitangakah               sa me madana-mohanah sakhi tanoti vaksah-sprham
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, Krsna's chest is as broad and attractive as a door
made of indranila gems, and His two arms, strong as bolts, can relievethe mental anguish of young girls distressed by lusty desires for Him.His body is cooler than the moon, sandalwood, the lotus flower andcamphor. In this way, Madana-mohana, the attractor of Cupid, isincreasing the desire of My breasts."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is also found in the Govinda-lilamrta (8.7).                                   TEXT 79                   prabhu kahe,--"krsna muni ekhana-i painu
                        apanara durdaive punah harainu
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then said, "I just now had Krsna, but
unfortunately I have lost Him again.
                                   TEXT 80
                 cancala-svabhava krsnera, na raya eka-sthane
                    dekha diya mana hari' kare antardhane
                                 TRANSLATION     "By nature, Krsna is very restless; He does not stay in one place.
He meets with someone, enchants his mind and then disappears.
                                   TEXT 81
                           tasam tat-saubhaga-madam
                           viksya manam ca kesavah                            prasama ya prasada ya                            tatraiva ntaradh iyata
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The gopis became proud of their great fortune. To subdue their
sense of superiority and show them special favor, Kesava, the subduer ofeven Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, disappeared from the rasa dance.",
                                   PURPORT     This verse quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.29.48) was spoken by
Sukadeva Gosvami to Maharaja Pariksit.
                                   TEXT 82                   svarupa-gosanire kahena,--"gao eka gita
                    yate amara hrdayera haye ta' `samvit"'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then said to Svarupa Damodara Gosvami:
"Please sing a song that will bring consciousness to My heart."
                                   TEXT 83
                      svarupa-gosani tabe madhura kariya
                   gita-govindera pada gaya prabhure sunana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus for the pleasure of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Svarupa Damodara
Gosvami began very sweetly singing the following verse from Gita-govinda.
                                   TEXT 84
                        rase harim iha vihita-vilasam
                       smarati mano mama krta-parihasam
                                 TRANSLATION     "Here in the arena of the rasa dance, I remember Krsna, who is
always fond of joking and performing pastimes."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is quoted from Gita-govinda (2.3).                                   TEXT 85                      svarupa-gosani yabe ei pada gahila
                     uthi' premavese prabhu nacite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Svarupa Damodara Gosvami sang this special song, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu immediately got up and began to dance in ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 86
                  `asta-sattvika' bhava ange prakata ha-ila
                      harsadi `vyabhicari' saba uthalila
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time, all eight kinds of spiritual transformations became
manifest in Lord Caitanya's body. The thirty-three symptoms ofvyabhicari-bhava, beginning with lamentation and jubilation, becameprominent as well.
                                   TEXT 87
                   bhavoda ya, bhava-sandhi, bha va-sabalya
                   bhave-bhave maha-yuddhe sabara prabalya
                                 TRANSLATION     All the ecstatic symptoms, such as bhavodaya, bhava-sandhi and
bhavasabalya, awakened in the body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. A greatfight arose between one emotion and another, and each of them becameprominent.
                                   TEXT 88
                      sei pada punah punah karaya gayana
                     punah punah asvadaye, karena nartana
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu had Svarupa Damodara sing the same verse
again and again. Each time he sang it, the Lord tasted it anew, and thusHe danced again and again.
                                   TEXT 89
                     ei-mata nrtya yadi ha-ila bahu-ksana
                      svarupa-gosani pada kaila samapana
                                 TRANSLATION     After the Lord had been dancing for a long time, Svarupa Damodara
Gosvami stopped singing the verse.
                                   TEXT 90
                  `bal' `bal' bali' prabhu kahena bara-bara
                  na gaya svarupa-gosani srama dekhi' tanra
                                 TRANSLATION     Over and over again Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "Go on! Sing!
Sing!" But Svarupa Damodara, seeing the Lord's fatigue, did not resumesinging.                                   TEXT 91
                 `bal' `bal' prabhu balena, bhakta-gana suni'
                    caudikete sabe meli' kare hari-dhvani
                                 TRANSLATION     When the devotees heard Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu say, "Go on
singing!" they all gathered around Him and began to chant the holy nameof Hari in unison.
                                   TEXT 92
                     ramananda-raya tabe prabhure vasaila
                    vijanadi kari' prabhura srama ghucaila
                                 TRANSLATION     At that time, Ramananda Raya made the Lord sit down and dissipated
His fatigue by fanning Him.
                                   TEXT 93
                    prabhure lana gela sabe samudrera tire
                   snana karana punah tanre lana aila ghare
                                 TRANSLATION     Then all the devotees took Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to the beach and
bathed Him. Finally they brought Him back home.
                                   TEXT 94
                    bhojana karana prabhure karaila sayana
                     ramananda-adi sabe gela nija-sthana
                                 TRANSLATION     After they fed Him lunch, they made Him lie down. Then all the
devotees, headed by Ramananda Raya, returned to their respective homes.
                                   TEXT 95
                    ei ta' kahilun prabhura udyana-vihara
                    vrndavana-bhrame yahan pravesa tanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes in the
garden, which He entered, mistaking it for Vrndavana.                                   TEXT 96
                       pralapa sahita ei unmada-varnana
                   sri-rupa-gosani iha kariyachena varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     There He exhibited transcendental madness and ecstatic ravings,
which Sri Rupa Gosvami has described very nicely in his Stava-mala asfollows.
                                   TEXT 97
                  payorases tire sphurad-upavanali-kalanaya
                muhur vrndaran ya-smarana-janita-prema-vivasah               kvacit krsnavrtti-pracala-rasano bhakti-rasikah               sa caitanyah kim me punarapi drsor yasyati padam
                                 TRANSLATION     ,`Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the topmost of all devotees.
Sometimes, while walking on the beach, He would see a beautiful gardennearby and mistake it for the forest of Vrndavana. Thus He would becompletely overwhelmed by ecstatic love of Krsna and begin to dance andchant the holy name. His tongue worked incessantly as He chanted,`Krsna! Krsna!' Will He again become visible before the path of Myeyes?"
                                   PURPORT     This quotation is from the first Caitanyastaka, verse 6, in Srila
Rupa Gosvami's Stava-mala.
                                   TEXT 98                     ananta caitanya-lila na yaya likhana
                     din-matra dekhana taha kariye sucana
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are unlimited; it is not
possible to write of them properly. I can only give an indication ofthem as I try to introduce them.
                                   TEXT 99
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Srt Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Fifteenth Chapter, describing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'spastimes in the garden by the sea.
                               Chapter Sixteen
           Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu Tastes Nectar from the Lips     The Sixteenth Chapter is summarized by Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura
in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. When the Bengali devotees of the Lordreturned to Jagannatha Puri, a gentleman named Kalidasa who was an uncleof Raghunatha dasa Gosvami went with them to see Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. Kalidasa had tasted the remnants of food of all theVaisnavas in Bengal, even Jhadu Thakura. Because of this, he receivedthe shelter of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Jagannatha Puri.     When Kavi-karnapura was only seven years old, he was initiated bySri Caitanya Mahaprabhu into the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. He later becamethe greatest poet among the Vaisnava acaryas.     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ate the remnants of food known asvallabha- bhoga, He described the glories of such remnants of the Lord'sfood and then fed all the devotees the prasada. Thus they all tastedadharamrta, the nectar from the lips of Lord Sri Krsna.
                                    TEXT 1                          vande sri-krsna-caitanyam
                           krsna-bhavamrtam hi yah                           asvadyasvadayan bhaktan                            prema-diksam asiksayat
                                 TRANSLATION     Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
who personally tasted the nectar of ecstatic love for Krsna and theninstructed His devotees how to taste it. Thus He enlightened them aboutecstatic love of Krsna to initiate them into transcendental knowledge.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord
Nityananda! All glories to Advaita Acarya! And all glories to all thedevotees of the Lord!
                                    TEXT 3
                      ei-mata mahaprabhu rahena nilacale
                     bhakta-gana-sange sada prema-vihvale
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus stayed at Jagannatha Puri in the
association of His devotees, always merged in ecstatic devotional love.
                                    TEXT 4
                   varsantare aila saba gaudera bhakta-gana
                     purvavat asi' kaila prabhura milana
                                 TRANSLATION     The next year, as usual, all the devotees from Bengal went to
Jagannatha Puri, and, as in previous years, there was a meeting betweenSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and the devotees.
                                    TEXT 5
                     tan-sabara sange aila kalidasa nama
                     krsna-nama vina tenho nahi kahe ana
                                 TRANSLATION     Along with the devotees from Bengal came a gentleman named
Kalidasa. He never uttered anything but the holy name of Krsna.
                                    TEXT 6
                      maha-bhagavata tenho sarala udara
                    krsna-nama-`sankete' calaya vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     Kalidasa was a very advanced devotee, yet he was simple and
liberal. He would chant the holy name of Krsna while performing all hisordinary dealings.
                                    TEXT 7
                     kautukete tenho yadi pasaka khelaya                   `hare krsna' `krsna' kari' pasaka calaya
                                 TRANSLATION     When he used to throw dice in jest, he would throw the dice while
chanting Hare Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     In this connection Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura warns
the men of this age not to imitate the jesting of a maha-bhagavata likeKalidasa. If someone imitates him by playing with dice or gambling whilechanting the Hare Krsna maha- mantra, he will certainly become a victimof offenses unto the holy name. As it is said, hari-nama-bale papepravrtti: one must not commit sinful activities on the strength ofchanting the Hare Krsna mantra. Playing with dice is certainly gambling,but it is clearly said here that Kalidasa did this only in jest. A maha--bhagavata can do anything, but he never forgets the basic principles.Therefore it is said, vaisnavera kriya-mudra vijneha na bujhaya: "No onecan understand the activities of a pure devotee." We should not imitateKalidasa.
                                    TEXT 8                   raghunatha-dasera tenho haya jnati-khuda
                 vaisnavera ucchista khaite tenho haila buda
                                 TRANSLATION     Kalidasa was an uncle of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami. Throughout his
entire life, even in his old age, he tried to eat the remnants of foodleft by Vaisnavas.
                                    TEXT 9
                     gauda-dese haya yata vaisnavera gana
                     sabara ucchista tenho karila bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     Kalidasa ate the remnants of food of as many Vaisnavas as there
were in Bengal.
                                   TEXT 10
                   brahmana-vaisnava yata--chota, bada haya
                   uttama-vastu bheta lana tanra thani yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     He would go to all the Vaisnavas born in brahmana families, be they
neophyte or advanced devotees, and present them gifts of first-classeatables.
                                   TEXT 11
                     tanra thani sesa-patra layena magiya
                       kahan na paya, tabe rahe lukana
                                 TRANSLATION     He would beg remnants of food from such Vaisnavas, and if he did
not receive any, he would hide.
                                   TEXT 12
                      bhojana karile patra phelana yaya
                      lukana sei patra ani' cati' khaya
                                 TRANSLATION     After the Vaisnavas finished eating, they would throw away their
dishes or leaves, and Kalidasa would come out of hiding, take the leavesand lick up the remnants.
                                   TEXT 13
                    sudra-vaisnavera ghare yaya bheta lana
                     ei-mata tanra ucchista khaya lukana
                                 TRANSLATION     He would also take gifts to the homes of Vaisnavas born in sudra
families. Then he would hide and eat the remnants of food they threwaway in this manner.
                                   TEXT 14
                bhunimali-jati, `vaisnava'--`jhadu' tanra nama
                   amra-phala lana tenho gela tanra sthana
                                 TRANSLATION     There was a great Vaisnava named Jhadu Thakura, who belonged to the
bhunimali caste. Kalidasa went to his home, taking mangoes with him.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura remarks that both Kalidasa
and Jhadu Thakura are worshiped at a place called Sripatabati, in thevillage known as Bhedo or Bhaduya. This village is situated about three
miles south of the village of Krsnapura, the birthplace of Raghunathadasa Gosvami, which is about one mile west of the Byandel junction ofthe Burdwan line. A post office there is named Devananda-pura. JhaduThakura used to worship the Deity of Sri Madana-gopala. The Deity isstill worshiped by one Ramaprasada dasa, who belongs to the ramayetcommunity. It is said that the Deity worshiped by Kalidasa had beenworshiped until now in the village of Sankhya on the bank of theSarasvati River, but the Deity has been taken away by a gentleman namedMatilala Cattopadhyaya from the village of Triveni. The Deity is nowbeing worshiped at his place.
                                   TEXT 15                     amra bheta diya tanra carana vandila
                      tanra patnire tabe namaskara kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Kalidasa presented the mangoes to Jhadu Thakura and offered him
respectful obeisances. Then he also offered respectful obeisances to theThakura's wife.
                                   TEXT 16
                       patni-sahita tenho achena vasiya
                    bahu sammana kaila kalidasere dekhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     When Kalidasa went to Jhadu Thakura, he saw that saintly person
sitting with his wife. As soon as Jhadu Thakura saw Kalidasa, helikewise offered his respectful obeisances unto him.
                                   TEXT 17
                    istagosthi kata-ksana kari' tanra sane
                   jhadu-thakura kahe tanre madhura vacane
                                 TRANSLATION     After a discussion for some time with Kalidasa, Jhadu Thakura said
something to him in sweet words.
                                   TEXT 18
                  "ami--nica-jati, tumi,--atithi sarvottama
                    kon prakare karimu ami tomara sevana?
                                 TRANSLATION     "I belong to a low caste, and you are a very respectable guest. How
shall I serve you?
                                   TEXT 19
                  ajna deha',--brahmana-ghare anna lana diye
                    tahan tumi prasada pao, tabe ami jiye"
                                 TRANSLATION     "If you will permit me, I shall send some food to a brahmana's
house, and there you may take prasada. If you do so, I shall then livevery comfortably."
                                   TEXT 20
                   kalidasa kahe,--"thakura, krpa kara more
                    tomara darsane ainu mui patita pamare
                                 TRANSLATION     Kalidasa replied,"My dear sir, please bestow your mercy upon me. I
have come to see you, although I am very fallen and sinful.
                                   TEXT 21
                      pavitra ha-inu mui painu darasana
                     krtartha ha-inu, mora saphala jivana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Simply by seeing you, I have become purified. I am very obligated
to you, for my life is now successful.
                                   TEXT 22
                    eka vancha haya,--yadi krpa kari' kara
                   pada-raja deha', pada mora mathe dhara"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear sir, I have one desire. Please be merciful to me by kindly
placing your feet upon my head so that the dust on your feet may touchit."
                                   TEXT 23
                  thakura kahe,--"aiche vat kahite na yuyaya
                    ami--nica-jati, tumi--susajjana raya"                                 TRANSLATION
     Jhadu Thakura replied, "It does not befit you to ask this of me. I
belong to a very low-caste family, whereas you are a respectable richgentleman."
                                   TEXT 24
                      tabe kalidasa sloka padi' sunaila
                   suni' jhadu-thakurera bada sukha ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     Kalidasa then recited some verses, which Jhadu Thakura was very
happy to hear.
                                   TEXT 25
                           na me'bhaktas catur-vedi
                         mad-bhaktah sva-pacah priyah                          tasmai deyam tato grahyam                          sa ca pujyo yatha hy aham
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Even though one is a very learned scholar in Sanskrit
literature, if he is not engaged in pure devotional service, he is notaccepted as My devotee. But if someone born in a family of dog-eaters isa pure devotee with no motives for enjoyment through fruitive activityor mental speculation, he is very dear to Me. All respect should begiven to him, and whatever he offers should be accepted, for suchdevotees are indeed as worshipable as I am.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is found in
Hari- bhakti-vilasa.
                                   TEXT 26                  viprad dvi-sad-guna-yutad aravinda-nabha-
                   padaravinda-vimukhat sva-pacam varistham                    manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitartha-                   pranam punati sa kulam na tu bhuri-manah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `A person may be born in a brahmana family and have all twelve
brahminical qualities, but if in spite of being qualified he is notdevoted to the lotus feet of Lord Krsna, who has a navel shaped like alotus, he is not as good as a candala who has dedicated his mind, words,activities, wealth and life to the service of the Lord. Simply to take
birth in a brahmana family or to have brahminical qualities is notsufficient. One must become a pure devotee of the Lord. If a sva-paca orcandala is a devotee, he delivers not only himself but his whole family,whereas a brahmana who is not a devotee but simply has brahminicalqualifications cannot even purify himseIf, not to speak of his family.'
                                   PURPORT     This and the following verse are quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam
(7.9.10 and 3.33.7).
                                   TEXT 27                         aho bata sva-paco'to gariyan
                      yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyam                      tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya                        brahmanucur nama grnanti ye te
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear Lord, anyone who always keeps Your holy name on his
tongue is greater than an initiated brahmana. Although he may be born ina family of dog-eaters and therefore, by material calculations, be thelowest of men, he is glorious nevertheless. That is the wonderful powerof chanting the holy name of the Lord. One who chants the holy name isunderstood to have performed all kinds of austerities. He has studiedall the Vedas, he has performed all the great sacrifices mentioned inthe Vedas, he has already taken his bath in all the holy places ofpilgrimage, and it is he who is factually the Aryan."'
                                   TEXT 28
                  suni' thakura kahe,--"sastra ei satya kaya
                  sei srestha, aiche yante krsna-bhakti haya
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing these quotations from the revealed scripture Srimad-
Bhagavatam, Jhadu Thakura replied, "Yes, this is true, for it is theversion of sastra. It is true, however, for one who is genuinelyadvanced in devotion to Krsna.
                                   TEXT 29
                   ami--nica-jati, amara nahi krsna-bhakti
                   anya aiche haya, amaya nahi aiche sakti"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Such a position may befit others, but I do not possess such
spiritual power. I belong to a lower class and have not even a pinch ofdevotion to Krsna."
                                   PURPORT     In his statement, Jhadu Thakura presents himself as being born in a
low-caste family and not having the qualifications of a bona fidedevotee of Lord Krsna. He accepts the statements declaring a lowbornperson highly exalted if he is a Vaisnava. However, he feels that thesedescriptions from Srimad-Bhagavatam appropriately describe others, butnot himself. Jhadu Thakura's attitude is quite befitting a realVaisnava, for a Vaisnava never considers himself exalted, even if hefactually is. He is always meek and humble and never thinks that he isan advanced devotee. He assigns himself to a lower position, but thatdoes not mean that he is indeed low. Sanatana Gosvami once said that hebelonged to a lowcaste family, for although he was born in a brahmanafamily, he had associated with mlecchas and yavanas in his service as agovernment minister. Similarly, Jhadu Thakura presented himself assomeone who belonged to a low caste, but he was actually elevated abovemany persons born in brahmana families. Not only is there evidence forthis in Srimad-Bhagavatam, as quoted by Kalidasa in verses For example,in the Mahabharata, Vana-parva, Chapter 180, it is stated:      sudre tuyad bhavel laksma     dvije tac ca na vidyate     na vai sudro bhavec chudro     brahmano na ca brahmanah"If the characteristics of a brahmana are found in a sudra and not in abrahmana, that sudra should not be known as a sudra, and that brahmanashould not be known as a brahmana."     Similarly, in the Vana-parva, Chapter 211, it is said:     sudra-yonau hi jatasya     sad-gunanupatisthatah     arjave vartamanasya     brahmanyam abhijayate"If a person born in a sudra family has developed the qualities of abrahmana, such as satya [truthfulness], sama [peacefulness], dama [self-control] and arjava [simplicity], he attains the exalted position of abrahmana."     In the Anusasana-parva, Chapter 163, it is said:     sthito brahmana-dharmena     brahman yam upajiva ti     ksatriyo vatha vaisyo va     brahma-bhuyah sa gacchati     ebhis tu karmabhir devi     subhair acaritais tatha     sudro brahmanatam yati     vaisyah ksatriyatam vrajet     na yonir napi samskaro     na srutam na ca santatih     karanani dvijatvasya     vrttam eva tu karanam"if one is factually situated in the occupation of a brahmana, he mustbe considered a brahmana, even if born of a ksatriya or vaisya family.     "O Devi, if even a sudra is actually engaged in the occupation and
pure behavior of a brahmana, he becomes a brahmana. Moreover, a vaisyacan become a ksatriya.     "Therefore, neither the source of one's birth, nor his reformation,nor his education is the criterion of a brahmana. The vrtta, oroccupation, is the real standard by which one is known as a brahmana."We have seen that a person who is not the son of a doctor and has notattended a medical college is sometimes able to practice medicine. Bypractical knowledge of how to perform a surgical operation, how to mixmedicine and how to give certain medicines for certain diseases, aperson can receive a certificate and be registered as a medicalpractitioner in the practical field. He can do a medical man's work andbe known as a doctor. Although qualified medical men may consider him aquack, the government will recognize his work. Especially in India,there are many such doctors who perform their medical servicesperfectly. They are accepted even by the government. Similarly, if oneis engaged in brahminical service or occupational duties, he must beconsidered a brahmana despite the family in which he is born. That isthe verdict of all the sastras.     In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, (7.11.35), it is said:     yasya yal laksanam proktam     pumso varnabhivyanjakam     yad anyatrapi drsyeta     tat tenaiva vinirdisetThis is a statement by Narada Muni to Maharaja Yudhisthira, whereinNarada says that the symptoms of a brahmana, ksatriya and vaisya are alldescribed in sastra. Therefore, if one is found exhibiting the symptomsand qualities of a brahmana and serving in a brahminical occupation,even if he is not born a brahmana or ksatriya, he should be consideredaccording to his qualifications and occupation.     Similarly, in the Padma purana it is said:     na sudra bhagavad-bhaktas     te tu bhagavata matah     sarva-varnesu te sudra     ye na bhakta janardane"A devotee should never be considered a sudra. All the devotees of theSupreme Personality of Godhead should be recognized as bhagavatas. ifone is not a devotee of Lord Krsna, however, even if born of a brahmana,ksatriya or vaisya family, he should be considered a sudra."     In the Padma Purana it is also said:     sva-pakam iva nekseta     loke vipram avaisnavam     vaisnavo varno-bahyo'pi     punati bhuvana-tra yam"If a person born in a brahmana family is an avaisnava, a nondevotee,one should not see his face, exactly as one should not look upon theface of a candala, or dog-eater. However, a vaisnava found in varnasother than brahmana can purify all the three worlds."     The Padma Purana further says:     sudram va bhagavad-bhaktam     nisadam sva-pacam tatha     viksate jati-samanyat     sa yati narakam dhruvam"One who considers a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who
was born in a family of sudras, nisadas or candalas to belong to thatparticular caste certainly goes to hell."     A brahmana must be a Vaisnava and a learned scholar. Therefore inIndia it is customary to address a brahmana as pandita. Withoutknowledge of Brahman, one cannot understand the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Therefore a Vaisnava is already a brahmana, whereas a brahmanamay become a Vaisnava. in the Garuda Purana it is said:     bhaktir asta-vidha hy esa     yasmin mlecche'pi vartate     sa viprendro muni-sresthah     sa jnani sa ca panditah"If even a mleccha becomes a devotee, he is to be considered the best ofthe brahmanas and a learned pandita."     Similarly, Tattva-sagara says:     yatha kancanatam yati     kamsyam rasa-vidhanatah     tatha diksa-vidhanena     dvijatvam jayate nrnam"As bell metal is turned to gold when mixed with mercury in analchemical process, so one who is properly trained and initiated by abona fide spiritual master becomes a brahmana immediately." All thisevidence found in the revealed scriptures proves that according to theVedic version, a Vaisnava is never to be considered an abrahmana, ornon-brahmana. A Vaisnava should not be thought to belong to a lowercaste even if born in a mleccha or yavana family. Because he has becomea devotee of Lord Krsna, he has become purified and has attained thestage of brahmana (dvijatvam jayate nrnam).
                                   TEXT 30                    tare namaskari' kalidasa vidaya magila
                   jhadu-thakura tabe tanra anuvraji, aila
                                 TRANSLATION     Kalidasa again offered his obeisances to Jhadu Thakura and asked
his permission to go. The saint Jhadu Thakura followed him as he left.
                                   TEXT 31
                  tanre vidaya diya thakura yadi ghare aila
                     tanra carana-cihna yei thani padila
                                 TRANSLATION     After bidding farewell to Kalidasa, Jhadu Thakura returned to his
home, leaving the marks of his feet plainly visible in many places.
                                   TEXT 32
                   sei dhuli lana kalidasa sarvange lepila                    tanra nikata eka-sthane lukana rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Kalidasa smeared the dust from those footprints all over his body.
Then he hid in a place near Jhadu Thakura's home.
                                   TEXT 33
                  jhadu-thakura ghara yai' dekhi' amra-phala
                      manasei krsna-candre arpila sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     Upon returning home, Jhadu Thakura saw the mangoes Kalidasa had
presented. Within his mind he offered them to Krsna-candra.
                                   TEXT 34
                   kalara patuya-khola haite amra nikasiya
                    tanra patni tanre dena, khayena cusiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Jhadu Thakura's wife then took the mangoes from their covering of
banana tree leaves and bark and offered them to Jhadu Thakura, who beganto suck and eat them.
                                   TEXT 35
                   cusi, cusi, cosa anthi phelila patuyate
                   tare khaoyana tanra patni khaya pascate
                                 TRANSLATION     When he finished eating, he left the seeds on the banana Ieaf, and
his wife, affer feeding her husband, later began to eat.
                                   TEXT 36
                    anthi-cosa sei patuya-kholate bhariya
                     bahire ucchista-garte phelaila lana
                                 TRANSLATION     After she finished eating, she filled the banana leaves and bark
with the seeds, picked them up and threw them in the ditch where all therefuse was thrown.                                   TEXT 37
                    sei khola, anthi, cokala cuse kalidasa
                      cusite cusite haya premete ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Kalidasa licked the banana bark and the mango seeds and skins, and
while licking them he was overwhelmed in jubilation by ecstatic love.
                                   TEXT 38
                    ei-mata yata vaisnava vaise gauda-dese
                      kalidasa aiche sabara nila avasese
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Kalidasa ate the remnants of food left by all the
Vaisnavas residing in Bengal.
                                   TEXT 39
                       sei kalidasa yabe nilacale aila
                    mahaprabhu tanra upara maha-krpa kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     When Kalidasa visited Jagannatha Puri, Nilacala, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu bestowed great mercy upon him.
                                   TEXT 40
                    prati-dina prabhu yadi ya'na darasane
                  jala-karanga lana govinda yaya prabhu-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had been regularly visiting the temple of
Jagannatha every day, and at that time Govinda, His personal servant,used to carry His waterpot and go with Him.
                                   TEXT 41
                    simha-dvarera uttara-dike kapatera ade
                   baisa `pahaca'-tale ache eka nimna gade
                                 TRANSLATION     On the northern side of the Simha-dvara, behind the door, there are
twentytwo steps leading to the temple, and at the bottom of those stepsis a ditch.
                                   TEXT 42
                    sei gade karena prabhu pada-praksalane
                      tabe karibare yaya isvara-darasane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would wash His feet in this ditch, and then
He would enter the temple to see Lord Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 43
                     govindere mahaprabhu kairache niyama
                   `mora pada-jala yena na laya kona jana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered His personal servant Govinda that
no one should take the water that had washed His feet.
                                   TEXT 44
                     prani-matra la-ite na paya sei jala
                    antaranga bhakta laya kari' kona chala
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of the Lord's strict order, no living being could take the
water. Some of His intimate devotees, however, would take it by sometrick.
                                   TEXT 45
                    eka-dina prabhu tanha pada praksalite
                      kalidasa asi' tahan patilena hate
                                 TRANSLATION     One day as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was washing His feet in that
place, Kalidasa came and extended his palm to take the water.
                                   TEXT 46
                   eka anjali, dui anjali, tina anjali pila
                     tabe mahaprabhu tanre nisedha karila                                 TRANSLATION
     Kalidasa drank one palmful and then a second and a third. Then Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu forbade him to drink more.
                                   TEXT 47
                      "atahpara ara na kariha punar-bara
                    etavata vancha-purana karilun toma-ra"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Do not act in this way any more. I have fulfilled your desire as
far as possible."
                                   TEXT 48
                      sarvajna-siromani caitanya isvara
                   vaisnave tanhara visvasa, janena antara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the most exalted, omniscient Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and therefore He knew that Kalidasa, in the coreof his heart, had full faith in Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 49
                   sei-guna lana prabhu tanre tusta ha-ila
                    anyera durlabha prasada tanhare karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Because of this quality, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu satisfied him with
mercy not attainable by anyone else.
                                   TEXT 50
                   baisa `pahaca'-pache upara daksina-dike
                  eka nrsimha-murti achena uthite vama-bhage
                                 TRANSLATION     On the southern side, behind and above the twenty-two steps, is a
Deity of Lord Nrsimhadeva. It is on the left as one goes up the stepstoward the temple.
                                   TEXT 51                   prati-dina tanre prabhu karena namaskara
                      namaskari' ei sloka pade bara-bara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, His left side toward the Deity, offered
obeisances to Lord Nrsimha as He proceeded toward the temple. He recitedthe following verses again and again while offering obeisaces.
                                   TEXT 52
                            namas te nara-simhaya
                            prahladahlada-da yine                            hiranyakasipor vaksah-                             sila-tanka-nakhalaye
                                 TRANSLATION     "I offer my respectful obeisaces unto You, Lord Nrsimhadeva. You
are the giver of pleasure to Maharaja Prahlada, and Your naiIs cut thechest of Hiranyakasipu like a chiseI cutting stone.
                                   PURPORT     This and the following verse are quoted from the Nrsimha Purana.                                   TEXT 53                         ito nrsimhah parato nrsimho
                         yato yato yami tato nrsimhah                         bahir nrsimho hrdaye nrsimho                        nrsimham adim saranam prapadye
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Nrsimhadeva is here, and He is also there on the opposite
side. Wherever I go, there I see Lord Nrsimhadeva. He is outside andwithin My heart. Therefore I take shelter of Lord Nrsimhadeva, theoriginal Supreme Personality of Godhead."
                                   TEXT 54
                    tabe prabhu karila jagannatha darasana
                  ghare asi' madhyahna kari' karila bhojana
                                 TRANSLATION     Having offered obeisances to Lord Nrsimhadeva, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu visited the temple of Lord Jagannatha. Then He returned toHis residence, finished His noon duties and took His lunch.                                   TEXT 55
                  bahir-dvare ache kalidasa pratyasa kariya
                     govindere thare prabhu kahena janiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Kalidasa was standing outside the door, expecting the remnants of
food from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Knowing this, Mahaprabhu gave anindication to Govinda.
                                   TEXT 56
                    mahaprabhura ingita govinda saba jane
                   kalidasere dila prabhura sesa-patra-dane
                                 TRANSLATION     Govinda understood all the indications of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Therefore he immediately delivered the remnants of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu's food to Kalidasa.
                                   TEXT 57
                   vaisnavera sesa-bhaksanera eteka mahima
                     kalidase paoyaila prabhura krpa-sima
                                 TRANSLATION     Taking the remnants of the food of Vaisnavas is so valuable that it
induced Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to offer Kalidasa His supreme mercy.
                                   TEXT 58
                tate `vaisnavera jhuta' khao chadi' ghrna-laja
                   yaha haite paiba nija vanchita saba kaja
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore, giving up hatred and hesitation, try to eat the remnants
of the food of Vaisnavas, for you will thus be able to achieve yourdesired goal of life.
                                   TEXT 59
                  krsnera ucchista haya `maha-prasada' nama
                `bhakta-sesa' haile `maha-maha-prasadakhya-na'
                                 TRANSLATION     The remnants of food offered to Lord Krsna are called maha-prasada.
After this same maha-prasada has been taken by a devotee, the remnantsare elevated to maha-maha-prasada.
                                   TEXT 60
                    bhakta-pada-dhuli ara bhakta-pada-jala
                    bhakta-bhukta-avasesa,--tina maha-bala
                                 TRANSLATION     The dust of the feet of a devotee, the water that has washed the
feet of a devotee, and the remnants of food left by a devotee are threevery powerful substances.
                                   TEXT 61
                     ei tina-seva haite krsna-prema haya
                   punah punah sarva-sastre phukariya kaya
                                 TRANSLATION     By rendering service to these three, one attains the supreme goal
of ecstatic love for Krsna. In all the revealed scriptures this isloudly declared again and again.
                                   TEXT 62
                    tate bara bara kahi,--suna bhakta-gana
                      visvasa kariya kara e-tina sevana
                                 TRANSLATION     Therefore, my dear devotees, please hear from me, for I insist
again and again: please keep faith in these three and render service tothem without hesitation.
                                   TEXT 63
                     tina haite krsna-nama-premera ullasa
                    krsnera prasada, tate `saksi' kalidasa
                                 TRANSLATION     From these three one achieves the highest goal of life--ecstatic
love of Krsna. This is the greatest mercy of Lord Krsna. The evidence isKalidasa himself.                                   TEXT 64
                       nilacale mahaprabhu rahe ei-mate
                      kalidase maha-krpa kaila alaksite
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu remained at Jagannatha Puri,
Nilacala, and He invisibly bestowed great mercy upon Kalidasa.
                                   TEXT 65
                     se vatsara sivananda patni lana aila
                     `puridasa'-chota-putre sangete anila
                                 TRANSLATION     That year, Sivananda Sena brought with him his wife and youngest
son, Puridasa.
                                   TEXT 66
                  putra sange lana tenho aila prabhu-sthane
                   putrere karaila prabhura carana vandane
                                 TRANSLATION     Taking his son, Sivananda Sena went to see Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
at His residence. He made his son offer respectful obeisances at thelotus feet of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 67
                  `krsna kaha' bali' prabhu balena bara bara
                    tabu krsna-nama balaka na kare uccara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked the boy again and again to chant the
name of Krsna, but the boy would not utter the holy name.
                                   TEXT 68
                     sivananda balakere bahu yatna karila
                     tabu sei balaka krsna-nama na kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Sivananda Sena tried with much endeavor to get his boy to
speak Krsna's holy name, the boy would not utter it.                                   TEXT 69
                   prabhu kahe,--"ami nama jagate laoyailun
                    sthavare paryanta krsna-nama kahailun
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sald, "I have induced the whole world to
take to the holy name of Krsna. I have induced even the trees andimmovable plants to chant the holy name.
                                   TEXT 70
                      ihare narilun krsna-nama kahaite!"
                     suniya svarupa-gosani lagila kahite
                                 TRANSLATION     "But I could not induce this boy to chant the holy name of Krsna."
Hearing this, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami began to speak.
                                   TEXT 71
                    "tumi krsna-nama-mantra kaila upadese
                    mantra pana ka'ra age na kare prakase
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord," he said, "You have given him initiation into the name of
Krsna, but after receiving the mantra he will not express it in front ofeveryone.
                                   TEXT 72
                    mane mane jape, mukhe na kare akhyana
                     ei ihara manah-katha--kari anumana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "This boy chants the mantra within his mind, but does not say it
aloud. That is his intention, as far as I can guess."
                                   TEXT 73
                  ara dina kahena prabhu,--`pada, puridasa'
                     ei sloka kari' tenho karila prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Another day, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said to the boy, "Recite,
My dear Puridasa," the boy composed the following verse and expressed itbefore everyone.
                                   TEXT 74
                      sravasoh kuvalayam aksnor anjanam
                           uraso mahendra-mani-dama                         vrndavana-ramaninam mandanam                             akhilam harir jayati
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Sri Krsna is just like a bluish lotus flower for the ears; He
is ointment for the eyes, a necklace of indranila gems for the chest,and universal ornaments for the gopi damsels of Vrndavana. Let that LordSri Hari, Krsna, be glorified."
                                   TEXT 75
                     sata vatsarera sisu, nahi adhyayana
                   aiche sloka kare,--lokera camatkara mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Although the boy was only seven years old and still had no
education, he composed such a nice verse. Everyone was struck withwonder.
                                   TEXT 76
                      caitanya-prabhura ei krpara mahima
                      brahmadi deva yara nahi paya sima
                                 TRANSLATION     This is the glory of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's causeless mercy,
which even the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma, cannot estimate.
                                   TEXT 77
                   bhakta-gana prabhu-sange rahe cari-mase
                    prabhu ajna dila sabe gela gauda-dese
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees remained with Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continuously
for four months. Then the Lord ordered them back to Bengal, andtherefore they returned.                                   TEXT 78
                 tan-sabara sange prabhura chila bahya-jnana
                    tanra gele punah haila unmada pradhana
                                 TRANSLATION     As long as the devotees were in Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri, Srt
Caitanya Mahaprabhu maintained His external consciousness, but aftertheir departure His chief engagement was agaln the madness of ecstaticlove for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 79
                  ratri-dine sphure krsnera rupa-gandha-rasa
                    saksad-anubhave,--yena krsna-upasparsa
                                 TRANSLATION     Throughout the entire day and night, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
directly relished Krsna's beauty, fragrance and mellow as if He weretouching Krsna hand to hand.
                                   TEXT 80
                   eka-dina prabhu gela jagannatha-darasane
                    simha-dvare dala-i asi' karila vandane
                                 TRANSLATION     One day, when Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to visit the temple of
Lord Jagannatha, the gatekeeper at Simha-dvara approached Him andoffered respectful obeisances.
                                   TEXT 81
                 tare bale,--`kotha krsna, mora prana-natha?
                   more krsna dekhao' bali' dhare tara hata
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord asked him, "Where is Krsna, My life and soul? Please show
Me Krsna." Saying this, He caught the doorkeeper's hand.
                                   TEXT 82
                   seha kahe,--`inha haya vrajendra-nandana
                    aisa tumi mora sange, karana darasana'                                 TRANSLATION
     The doorkeeper replied,"The son of Maharaja Nanda is here; please
come along with me, and I shall show You."
                                   TEXT 83
                `tumi mora sakha, dekhaha--kahan prana-natha?'
                  eta bali' jagamohana gela dhari' tara hata
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Caitanya said to the doorman,"You are My friend. Please show
Me where the Lord of My heart is." After the Lord said this, they bothwent to the place known as Jagamohana, where everyone views LordJagannatha.
                                   TEXT 84
                    seha bale,--`ei dekha sri-purusottama
                     netra bhariya tumi karaha darasana'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Just see!" the doorkeeper said."Here is the best of the
Personalities of Godhead. From here You may see the Lord to the fullsatisfaction of Your eyes."
                                   TEXT 85
                     garudera pache rahi' karena darasana
                   dekhena,--jagannatha haya murali-vadana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed behind the huge column called the
Garuda-stambha and looked upon Lord Jagannatha, but as He looked He sawthat Lord Jagannatha had become Lord Krsna, with His flute to His mouth.
                                   TEXT 86
                     ei lila nija-granthe raghunatha-dasa
               `gauranga-stava-kalpavrkse' kariyachena prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     In his book known as Gauranga-stava-kalpavrksa, Raghunatha dasa
Gosvami has described this incident very nicely.                                   TEXT 87
              kva me kantah krsnas tvaritam iha tam lokaya sakhe
                 tvam eveti dvaradhipam abhivadann unmada iva            drutam gaccha drastum priyam iti tad-uktena dhrta-tad-                bhujantar gaurango hrdaya udayan mam madayati
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear friend the doorkeeper, where is Krsna, the Lord of My
heart? Kindly show Him to Me quickly.' With these words, Lord SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu addressed the doorkeeper like a madman. Thedoorkeeper grasped His hand and replied very hastily,`Come, see Yourbeloved!' May that Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu rise within my heart andthus make me mad also."
                                   TEXT 88
                  hena-kale `gopala-vallabha'-bhoga lagaila
                     sankha-ghanta-adi saha arati bajila
                                 TRANSLATION     The offering of food known as gopala-vallabha-bhoga was then given
to Lord Jagannatha, and arati was performed with the sound of the conchand the ringing of bells.
                                   TEXT 89
                    bhoga sarile jagannathera sevaka-gana
                   prasada lana prabhu-thani kaila agamana
                                 TRANSLATION     When the arati finished, the prasada was taken out, and the
servants of Lord Jagannatha came to offer some to Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 90
                    mala parana prasada dila prabhura hate
                   asvada dure rahu, yara gandhe mana mate
                                 TRANSLATION     The servants of Lord Jagannatha first garlanded Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and then offered Him Lord Jagannatha's prasada. The prasadawas so nice that its aroma alone, to say nothing of its taste, woulddrive the mind mad.                                   TEXT 91
                   bahu-mulya prasada sei vastu sarvottama
                   tara alpa khaoyaite sevaka karila yatana
                                 TRANSLATION     The prasada was made of very valuable ingredients. Therefore the
servant wanted to feed Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu a portion of it.
                                   TEXT 92
                   tara alpa lana prabhu jihvate yadi dila
                      ara saba govindera ancale bandhila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu tasted a portion of the prasada. Govinda
took the rest and bound it in the end of his wrapper.
                                   TEXT 93
                   koti-amrta-svada pana prabhura camatkara
                    sarvange pulaka, netre vahe asru-dhara
                                 TRANSLATION     To Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu the prasada tasted millions upon
millions of times better than nectar, and thus He was fully satisfied.The hair all over His body stood on end, and incessant tears flowed fromHis eyes.
                                   TEXT 94
                    `ei dravye eta svada kahan haite aila?
                      krsnera adharamrta ithe sancarila'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu considered, "Where has such a taste in this
prasada come from? Certainly it is due to its having been touched by thenectar of Krsna's lips."
                                   TEXT 95
                   ei buddhye mahaprabhura premavesa haila
                  jagannathera sevaka dekhi' samvarana kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Understanding this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu felt an emotion of
ecstatic love for Krsna, but upon seeing the servants of LordJagannatha, He restrained Himself.
                                   TEXT 96
                 `sukrti-labhya phela-lava'--balena bara-bara
                   isvara-sevaka puche,--`ki artha ihara'?
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord said again and again, "Only by great fortune may one come
by a particle of the remnants of food offered to the Lord." The servantsof the Jagannatha temple inquired, "What is the meaning of this?"
                                   PURPORT     The remnants of Krsna's food are mixed with His saliva. In the
Mahabharata and the Skanda Purana it is stated:     maha-prasade govinde     nama-brahmani vaisnave     svalpa-punyavatam rajan     visvaso naiva jayate"Persons who are not very highly elevated in pious activities cannotbelieve in the remnants of food [prasada] of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, nor in Govinda, the holy name of the Lord, nor in theVaisnavas."
                                   TEXT 97                   prabhu kahe,--"ei ye dila krsnadharamrta
                     brahmadi-durlabha ei nindaye `amrta'
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "These are remnants of food that
Krsna has eaten and thus turned to nectar with His lips. It surpassesheavenly nectar, and even such demigods as Lord Brahma find it difficultto obtain.
                                   TEXT 98
                  krsnera ye bhukta-sesa, tara `phela'-nama
                    tara eka `lava' ye paya, sei bhagyavan
                                 TRANSLATION     "Remnants left by Krsna are called phela. Anyone who obtains even a
small portion must be considered very fortunate.                                   TEXT 99
                  samanya bhagya haite tara prapti nahi haya
                   krsnera yante purna-krpa, sei taha paya
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who is only ordinarily fortunate cannot obtain such mercy.
Only persons who have the full mercy of Krsna can receive such remnants.
                                   TEXT 100
                 `sukrti'-sabde kahe `krsna-krpa-hetu punya'
                   sei yanra haya, `phela' paya sei dhanya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The word `sukrti' refers to pious activities performed by the
mercy of Krsna. One who is fortunate enough to obtain such mercyreceives the remnants of the Lord's food and thus becomes glorious."
                                   TEXT 101
                    eta bali' prabhu ta-sabare vidaya dila
                  upala-bhoga dekhiya prabhu nija-vasa aila
                                 TRANSLATION     After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade farewell to all the
servants. After seeing the next offering of food to Lord Jagannatha, afunction known as upala-bhoga, He returned to His own quarters.
                                   TEXT 102
                   madhyahna kariya kaila bhiksa nirvahana
                      krsnadharamrta sada antare smarana
                                 TRANSLATION     After finishing His noon duties, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ate His
lunch, but He constantly remembered the remnants of Krsna's food.
                                   TEXT 103
                   bahya-krtya karena, preme garagara mana
                    kaste samvarana karena, avesa saghana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu performed His external activities, but His
mind was filled with ecstatic love. With great difficulty He tried torestrain His mind, but it would always be overwhelmed by very deepecstasy.
                                   TEXT 104
                  sandhya-krtya kari' punah nija-gana-sange
                    nibhrte vasila nana-krsna-katha-range
                                 TRANSLATION     After finishing His evening duties, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sat
down with His personal associates in a secluded place and discussed thepastimes of Krsna in great jubilation.
                                   TEXT 105
                    prabhura ingite govinda prasada anila
                     puri-bharatire prabhu kichu pathaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Following the indications of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Govinda
brought the prasada of Lord Jagannatha. The Lord sent some toParamananda Puri and Brahmananda Bharati.
                                   TEXT 106
                    ramananda-sarvabhauma -svarupadi-gane
                      sabare prasada dila kariya bantane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu then gave shares of the prasada to
Ramananda Raya, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami andall the other devotees.
                                   TEXT 107
                 prasadera saurabhya-madhurya kari' asvadana
                  alaukika asvade sabara vismita haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     As they tasted the uncommon sweetness and fragrance of the prasada,
everyone's mind was struck with wonder.
                                 TEXT 108-109                 prabhu kahe,--"ei saba haya `prakrta' dravya
               aiksava, karpura, marica, elaica, lavanga, gavya
                      rasavasa, gudatvaka-adi yata saba
                   `prakrta' vastura svada sabara anubhava
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "These ingredients, such as sugar,
camphor, black pepper, cardamom, cloves, butter, spices and licorice,are all material. Everyone has tasted these material substances before.
                                   PURPORT     The word prakrta refers to things tasted for the sense
gratification of the conditioned soul. Such things are limited by thematerial laws. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted to make the point thatmaterial things have already been experienced by materially absorbedpersons who are interested only in sense gratification.
                                   TEXT 110                    sei dravye eta asvada, gandha lokatita
                     asvada kariya dekha,--sabara pratita
                                 TRANSLATION     "However," the Lord continued, "in these ingredients there are
extraordinary tastes and uncommon fragrances. Just taste them and seethe difference in the experience.
                                   TEXT 111
                   asvada dure rahu, yara gandhe mate mana
                  apana vina anya madhurya karaya vismarana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Apart from the taste, even the fragrance pleases the mind and
makes one forget any other sweetness besides its own.
                                   TEXT 112
                    tate ei dravye krsnadhara-sparsa haila
                      adharera guna saba ihate sancarila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore, it is to be understood that the spiritual nectar of
Krsna's lips has touched these ordinary ingredients and transferred tothem all their spiritual qualities.                                   PURPORT
     Since everyone had previously tasted these ingredients, why had
they become extraordinary and spiritually tasteful? This was proof thatfood, prasada, becomes uncommonly flavorful and tasteful by touchingKrsna's lips.
                                   TEXT 113                    alaukika-gandha-svada, anya-vismarana
                    maha-madaka haya ei krsnadharera guna
                                 TRANSLATION     "An uncommon, greatly enchanting fragrance and taste that make one
forget all other experiences are attributes of Krsna's lips.
                                   TEXT 114
                     aneka `sukrte' iha hanache sampraoti
                    sabe ei asvada kara kari' maha-bhakti"
                                 TRANSLATION     "This prasada has been made available only as a result of many
pious activities. Now taste it with great faith and devotion."
                                   TEXT 115
                    hari-dhvani kari' sabe kaila asvadana
                   asvadite preme matta ha-ila sabara mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Loudly chanting the holy name of Hari, all of them tasted the
prasada. As they tasted it, their minds became mad in the ecstasy oflove.
                                   TEXT 116
                     premavese mahaprabhu yabe ajna dila
                      ramananda-raya sloka padite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     In ecstatic love, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ordered Ramananda Raya to
recite some verses. Thus Ramanada Raya spoke as follows.
                                   TEXT 117                        surata-vardhanam soka-nasanam
                        svarita-venuna susthu-cumbitam                         itara-raga-vismaranam nrnam                        vitara vira nas te'dharamrtam
                                 TRANSLATION     "O hero of charity, please deliver unto us the nectar of Your lips.
That nectar increases lusty desires for enjoyment and diminisheslamentation in the material world. Kindly give us the nectar of Yourlips, which are touched by Your transcendentally vibrating flute, forthat nectar makes all human beings forget all other attachments."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.31.14).                                   TEXT 118                   sloka suni' mahaprabhu maha-tusta haila
                     radhara utkantha-sloka padite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Upon hearing Ramananda Raya quote this verse, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was very satisfied. Then He recited the following verse,which had been spoken by Srimati Radharani in great anxiety.
                                   TEXT 119
                 vrajatula-kulanganetara-rasali-trsna- hara-
               pradivyad-adharamrtah sukrti-labhya-phela-la vah                 sudha-jid-ahivallika-sudala- vitika-carvitah                sa me madana-mohanah sakhi tanoti jihva-sprham
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, the all-surpassing nectar from the lips of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, can be obtained only after many,many pious activities. For the beautiful gopis of Vrndavana, that nectarvanquishes the desire for all other tastes. Madana-mohana always chewspan that surpasses the nectar of heaven. He is certainly increasing thedesires of My tongue."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is found in the Govinda-lilamrta (8.8).                                   TEXT 120                    eta kahi' gaura-prabhu bhavavista hana
                    dui slokera artha kare pralapa kariya                                 TRANSLATION
     After saying this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was overwhelmed by
ecstatic loving emotions. Talking like a madman, He began to explain themeaning of the two verses.
                                 TEXT 121-122
                tanu-mana karaya ksobha, badaya surata-lobha,
                         harsa-sokadi-bhara vinasaya                  pasaraya anya rasa, jagat kare atma-vasa,                      lajja, dharma, dhairya kare ksaya
                      nagara, suna tomara adhara-carita
                   mataya narira mana, jihva kare akarsana,                            vicarite saba viparita
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear lover," He said, "let Me describe some of the
characteristics of Your transcendental lips. They agitate the mind andbody of everyone, they increase lusty desires for enjoyment, theydestroy the burden of material happiness and lamentation, and they makeone forget all material tastes. The whole world falls under theircontrol. They vanquish shame, religion and patience, especially inwomen. Indeed, they inspire madness in the minds of all women. Your lipsincrease the greed of the tongue and thus attract it. Considering allthis, we see that the activities of Your transcendental lips are alwaysperplexing.
                                   TEXT 123
                   achuka narira kaya, kahite vasiye laja,
                        tomara adhara bada dhrsta-raya                  puruse kare akarsana, apana piyaite mana,                           anya-rasa saba pasaraya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Krsna, since You are a maIe, it is not very extraordinary
that the attraction of Your lips can disturb the minds of women. I amashamed to say this, but Your lips sometimes attract even Your flute,which is also considered a male. It likes to drink the nectar of Yourlips, and thus it also forgets all other tastes.
                                   TEXT 124
                  sacetana rahu dure, acetana sacetana kare,
                         tomara adhara--bada vajikara             tomara venu suskendhana, tara janmaya indriya-mana,                         tare apana piyaya nirantara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Aside from conscious living beings, even unconscious matter is
sometimes made conscious by Your lips. Therefore, Your lips are greatmagicians. Paradoxically, although Your flute is nothing but dry wood,Your lips make it drink their nectar. They create a mind and senses inthe dry wooden flute and give it transcendental bliss.
                                   TEXT 125
               venu dhrsta-purusa hana, purusadhara piya piya,
                          gopi-gane janaya nija-pana                `aho suna, gopi-gana, bale pino tomara dhana,                          tomara yadi thake abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     "That flute is a very cunning male who drinks again and again the
taste of another male's lips. It advertises its qualities and says tothe gopis, `O gopis, if you are so proud of being women, come forwardand enjoy your property--the nectar of the lips of the SupremePersonality of Godhead.'
                                   TEXT 126
             tabe more krodha kari;, lajja bhaya, dharma, chadi;,
                         chadi' dimu, kara asi' pana                nahe pimu nirantara, tomaya mora nahika dara,                          anye dekhon trnera samana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Thereupon, the fIute said angrily to Me, `Give up Your shame, fear
and religion and come drink the lips of Krsna. On that condition, Ishall give up my attachment for them. If You do not give up Your shameand fear, however, I shall continuously drink the nectar of Krsna'slips. I am slightly fearful because You also have the right to drinkthat nectar, but as for the others, I consider them like straw.'
                                   TEXT 127
                  adharamrta nija-svare, sancariya sei bale,
                            akarsaya trijagat-jana             amara dharma-bhaya kari', rahi' yadi dhairya dhari;,                          tabe amaya kare vidambana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The nectar of Krsna's lips, combined with the vibration of His
flute, attracts all the people of the three worlds. However, if we gopisremain patient out of respect for religious principles, the flute thencriticizes us.
                                   TEXT 128
              nivi khasaya guru-age, lajja-dharma karaya tyage,
                          kese dhari' yena lana yaya               ani' karaya tomara dasi, suni' loka kare hasi',                            ei-mata narire nacaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The nectar of Your lips and vibration of Your flute join together
to loosen our belts and induce us to give up shame and religion, evenbefore our
superiors. As if catching us by our hair, they forcibly take us away and
surrender us unto You to become Your maidservants. Hearing of theseincidents, people laugh at us. We have thus become completelysubordinate to the flute.
                                   TEXT 129
                 suska bansera lathikhana, eta kare apamana,
                            ei dasa karila, gosani               na sahi' ki karite pari, tahe rahi mauna dhari',                        corara make daki' kandite nai
                                 TRANSLATION     "This flute is nothing but a dry stick of bamboo, but it becomes
our master and insults us in so many ways that it forces us into apredicament. What can we do but tolerate it? The mother of a thiefcannot cry loudly for justice when the thief is punished. Therefore wesimply remain silent.
                                   TEXT 130
                      adharera ei riti, ara suna kuniti,
                           se adhara-sane yara mela                 sei bhaks ya-bhojya-pana, haya amrta-samana,                         nama tara haya `krsna-phela'
                                 TRANSLATION     "That is the policy of these lips. Just consider the other
injustices. Everything that touches those lips--including food, drink orbetel--becomes just like nectar. It is then called krsna-phela, orremnants left by Krsna.                                   TEXT 131
                  se phelara eka lava, na paya devata saba,
                           e dambhe keba patiyaya?               bahu-janma punya kare, tabe `sukrti' nama dhare,                          se `sukrte' tara lava paya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Even after much prayer, the demigods themselves cannot obtain even
a small portion of the remnats of such food. Just imagine the pride ofthose remnants! Only a person who has acted piously for many, manybirths and has thus become a devotee can obtain the remnants of suchfood.
                                   TEXT 132
                krsna ye khaya tambula, kahe tara nahi rnula,
                           tahe ara dambha-paripati                  tara yeba udgara, tare kaya `amrta-sa-ra',                         gopira mukha kare `alabati'
                                 TRANSLATION     "The betel chewed by Krsna is priceless, and the remnants of such
chewed betel from His mouth are sald to be the essence of nectar. Whenthe gopis accept these remnants, their mouths become like His spittoons.
                                   TEXT 133
                 e-saba--tomara kutinati, chada ei paripati,
                         venu-dvare kanhe hara' prana                apanara hasi lagi;, naha narira vadha-bha-gi,                          deha' nijadharamrta-dana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Therefore, My dear Krsna, please give up all the tricks You have
set up so expertly. Do not try to kill the life of the gopis with thevibration of Your flute. Because of Your joking and laughing, You arebecoming responsible for the killing of women. It would be better forYou to satisfy us by giving us the charity of the nectar of Your lips."
                                   TEXT 134
                   kahite kahite prabhura mana phiri' gela
                   krodha-amsa santa haila, utkantha badila
                                 TRANSLATION     While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was talking like this, His mind
changed. His anger subsided, but His mental agitation increased.
                                   TEXT 135
                      parama durlabha ei krsnadharamrta
                      taha yei paya, tara saphala jivita
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, "This nectar from Krsna's lips
is supremely difficult to obtain, but if one gets some, his life becomessuccessful.
                                   TEXT 136
                     yogya hana keha karite na paya pana
                    tathapi se nirlajja, vrtha dhare prana
                                 TRANSLATION     "When a person competent to drink that nectar does not do so, that
shameless person continues his life uselessly.
                                   TEXT 137
                     ayogya hana taha keha sada pana kare
                    yogya jana nahi paya, lobhe matra mare
                                 TRANSLATION     "There are persons who are unfit to drink that nectar but who
nevertheless drink it continuously, whereas some who are suitable neverget it and thus die of greed.
                                   TEXT 138
                     tate jani,--kona tapasyara ache bala
                    ayogyere deoyaya krsnadharamrta-phala
                                 TRANSLATION     "It is therefore to be understood that such an unfit person must
have obtained the nectar of Krsna's lips on the strength of someausterity."
                                   TEXT 139                   `kaha rama-raya, kichu sunite haya mana'
                     bhava jani' pade raya gopira vacana
                                 TRANSLATION     Again Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sald to Ramananda Raya, "Please say
something. I want to hear." Understanding the situation, Ramananda Rayarecited the following words of the gopis.
                                   TEXT 140
                   gopyah kim acarad ayam kusalam sma venur
                      damodaradhara-sudham api gopikanam                  bhunkte svayam yad avasista-rasam hradinyo                  hrsyat-tvaco'sru mumucus taravo yatharyah
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear gopis, what auspicious activities must the flute have
performed to enjoy the nectar of Krsna's lips independently and leaveonly a taste for the gopis for whom that nectar is actually meant. Theforefathers of the flute, the bamboo trees, shed tears of pleasure. Hismother, the river, on whose bank the bamboo was born, feels jubilation,and therefore her blooming lotus flowers are standing like hair on herbody."
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.21.9) regarding a
discussion the gopis had among themselves. As the autumn season began inVrndavana, Lord Krsna was tending the cows and blowing on His flute. Thegopis then began to praise Krsna and discuss the fortunate position ofHis flute.
                                   TEXT 141                    ei sloka suni' prabhu bhavavista hana
                     utkanthate artha kare pralapa kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Upon hearing the recitation of this verse, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
became absorbed in ecstatic love, and with a greatly agitated mind Hebegan to explain its meaning like a madman.
                                   TEXT 142
               eho vrajendra-nandana, vrajera kona kanya-gana,
                            avasya kariba parinaya                se-sambandhe gopi-gana, yare mane nija-dhana,                         se sudha anyera labhya naya                                 TRANSLATION
     "Some gopis said to other gopis, `Just see the astonishing pastimes
of Krsna, the son of Vrajendra! He will certainly marry all the gopis ofVrndavana. Therefore, the gopis know for certain that the nectar ofKrsna's lips is their own property and cannot be enjoyed by anyoneelse.'
                                   TEXT 143
                      gopi-gana, kaha saba kariya vicare
                kon tirtha, kon tapa, kon siddha-mantra-japa,                          ei venu kaila janmantare?
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear gopis, fully consider how many pious activities this
flute performed in his past life. We do not know what places ofpilgrimage he visited, what austerities he performed or what perfectmantra he chanted.
                                   TEXT 144
                 hena krsnadhara-sudha, ye kaila amrta mudha,
                         yara asaya gopi dhare prana                 ei venu ayogya ati, sthavara `purusa-jati',                           sei sudha sada kare pana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `This flute is utterly unfit because it is merely a dead bamboo
stick. Moreover, it belongs to the male sex. Yet this flute is alwaysdrinking the nectar of Krsna's lips, which surpasses nectarean sweetnessof every description. Only in hope of that nectar do the gopis continueto live.
                                   TEXT 145
                yara dhana, na kahe tare, pana kare balatkare,
                           pite tare dakiya janaya                tara tapasyara phala, dekha ihara bhagya-bala,                        ihara ucchista maha-jane khaya
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Although the nectar of Krsna's lips is the absolute property of
the gopis, the flute, which is just an insignificant stick, is forciblydrinking that nectar and loudly inviting the gopis to come drink italso. Just imagine the strength of the flute's austerities and goodfortune. Even great devotees drink the nectar of Krsna's lips after theflute has done so.                                   TEXT 146
                 manasa-ganga, kalindi, bhuvana-pavani nadi,
                          krsna yadi tate kare snana                 venura jhutadhara-rasa, hana lobhe paravasa,                           sei kale harse kare pana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `When Krsna takes His bath in universally purifying rivers like
the Yamuna and the Ganges of the celestial world, the greatpersonalities of those rivers greedily and jubilantly drink the remnantsof the nectarean juice from His lips.
                                   TEXT 147
                  e-ta nari rahu dure, vrksa saba tara tire,
                            tapa kare para-upakari                 nadira sesa-rasa pana, mula-dvare akarsiya,                          kene piye, bujhite na pari
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Aside from the rivers, the trees standing on the banks like
great ascetics and engaging in welfare activities for all livingentities drink the nectar of Krsna's lips by drawing water from theriver with their roots. We cannot understand why they drink like that.
                                   TEXT 148
                  nijankure pulakita, puspe hasya vikasita,
                          madhu-mise vahe asru-dhara               venure mani' nija-jati, aryera yena putra-nati,                       `vaisnava' haile ananda- vikara
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The trees on the bank of the Yamuna and Ganges are always
jubilant. They appear to be smiling with their flowers and sheddingtears in the form of flowing honey. Just as the forefathers of aVaisnava son or grandson feel transcendental bliss, the trees feelblissful because the flute is a member of their family.'
                                   TEXT 149
                  venura tapa jani yabe, sei tapa kari tabe,
                        e--a yogya, amara--yog ya nari               ya na pana duhkhe mari, ayogya piye sahite nari,                          taha lagi' tapasya vicari                                 TRANSLATION
     "The gopis considered, `The flute is completely unfit for his
position. We want to know what kind of austerities the flute executed,so that we may also perform the same austerities. Although the flute isunfit, he is drinking the nectar of Krsna's lips. Seeing this, wequalified gopis are dying of unhappiness. Therefore, we must considerthe austerities the flute underwent in his past life."'
                                   TEXT 150
                  eteka pralapa kari', premavese gaurahari,
                         sange lana svarupa-rama-raya               kabhu nace, kabhu gaya, bhavavese murccha yaya,                           ei-rupe ratri-dina yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     While thus speaking like a madman, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became
full of ecstatic emotion. In the company of His two friends, SvarupaDamodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya, He sometimes danced, sometimes sangand sometimes became unconscious in ecstatic love. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu passed His days and nights in this way.
                                   TEXT 151
              svarupa, rupa, sanatana, raghunathera sri-carana,
                          sire dhari' kari yara asa                  caitanya-caritamrta, amrta haite paramrta,                           gaya dina-hina krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Expecting the mercy of Svarupa, Rupa, Sanatana and Raghunatha dasa,
and taking their lotus feet on my head, I, the most fallen Krsnadasa,continue chanting the epic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, which is sweeterthan the nectar of transcendental bliss.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Sixteenth Chapter, describing the nectar flowing from SriKrsna's lotus lips.
                              Chapter Seventeen
          The Bodily Transformations of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahappabhu     Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura gives the following summary of this
Seventeenth Chapter in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. Absorbed intranscendental ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went out one nightwithout opening the doors to His room. After crossing over three walls,
He fell down among some cows belonging to the district of Tailanga.There He remained unconscious, assuming the aspect of a tortoise.
                                    TEXT 1                           likhyate srila-gaurendor
                            atyadbhutam alaukikam                        yair drstam tan-mukhac chrutva                           di vyonmada- vicestitam
                                 TRANSLATION     I am simply trying to write about Lord Gauracandra's transcendental
activities and spiritual madness, which are very wonderful and uncommon.I dare to write of them only because I have heard from the mouths ofthose who have personally seen the Lord's activities.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord
Nityananda! All glories to Advaitacandra! All glories to all thedevotees of the Lord!
                                    TEXT 3
                       ei-mata mahaprabhu ratri-divase
                    unmadera cesta, pralapa kare premavese
                                 TRANSLATION     Absorbed in ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu acted and talked like
a madman day and night.
                                    TEXT 4
                   eka-dina prabhu svarupa-ramananda-sange
                    ardha-ratri gonaila krsna-katha-range
                                 TRANSLATION     In the company of Svarupa Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu once passed half the night talking about thepastimes of Lord Krsna.                                    TEXT 5
                     yabe yei bhava prabhura karaye udaya
                    bhavanurupa gita gaya svarupa-mahasaya
                                 TRANSLATION     As they talked of Krsna, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami would sing songs
exactly suitable for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's transcendental emotions.
                                    TEXT 6
                    vidyapati, candidasa, sri-gita-govinda
                   bhavanurupa sloka padena raya-ramananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Ramananda Raya would quote verses from the books of Vidyapati and
Candidasa, and especially from the Gita-govinda by Jayadeva Gosvami, tocomplement the ecstasy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                    TEXT 7
                   madhye madhye apane prabhu sloka padiya
                  slokera artha karena prabhu vilapa kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     At intervals, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would also recite a verse.
Then, in great lamentation, He would explain it.
                                    TEXT 8
                     ei-mate nana-bhave ardha-ratri haila
                   gosanire sayana karai' dunhe ghare gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu passed half the night experiencing
varieties of emotions. Finally, after making the Lord lie down on Hisbed, both Svarupa Damodara and Ramananda Raya returned to their homes.
                                    TEXT 9
                    gambhirara dvare govinda karila sayana
                   saba-ratri prabhu karena ucca-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's personal servant, Govinda, lay down at
the door of His room, and the Lord very loudly chanted the Hare Krsnamaha-mantra all night.
                                   TEXT 10
                    acambite sunena prabhu krsna-venu-gana
                    bhavavese prabhu tahan karila prayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Suddenly, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu heard the vibration of Krsna's
flute. Then, in ecstasy, He began to depart to see Lord Krsna.
                                   TEXT 11
                   tina-dvare kapata aiche ache ta' lagiya
                      bhavavese prabhu gela bahira hana
                                 TRANSLATION     All three doors were fastened as usual, but Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, in great ecstasy, nevertheless got out of the room and leftthe house.
                                   TEXT 12
                 simha-dvara-daksine ache tailangi-gabhi-gana
                    tahan yai' padila prabhu hana acetana
                                 TRANSLATION     He went to a cow shed on the southern side of the Simha-dvara.
There the Lord fell down unconscious among cows from the district ofTailanga.
                                   TEXT 13
                   etha govinda mahaprabhura sabda na pana
                       svarupere bolaila kapata khuliya
                                 TRANSLATION     Meanwhile, not hearing any sounds from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Govinda immediateIy sent for Svarupa Damodara and opened the doors.
                                   TEXT 14
                  tabe svarupa-gosani sange lana bhakta-gana                    deuti jvaliya karena prabhura anvesana
                                 TRANSLATION     Then Svarupa Damodara Gosvami lit a torch, and went out with all
the devotees to search for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 15
                      iti-uti anvesiya simha-dvare gela
                    gabhi-gana-madhye yai' prabhure paila
                                 TRANSLATION     After searching here and there, they finally came to the cow shed
near the Simha-dvara. There they saw Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lyingunconscious among the cows.
                                   TEXT 16
                   petera bhitara hasta-pada--kurmera akara
                   mukhe phena, pulakanga, netre asru-dhara
                                 TRANSLATION     His arms and legs had entered the trunk of His body, exactly like
those of a tortoise. His mouth was foaming, there were eruptions on Hisbody, and tears flowed from His eyes.
                                   TEXT 17
                  acetana padiyachena,--yena kusmanda-phala
                     bahire jadima, antare ananda-vihvala
                                 TRANSLATION     As the Lord lay there unconscious, His body resembled a large
pumpkin. Externally He was completely inert, but within He feltoverwhelming transcendental bliss.
                                   TEXT 18
                  gabhi saba caudike sunke prabhura sri-anga
                dura kaile nahi chade prabhura sri-anga-sanga
                                 TRANSLATION     All the cows around the Lord were sniffing His transcendental body.
When the devotees tried to check them, they refused to give up theirassociation with the transcendental body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.                                   TEXT 19
                      aneka karila yatna, na haya cetana
                   prabhure uthana ghare anila bhakta-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees tried to rouse the Lord by various means, but His
consciousness did not return. Therefore they all lifted Him and broughtHim back home.
                                   TEXT 20
                   ucca kari' sravane kare nama-sankirtana
                     aneka-ksane mahaprabhu paila cetana
                                 TRANSLATION     All the devotees began to chant the Hare Krsna mantra very loudly,
and after a considerable time, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu regainedconsciousness.
                                   TEXT 21
                     cetana ha-ile hasta-pada bahire aila
                      purvavat yatha-yogya sarira ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     When He regained consciousness, His arms and legs came out of His
body, and His whole body returned to normal.
                                   TEXT 22
                    uthiya vasilena prabhu, cahena iti-uti
                    svarupe kahena,--"tumi ama anila kati?
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stood up, and then sat down again. Looking
here and there, He inquired from Svarupa Damodara,"Where have youbrought Me?
                                   TEXT 23
                    venu-sabda suni' ami gelana vrndavana
                 dekhi,--gosthe venu bajaya vrajendra-nandana                                 TRANSLATION
     "After hearing the vibration of a flute, I went to Vrndavana, and
there I saw that Krsna, the son of Maharaja Nanda, was playing on Hisflute in the pasturing grounds.
                                   TEXT 24
                   sanketa-venu-nade radha ani' kunja-ghare
                     kunjere calila krsna krida karibare
                                 TRANSLATION     "He brought Srimati Radharani to a bower by signaling with His
flute. Then He entered within that bower to perform pastimes with Her.
                                   TEXT 25
                     tanra pache pache ami karinu gamana
                  tanra bhusa-dhvanite amara harila sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I entered the bower just behind Krsna, My ears captivated by the
sound of His ornaments.
                                   TEXT 26
                    gopi-gana-saha vihara, hasa, parihasa
                   kantha-dhvani-ukti suni' mora karnollasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "I saw Krsna and the gopis enjoying all kinds of pastimes while
laughing and joking together. Hearing their vocal expressions enhancedthe joy of My ears.
                                   TEXT 27
                      hena-kale tumi-saba kolahala kari'
                      ama inha lana aila balatkara kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Just then, all of you made a tumultuous sound and brought Me back
here by force.
                                   TEXT 28                     sunite na painu sei amrta-sama vani
                   sunite na painu bhusana-muralira dhvani"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because you brought Me back here, I could no longer hear the
nectarean voices of Krsna and the gopis, nor could I hear the sounds oftheir ornaments or the flute."
                                   TEXT 29
                    bhavavese svarupe kahena gadgada-vani
                  `karna trsnaya mare, pada rasayana, suni'
                                 TRANSLATION     In great ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said to Svarupa Damodara
in a faltering voice, "My ears are dying of thirst. Please recitesomething to quench this thirst. Let me hear it."
                                   TEXT 30
                     svarupa-gosani prabhura bhava janiya
                    bhagavatera sloka pade madhura kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     Understanding the ecstatic emotions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Svarupa Damodara, in a sweet voice, recited the following verse fromSrimadBhagavatam.
                                   TEXT 31
                   ka stry anga te kala-padamrta-venu-gita-
                   sammohitarya-caritan na calet trilokyam                  trailokya-saubhagam idam ca niriksya rupam                  yad go-dvija-druma-mrgah pulakany abibhran
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear Lord Krsna, where is that woman within the three worlds
who cannot be captivated by the rhythms of the sweet songs coming fromYour wonderful flute? Who cannot fall down from the path of chastity inthis way? Your beauty is the most sublime within the three worlds. Uponseeing Your beauty, even cows, birds, animals and trees in the forestare stunned in jubilation.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.29.40).                                   TEXT 32
                    suni' prabhu gopi-bhave avista ha-ila
                   bhagavatera slokera artha karite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Upon hearing this verse, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, overwhelmed with
the ecstasy of the gopis, began to explain it.
                                   TEXT 33
                  haila gopi-bhavavesa, kaila rase paravesa,
                         krsnera suni' upeksa-vacana              krsnera mukha-hasya-vani, tyage taha satya mani',                           rose krsne dena olahana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "The gopis entered the arena of the
rasa dance in ecstasy, but after hearing Krsna's words of negligence anddetachment, they understood that He was going to renounce them. Thusthey began to chastise Him in anger.
                                   TEXT 34
                      "nagara, kaha, tumi kariya niscaya
                  ei trijagat bhari', ache yata yogya nari,                        tomara venu kahan na akarsaya?
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O dear lover,"' they said, " `please answer just one question.
Who among all the youthful women within this universe is not attractedby the sound of Your flutel.
                                   TEXT 35
               kaila jagate venu-dhvani, siddha-mantra yogini,
                           duti hana mohe nari-mana                   mahotkantha badana, arya-patha chadana,                          ani' tomaya kare samarpana
                                 TRANSLATION     " `When You play Your flute, it acts like a messenger in the form
of a yogini perfect in the art of chanting mantras. This messengerenchants all the women in the universe and attracts them to You. Thenshe insreases their great anxiety and induces them to give up thereguIative principle of obeying superiors. Finally, she forcibly bringsthem to You to surrender in amorous love.                                   TEXT 36
              dharma chadaya venu-dvare, hane kataksa-kama-sare,
                         lajja, bhaya, sakala chadaya                ebe amaya kari' rosa, kahi' pati-tyage `dosa',                        dharmika hana dharma sikhaya!
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The vibration of Your flute, accompanied by Your glance, which
pierces us forcibly with the arrows of lust, induces us to ignore theregulative principles of religious life. Thus we become excited by lustydesires and come to You, giving up all shame and fear. But now You areangry with us. You are finding fault with our violating religiousprinciples and leaving our homes and husbands. And as You instruct usabout religious principles, we become helpless.
                                   TEXT 37
                 anya-katha, anya-mana, bahire anya acarana,
                            ei saba satha-paripati                 tumi jana parihasa, haya narira sarva-nasa,                            chada ei saba kutinati
                                 TRANSLATION     " `We know that this is all a well-planned trick. You know how to
make jokes that cause the complete annihilation of women, but we canunderstand that Your real mind, words and behavior are different.Therefore please give up all these clever tricks.
                                   TEXT 38
               venu-nada amrta-ghole, amrta-samana mitha bole,
                         amrta-samana bhusana-sinjita                 tina amrte hare kana, hare mana, hare prana,                         kemane nari dharibeka cita?"
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The nectarean buttermilk of Your flute's vibration, the nectar
of Your sweet words and the nectarean sound of Your ornaments mixtogether to attract our ears, minds and lives. In this way You arekilling us."'
                                   TEXT 39
                 eta kahi' krodhavese, bhavera tarange bhase,
                          utkantha-sagare dube mana                 radhara utkantha-vani, padi' apane vakhani,
                         krsna-madhurya kare asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke these words in a mood of anger as He
floated on waves of ecstatic love. Merged in an ocean of anxiety, Herecited a verse spoken by Srimati Radharani expressing the same emotion.Then He personally explained the verse and thus tasted the sweetness ofKrsna.
                                   TEXT 40
              nadaj-jalada-nisvanah sravana-karsi-sac-chinjitah
              sanarma-rasa-sucakaksara-padartha-bhang y-uktikah                ramadika- varangana-hrda ya-hari- vamsi-kalah                sa me madana-mohanah sakhi tanoti karna-sprham
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, " `My dear friend, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, has a voice as deep as a cloud resoundingin the sky. With the tinkling of His ornaments, He attracts the ears ofthe gopis, and with the sound of His flute He attracts even the goddessof fortune and other beautiful women. That Personality of Godhead, knownas Madana-mohana, whose joking words carry many indications and deepmeanings, is increasing the lusty desires of My ears.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is found in the Govinda-lilamrta (8.5).                                   TEXT 41              "kanthera gambhira dhvani, navaghana-dhvani jini',
                           yara gune kokila lajaya                  tara eka sruti-kane, dubaya jagatera kane,                          punah kana bahudi' na aya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna's deep voice is more resonant than newly arrived clouds, and
His sweet song defeats even the sweet voice of the cuckoo. Indeed, Hissong is so
sweet that even one particle of its sound can inundate the entire world.
If such a particle enters one's ear, one is immediately bereft of allother types of hearing.
                                   TEXT 42
                         kaha, sakhi, ki kari upaya?                  krsnera se sabda-gune, harile amara kane,
                       ebe na paya, trsnaya mari' yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, please tell me what to do. My ears have been
plundered by the qualities of Krsna's sound. Now, however, I cannot hearHis transcendental sound, and I am almost dead for want of it.
                                   TEXT 43
                  nupura-kinkini-dhvani, hamsa-sarasa jini',
                         kankana-dhvani catake lajaya                  eka-bara yei sune, vyapi rahe' tara kane,                          anya sabda se-kane na yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The tinkling of Krsna's ankle bells surpasses the songs of even
the swan and crane, and the sound of His bangles puts the singing of thecataka bird to shame. Having allowed these sounds to enter the ears evenonce, one cannot tolerate hearing anything else.
                                   TEXT 44
                 se sri-mukha-bhasita, amrta haite paramrta,
                         smita-karpura tahate misrita               sabda, artha,--dui-sakti, nana-rasa kare vyakti,                        pratyaksara--narma- vibhusita
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna's speech is far sweeter than nectar. Each of His jubilant
words is full of meaning, and when His speech mixes with His smile,which is like camphor, the resultant sound and the deep meaning ofKrsna's words create various transcendental mellows.
                                   TEXT 45
                  se amrtera eka-kana, karna-cakora-jivana,
                          karna-cakora jiye sei ase                bhagya-vase kabhu paya, abhagye kabhu na paya,                            na paile maraye piyase
                                 TRANSLATION     "One particle of that transcendental, blissful nectar is the life
and soul of the ear, which is like a cakora bird that lives in hope oftasting that nectar. Sometimes, by good fortune, the bird can taste it,but at other times he unfortunately cannot and therefore almost dies ofthirst.                                   TEXT 46
                 yeba venu-kala-dhvani, eka-bara taha suni',
                           jagan-nari-citta aulaya                nivi-bandha pade khasi;, vina-mule haya dasi,                         bauli hana krsna-pase dhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The transcendental vibration of Krsna's flute disturbs the hearts
of women all over the world, even if they hear it only once. Thus theirfastened belts
become loose, and these women become the unpaid maidservants of Krsna.
Indeed, they run toward Krsna exactly like madwomen.
                                   TEXT 47
                yeba laksmi-thakurani, tenho ye kakali suni',
                          krsna-pasa aise pratyasaya                  na paya krsnera sanga, bade trsna-taranga,                          tapa kare, tabu nahi paya
                                 TRANSLATION     "When she hears the vibration of Krsna's flute, even the goddess of
fortune comes to Him, greatly hoping for His association, butnevertheless she does not get it. When the waves of thirst for Hisassociation increase, she performs austerities, but still she cannotmeet Him.
                                   TEXT 48
                 ei sabdamrta cari, yara haya bhagya bha-ri,
                           sei karne iha kare pana                   iha yei nahi sune, se kana janmila kene,                           kanakadi-sama sei kana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Only the most fortunate can hear these four nectarean sounds--
Krsna's words, the tinkling of His ankle bells and bangles, His voiceand the vibration of His flute. If one does not hear these sounds, hisears are as useless as small conchshells with holes."
                                   TEXT 49
                  karite aiche vilapa, uthila udvega, bhava,
                           mane kaho nahi alambana            udvega, visada, ma ti, autsuk ya, trasa, dhrti, smrti,
                          nana-bhavera ha-ila milana
                                 TRANSLATION     While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lamented in this way, agitation and
ecstasy awoke in His mind, and He became very restless. Manytranscendental ecstasies combined in Him, including anxiety,lamentation, attention, eagerness, fear, determination and remembrance.
                                   TEXT 50
             bhava-sabalye radhara ukti, lila-suke haila sphurti,
                           sei bhave pade eka sloka                 unmadera samarthye, sei slokera kare arthe,                           yei artha nahi jane loka
                                 TRANSLATION     The aggregate of all these ecstasies awoke a statement by Srimati
Radharani in the mind of Bilvamangala Thakura [Lila-suka]. In the sameecstatic mood, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu now recited that verse, and onthe strength of madness, He described its meaning, which is unknown topeople in general.
                                   TEXT 51
                kim iha krnumah kasya brumah krtam krtam asaya
               kathayata katham anyam dhanyam aho hrdaye sayah                 madhura-madhura-smerakare mano-na yanotsave                 krpana-krpana krsne trsna ciram bata lambate
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, " `Alas, what shall I do? To whom
shall I speak? Let whatever I have done in hopes of meeting Krsna befinished now. Please say something auspicious, but do not speak aboutKrsna. Alas, Krsna is lying within My heart like Cupid; therefore howcan I possibly give up talking of Him? I cannot forget Krsna, whosesmile is sweeter than sweetness itself and who gives pleasure to My mindand eyes. Alas, My great thirst for Krsna is increasing moment bymoment!'
                                   PURPORT     Th is statement by Srimati Radharani is quoted from Krsna-karnamrta
(42).
                                   TEXT 52                 "ei krsnera virahe, udvege mana sthira nahe,
                         prapty-upaya-cintana na yaya                   yeba tumi sakhi-gana, visade baula mana,
                         kare puchon, ke kahe upaya?
                                 TRANSLATION     "The anxiety caused by separation from Krsna has made Me impatient,
and I can think of no way to meet Him. O My friends, you are alsoderanged by lamentation. Who, therefore, will tell Me how to find Him?
                                   TEXT 53
                         ha ha sakhi, ki kari upaya!
               kanha karon, kahan yana, kahan gele krsna pana,                         krsna vina prana mora ya-ya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "O My dear friends, how shall I find Krsna? What shall I do? Where
shall I go? Where can I meet Him? Because I cannot find Krsna, My lifeis leaving Me."
                                   TEXT 54
                 ksane mana sthira haya, tabe mane vicaraya,
                           balite ha-ila bhavodgama                 pingalara vacana-smrti, karaila bhava-mati,                          tate kare artha-nirdharana
                                 TRANSLATION     Suddenly, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became calm and considered His
state of mind. He remembered the words of Pingala, and this aroused anecstasy that moved Him to speak. Thus He explained the meaning of theverse.
                                   PURPORT     Pingala was a prostitute who said, "To hope against hope produces
only misery. Utter hopelessness is the greatest happiness." Rememberingthis statement, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became ecstatic. The story ofPingala is found in Srimad- Bhagavatam, Eleventh Canto, Eighth Chapter,verses 22-44, as well as in Mahabharata, Santi-parva, Chapter 174.
                                   TEXT 55                   "dekhi ei upa ye, krsna-asa chadi' diye,
                         asa chadile sukhi haya mana             chada' krsna-katha adhanya, kaha anya-katha dhanya,                         yate haya krsna-vismarana,,
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, " `If I give up hope of meeting
Krsna, I shall then be happy. Therefore, let us stop this mostinglorious discussion of Krsna. It would be better for us to talk ofglorious topics and forget Him.'
                                   TEXT 56
               kahitei ha-ila smrti, citte haila krsna-sphurti,
                          sakhire kahe hana vismite                   "yare cahi chadite, sei suna ache citte,                          kona rite na pari chadite"
                                 TRANSLATION     "While speaking in this way, Srimati Radharani suddenly remembered
Krsna. Indeed, He appeared within Her heart. Greatly astonished, Shetold Her friends, `The person I want to forget is lying in My heart.'
                                   TEXT 57
            radha-bhavera svabhava ana, krsne karaya `kama'-jnana,
                         kama-jnane trasa haila citte                   kahe--"ye jagat mare, se pasila antare,                          ei vairi na deya pasarite"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Srimati Radharani's ecstasy also made Her think of Krsna as Cupid,
and this understanding frightened Her. She said, `This Cupid, who hasconquered the whole world and entered My heart, is My greatest enemy,for He does not allow Me to forget Him.'
                                   TEXT 58
                autsukyera pravinye, jiti' an ya bhava-sainye,
                         udaya haila nija-rajya-mane                   mane ha-ila lalasa, na haya apana-vasa,                         duhkhe mane karena bhartsane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Then great eagerness conquered all the other soldiers of ecstasy,
and an uncontrollable desire arose in the kingdom of Srimati Radharani'smind. Greatly unhappy, She then chastised Her own mind.
                                   TEXT 59
                  "mana mora vama-dina, jala vina yena mina,
                         krsna vina ksane mari' yaya                 madhura-has ya-vadane, mana -netra-rasayane,
                          krsna-trsna dviguna badaya
                                 TRANSLATION     " `If I do not think of Krsna, My impoverished mind will die within
a moment like a fish out of water. But when I see Krsna's sweetlysmiling face, My mind and eyes are so pleased that My desire for Himredoubles.
                                   TEXT 60
                 ha ha krsna prana-dhana, ha ha padma-locana,
                         ha ha divya sad-guna-sagara!                 ha ha syama-sundara, ha ha pitambara-dhara,                           ha ha rasa-vilasa nagara
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Alas! Where is Krsna, the treasure of My life? Where is the
lotus-eyed one? Alas! Where is the divine ocean of alI transcendentalqualities? Alas! Where is the beautiful, blackish youth dressed inyellow garments? Alas! Where is the hero of the rasa dance?
                                   TEXT 61
                 kahan gele toma pai, tumi kaha,--tahan yai",
                            eta kahi' calila dhana               svarupa uthi' kole kari', prabhure anila dhari',                          niia-sthane vasaila laina
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Where shall I go? Where can I find You? Please tell Me. I shall
go there."' Speaking in this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began running.Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, however, stood up, caught Him and took Him onhis lap. Then Svarupa Damodara brought Him back to His place and madeHim sit down.
                                   TEXT 62
              ksaneke prabhura bahya haila, svarupere ajna dila,
                     "svarupa, kichu kara madhura ga-na"                  svarupa gaya vidyapati, gita-govinda-giti,                         suni' prabhura judaila kana
                                 TRANSLATION     Suddenly Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to external consciousness
and said to Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, "My dear Svarupa, please sing somesweet songs." The Lord's ears were satisfied when He heard Svarupa
Damodara sing songs from Gita-govinda and those by the poet Vidyapati.
                                   TEXT 63
                     ei-mata mahaprabhu prati-ratri-dine
                      unmada cestita haya pralapa-vacane
                                 TRANSLATION     Each day and night, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would become deranged
in this way and talk like a madman.
                                   TEXT 64
                      eka-dine yata haya bhavera vikara
                   sahasra-mukhe varne yadi, nahi paya para
                                 TRANSLATION     Even Anantadeva, who possesses thousands of mouths, cannot fully
describe the ecstatic transformations that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuexperienced in a single day.
                                   TEXT 65
                     jiva dina ki karibe tahara varnana?
                    sakha-candra-nyaya kari' dig-darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     What can a poor creature like me describe of those transformations?
I can give only a hint of them, as if showing the moon through thebranches of a tree.
                                   TEXT 66
                     iha yei sune, tara judaya mana-kana
                    alaukika gudha-prema-cesta haya jnana
                                 TRANSLATION     This description, however, will satisfy the mind and ears of anyone
who hears it, and he will be able to understand these uncommonactivities of deep ecstatic love for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 67
                   adbhuta nigudha premera madhurya-mahima                      apani asvadi' prabhu dekhaila sima
                                 TRANSLATION     Ecstatic love for Krsna is wonderfully deep. By personally tasting
the glorious sweetness of that love, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu showed usits extreme limit.
                                   TEXT 68
                 adbhuta-da yalu caitanya--adbhuta-vadan ya!
                    aiche dayalu data loke nahi suni anya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is wonderfully merciful and wonderfully
magnaimous. We have heard of no one else within this world so mercifuland charitable.
                                   TEXT 69
                   sarva-bhave bhaja, loka, caitanya-carana
                    yaha haite paiba krsna-premamrta-dhana
                                 TRANSLATION     Worship the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in all respects.
Only in this way will you achieve the nectarean treasure of ecstaticlove for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 70
                     ei ta' kahilun `kurmakrti'-anubhava
                      unmada-cestita tate unmada-pralapa
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's ecstatic
transformation of becoming like a tortoise. In that ecstasy, He talkedand acted like a madman.
                                   TEXT 71
                     ei lila sva-granthe raghunatha-dasa
                 gauranga-stava-kalpavrkse kairachena prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami has fully described this pastime in
his book Gau ranga-stava-kal pavrksa.                                   TEXT 72
               anudghatya dvara-trayam uru ca bhitti-trayam aho
              vilanghyoccaih kalingika-surabhi-madhye nipatitah                tanudyat-sankocat kamatha iva krsnoru-virahad                 virajan gaurango hrdaya udayan mam madayati
                                 TRANSLATION     "How wonderful it is! Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu left His residence
without opening the three strongly bolted doors. Then He crossed overthree high walls, and later, because of strong feelings of separationfrom Krsna, He fell down amidst the cows of the Tailanga district andretracted all the limbs of His body like a tortoise. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu, who appeared in that way, rises in my heart and maddens me."
                                   TEXT 73
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Seventeenth Chapter, describing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'spastime of retracting His limbs like a tortoise.
                               Chapter Eighteen
                        Rescuing the Lord from the Sea     A summary of the Eighteenth Chapter is given by Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. On an autumn evening when the moonwas full, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu walked along the seashore near theAitota temple. Mistaking the sea for the Yamuna River, He jumped intoit, hoping to see the water pastimes of Krsna and Srimati Radharani andthe other gopis. As He floated in the sea, however, He was washed awayto the Konarka temple, where a fisherman, thinking that the Lord's bodywas a big fish, caught Him in his net and brought Him ashore. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu was unconscious, and His body had become unusuallytransformed. As soon as the fisherman touched the Lord's body, he becamemad in ecstatic love of Krsna. His own madness frightened him, however,because he thought that he was being haunted by a ghost. As he was aboutto seek a ghost charmer, he met Svarupa Damodara Gosvami and the otherdevotees on the beach, who had been looking everywhere for the Lord.After some inquiries, Svarupa Damodara could understand that the
fisherman had caught Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in his net. Since thefisherman was afraid of being haunted by a ghost, Svarupa Damodara gavehim a slap and chanted Hare Krsna, which immediately pacified him.Thereafter, when the devotees chanted the Hare Krsna maha-mantra loudly,Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to His external consciousness. Then theybrought Him back to His own residence.
                                    TEXT 1              saraj-jyotsna-sindhor a vakalana ya jata- yamuna-
               bhramad dhavan yo'smin hari-viraha-taparnava iva               nimagno murcchalah payasi nivasan ratrim akhilam              prabhate praptah svair avatu sa saci-sunur iha nah
                                 TRANSLATION     In the brilliant autumn moonlight, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu mistook
the sea for the River Yamuna. Greatly afflicted by separation fromKrsna, He ran and dove into the sea and remained unconscious in thewater the entire night. In the morning, He was found by His personaldevotees. May that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the son of mother Saci,protect us by His transcendental pastimes.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Nityananda
Prabhu! All glories to Advaita Acarya! And all glories to all thedevotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu!
                                    TEXT 3
                  Text 5] Rescuing the Lord from the Sea lZl                      ei-mate mahaprabhu nilacale vaise
                     ratri-dine krsna-vicchedarnave bhase
                                 TRANSLATION     While thus living at Jagannatha Puri, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
floated all day and night in an ocean of separation from Krsna.
                                    TEXT 4
                  sarat-kalera ratri, saba candrika-ujjvala
                  prabhu nija-gana lana bedana ratri-sakala                                 TRANSLATION
     During a night of the autumn season when a full moon brightened
everything, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wandered all night long with Hisdevotees.
                                    TEXT 5
                    udyane udyane bhramena kautuka dekhite
                     rasa-lilara gita-sloka padite sunite
                                 TRANSLATION     He walked from garden to garden, seeing the pastimes of Lord Krsna
and hearing and reciting songs and verses concerning the rasa-lila.
                                    TEXT 6
                    prabhu premavese karena gana, nartana
                      kabhu bhavavese rasa-lilanukarana
                                 TRANSLATION     He sang and danced in ecstatic love and sometimes imitated the rasa
dance in emotional ecstasy.
                                    TEXT 7
                    kabhu bhavonmade prabhu iti-uti dhaya
                 bhume padi' kabhu murccha, kabhu gadi' yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     He sometimes ran here and there in the madness of ecstasy and
sometimes fell and rolled on the ground. Sometimes He became completelyunconscious.
                                    TEXT 8
                    rasa-lilara eka sloka yabe pade, sune
                       purvavat tabe artha karena apane
                                 TRANSLATION     When He heard Svarupa Damodara recite a verse concerning the rasa-
lila or He Himself recited one, He would personally explain it, as Hehad previously done.                                    TEXT 9
                     ei-mata rasa-lilaya haya yata sloka
                   sabara artha kare, paya kabhu harsa-soka
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, He explained the meaning of all the verses concerning
the rasalila. Sometimes He would be very sad and sometimes very happy.
                                   TEXT 10
                   se saba slokera artha, se saba `vika-ra'
                   se saba varnite grantha haya ati-vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     To explain fully all those verses and all the transformations that
took place in the Lord's body would require a very large volume.
                                   TEXT 11
                    dvadasa vatsare ye ye lila ksane-ksane
                 ati-bahulya-bhaye grantha na kailun likhane
                                 TRANSLATION     So as not to increase the size of this book, I have not written
about all the Lord's pastimes, for He performed them every moment ofevery day for twelve years.
                                   TEXT 12
                      purve yei dekhanachi dig-darasana
                   taiche janiha `vikara' `pralapa' varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     As I have previously indicated, I am describing the mad speeches
and bodily transformations of the Lord onIy in brief.
                                   TEXT 13
                     sahasra-vadane yabe kahaye `ananta'
                    eka-dinera lilara tabu nahi paya anta
                                 TRANSLATION     If Ananta, with His one thousand hoods, tried to describe even one
day,s pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, He would find them impossibleto describefully.
                                   TEXT 14
                    koti-yuga paryanta yadi likhaye ganesa
                    eka-dinera lilara tabu nahi paya sesa
                                 TRANSLATION     If Ganesa, Lord Siva's son and the expert scribe of the demigods,
tried for millions of millenniums to fully describe one day of theLord's pastimes, he would be unable to find their limit.
                                   TEXT 15
               bhaktera prema-vikara dekhi' krsnera camatkara!
                   krsna yara na paya anta, keba chara ara?
                                 TRANSLATION     Even Lord Krsna is struck with wonder at seeing the transformations
of ecstasy in His devotees. If Krsna Himself cannot estimate the limitsof such emotions, how could others?
                                  TEXT 16-17
                  bhakta-premara yata dasa, ye gati prakara
                    yata duhkha, yata sukha, yateka vikara
                       krsna taha samyak na pare janite
                     bhakta-bhava angikare ta-ha asvadite
                                 TRANSLATION     Krsna Himself cannot fully understand the conditions, the mode of
progress, the happiness and unhappiness, and the moods of ecstatic loveof His devotees. He therefore accepts the role of a devotee to tastethese emotions fully.
                                   TEXT 18
                    krsnere nacaya prema, bhaktere nacaya
                      apane nacaye,--tine nace eka-thani
                                 TRANSLATION     Ecstatic love of Krsna makes Krsna and His devotees dance, and it
also dances personally. In this way, all three dance together in oneplace.
                                   TEXT 19
                     premara vikara varnite cahe yei jana
                    canda dharite cahe, yena hana `vamana'
                                 TRANSLATION     One who wants to describe the transformations of ecstatic love of
Krsna is like a dwarf trying to catch the moon in the sky.
                                   TEXT 20
                  vayu yaiche sindhu-jalera hare eka `kana'
                   krsna-prema-kana taiche jivera sparsana
                                 TRANSLATION     As the wind can carry away but a drop of the water in the ocean, a
living entity can touch only a particle of the ocean of love of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 21
                   ksane ksane uthe premara taranga ananta
                     jiva chara kahan tara paibeka anta?
                                 TRANSLATION     Endless waves arise moment after moment in that ocean of love. How
could an insignificant living entity estimate their limits?
                                   TEXT 22
                   sri-krsna-caitanya yaha karena asvadana
                     sabe eka jane taha svarupadi `gana'
                                 TRANSLATION     Only a person on the Ievel of Svarupa Damodara Gosvami can fully
know what Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu tastes in His love for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 23
                      jiva hana kare yei tahara varnana
                     apana sodhite tara chonye eka `kana'                                 TRANSLATION
     When an ordinary living entity describes the pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he purifies himself by touching one drop of thatgreat ocean.
                                   TEXT 24
                     ei-mata rasera sloka-sakala-i padila
                     sese jala-kelira sloka padite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus all the verses about the rasa-lila dance were recited. Then
finally the verse concerning the pastimes in the water was recited.
                                   TEXT 25
                   tabhir yutah sramam apohitum anga-sanga-
                   ghrsta-srajah sa kuca-kunkuma-ranjitayah                    gandharva-palibhir anudruta avisad vah                  sranto gajibhir ibha-rad iva bhinna-setuh
                                 TRANSLATION     "As an independent leader among elephants enters the water with its
female elephants, Krsna, who is transcendental to the Vedic principlesof morality, entered the water of the Yamuna with the gopis. His chesthad brushed against their breasts, crushing His flower garland andcoloring it with red kunkuma powder. Attracted by the fragrance of thatgarland, humming bumblebees followed Krsna like celestial beings ofGandharvaloka. In this way, Lord Krsna mitigated the fatigue of the rasadance."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.23).                                   TEXT 26                     ei-mata mahaprabhu bhramite bhramite
                    aitota haite samudra dekhena acambite
                                 TRANSLATION     While thus wandering near the temple of Aitota, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu suddenly saw the sea.
                                   TEXT 27
                    candra-kantye uchalita taranga ujjvala                    jhalamala kare,--yena `yamunara jala,
                                 TRANSLATION     Brightened by the shining light of the moon, the high waves of the
sea glittered like the waters of the River Yamuna.
                                   TEXT 28
                     yamunara bhrame prabhu dhana calila
                    alaksite yai' sindhu-jale jhanpa dila
                                 TRANSLATION     Mistaking the sea for the Yamuna, the Lord ran swiftly and jumped
into the water, unseen by the others.
                                   TEXT 29
                    paditei haila murccha, kichui na jane
                  kabhu dubaya, kabhu bhasaya tarangera gane
                                 TRANSLATION     Falling into the sea, He lost consciousness and could not
understand where He was. Sometimes He sank beneath the waves, andsometimes He floated above them.
                                   TEXT 30
                   tarange vahiya phire,--yena suska kastha
                     ke bujhite pare ei caitanyera nata?
                                 TRANSLATION     The waves carried Him here and there like a piece of dry wood. Who
can understand this dramatic performance by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu?
                                   TEXT 31
                  konarkera dike prabhure tarange lana yaya
                 kabhu dubana rakhe, kabhu bhasana lana yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     Keeping the Lord sometimes submerged and sometimes afloat, the
waves carried Him toward the Konarka temple.
                                   PURPORT     Konarka, generally known as Arka-tirtha, is a temple of Lord Surya,
the sun-god. it is situated on the seashore, nineteen miles north ofJagannatha Puri. It was constructed of black stone in the beginning ofthe thirteenth century of the Saka Era, and it shows expertcraftsmanship and architecture.
                                   TEXT 32                      yamunate jala-keli gopi-gana-sange
                   krsna karena--mahaprabhu magna sei range
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Krsna performed pastimes with the gopis in the waters of the
Yamuna, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu f ully merged in those pastimes.
                                   TEXT 33
                    ihan svarupadi-gana prabhu na dekhiya
                   `kahan gela prabhu?' kahe camakita hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Meanwhile, all the devotees, headed by Svarupa Damodara, lost sight
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Astonished, they began searching for Him,asking, "Where has the Lord gone?"
                                   TEXT 34
                    mano-vege gela prabhu, dekhite narila
                  prabhure na dekhiya samsaya karite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu had run off at the speed of mind. No one
could see Him. Thus everyone was puzzled as to His whereabouts.
                                   TEXT 35
                   `jagannatha dekhite kiba devalaye gela?
                       anya udyane kiba unmade padila?
                                 TRANSLATION     "Has the Lord gone to the temple of Jagannatha, or has He fallen
down in madness in some garden?
                                   TEXT 36
                    gundica-mandire gela, kiba narendrere?                    cataka-parvate gela, kiba konarkere?'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Perhaps He went to the Gundica temple, or to Lake Narendra, or to
the Cataka-parvata. Maybe He went to the temple at Konarka."
                                   TEXT 37
                     eta bali' sabe phire prabhure cahiya
                      samudrera tire aila kata jana lana
                                 TRANSLATION     Talking like this, the devotees wandered here and there looking for
the Lord. Finally they came to the shore, accompanied by many others.
                                   TEXT 38
                    cahiye bedaite aiche ratri-sesa haila
                 `antardhana ha-ila prabhu',--niscaya karila
                                 TRANSLATION     While they were searching for the Lord, the night ended, and thus
they all decided, "Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has now disappeared."
                                   TEXT 39
                    prabhura vicchede kara dehe nahi prana
                     anista-sanka vina kara mane nahi ana
                                 TRANSLATION     In separation from the Lord, everyone felt as though he had lost
his very life. They concluded that there must have been some mishap.They could not think of anything else.
                                   TEXT 40
                 "anista-sankini bandhu-hrdayani bhavanti hi"                                 TRANSLATION     "A relative or intimate friend is always fearful of some injury to
his beloved.
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from the Abhijnana-sakuntala-nataka.                                   TEXT 41
                      samudrera tire asi' yukati karila
                      cirayu-parvata-dike kata-jana gela
                                 TRANSLATION     When they arrived at the seashore, they conferred among themselves.
Then some of them sought out Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Cataka-parvata.
                                   TEXT 42
                   purva-disaya cale svarupa lana kata jana
                  sindhu-tire-nire karena prabhura anvesana
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara proceeded east with others, looking for the Lord
on the beach or in the water.
                                   TEXT 43
                     visade vihvala sabe, nahika `cetana'
                   tabu preme bule kari' prabhura anvesana
                                 TRANSLATION     Everyone was overwhelmed with moroseness and almost unconscious,
but out of ecstatic love they continued to wander here and there,searching for the Lord.
                                   TEXT 44
                  dekhena--eka jaliya aise kandhe jala kari'
                 hase, kande, nace, gaya, bale `hari' `hari'
                                 TRANSLATION     Passing along the beach, they saw a fisherman approaching with his
net over his shoulder. Laughing, crying, dancing and singing, he keptrepeating the holy name"Hari, Hari."
                                   TEXT 45
                    jaliyara cesta dekhi' sabara camatkara
                     svarupa-gosani tare puchena samacara
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the activities of the fisherman, everyone was astonished.
Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, therefore, asked him for information.
                                   TEXT 46
                   "kaha, jaliya, ei dike dekhila eka-jana?
                    tomara ei dasa kene,--kahata' karana?"
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear fisherman," he said, "why are you behaving like this? Have
you seen someone hereabouts? What is the cause of your behavior? Pleasetell us."
                                   TEXT 47
                  jaliya kahe,--"ihan eka manusya na dekhila
                    jala vahite eka mrtaka mora jale aila
                                 TRANSLATION     The fisherman replied, "I have not seen a single person here, but
while casting my net in the water, I captured a dead body.
                                   TEXT 48
                    bada matsya bali' ami uthailun yatane
                     mrtaka dekhite mora bhaya haila mane
                                 TRANSLATION     "I lifted it with great care, thinking it a big fish, but as soon
as I saw that it was a corpse, great fear arose in my mind.
                                   TEXT 49
                    jala khasaite tara anga-sparsa ha-ila
                     sparsa-matre sei bhuta hrdaye pasila
                                 TRANSLATION     "As I tried to release the net, I touched the body, and as soon as
I touched it, a ghost entered my heart.
                                   TEXT 50
                   bhaye kampa haila, mora netre vahe jala
                       gadgada vani, roma uthila sakala                                 TRANSLATION
     "I shivered in fear and shed tears. My voice faltered, and all the
hairs on my body stood up.
                                   TEXT 51
                kiba brahma-daitya, kiba bhuta, kahane na yaya
                    darsana-matre manusyera paise sei kaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "I do not know whether it was the ghost of a dead brahmana or an
ordinary man, but as soon as one looks upon it, it enters his body.
                                   TEXT 52
                     sarira dighala tara--hata panca-sata
                    ekeka-hasta-pada tara, tina tina hata
                                 TRANSLATION     "The body of this ghost is very long, five to seven cubits. Each of
its arms and legs is as much as three cubits long.
                                   TEXT 53
                  asthi-sandhi chutile carma kare nada-bade
                   taha dekhi' prana ka'ra nahi rahe dhade
                                 TRANSLATION     "Its joints are all separated beneath the skin, which is completely
slack. No one could see it and remain alive in his body.
                                   TEXT 54
                     mada-rupa dhari' rahe uttana-nayana
                    kabhu gon-gon kare, kabhu rahe acetana
                                 TRANSLATION     "That ghost has taken the form of a corpse, but he keeps his eyes
open. Sometimes he utters the sounds`gon-gon,' and sometimes he remainsunconscious.
                                   TEXT 55
                   saksat dekhechon,--more paila sei bhuta                     mui maile mora kaiche jive stri-put
                                 TRANSLATION     "I have seen that ghost directly, and he is haunting me. But if I
die, who will take care of my wife and children?
                                   TEXT 56
                     sei ta' bhutera katha kahana na yaya
                  ojha-thani yaichon,--yadi se bhuta chadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "The ghost is certainly very difficult to talk about, but I am
going to find an exorcist and ask him if he can release me from it.
                                   TEXT 57
                    eka ratrye buli' matsya mariye nirjane
                 bhuta-preta amara na lage `nrsimha'-smarane
                                 TRANSLATION     "I wander alone at night killing fish in solitary places, but
because I remember the hymn to Lord Nrsimha, ghosts do not touch me.
                                   TEXT 58
                     ei bhuta nrsimha-name capaye dvigune
                     tahara akara dekhite bhaya lage mane
                                 TRANSLATION     "This ghost, however, overcomes me with redoubled strength when I
chant the Nrsimha mantra. When I even see the form of this ghost, greatfear arises in my mind.
                                   TEXT 59
                      otha na yaiha, ami nisedhi tomare
                     tahan gele sei bhuta lagibe sabare"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Do not go near there. I forbid you. If you go, that ghost will
catch you all."
                                   TEXT 60                  eta suni' svarupa-gosani saba tattva jani'
                      jaliyare kichu kaya sumadhura vani
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, Svarupa Damodara could understand the full truth of
the matter. He spoke sweetly to the fisherman.
                                   TEXT 61
                     `ami--bada ojha jani bhuta chadaite'
                  mantra padi' sri-hasta dila tahara mathate
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am a famous exorcist," he sald,"and I know how to rid you of
this ghost." He then chanted some mantras and placed his hand on the topof the fisherman's head.
                                   TEXT 62
                   tina capada mari' kahe,--`bhuta palaila
                    bhaya na paiha'--bali' susthira karila
                                 TRANSLATION     He slapped the fisherman three times and said, "Now the ghost has
gone away. Do not be afrald." By saying this, he pacified the fisherman.
                                   TEXT 63
                    eke prema, are bhaya,--dviguna asthira
                    bhaya-amsa gela,--se haila kichu dhira
                                 TRANSLATION     The fisherman was affected by ecstatic love, but he was also
fearful. He had thus become doubly agitated. Now that his fear hadsubsided, however, he had become somewhat normal.
                                   TEXT 64
                svarupa kahe,--"yanre tumi kara `bhuta'-jnana
                  bhuta nahe--tenho krsna-caitanya bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara said to the fisherman,"My dear sir, the person
whom you are thinking a ghost is not actually a ghost but the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 65
                    premavese padila tenho samudrera jale
                       tanre tumi uthaila apanara jale
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because of ecstatic love, the Lord fell into the sea, and you have
caught Him in your net and rescued Him.
                                   TEXT 66
                  tanra sparse ha-ila tomara krsna-premodaya
                  bhuta-preta-jnane tomara haila maha-bhaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Simply touching Him has awakened your dormant love of Krsna, but
because you thought Him a ghost, you were very much afraid of Him.
                                   TEXT 67
                   ebe bhaya gela, tomara mana haila sthire
                   kahan tanre uthanacha, dekhaha ama-re,,
                                 TRANSLATION     "Now that your fear has gone and your mind is peaceful, please show
me where He is."
                                   TEXT 68
                 jaliya kahe,--"prabhure dekhyachon bara-bara
                     tenho nahena, ei ati-vikrta aka-ra"
                                 TRANSLATION     The fisherman replied, "I have seen the Lord many times, but this
is not He. This body is very deformed."
                                   TEXT 69
                  svarupa kahe,--"tanra haya premera vikara
                   asthi-sandhi chade, haya ati dirghakara"                                 TRANSLATION
     Svarupa Damodara said, "The Lord's body becomes transformed in His
love for God. Sometimes the joints of His bones separate, and His bodybecomes very elongated."
                                   TEXT 70
                       suni, sei jaliya anandita ha-ila
                    saba lana gela, mahaprabhure dekhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, the fisherman was very happy. He brought all the
devotees with him and showed them the body of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 71
                  bhumite padi' ache prabhu dirgha saba kaya
                     jale sveta-tanu, valu lagiyache gaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord was lying on the ground, His body elongated and bleached
white by the water. He was covered from head to foot with sad.
                                   TEXT 72
                    ati-dirgha sithila tanu-carma natkaya
                    dura patha uthana ghare anana na yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord's body was stretched, and His skin was slack and hanging
loose. To lift Him and take Him the long distance home would have beenimpossible.
                                   TEXT 73
                    ardra kaupina dura kari' suska parana
                       bahirvase soyaila valuka chadana
                                 TRANSLATION     The devotees removed His wet undergarment and replaced it with a
dry one. Then, laying the Lord on an outer cloth, they cleaned the sandfrom His body.
                                   TEXT 74                   sabe meli' ucca kari' karena sankirtane
                  ucca kari' krsna-nama kahena prabhura kane
                                 TRANSLATION     They all performed sankirtana, loudly chanting the holy name of
Krsna into the Lord's ear.
                                   TEXT 75
                   kata-ksane prabhura kane sabda parasila
                     hunkara kariya prabhu tabahi uthila
                                 TRANSLATION     After some time, the sound of the holy name entered the ear of the
Lord, who immediately got up, making a great noise.
                                   TEXT 76
                    uthitei asthi saba lagila nija-sthane
                    `ardha-bahye' iti-uti karena darasane
                                 TRANSLATION     As soon as He got up, His bones assumed their proper places. With
halfexternal consciousness, the Lord looked here and there.
                                   TEXT 77
                   tina-dasaya mahaprabhu rahena sarva-kala
              `an tar-dasa;, `bah ya-dasa', `a rdha-bah ya' ara
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord remains in one of three different states of consciousness
at all times: internal, external, and half-external.
                                   TEXT 78
                 antar-dasara kichu ghora, kichu bahya-jnana
                   sei dasa kahe bhakta `ardha-bahya'-nama
                                 TRANSLATION     When the Lord is deeply absorbed in internal consciousness but He
nevertheless exhibits some external consciousness, devotees call Hiscondition ardha-bahya, or half-external consciousness.                                   TEXT 79
                  `ardha-bahye' kahena prabhu pralapa-vacane
                   akase kahena prabhu, sunena bhakta-gane
                                 TRANSLATION     In this half-external consciousness, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu talked
like a madman. The devotees could distinctly hear Him speaking to thesky.
                                   TEXT 80
                    "kalindi dekhiya ami gelana vrndavana
                 dekhi,--jala-krida karena vrajendra-nandana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Seeing the River Yamuna," He said, "I went to Vrndavana. There I
saw the son of Nanda Maharaja performing His sporting pastimes in thewater.
                                   TEXT 81
                    radhikadi gopi-gana-sange ekatra meli'
                     yamunara jale maha-range karena keli
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Krsna was in the water of the Yamuna in the company of the
gopis, headed by Srimati Radharani. They were performing pastimes in agreat sporting manner.
                                   TEXT 82
                    tire rahi' dekhi ami sakhi-gana-sange
                    eka-sakhi sakhi-gane dekhaya sei range
                                 TRANSLATION     "I saw this pastime as I stood on the bank of the Yamuna in the
company of the gopis. One gopi was showing some other gopis the pastimesof Radha and Krsna in the water.
                                   TEXT 83
                patta-vastra, alankare, samarpiya sakhi-kare,
                       suksma-su kla-vas tra -paridhana                  krsna lana kanta-gana, kaila jalavagahana,                           jala-keli racila suthama
                                 TRANSLATION     "All the gopis entrusted their silken garments and ornaments to the
care of their friends and then put on fine white cloth. Taking Hisbeloved gopis with Him, Lord Krsna bathed and performed very nicepastimes in the water of the Yamuna.
                                   TEXT 84
                   sakhi he, dekha krsnera jala-keli-range
                 krsna matta kari-vara, cancala kara-puskara,                           gopi-gana karinira sange
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friends, just see Lord Krsna's sporting pastimes in the
water. Krsna's restless palms resemble lotus flowers. He is just like achief of mad elephants, and the gopis who accompany Him are like she-elephants.
                                   TEXT 85
                arambhila jala-keli, anyo'nye jala phelapheli,
                          hudahudi, varse jala-dhara                   sabe jaya-parajaya, nahi kichu niscaya,                           jala-yuddha badila apara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The sporting pastimes in the water began, and everyone started
splashing water back and forth. In the tumultuous showers of water, noone could be certain which party was winning and which was losing. Thissporting water fight increased unlimitedly.
                                   TEXT 86
               varse sthira tadid-gana, since syama nava-ghana,
                           ghana varse tadit-upare                   sakhi-ganera nayana, trsita cataka-gana,                          sei amrta sukhe pana kare
                                 TRANSLATION     "The gopis were like steady streaks of lightning, and Krsna
resembled a blackish cloud. The lightning began sprinkling water uponthe cloud, and the cloud upon the lightning. Like thirsty cataka birds,the eyes of the gopis joyously drank the nectarean water from the cloud.                                   TEXT 87
              prathame yuddha jalajali', tabe yuddha `karakari',
                        tara pache yuddha `mukhamukhi'                tabe yuddha `hrdahrdi', tabe haila `radaradi',                        tabe haila yuddha `nakhanakhi'
                                 TRANSLATION     "As the fight began, they splashed water on one another. Then they
fought hand to hand, then face to face, then chest to chest, teeth toteeth and finally nail to nail.
                                   TEXT 88
              sahasra-kare jala seke, sahasra netre gopi dekhe,
                          sahasra-pade nikata gamane
                 sahasra-mukha-cumbane, sahasra-vapu-sangame,
                         gopi-narma sune sahasra-kane
                                 TRANSLATION     "Thousands of hands splashed water, and the gopis saw Krsna with
thousands of eyes. With thousands of legs they came near Him and kissedHim with thousands of faces. Thousands of bodies embraced Him. The gopisheard His joking words with thousands of ears.
                                   TEXT 89
               krsna radha lana bale, gela kantha-daghna lale,
                       chadila tahan, yahan agadha pani                tenho krsna-kantha dhari;, bhase jalera upari,                          gajotkhate yaiche kamalini
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna forcibly swept Radharani away and took Her into water up to
Her neck. Then He released Her where the water was very deep. Shegrasped
Krsna's neck, however, and floated on the water like a lotus flower
plucked by the trunk of a elephant.
                                   TEXT 90
                  yata gopa-sundari, krsna tata rupa dhari',
                         sabara vastra karila harane                  yamuna-jala nirmala, anga kare jhalamala,                          sukhe krsna kare darasane                                 TRANSLATION
     "Krsna expanded Himself into as many forms as there were gopis and
then took away all the garments that covered them. The water of theRiver Yamuna was crystal clear, and Krsna saw the glittering bodies ofthe gopis in great happiness.
                                   TEXT 91
                 padmini-lata--sakhi-caya, kaila karo sahaya,
                        taranga-haste patra samarpila                  keha mukta-kesa-pasa, age kaila adhovasa,                          haste keha kanculi dharila
                                 TRANSLATION     "The lotus stems were friends of the gopis and therefore helped
them by offering them lotus leaves. The lotuses pushed their large,round leaves over the surface of the water with their hands, the wavesof the Yamuna, to cover the gopis' bodies. Some gopis undid their hairand kept it in front of them as dresses to cover the lower portions oftheir bodies and used their hands as bodices to cover their breasts.
                                   TEXT 92
               krsnera kalaha radha-sane, gopi-gana sei-ksane,
                          hemabja-vane gela lukaite               akantha-vapu jale paise, mukha-matra jale bhase,                          padme-mukhe na pari cinite
                                 TRANSLATION     "Then Krsna quarreled with Radharani, and all the gopis hid
themselves in a cluster of white lotus flowers. They submerged theirbodies up to their necks in the water. Only their faces floated abovethe surface, and the faces were indistinguishable from the lotuses.
                                   TEXT 93
                 etha krsna radha-sane, kaila ye achila mane,
                           gopi-gana anvesite gela                tabe radha suksma-mati, janiya sakhira sthiti,                          sakhi-madhye asiya milila
                                 TRANSLATION     "In the absence of the other gopis, Lord Krsna behaved with Srimati
Radharani as freely as He desired. When the gopis began searching forKrsna, Srimati Radharani, being of very fine intelligence and thusknowing the situation of Her friends, immediately mingled in theirmidst.                                   TEXT 94
               yata hemabja jale bhase, tata nilabla tara pase,
                           asi' asi' karaye milana                 nilabje hemabje theke, yuddha haya pratyeke,                        kautuke dekhe tire sakhi-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Many white lotus flowers were floating in the water, and as many
bluish lotus flowers came nearby. As they came close together, the whiteand blue lotuses collided and began fighting with one another. The gopison the bank of the Yamuna watched with great amusement.
                                   TEXT 95
                   cakravaka-mandala, prthak prthak yugala,
                           jala haite karila udgama                 uthila padma-mandala, prthak prthak yugala,                          cakravake kaila acchadana
                                 TRANSLATION     "When the raised breasts of the gopis, which resembled the
globelike bodies of cakravaka birds, emerged from the water in separatecouples, the bluish lotuses of Krsna's hands rose to cover them.
                                   TEXT 96
                uthila bahu raktotpala, prthak prthak yugala,
                         padma-ganera kaila nivarana               `padma' cahe luti' nite, `utpala' cahe rakhite',                        `cakravaka' lagi' dunhara rana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The hands of the gopis, which resembled red lotus flowers, arose
from the water in pairs to obstruct the bluish flowers. The blue lotusestried to plunder the white cakravaka birds, and the red lotuses tried toprotect them. Thus there was a fight between the two.
                                   TEXT 97
                  padmotpala--acetana, cakra vaka--sacetana,
                           cakravake padma asvadaya               ihan dunhara ulta sthiti, dharma haila vipariti,                        krsnera rajye aiche nyaya haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Blue and red lotus flowers are unconscious objects, whereas
cakravakas are conscious and alive. Nevertheless, in ecstatic love, theblue lotuses began to taste the cakravakas. This is a reversal of theirnatural behavior, but in Lord Krsna's kingdom such reversals are aprinciple of His pastimes.
                                   PURPORT     Generally the cakravaka bird tastes the lotus flower, but in
Krsna's pastimes the lotus, which is usually lifeless, tastes thecakravaka bird.
                                   TEXT 98                 mitrera mitra saha-vasi cakravake lute asi',
                        krsnera rajye aiche vyavahara            aparicita satrura mitra, rakhe utpala,--e bada citra,                          ei bada `virodha-alankara'
                                 TRANSLATION     "The blue lotuses are friends of the sun-god, and though they all
live together, the blue lotuses plunder the cakravakas. The red lotuses,however, blossom at night and are therefore strangers or enemies to thecakravakas. Yet
in Krsna's pastimes the red lotuses, which are the hands of the gopis,
protect their cakravaka breasts. This is a metaphor of contradiction."
                                   PURPORT     Because the blue lotus flower blossoms with the rising of the sun,
the sun is the friend of the blue lotus. The cakravaka birds also appearwhen the sun rises, and therefore the cakravakas and blue lotuses meet.Although the blue lotus is a friend of the sun, in Krsna's pastimes itnevertheless plunders their mutual friend the cakravaka. Normally,cakravakas move about whereas lotuses stand still, but herein Krsna'shands, which are compared to blue lotuses, attack the breasts of thegopis, which are compared to cakravakas. This is called a reverseanalogy. At night the red lotus blossoms, whereas in sunlight it closes.Therefore the red lotus is an enemy to the sun and is unknown to thesun's friend the cakravaka. The gopis' breasts, however, are compared tocakravakas and their hands to red lotuses protecting them. This is awonderful instance of reverse analogy.
                                   TEXT 99               atisayokti, virodhabhasa, dui alankara prakasa,
                         kari' krsna prakata dekhaila                   yaha kari' asvadana, anandita mora mana,                          netra-karna- yugma judaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued, "In His pastimes, Krsna
displayed the two ornaments of hyperbole and reverse analogy. Tastingthem brought gladness to My mind and fully satisfied My ears and eyes.
                                   TEXT 100
                aiche vicitra krida kari;, tire aila sri-hari,
                          sange lana saba kanta-gana                   gandha-taila-mardana, amalaki-udvartana,                          seva kare tire sakhi-gana
                                 TRANSLATION     "After performing such wonderful pastimes, Lord Sri Krsna got up on
the shore of the Yamuna River, taking with Him all His beloved gopis.Then the gopis on the riverbank rendered service by massaging Krsna andthe other gopis with scented oil and smearing paste of amalaki fruit ontheir bodies.
                                   TEXT 101
                punarapi kaila snana, suska-vastra paridhana,
                         ratna-mandire kaila agamana                 vrnda-krta sambhara, gandha-puspa-alankara,                           vanya-vesa karila racana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Then they all bathed again, and after putting on dry clothing,
they went to a small jeweled house, where the gopi Vrnda arranged todress them in forest clothing by decorating them with fragrant flowers,green leaves and all kinds of other ornaments.
                                   TEXT 102
                  vrndavane taru-lata, adbhuta tahara katha,
                         bara-masa dhare phula-phala                  vrndavane devi-gana, kunja-dasi yata jana,                           phala padi' aniya sakala
                                 TRANSLATION     "In Vrndavana, the trees and creepers are wonderful because
throughout the entire year they produce all kinds of fruits and flowers.The gopis and maidservants in the bowers of Vrndavana pick these fruitsand flowers and bring them before Radha and Krsna.
                                   TEXT 103                uttama samskara kari;, bada bada thali bhari',
                         ratna-mandire pindara upare                bhaksanera krama kari', dhariyache sari sari,                           age asana vasibara tare
                                 TRANSLATION     "The gopis peeled all the fruits and placed them together on large
plates on a platform in the jeweled cottage. They arranged the fruit inorderly rows for eating, and in front of it they made a place to sit.
                                   TEXT 104
                 eka narikela nana-lati, eka amra nana bhati,
                         kala, koli--vividha-prakara              panasa, kharjura, kamala, naranga, jama, santara,                        draksa, badama, meoya yata ara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Among the fruits were many varieties of coconut and mango,
bananas, berries, jackfruits, dates, tangerines, oranges, blackberries,santaras, grapes, almonds and all kinds of dried fruit.
                                   TEXT 105
            kharamuja, ksirika, tala, kesura, pani-phala, mrnala,
                         bilva, p ilu, dadimbadi yata                kona dese kara khyati, vrndavane saba-prapti,                        sahasra-jati, lekha yaya kata?
                                 TRANSLATION     "There were cantaloupes, ksirikas, palmfruits, kesuras,
waterfruits, lotus fruits, bel, pilu, pomegranate and many others. Someof them are variously known in different places, but in Vrndavana theyare always available in so many thousands of varieties that no one canfully describe them.
                                   TEXT 106
              gangajala, amrtakeli, piyusagranthi, karpurakeli,
                         sa rapuri, amrti, padmacini              khanda-ksirisara-vrksa, ghare kari' nana bhaksya,                          radha yaha krsna lagi' ani
                                 TRANSLATION     "At home Srimati Radharani had made various types of sweetmeats
from milk and sugar, such as gangajala, amrtakeli, piyusagranthi,karpurakeli, sarapuri, amrti, padmacini and khanda-ksirisara-vrksa. She
had then brought them all for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 107
              bhaksyera paripati dekhi;, krsna haila maha-sukhi,
                          vasi' kaila vanya bhojana                 sange lana sakhi-gana, radha kaila bhojana,                          dunhe kaila mandire sayana
                                 TRANSLATION     "When Krsna saw the very nice arrangement of food, He happily sat
down and had a forest picnic. Then, after Srimati Radharani and Her gopifriends partook of the remnants, Radha and Krsna lay down together inthe jeweled house.
                                   TEXT 108
                    keha kare vijana, keha pada-samvahana,
                         keha karaya tambula bhaksana               radha-krsna nidra gela, sakhi-gana sayana kaila,                        dekhi' amara sukhi haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Some of the gopis fanned Radha and Krsna, others massaged Their
feet, and some fed Them betel leaves to chew. When Radha and Krsna fellasleep, all the other gopis also lay down. When I saw this, My mind wasvery happy.
                                   TEXT 109
                  hena-kale more dhari, maha-kolahala kari;,
                           tumi-saba ihan lana aila               kanha yamuna, vrndavana, kanha krsna, gopi-gana,                         sei sukha bhanga karaila.i"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Suddenly, all of you created a great tumult and picked Me up and
brought Me back here. Where now is the River Yamuna? Where is Vrndavana?Where are Krsna and the gopis? You have broken My happy dream!"
                                   TEXT 110
                  eteka kahite prabhura kevala `bahya' haila
                   svarupa-gosanire dekhi' tanhare puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     Speaking in this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fully returned to
external consciousness. Seeing Svarupa Damodara Gosvami, the Lordquestioned him.
                                   TEXT 111
                     `ihan kene tomara amare lana aila?'
                      svarupa-gosani tabe kahite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     "Why have you brought Me here?" He asked. Then Svarupa Damodara
answered Him.
                                   TEXT 112
                     "yamunara bhrame tumi samudre padila
                    samudrera tarange asi, eta dura ai1a.i
                                 TRANSLATION     "You mistook the sea for the Yamuna River," he said, "and You
jumped into it. You have been carried this far by the waves of the sea.
                                   TEXT 113
                      ei jaliya jale kari' toma uthaila
                     tomara parase ei preme matta ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     "This fisherman caught You in his net and rescued You from the
water. Because of Your touch, he is now mad with ecstatic love forKrsna.
                                   TEXT 114
                    saba ratri sabe bedai tomare anvesiya
                       jaliyara mukhe suni' painu asiya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Throughout the night, we all walked about in search of You. After
hearing from this fisherman, we came here and found You.
                                   TEXT 115
                   tumi murccha-chale vrndavane dekha krida                   tomara murccha dekhi' sabe mane pai pida
                                 TRANSLATION     "While apparently unconscious, You witnessed the pastimes in
Vrndavana, but when we saw You unconscious, we suffered great agony inour minds.
                                   TEXT 116
                krsna-nama la-ite tomara `ardha-bahya' ha-ila
                    tate ye pralapa kaila, taha ye sunila"
                                 TRANSLATION     "When we chanted the holy name of Krsna, however, You came to
semiconsciousness, and we have all been hearing You speak like amadman."
                                   TEXT 117
                prabhu kahe,--"svapne dekhi' gelana vrndavane
                   dekhi,--krsna rasa karena gopigana-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu sald, "In My dream I went to Vrndavana,
where I saw Lord Krsna perform the rasa dance with all the gopis.
                                   TEXT 118
                     jala-krida kari' kaila vanya-bhojane
                  dekhi' ami pralapa kailun--hena laya mane"
                                 TRANSLATION     "After sporting in the water, Krsna enjoyed a picnic. I can
understand that affer seeing this, I must certainly have talked like amadman."
                                   TEXT 119
                    tabe svarupa-gosani tanre snana karana
                    prabhure lana ghara aila anandita hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thereafter, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami had Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu bathe in the sea, and then he very happily brought Him backhome.                                   TEXT 120
                    ei ta' kahilun prabhura samudra-patana
                      iha yei sune, paya caitanya-carana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus I have described the incident of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's falling into the ocean. Anyone who listens to this pastimewill certainly attain shelter at the lotus feet of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 121
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Eighteenth Chapter, describing Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu's falling into the water of the sea.
                               Chapter Nineteen
          The Inconceivable Behavior of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu     The following summary of Chapter Nineteen is given by Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya.     Every year, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked Jagadananda Pandita tovisit His mother in Navadvipa with gifts of cloth and prasada. After onesuch visit, Jagadananda Pandita returned to Puri with a sonnet thatAdvaita Acarya had written. When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu read it, Hisecstasy was so great that all the devotees feared that the Lord wouldvery soon pass away. The Lord's condition was so serious that at nightHe would bruise and bloody His face by rubbing it against the walls. Tostop this, Svarupa Damodara asked Sankara pandita to stay at night inthe same room with the Lord.     This chapter further describes how Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuentered the Jagannatha-vallabha garden during the full-moon night ofVaisakha (April-May) and experienced various transcendental ecstasies.Overwhelmed with ecstatic love at suddenly seeing Lord Sri Krsna beneathan asoka tree, He exhibited various symptoms of spiritual madness.
                                    TEXT 1                          vande tam krsna-caitanyam
                            matr-bhak ta-siromanim                           pralapya mukha-sangharsi                            madhudyane lalasa yah
                                 TRANSLATION     Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the most exalted of all devotees of
mothers, spoke like a madman and rubbed His face against the walls.Overwhelmed by emotions of ecstatic love, He would sometimes enter theJagannatha-vallabha garden to perform His pastimes. I offer myrespectful obeisances unto Him.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya sri-caitanya jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord
Nityananda! All glories to Advaita Acarya! And aIl glories to all thedevotees of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu!
                                    TEXT 3
                      ei-mate mahaprabhu krsna-premavese
                       unmada-pralapa kare ratri-divase
                                 TRANSLATION     In the ecstasy of love of Krsna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus
behaved like a madman, talking insanely all day and night.
                                    TEXT 4
                  prabhura atyanta priya pandita-jagadananda
                     yahara caritre prabhu payena ananda
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita was a very dear devotee of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. The Lord derived great pleasure from his activities.
                                    TEXT 5
                 prati-vatsara prabhu tanre pathana nadiyate
                   viccheda-duhkhita jani' janani asvasite                                 TRANSLATION
     Knowing His mother to be greatly afflicted by separation, the Lord
would send Jagadananda Pandita to Navadvipa every year to console her.
                                    TEXT 6
                   "nadiya calaha, matare kahiha namaskara
                    amara name pada-padma dhariha tanhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told Jagadananda Pandita,"Go to Nadia and
offer My obeisances to My mother. Touch her lotus feet in My name.
                                    TEXT 7
                     kahiha tanhare--`tumi karaha smarana
                     nitya asi' ami tomara vandiye carana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Tell her for Me, `Please remember that I come here every day and
offer My respects to your lotus feet.
                                    TEXT 8
                     ye-dine tomara iccha karaite bhojana
                     se-dine asi' avasya kariye bhaksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "`Any day you desire to feed Me, I certainly come and accept what
you offer.
                                    TEXT 9
                   tomara seva chadi' ami karilun sannyasa
                     `baula' hana ami kailun dharma-nasa
                                 TRANSLATION     " `I have given up service to you and have accepted the vow of
sannyasa. I have thus become mad and have destroyed the principles ofreligion.
                                   TEXT 10
                       ei aparadha tumi na la-iha amara                      tomara adhina ami--putra se tomara
                                 TRANSLATION     " `Mother, please do not take this as an offense, for I, your son,
am completely dependent upon you.
                                   TEXT 11
                       nilacale achi ami tomara ajnate
                    yavat jiba, tavat ami nariba chadite'
                                 TRANSLATION     "`I am staying here at Nilacala, Jagannatha Puri, according to your
order. As long as I live, I shall not leave this place."'
                                   TEXT 12
                     gopa-lilaya paila yei prasada-vasane
                      matare pathana taha purira vacane
                                 TRANSLATION     Following the order of Paramananda Puri, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
sent His mother the prasada clothing left by Lord Jagannatha after Hispastimes as a cowherd boy.
                                   TEXT 13
                   jagannathera uttama prasada aniya yatane
                    matare prthak pathana, ara bhakta-gane
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu very carefully brought first-class prasada
from Lord Jagannatha and sent it in separate packages to His mother andthe devotees at Nadia.
                                   TEXT 14
                   matr-bhakta-ganera prabhu hana siromani
                      sannyasa kariya sada sevena janani
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the topmost gem of all devotees of
mothers. He rendered service to His mother even after He had acceptedthe vow of sannyasa.                                   TEXT 15
                    jagadananda nadiya giya matare milila
                    prabhura yata nivedana, sakala kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Jagadananda Pandita thus returned to Nadia, and when he met
Sacimata, he conveyed to her all the Lord's salutations.
                                   TEXT 16
                   acaryadi bhakta-gane milila prasada diya
                     mata-thani ajna la-ila maseka rahiya
                                 TRANSLATION     He then met all the other devotees, headed by Advalta Acarya, and
gave them the prasada of Jagannatha. After staying for one month, hetook permission from mother Saci to leave.
                                   TEXT 17
                       acaryera thani giya ajna magila
                    acarya-gosani prabhure sandesa kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     When he went to Advaita Acarya and also asked His permission to
return, Advaita Prabhu gave him a message to deliver to Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 18
                   taraja-praheli acarya kahena thare-thore
                  prabhu matra bujhena, keha bujhite na pare
                                 TRANSLATION     Advaita Acarya had written a sonnet in equivocal language with an
import that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu could understand but others couldnot.
                                   TEXT 19
                    "prabhure kahiha amara koti namaskara
                        ei nivedana tanra carane amara
                                 TRANSLATION     In His sonnet, Advaita Prabhu first offered His obeisances hundreds
and thousands of times unto the lotus feet of Lord Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. He then submitted the following statement at His lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 20
                      baulake kahiha,--loka ha-ila baula
                    baulake kahiha,--hate na vikaya caula
                                 TRANSLATION     "Please inform Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is acting like a
madman, that everyone here has become mad like Him. Inform Him also thatin the marketplace, rice is no longer in demand.
                                   TEXT 21
                      baulake kahiha,--kaye nahika aula
                    baulake kahiha,--iha kahiyache baula"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Those now mad in ecstatic love are no longer interested in the
material world. Tell Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu that Advaita Prabhu, whohas also become a madman in ecstatic love, has spoken these words."
                                   TEXT 22
                     eta suni' jagadananda hasite lagila
                      nilacale asi' tabe prabhure kahila
                                 TRANSLATION     When he heard Advaita Acarya's statement, Jagadananda Pandita began
to laugh, and when he returned to Jagannatha Puri, Nilacala, he informedCaitanya Mahaprabhu of everything.
                                   TEXT 23
                     taraja suni' mahaprabhu isat hasila
                    `tanra yei ajna'--bali' mauna dharila
                                 TRANSLATION     After hearing the equivocal sonnet by Advaita Acarya, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu quietly smiled. "That is His order," He said. Then He fellsilent.                                   TEXT 24
                   janiyao svarupa gosani prabhure puchila
                      `ei tarajara artha bujhite narila'
                                 TRANSLATION     Although he knew the secret, SvarOpa Damodara Gosvami inquired from
the Lord, "What is the meaning of this sonnet? I could not understandit."
                                   TEXT 25
                 prabhu kahena,--`acarya haya pujaka prabala
                     agama-sastrera vidhi-vidhane kusala
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "Advaita Acarya is a great
worshiper of the Lord and is very expert in the regulative principlesenjoined in the Vedic literatures.
                                   TEXT 26
                     upasana lagi' devera karena avahana
                    puja lagi' kata kala karena nirodhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Advaita Acarya invites the Lord to come and be worshiped, and to
perform the worship He keeps the Deity for some time.
                                   TEXT 27
                 puja-nirvahana haile pache karena visarjana
                   tarajara na jani artha, kiba tanra mana
                                 TRANSLATION     "After the worship is completed, He sends the Deity somewhere else.
I do not know the meaning of this sonnet, nor do I know what is inAdvaita Prabhu's mind.
                                   TEXT 28
                  maha- yogesvara acarya--tarajate samartha
                      amiha bujhite nari tarajara artha'
                                 TRANSLATION     "Advaita Acarya is a great mystic. No one can understand Him. He is
expert in writing sonnets that even I Myself cannot understand."
                                   TEXT 29
                    suniya vismita ha-ila saba bhakta-gana
                      svarupa-gosani kichu ha-ila vimana
                                 TRANSLATION     Hearing this, all the devotees were astonished, especially Svarupa
Damodara, who became somewhat morose.
                                   TEXT 30
                   sei dina haite prabhura ara dasa ha-ila
                     krsnera viccheda-dasa dviguna badila
                                 TRANSLATION     From that day on, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's emotional state changed
markedly; His feelings of separation from Krsna doubled in intensity.
                                   TEXT 31
                     unmada-pralapa-cesta kare ratri-dine
                     radha-bhavavese viraha bade anuksane
                                 TRANSLATION     As His feelings of separation in the ecstasy of Srimati Radharani
increased at every moment, the Lord's activities, both day and night,were now wild, insane performances.
                                   TEXT 32
                    acambite sphure krsnera mathura-gamana
                      udghurna-dasa haila unmada-laksana
                                 TRANSLATION     Suddenly there awoke within Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu the scene of
Lord Krsna's departure to Mathura, and He began exhibiting the symptomof ecstatic madness known as udghurna.
                                   TEXT 33
                   ramanandera gala dhari' karena pralapana
                    svarupe puchena mani' nija-sakhi-gana                                 TRANSLATION
     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke like a madman, holding Ramanada Raya
by the neck, and He questioned Svarupa Damodara, thinking him to be Hisgopi friend.
                                   TEXT 34
                     purve yena visakhare radhika puchila
                    sei sloka padi' pralapa karite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Just as Srimati Radharani inquired from Her personal friend
Visakha, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, reading that very verse, beganspeaking like a madman.
                                   TEXT 35
             kva nanda-kula-candramah kva sikhi-candrakalankrtih
             kva mandra-murali-ravah kva nu surendra-nila-dyutih              kva rasa-rasa-tandavi kva sakhi jiva-raksausadhir             nidhir mama suhrttamah kva bata hanta ha dhig-vidhim
                                 TRANSLATION     " `My dear friend, where is Krsna, who is like the moon rising from
the ocean of Maharaja Nanda's dynasty? Where is Krsna, His headdecorated with a peacock feather? Where is He? Where is Krsna, whoseflute produces such a deep sound? Oh, where is Krsna, whose bodilyluster is like the luster of the blue indranila jewel? Where is Krsna,who is so expert in rasa dancing? Oh, where is He who can save My life?Kindly tell Me where to find Krsna, the treasure of My life and best ofMy friends. Feeling separation from Him, I hereby condemn Providence,the shaper of My destiny.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is found in the Lalita-madhava (3.25) of Srila Rupa
Gosvami.
                                   TEXT 36            "vrajendra-kula--dugdha-sindhu, krsna tahe purna indu,
                           janmi' kaila jagat ujora                 kanty-amrta yeba piye, nirantara piya jiye,                          vraja-janera nayana-cakora
                                 TRANSLATION     "The family of Maharaja Nanda is just like an ocean of milk,
wherein Lord Krsna has arisen like the full moon to illuminate theentire universe. The eyes of the residents of Vraja are like cakorabirds that continuously drink the nectar of His bodily luster and thuslive peacefully.
                                   TEXT 37
                    sakhi he, kotha krsna, karaha darasana
                 ksaneke yahara mukha, na dekhile phate buka,                        sighra dekhaha, na rahe jivana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, where is Krsna? Kindly let Me see Him. My heart
breaks at not seeing His face even for a moment. Kindly show Him to Meimmediately; otherwise I cannot live.
                                   TEXT 38
                  ei vrajera ramani, kamarka-tapta-kumudini,
                           nija-karamrta diya dana                 praphullita kare yei, kahan mora candra sei,                       dekhaha, sakhi, rakha mora prana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The women of Vrndavana are just like lilies growing hot in the sun
of lusty desires. But moonlike Krsna makes them all jubilant bybestowing upon them the nectar of His hands. O My dear friend, where isMy moon now? Save My life by showing Him to Me!
                                   TEXT 39
                 kahan se cudara thama, sikhi-pinchera udana,
                         nava-meghe yena indra-dhanu               pitambara--tadid-dyuti, mukta-mala--baka-panti,                          navambuda jini' syama-tanu
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, where is that beautiful helmet with a peacock
feather upon it like a rainbow upon a new cloud? Where are those yellowgarments, shining like lightning? And where is that necklace of pearlsthat resemble flocks of ducks flying in the sky? The blackish body ofKrsna triumphs over the new blackish rain cloud.
                                   TEXT 40
              eka-bara yara nayane lage, sada tara hrdaye jage,                          krsna-tanu--yena amra-atha
                  nari-mane paise haya, yatne nahi bahiraya,                        tanu nahe,--seya-kulera kanta
                                 TRANSLATION     "If a person's eyes even once capture that beautiful body of
Krsna's, it remains always prominent within his heart. Krsna's bodyresembles the sap of the mango tree, for when it enters the minds ofwomen, it will not come out, despite great endeavor. Thus Krsna'sextraordinary body is like a thorn of the seya berry tree.
                                   TEXT 41
                  jiniya tamala-dyuti, indranila-sama kanti,
                           se kantite jagat mataya            srngara-rasa-sara chani', tate candra-jyotsna sa-ni',                           jani vidhi niramila taya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna's bodily luster shines like the indranila gem and surpasses
the luster of the tamala tree. The luster of His body drives the entireworld mad because Providence has made it transparent by refining theessence of the mellow of conjugal love and mixing it with moonshine.
                                   TEXT 42
               kahan se murali-dhvani, navabhra-garjita jini',
                         jagat akarse sravane yahara                 uthi' dhaya vraja-jana, trsita cataka-gana,                         asi' piye kanty-amrta-dhara
                                 TRANSLATION     "The deep vibration of Krsna's flute surpasses the thundering of
new clouds and attracts the aural reception of the entire world. Thusthe inhabitants of Vrndavana rise and pursue that sound, drinking theshowering nectar of Krsna's bodily luster like thirsty cataka birds.
                                   TEXT 43
                 mora sei kala-nidhi, prana-raksa-mahausadhi,
                         sakhi, mora tenho suhrttama                    deha jiye tanha vine, dhik ei jivane,                          vidhi kare eta vidambana!"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna is the reservoir of art and culture, and He is the panacea
that saves My life. O My dear friend, since I live without Him, who isthe best among My friends, I condemn the duration of My life. I think
that Providence has cheated Me in many ways.
                                   TEXT 44
                 ,ye-jana jite nahi caya, ta-re kene jiyaya',
                         vidhi-prati uthe krodha-soka                 vidhire kare bhartsana, krsne dena olahana,                         padi' bhagavatera eka sloka
                                 TRANSLATION     "Why does Providence continue the life of one who does not wish to
liver" This thought aroused anger and lamentation. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu then
read a verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam that chastises Providence and makes
an accusation against Krsna.
                                   TEXT 45
                       aho vidhatas tava na kvacid daya
                      samyojya maitrya pranayena dehinah                    tams cakrtarthan viyunanksy aparthakam                     vicestitam te'rbhaka-cestitam yatha
                                 TRANSLATION     " `O Providence, you have no mercy! You bring embodied souls
together through friendship and affection, but before their desires arefulfilled, you separate them. Your activities are like the foolishpranks of children.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse, quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.39.19), was chanted
by the damsels of Vraja when Krsna left Vrndavana for Mathura withAkrura and Balarama. The gopis lamented that providence had made itpossible for them to meet Krsna and Balarama in affection and love andhad then separated them.
                                   TEXT 46               "na janis prema-marma, vyartha karis parisrama,
                          tora cesta--balaka-samana                 `tora yadi lag paiye, tabe tore siksa diye,                         emana yena na karis vidhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Providence, you do not know the purport of loving affairs, and
therefore you baffle all our endeavors. This is very childish of you. Ifwe could catch you, we would give you such a lesson that you would never
again make such arrangements.
                                   TEXT 47
                        are vidhi, tui bada-i nithura
               anyo'nya durlabha jana, preme karana sammilana,                        `akrtarthan' kene karis dura?
                                 TRANSLATION     "Oh, cruel Providence! You are very unkind, for you bring together
in love people who are rarely in touch with each other. Then, after youhave made them meet but before they are fulfilled, you again spread themfar apart.
                                   TEXT 48
                    are vidhi akaruna, dekhana krsnanana,
                           netra-mana lobhaila mora                 ksaneke karite pana, kadi' nila anya sthana                          papa kaili `datta-apahara'
                                 TRANSLATION     "0 Providence, you are so unkind! You reveal the beautiful face of
Krsna and make the mind and eyes greedy, but after they have drunk thatnectar for only a moment, you whisk Krsna away to another place. This isa great sin because you thus take away what you have given as charity.
                                   TEXT 49
               `akrura kare tomara dosa, amaya kene kara rosa',
                          iha yadi kaha `duraca-ra,               tui akrura-murti dhari', krsna nili curi kari',                         anyera nahe aiche vyavahara
                                 TRANSLATION     "O misbehaved Providence! If you reply to us, `Akrura is actually
at fault; why are you angry with me?' then I say to you, `Providence,you have taken the form of Akrura and have stolen Krsna away. No oneelse would behave like this.'
                                   TEXT 50
                   apanara karma-dosa, tore kiba kari rosa,
                          toya-moya sambandha vidura                ye amara prana-natha, ekatra rahi yanra satha,                          sei krsna ha-ila nithura!                                 TRANSLATION
     "But this is the fault of My own destiny. Why should I needlessly
accuse you? There is no intimate relationship between you and Me. Krsna,however, is My life and soul. It is We who live together, and it is Hewho has become so cruel.
                                   TEXT 51
                saba tyaji' bhaji yanre, sei apana-hate mare,
                        nari-vadhe krsnera nahi bhaya                  tanra lagi' ami mari, ulati' na cahe hari,                         ksana-matre bhangila pranaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "He for whom I have left everything is personally killing Me with
His own hands. Krsna has no fear of killing women. Indeed, I am dyingfor Him, but He doesn't even turn back to look at Me. Within a moment,He has broken off our loving affairs.
                                   TEXT 52
                  krsne kene kari rosa, apana durdaiva-dosa,
                          pakila mora ei papa-phala                ye krsna--mora premadhina, tare kaila udasina,                           ei mora abhagya prabala"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Yet why should I be angry with Krsna? It is the fault of My own
misfortune. The fruit of my sinful activities has ripened, and thereforeKrsna, who has always been dependent on My love, is now indifferent.This means that My misfortune is very strong."
                                   TEXT 53
                  ei-mata gaura-raya, visade kare haya haya,
                        `ha ha krsna, tumi gela kati?'                   gopi-bhava hrdaye, tara vakye vilapaye,                         `govinda damodara madhaveti'
                                 TRANSLATION     In this way, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lamented in the mood of
separation, "Alas, alas! O Krsna, where have You gone?" Feeling in Hisheart the ecstatic emotions of the gopis, Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhuagonized in their words, saying, "O Govinda! O Damodara! O Madhava!"                                   TEXT 54
                  tabe svarupa-rama-raya, kari' nana upaya,
                          mahaprabhura kare asvasana                 gayena sangama-gita, prabhura phiraila cita,                       prabhura kichu sthira haila mana
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara ad Ramananda Raya then devised various means to
pacify the Lord. They sang songs of meeting that transformed His heartand made His mind peaceful.
                                   TEXT 55
                      ei-mata vilapite ardha-ratri gela
                  gambhirate svarupa-gosani prabhure soyaila
                                 TRANSLATION     As Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu lamented in this way, half the night
passed. Then Svarupa Damodara made the Lord lie down in the room knownas the Gambhira.
                                   TEXT 56
                     prabhure soyana ramananda gela ghare
                   svarupa, govinda suila gambhirara dvare
                                 TRANSLATION     After the Lord was made to lie down, Ramananda Raya returned home,
and Svarupa Damodara and Govinda lay down at the door of the Gambhira.
                                   TEXT 57
                    premavese mahaprabhura gara-gara mana
                    nama-sankirtana kari' karena jagarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed awake all night, chanting the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra, His mind overwhelmed by spiritual ecstasy.
                                   TEXT 58
                     virahe vyakula prabhu udvege uthila
                   gambhirara bhittye mukha ghasite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     Feeling separation from Krsna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was so
distraught that in great anxiety He stood up and began rubbing His faceagainst the walls of the Gambhira.
                                   TEXT 59
                    mukhe, gande, nake ksata ha-ila apara
                 bhavavese na janena prabhu, pade rakta-dhara
                                 TRANSLATION     Blood oozed from the many injuries on His mouth, nose and cheeks,
but due to His ecstatic emotions, the Lord did not know it.
                                   TEXT 60
                  sarva-ratri karena bhave mukha sangharsana
                gon-gon-sabda karena,--svarupa sunila takhana
                                 TRANSLATION     In ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu rubbed His face against the
walls all night long, making a peculiar sound, "gon-gon," which SvarupaDamodara could hear through the door.
                                   TEXT 61
                dipa jvali' ghare gela, dekhi' prabhura mukha
                  svarupa, govinda dunhara haila bada duhkha
                                 TRANSLATION     Lighting a lamp, Svarupa Damodara and Govinda entered the room.
When they saw the Lord's face, both of them were full of sorrow.
                                   TEXT 62
                    prabhure sayyate ani' susthira karaila
                   `kanhe kaila ei tumi?'--svarupa puchila
                                 TRANSLATION     They brought the Lord to His bed, calmed Him and then asked, "Why
have You done this to Yourself?"
                                   TEXT 63
                 prabhu kahena,--"udvege ghare na pari rahite                    dvara cahi' buli' sighra bahira ha-ite
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, "I was in such anxiety that I
could not stay in the room. I wanted to go out, and therefore I wanderedabout the room, looking for the door.
                                   TEXT 64
                    dvara nahi' pana mukha lage cari-bhite
                    ksata haya, rakta pade, na pai yaite"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Unable to find the door, I kept hitting the four walls with My
face. My face was injured, and it bled, but I still could not get out."
                                   TEXT 65
                   unmada-dasaya prabhura sthira nahe mana
                   yei kare, yei bole saba,--unmada-laksana
                                 TRANSLATION     In this state of madness, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's mind was
unsteady. Whatever He sald or did was all symptomatic of madness.
                                   TEXT 66
                     svarupa-gosani tabe cinta paila mane
                    bhakta-gana lana vicara kaila ara dine
                                 TRANSLATION     Svarupa Damodara was very anxious, but then he had an idea. The
following day, he and the other devotees considered it together.
                                   TEXT 67
                   saba bhakta meli' tabe prabhure sadhila
                    sankara-pandite prabhura sange soyaila
                                 TRANSLATION     After consulting with one another, they entreated Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu to allow Sankara Pandita to lie down in the same room withHim.                                   TEXT 68
                    prabhu-pada-tale sankara karena sayana
                   prabhu tanra upara karena pada-prasarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus Sankara Pandita lay at the feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
and the Lord placed His legs upon Sankara's body.
                                   TEXT 69
                 `prabhu-padopadhana' bali' tanra nama ha-ila
                      purve vidure yena sri-suka varnila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sankara became celebrated by the name "the pillow of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu." He was like Vidura, as Sukadeva Gosvami previouslydescribed him.
                                   TEXT 70
                         iti bruvanam viduram vinitam
                        sahasra-sirsnas caranopadhanam                       prahrsta-roma bhagavat-kathayam                         praniyamano munir abhyacasta                                 TRANSLATION
     "When submissive Vidura, the resting place of the legs of Lord
Krsna, had thus spoken to Maitreya, Maitreya began speaking, his hairstanding on end due to the transcendental pleasure of discussing topicsconcerning Lord Krsna."
                                   PURPORT     This is a quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.13.5).                                   TEXT 71                    sankara karena prabhura pada-samvahana
                     ghumana padena, taiche karena sayana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sankara massaged the legs of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, but while
massaging he would fall asleep and thus lie down.
                                   TEXT 72
                    ughada-ange padiya sankara nidra yaya                   prabhu uthi' apana-kantha tahare jadaya
                                 TRANSLATION     He would lie asleep without a covering on his body, and Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu would get up and wrap him with His own quilt.
                                   TEXT 73
                   nirantara ghumaya sankara sighra-cetana
                     vasi' pada capi' kare ratri-jagarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sankara Pandita would always fall asleep, but he would quickly
awaken, sit up and again begin massaging the legs of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu. In this way he would stay awake the entire night.
                                   TEXT 74
                    tanra bhaye narena prabhu bahire yaite
                 tanra bhaye narena bhittye mukhabja ghasite
                                 TRANSLATION     Out of fear of Sankara, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu could neither leave
His room nor rub His lotuslike face against the walls.
                                   TEXT 75
                     ei lila mahaprabhura raghunatha-dasa
                 gauranga-stava-kalpavrkse kariyache prakasa
                                 TRANSLATION     This pastime of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's has been described very
nicely by Raghunatha dasa Gosvami in his book known as Gauranga-stavakalpavrksa.
                                   TEXT 76
                svakiyasya pranarbuda-sadrsa-gosthasya virahat
               pralapan unmadat satatam ati kurvan vikala-dhih             dadhad bhittau sasvad vadana-vidhu-gharsena rudhiram                ksatottham gaurango hrdaya udayan mam madayati
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because of separation from His many friends in Vrndavana, who were
like His own life, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke like a madman. Hisintelligence was transformed. Day and night He rubbed His moonlike face
against the walls, and blood flowed from the injuries. May that SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu rise in my heart and make me mad with love."
                                   TEXT 77
                       ei-mata mahaprabhu ratri-divase
                  prema-sindhu-magna rahe, kabhu dube, bhase
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in this way stayed immersed day and night
in an ocean of ecstatic love for Krsna. Sometimes He was submerged, andsometimes He floated.
                                   TEXT 78
                     eka-kale vaisakhera paurnamasi-dine
                     ratri-kale mahaprabhu calila udyane
                                 TRANSLATION     One full-moon night in the month of Vaisakha [April and May], Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to a garden.
                                   TEXT 79
                  jagannatha-vallabha' nama udyana-pradhane
                    pravesa karila prabhu lana bhakta-gane
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord, along with His devotees, entered one of the nicest
gardens, called Jagannatha-vallabha.
                                   TEXT 80
                   praphullita vrksa-valli,--yena vrndavana
                    suka, sari, pika, bhrnga kare alapana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the garden were fully blossomed trees and creepers exactly like
those in Vrndavana. Bumblebees and birds like the suka, sari and pikatalked with one another.
                                   TEXT 81
                     puspa-gandha lana vahe malaya-pavana                    `guru' hana taru-lataya sikhaya nacana
                                 TRANSLATION     A mild breeze was blowing, carrying the fragrance of aromatic
flowers. The breeze had become a guru and was teaching all the trees andcreepers how to dance.
                                   TEXT 82
                    purna-candra-candrikaya parama ujjvala
                     taru-latadi jyotsnaya kare jhalamala
                                 TRANSLATION     Brightly illuminated by the full moon, the trees and creepers
glittered in the light.
                                   TEXT 83
                    chaya rtu-gana yahan vasanta pradhana
                     dekhi' anandita haila gaura bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     The six seasons, especially spring, seemed present there. Seeing
the garden, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,was very happy.
                                   TEXT 84
                      "lalita-lavanga-lata" pada gaoyana
                   nrtya kari' bulena prabhu nija-gana lana
                                 TRANSLATION     In this atmosphere, the Lord had His associates sing a verse from
the Gitagovinda, beginning with the words "lalita-lavanga-lata," as Hedanced and wandered about with them.
                                   TEXT 85
                  prati-vrksa-valli aiche bhramite bhramite
                     asokera tale krsne dekhena acambite
                                 TRANSLATION     As He thus wandered around every tree and creeper, He came beneath
an asoka tree and suddenly saw Lord Krsna.                                   TEXT 86
                     krsna dekhi' mahaprabhu dhana calila
                   age dekhi' hasi' krsna antardhana ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     When He saw Krsna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu began running very
swiftly, but Krsna smiled and disappeared.
                                   TEXT 87
                     age paila krsne, tanre punah harana
                     bhumete padila prabhu murcchita hana
                                 TRANSLATION     Having first gotten Krsna and then having lost Him again, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu fell to the ground unconscious.
                                   TEXT 88
                   krsnera sri-anga-gandhe bhariche udyane
                     sei gandha pana prabhu haila acetane
                                 TRANSLATION     The entire garden was filled with the scent of Lord Sri Krsna's
transcendental body. When Srt Caitanya Mahaprabhu smelled it, He fellunconscious at once.
                                   TEXT 89
                     nirantara nasaya pase krsna-parimala
                     gandha asvadite prabhu ha-ila pagala
                                 TRANSLATION     The scent of Krsna's body, however, incessantly entered His
nostrils, and the Lord became mad to relish it.
                                   TEXT 90
                 krsna-gandha-lubdha radha sakhire ye kahila
                     sei sloka padi' prabhu artha karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Srimati Radharani expressed to Her gopi friends how She hankers for
the transcendental scent of Krsna's body. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhurecited that same verse and made its meaning clear.
                                   TEXT 91
               ku ranga-mada-jid-vapuh-parimalormi-krstanganah
               svakanga-nalinastake sasi-yutabja-gandha-prathah             madendu va ra-ca n danaguru-sugan dh i-ca rcarcitah                sa me madana-mohanah sakhi tanoti nasa-sprham
                                 TRANSLATION     " `The scent of Krsna's transcendental body surpasses the aroma of
musk and attracts the minds of all women. The eight lotuslike parts ofHis body distribute the fragrance of lotuses mixed with that of camphor.His body is anointed with aromatic substances like musk, camphor,sandalwood and aguru. O My dear friend, that Personality of Godhead,also known as the enchanter of Cupid, always increases the desire of Mynostrils.'
                                   PURPORT     This is a verse found in Govinda-lilamrta (8.6).                                   TEXT 92                   kasturika-nilotpala, tara yei parimala,
                         taha jini' krsna-anga-gandha                  vyape caudda-bhuvane, kare sarva akarsane,                         nari-ganera ankhi kare andha
                                 TRANSLATION     "The scent of Krsna's body surpasses the fragrances of musk and the
bluish lotus flower. Spreading throughout the fourteen worlds, itattracts everyone and makes the eyes of all women blind.
                                   TEXT 93
                     sakhi he, krsna-gandha jagat mataya
                 narira nasate pase, sarva-kala tahan vaise,                         krsna-pasa dhari' lana yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, the scent of Krsna's body enchants the entire
world. It especially enters the nostrils of women and remains seatedthere. Thus it captures them and forcibly brings them to Krsna.
                                   TEXT 94                    netra-nabhi, vadana, kara-yuga carana,
                           ei asta-padma krsna-ange                 karpura-lipta kamala, tara yaiche parimala,                         sei gandha asta-padma-sange
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna's eyes, navel and face, hands and feet are Iike eight lotus
flowers on His body. From those eight lotuses emanates a fragrance likea mixture of camphor and lotus. That is the scent associated with Hisbody.
                                   TEXT 95
                  hema-kilita candana, taha kari' gharsana,
                         tahe aguru, kunkuma, kasturi             karpura-sane carca ange, purva angera gandha sange,                          mili' tare yena kaila curi
                                 TRANSLATION     "When sandalwood pulp with aguru, kunkuma and musk is mixed with
camphor and spread on Krsna's body, it combines with Krsna's ownoriginal bodily perfume and seems to cover it.
                                   PURPORT     In another version, the last line of this verse reads, kamadevera
mana kaila curi. This means "the scent of all these substances mixeswith the previous scent of Krsna's body and steals away the mind ofCupid."
                                   TEXT 96                  hare narira tanu-mana, nasa kare ghurnana,
                      khasaya nivi, chutaya kesa-bandha
                    kariya age bauri, nacaya jagat-na-ri,
                        hena dakatiya krsnanga-gandha
                                 TRANSLATION     "The scent of Krsna's transcendental body is so attractive that it
enchants the bodies and minds of all women. It bewilders their nostrils,loosens their belts and hair, and makes them madwomen. All the women ofworld come under its influence, and therefore the scent of Krsna's bodyis like a plunderer.
                                   TEXT 97
                sei gandha-vasa nasa, sada kare gandhera asa,                         kabhu paya, kabhu nahi paya
                 paile piya peta bhare, pina pina tabu kare,                         na paile trsnaya mari' yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Falling completely under its influence, the nostrils yearn for it
continuously, although sometimes they obtain it and sometimes not. Whenthey do they drink their fill, though they still want more and more, butif they don't, out of thirst they die.
                                   TEXT 98
                  madana-mohana-nata, pasari gandhera hata,
                          jagan-nari-grahake lobhaya               vina-mulye deya gandha, gandha diya kare andha,                         ghara yaite patha nahi paya"
                                 TRANSLATION     "The dramatic actor Madana-mohana has opened a shop of scents that
attract the women of the world to be His customers. He delivers thescents freely, but they make the women all so blind they cannot find thepath returning home."
                                   TEXT 99
                  ei-mata gaurahari, gandhe kaila mana curi,
                          bhrnga-praya iti-uti dhaya                 yaya vrksa-lata-pase, krsna sphure--sei ase,                       krsna na paya, gandha-matra paya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, His mind thus stolen by that scent, ran
here and there like a bumblebee. He ran to the trees and plants, hopingthat Lord Krsna would appear, but instead He found only the scent ofKrsna's body.
                                   TEXT 100
               svarupa-ramananda gaya, prabhu nace, sukha paya,
                          ei-mate pratah-kala haila                   svarupa-ramananda-raya, kari nana upaya,                      mahaprabhura bah ya-sphurti kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     Both Svarupa Damodara and Ramananda Raya sang to the Lord, who
danced and enjoyed happiness until the morning arrived. Then theydevised a plan to revive the Lord to external consciousness.                                   TEXT 101
               matr-bhakti, pralapana, bhittye mukha-gharsana,
                      krsna-gandha-sphurtye divya-nrtya                   ei cari-lila-bhede, gaila ei paricchede,                         krsnadasa rupa-gosani-bhrtya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus, I, Krsnadasa, the servant of Srila Rupa Gosvami, have sung of
four divisions of the Lord's pastimes in this chapter: the Lord'sdevotion to His mother, His words of madness, His rubbing His faceagainst the walls at night, and His dancing at the appearance of LordKrsna's fragrance.
                                   PURPORT     Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami says that he has been able to describe
these four pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by the blessings of SrilaRupa Gosvami. Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami was not actually a directdisciple of Srila Rupa Gosvami, but he followed the instructions givenby Srila Rupa Gosvami in Bhakti- rasamrta-sindhu. He therefore actedaccording to the directions of Rupa Gosvami and prayed in every chapterfor his mercy.
                                   TEXT 102                        ei-mata mahaprabhu pana cetana
                    snana kari' kaila jagannatha-darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus returned to consciousness. He then
bathed and went to see Lord Jagannatha.
                                   TEXT 103
                    alaukika krsna-lila, divya-sakti tara
                      tarkera gocara nahe caritra yahara
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Lord Krsna are uncommonly full of transcendental
potency. It is a characteristic of such pastimes that they do not fallwithin the jurisdiction of experimental logic and arguments.
                                   TEXT 104
                       ei prema sada jage yahara antare
                     panditeha tara cesta bujhite na pare                                 TRANSLATION
     When transcendental love of Krsna awakens in one's heart, even a
learned scholar cannot comprehend one's activities.
                                   TEXT 105
                           dhanyasyayam navah prema
                             yasyonmilati cetasi                            antarvanibhir apy asya                            mudra susthu sudurgama
                                 TRANSLATION     "The activities and symptoms of that exalted personality in whose
heart love of Godhead has awakened cannot be understood even by the mostlearned scholar."
                                   PURPORT     This verse is quoted from Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.4.17).                                   TEXT 106                 alaukika prabhura `cesta', `pralapa' suniya
                     tarka na kariha, suna visvasa kariya
                                 TRANSLATION     The activities of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are undoubtedly uncommon,
especially His talking like a madman. Therefore, one who hears of thesepastimes should not put forward mundane arguments. He should simply hearthe pastimes with full faith.
                                   TEXT 107
                     ihara satyatve pramana sri-bhagavate
                 sri-radhara prema-pralapa `bhramara-gita'te
                                 TRANSLATION     The evidence of the truth of these talks is found in Srimad-
Bhagavatam. There, in the section of the Tenth Canto known as theBhramara-gita, "the Song to the Bumblebee," Srimati Radharani speaksinsanely in ecstatic love for Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     When Uddhava arrived from Mathura carrying a message for the gopis,
the gopis began talking about Krsna and crying. Then one important gopisaw a bumblebee and began speaking to it like someone mad, thinking thatthe bee was a messenger of Uddhava's or was someone very dear to him and
Krsna. The verses are as follows (SB. 10.47.12-21):     madhupa kitava-bandho ma sprsanghrim sapatnyah     kuca-vilulita-mala-kunkuma-smasrubhir nah     vahatu madhu-patis tan-manininam prasadam     yadu-sadasi vidambyam yasya dutas tvam idrk"My dear bumblebee, you are a very cunning friend of Uddhava and Krsna.You are very expert in touching people's feet, but I am not going to bemisled by this. You appear to have sat on the breasts of one of Krsna'sfriends, for I see that you have kunkuma dust on your mustache. Krsna isnow engaged in flattering all His young girl friends in Mathura.Therefore, now that He can be called a friend of the residents ofMathura, He does not need the help of the residents of Vrndavana. He hasno reason to satisfy us gopis. Since you are the messenger of such aperson as He, what is the use of your presence here? Certainly Krsnawould be ashamed of your presence in this assembly."     How has Krsna offended the gopis so that they want to reject Himfrom their minds? The answer is given as follows:     sakrd adhara-sudham svam mohinim payayitva     sumanasa iva sadyas tatyaje'sman bhavadrk     paricarati katham tat-pada-padmam tu padma     hy api bata hrta-ceta uttama-sloka-jalpaih"Krsna no longer gives us the enchanting nectar of His lips; instead, Henow gives that nectar to the women of Mathura. Krsna directly attractsour minds, yet He resembles a bumblebee like you because He gives up theassociation of a beautiful flower and goes to a flower that is inferior.That is the way Krsna has treated us. I do not know why the goddess offortune continues to serve His lotus feet instead of leaving them aside.Apparently she believes in Krsna's false words. We gopis, however, arenot unintelligent like Laksmi."     After hearing the bumblebee's sweet songs and recognizing that thebee was singing about Krsna for Her satisfaction, the gopi replied,     kim iha bahu sadanghre gayasi tvam yadunam     adhipatim agrhanam agrato nah puranam     vijaya-sakha-sakhinam giyatam tat-prasangah     ksapita-kucarujas te kalpayantistam istah"Dear bumblebee, Lord Krsna has no residence here, but we know Him asYadupati [the King of the Yadu dynasty]. We know Him very well, andtherefore we are not interested in hearing any more songs about Him. Itwould be better for you to go sing to those who are now very dear toKrsna. Those women of Mathura have now achieved the opportunity to beembraced by Him. They are His beloveds now, and therefore He hasrelieved the burning in their breasts. If you go there and sing yoursongs to those fortunate women, they will be very pleased, and they willhonor you."     divi bhuvi ca rasayam kah striyas tad durapah     kapata-rucira-hasa-bhruvi-jrmbhasya yah syuh     carana-raja upaste yasya bhutir vayam ka     api ca krpana-pakse hy uttamasloka-sabdah "O collector of honey,Krsna must be very sorry not to see us gopis. Surely He is afflicted bymemories of our pastimes. Therefore He has sent you as a messenger tosatisfy us. Do not speak to us! All the women in the three worlds wheredeath is inevitable--the heavenly, middle and lower planets--are veryeasily available to Krsna because His curved eyebrows are so attractive.Moreover, He is always served very faithfully by the goddess of fortune.
In comparison with her, we are most insignificant. Indeed, we arenothing. Yet although He is very cunning, Krsna is also very charitable.You may inform Him that He is praised for His kindness to unfortunatepersons and that He is therefore known as Uttamasloka, one who ispraised by chosen words and verses."     visrja sirasi padam vedmy aham catukarair     anunaya-vidusas te `bhyetya dautyair mukundat     svakrta iha visrstapatya-paty-anya-loka     vyasrjad akrta-cetah kim nu sandheyam asmin"You are buzzing at My feet just to be forgiven for your past offenses.Kindly go away from My feet! I know that Mukunda has taught you to speakvery sweet, flattering words like this and to act as His messenger.These are certainly clever tricks, My dear bumblebee, but I canunderstand them. This is Krsna's offense. Do not tell Krsna what I havesaid, although i know that you are very envious. We gopis have given upour husbands, our sons, and all the religious principles that promisebetter births, and now we have no other business then serving Krsna. YetKrsna, by controlling His mind, has easily forgotten us. Therefore,don't speak of Him any more. Let us forget our relationship."     mrgayur iva kapindram vivyadhe lubdha-dharma     striyam akrta-virupam stri-jitah kamayanam     balim api balim attvavestayad dhvanksavad yas     tad alam asita-sakhyair dustyajas tat-katharthah"When we remember the past births of Krsna, My dear bumblebee, we arevery afraid of Him. In His incarnation as Lord Ramacandra, He acted justlike a hunter and unjustly killed His friend Vali. Lusty Surpanakha cameto satisfy Ramacandra's desires, but He was so attached to Sitadevi thatHe cut off Surpanakha's nose. In His incarnation as Vamanadeva, Heplundered Bali Maharaja and took all his possessions, cheating him onthe pretext of accepting worship from him. Vamanadeva caught BaliMaharaja exactly as one catches a crow. My dear bumblebee, it is notvery good to make friends with such a person. I know that once onebegins to talk about Krsna, it is very difficult to stop, and I admitthat I have insufficient strength to give up talking about Him."yad-anucarita-lila-karna-piyusa-viprut     sakrd adana-vidhuta-dvandva-dharma vinastah     sapadi grha-kutumbam dinam utsrjya dina     bahava iha vihanga bhiksu-caryam caranti"Topics about Krsna are so powerful that they destroy the four religiousprinciples--religion, economic development, sense gratification andliberation. Anyone who drinks even a small drop of krsna-katha throughaural reception is freed from all material attachment and envy. Like abird with no means of subsistence, such a person becomes a mendicant andlives by begging. Ordinary household affairs become miserable for him,and without attachment he suddenly gives up everything. Although suchrenunciation is quite suitable, because I am a woman I am unable toadopt it."     vayam rtam iva jihma-vyahrtam sraddadhanah     kulikarutam ivajnah krsna-vadhvo hiranyah     dadrsur asakrd etat tan-nakha-sparsativra-     smararuja upamantrin bhanyatam anya-varta"O My dear messenger, I am just like a foolish bird that hears the sweetsongs of a hunter, believes in them due to simplicity, and is thenpierced in the heart and made to suffer all kinds of miseries. Because
we believed in Krsna's words, we have suffered great pain. Indeed, thetouch of Krsna's nails has injured our faces. He has caused us so muchpain! Therefore, you should give up topics concerning Him and talk aboutsomething else."     After hearing all these statements from Srimati Radhika, thebumblebee left and then returned. After some thought, the gopi said:     priya-sakha punar agah preyasa presitah kim-     varaya kim anurundhe mananiyo'si me'nga     nayasi katham ihasman dustyaja-dvandva-parsvam     satatam urasi saumya srir vadhuh sakamaste"You are Krsna's very dear friend, and by His order you have come hereagain. Therefore you are worshipable for Me. O best of messengers, tellMe now, what is your request? What do you want? Krsna cannot give upconjugal love, and therefore I understand that you have come here totake us to Him. But how will you do that? We know many goddesses offortune now reside at Krsna's chest, and they constantly serve Krsnabetter than we can."     Praising the bumblebee for its sobriety, She began to speak ingreat jubilation.     api bata madhu-puryam arya-putro'dhuna'ste     smarati sa pitr-gehan saumya bandhums ca gopan      kvacid api sakatha nah kinkarinam grnite     bhujam aguru-sugandham murdhny adhasyat kada nu"Krsna is now living like a gentleman at the Gurukula in Mathura,forgetting all the gopis of Vrndavana. But does He not remember thesweet house of His father, Nanda Maharaja? We are all naturally Hismaidservants. Does He not remember us? Does He ever speak about us, orhas He forgotten us completely? Will He ever forgive us and once againtouch us with those hands fragrant with the scent of aguru?"
                                   TEXT 108                      mahisira gita yena'dasame'ra sese
                      pandite na bujhe tara artha-visese
                                 TRANSLATION     The songs of the queens at Dvaraka, which are mentioned at the end
of the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, have a very special meaning.They are not understood even by the most learned scholars.
                                   PURPORT     These songs of Srimad-Bhagavatam are verses 15-24 of the Ninetieth
Chapter of the Tenth Canto.     kurari vilapasi tvam vita-nidra na sese     svapiti jagati ratryam isvaro gupta-bodhah     vayam iva sakhi kaccid gadha-nirbhinna-ceta     nalina-na yana-hasodara-lileksitenaAll the queens incessantly thought of Krsna. After their pastimes in thewater, the queens said, "Our dear friend the osprey, Krsna is nowasleep, but we stay awake at night because of Him. You laugh at us whenyou see us awake at night, but why are you not sleeping? You seemabsorbed in thoughts of Krsna. Have you also been pierced by Krsna's
smile? His smile is very sweet. One who is pierced by such an arrow isvery fortunate."      netre nimilayasi naktam adrsta-bandhus     tvam roravisi karunam bata cakravaki     dasyam gata vayam ivacyuta-pada-justam     kim va srajam sprhayase kabarena vodhum"O cakravaki, you keep your eyes wide open at night because you cannotsee your friend. Indeed, you are suffering very much. Is it because ofcompassion that you are crying, or are you trying to capture Krsna byremembering Him? Having been touched by the lotus feet of Krsna, all thequeens are very happy. Are you crying to wear Krsna's garland on yourhead? Please answer these questions clearly, O cakravaki, so that we canunderstand."     bho bhoh sada nistanase udanvann     alabdha-nidro 'dhigata-prajagarah     kim va mukundapahrtatma-lanchanah     praptam dasam tvam ca gato duratyayam"O ocean, you have no opportunity to sleep quietly at night. Instead,you are always awake and crying. You have received this benediction, andyour heart is broken just like ours. Mukunda's business with us issimply to smear our marks of kunkuma.O ocean, you suffer as much as we."     tvam yaksmana balavatasi grhita indo     ksinas tamo na nija-didhitibhih ksinosi     kaccin mukunda-gaditani yatha vayam tvam     vismrtya bhoh sthagita-gir upalaksyase nah"O moon, you appear to be suffering from a severe fever, perhapstuberculosis. Indeed, your effulgence does not have the strength todestroy the darkness. Have you become mad after hearing the songs ofKrsna? Is that why you are silent? Seeing your suffering, we feel thatyou are one of us."     kim tvacaritam asmabhir     malayanila te'priyam     govindapanga-nirbhinne     hrdirayasi nah smaran"O Malayan breeze, kindly tell us what wrong we have done to you. Why doyou fan the flames of desire in our hearts? We have been pierced by thearrow of Govinda's glance, for He is perfect in the art of awakening theinfluence of Cupid."      megha srimams tvam asi dayito yadavendrasyanunam     srivatsankam vayam iva bhavan dhyayati prema-baddhah     atyutkanthah sabala-hrdayo'smad-vidho baspa-dharah     smrtva smrtva visrjasi muhur duhkha-das tat-prasangah"Dear cloud, O friend of Krsna's, are you thinking of the Srivatsasymbol on Krsna's chest like us queens engaged in loving affairs withHim? You are absorbed in meditation, remembering the association ofKrsna, and thus you shed tears of misery."     priya-rava-padani bhasase     mrta-samjivika yana ya gira     karavani kim adya te priyam     vada me valgita-kantha kokila"Dear cuckoo, you possess a very sweet voice, and you are very expert inimitating others. You could excite even a dead body with your voice.Therefore, tell the queens that good behavior is their proper duty."     na calasi na vadasy udara-buddhe     ksiti-dhara cintyase mahantam artham
     api bata vasudeva-nandananghrim     vayam iva kamayase stanair vidhartum"O magnanimous mountain, you are very grave and sober, absorbed inthoughts of doing something very great. Like us, you have vowed to keepwithin your heart the lotus feet of Krsna, the son of Vasudeva."     susyad-ghradah karsita bata sindhu-patnyah     sampraty-apasta-kamala-sri ya-ista-bhartuh     yadvad va yam madhu-pateh pranayavalokam     aprapya musta-hrdayah puru-karsitah sma"O rivers, wives of the ocean, we see that the ocean does not give youhappiness. Thus you have almost dried up, and you no longer bearbeautiful lotuses. The lotuses have become skinny, and even in thesunshine they are devoid of all pleasure. Similarly, the hearts of uspoor queens are all dried up, and our bodies are skinny because we arenow devoid of loving affairs with Madhupati. Are you, like us, dry andwithout beauty because you are devoid of Krsna's loving glance?"     hamsa svagatam asyatam piba payo bruhy anga saureh katham     dutam tvam nu vidama kaccid ajitah svasty asta uktam pura      kimva nas cala-sauhrdah smarati tam kasmad bhajamo vayam     ksaudralapaya-kamadam sriyamrte saivaika-nistha striyam"O swan, you have come here so happily! Let us welcome you. Weunderstand that you are always Krsna's messenger. Now while you drinkthis milk, tell us what His message is. Has Krsna said something aboutus to you? May we inquire from you whether Krsna is happy? We want toknow. Does He remember us? We know that the goddess of fortune isserving Him alone. We are simply maidservants. How can we worship He whospeaks sweet words but never fulfills our desires?"
                                   TEXT 109                  mahaprabhu-nityananda, donhara dasera dasa
                   yare krpa karena, tara haya ithe visvasa
                                 TRANSLATION     If one becomes a servant of the servants of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
and Lord Nityananda Prabhu and is favored by Them, he can believe in allthese discourses.
                                   TEXT 110
                  sraddha kari, suna iha, sunite maha-sukha
                    khandibe adhyatmikadi kutarkadi-duhkha
                                 TRANSLATION     Just try to hear these topics with faith, for there is great
pleasure even in hearing them. That hearing will destroy all miseriespertaining to the body, mind and other living entities, and theunhappiness of false arguments as well.                                   TEXT 111
                      caitanya-caritamrta--nitya-nuta na
                     sunite sunite judaya hrdaya-sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     Caitanya-caritamrta is ever-increasingly fresh. Continuously
hearing it pacifies one's heart and ear.
                                   TEXT 112
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Nineteenth Chapter, describing the Lord's devotion to Hismother, His mad speeches in separation from Krsna, His rubbing His faceagainst the walls, and His dancing in the Jagannatha-vallabha garden.
                                Chapter Twenty
                            The Siksastaka Prayers     The following summary study of the Twentieth Chapter is given by
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura in his Amrta-pravaha-bhasya. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu passed His nights tasting the meaning of Siksastaka in thecompany of Svarupa Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya. Sometimes Herecited verses from Jayadeva Gosvami's Gita-govinda, from Srimad-Bhagavatam, from Sri Ramananda Raya's jagannatha-vallabha-nataka or from Sri Bilvamangala Thakura's Krsna-karnamrta. In this way, He becameabsorbed in ecstatic emotions. For the twelve years Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu lived at Jagannatha Puri, He relished the taste of recitingsuch transcendental verses. The Lord was present in this mortal worldfor fortyeight years altogether. After hinting about the Lord'sdisappearance, the author of Caitanya-caritamrta gives a shortdescription of the entire Antya-lila and then ends his book.
                                    TEXT 1                          premodbhavita-harsers yod-
                          vega-dain yarti-misrita m                           lapitam gauracandras ya                           bhagyavadbhir nisevyate                                 TRANSLATION
     Only the most fortunate will relish the mad words of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, which mixed with jubilation, envy, agitation, submissivenessand grief, all produced by ecstatic loving emotions.
                                    TEXT 2
                    jaya jaya gauracandra jaya nityananda
                  jayadvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                                 TRANSLATION     All glories to Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu! All glories to Lord
Nityananda! All glories to Advaitacandra! And all glories to all thedevotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu!
                                    TEXT 3
                      ei-mata mahaprabhu vaise nilacale
                      rajani-divase krsna-virahe vihvale
                                 TRANSLATION     While Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thus resided at Jagannatha Puri
[Nilacala], He was continuously overwhelmed, night and day, byseparation from Krsna.
                                    TEXT 4
                     svarupa, ramananda,--ei duijana-sane
                     ratri-dine rasa-gita-sloka asvadane
                                 TRANSLATION     Day and night He tasted transcendental blissful songs and verses
with two associates, namely Svarupa Damodara Gosvami and Ramananda Raya.
                                    TEXT 5
                  nana-bhava uthe prabhura harsa, soka, rosa
                      dainyodvega-arti utkantha, santosa
                                 TRANSLATION     He relished the symptoms of various transcendental emotions such as
jubilation, lamentation, anger, humility, anxiety, grief, eagerness andsatisfaction.                                    TEXT 6
                       sei sei bhave nija-sloka padiya
                    slokera artha asvadaye dui-bandhu lana
                                 TRANSLATION     He would recite His own verses, expressing their meanings and
emotions, and thus enjoy tasting them with these two friends.
                                    TEXT 7
                      kona dine kona bhave sloka-pathana
                      sei sloka asvadite ratri-jagarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Sometimes the Lord would be absorbed in a particular emotion and
would stay awake all night reciting related verses and relishing theirtaste.
                                    TEXT 8
                harse prabhu kahena,--"suna svarupa-rama-raya
                     nama-sankirtana--kalau parama upaya
                                 TRANSLATION     In great jubilation, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, "My dear Svarupa
Damodara and Ramananda Raya, know from Me that chanting of the holynames is the most feasible means of salvation in this age of Kali.
                                    TEXT 9
                    sankirtana-yajne kalau krsna-aradhana
                     sei ta' sumedha paya krsnera carana
                                 TRANSLATION     "In this age of Kali, the process of worshiping Krsna is to perform
sacrifice by chanting the holy name of the Lord. One who does so iscertainly very intelligent, and he attains shelter at the lotus feet ofKrsna.
                                   PURPORT     For further information, one may refer to the Adi-lila, Chapter
Three, texts
                                   TEXT 10                           krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam
                          sa ngopangastra -pa rsadam                          yajnaih sankirtana-prayair                            yajanti hi sumedhasah
                                 TRANSLATION     " `In the age of Kali, intelligent persons perform congregational
chanting to worship the incarnation of Godhead who constantly sings thename of Krsna. Although His complexion is not blackish, He is KrsnaHimself. He is accompanied by His associates, servants, weapons andconfidential companions.'
                                   PURPORT     This verse is spoken by Saint Karabhajana in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(11.5.32). For further information, see Adi-lila, Chapter Three, text52.
                                   TEXT 11                    nama-sankirtana haite sarvanartha-nasa
                    sarva-subhodaya, krsna-premera ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "Simply by chanting the holy name of Lord Krsna, one can be freed
from all undesirable habits. This is the means of awakening all goodfortune and initiating the flow of waves of love for Krsna.
                                   TEXT 12
              ceto-darpana-marjanam bhava-mahadavagni-nirvapanam
            sreyah-kairava-candrika-vitaranam vidya-vadhu-jivanam            anandambudhi-vardhanam prati-padam purnamrtas vadanam            sarvatma-snapanam param vijayate sri-krsna-sankirtanam
                                 TRANSLATION     "Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Lord
Krsna, which can cleanse the mirror of the heart and stop the miseriesof the blazing fire of material existence. That chanting is the waxingmoon that spreads the white lotus of good fortune for all livingentities. It is the life and soul of alI education. The chanting of theholy name of Krsna expands the blissful ocean of transcendental life. Itgives a cooling effect to everyone and enables one to taste full nectarat every step.
                                   PURPORT     This is the first verse of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's Siksastaka.
The other seven verses are found in texts 16, 21, 29, 32, 36, 39 and 47.                                   TEXT 13
                     sankirtana haite papa-samsara-nasana
                  citta-suddhi, sarva-bhakti-sadhana-udgama
                                 TRANSLATION     "By performing congregational chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra,
one can destroy the sinful condition of material existence, purify theunclean heart and awaken all varieties of devotional service.
                                   TEXT 14
                     krsna-premodgama, premamrta-asvadana
                    krsna-prapti, sevamrta-samudre majjana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The result of chating is that one awakens his love for Krsna and
tastes transcendental bliss. Ultimately, one attains the association ofKrsna and engages in His devotional service, as if immersing himself ina great ocean of love."
                                   TEXT 15
                   uthila visada, dainya,--pade apana-sloka
                   yahara artha suni' saba yaya duhkha-soka
                                 TRANSLATION     Lamentation and humility awoke within Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and
He began reciting another of His own verses. By hearing the meaning ofthat verse, one can forget all unhappiness and lamentation.
                                   TEXT 16
                    namnam akari bahudha nija-sarva-saktis
                    tatrarpita niyamitah smarane na kalah                      etadrsi tava krna bhagavan mamapi                      durdaivam idrsam ihajani nanuragah
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, in Your holy name there
is all good fortune for the living entity, and therefore You have manynames, such as Krsna and Govinda, by which You expand Yourself. You haveinvested all Your potencies in those names, and there are no hard andfast rules for remembering them. My dear Lord, although You bestow suchmercy upon the fallen, conditioned souls by liberally teaching Your holynames, I am so unfortunate that I commit offenses while chanting theholy name, and therefore I do not achieve attachment for chanting.                                   TEXT 17
                      aneka-lokera vancha--aneka-prakara
                      krpate karila aneka-namera pracara
                                 TRANSLATION     "Because people vary in their desires, You have distributed various
holy names by Your mercy.
                                   TEXT 18
                      khaite suite yatha tatha nama laya
                   kala-desa-niyama nahi, sarva siddhi haya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Regardless of time or place, one who chants the holy name, even
while eating or sleeping, attains all perfection.
                                   TEXT 19
                    "sarva-sakti name dila kariya vibhaga
                   amara durdai va,--name nahi an uraga!!"
                                 TRANSLATION     "You have invested Your full potencies in each individual holy
name, but I am so unfortunate that I have no attachment for chantingYour holy names."
                                   TEXT 20
                      ye-rupe la-ile nama prema upajaya
                    tahara laksana suna, svarupa-rama-raya
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu continued,"O Svarupa Damodara Gosvami and
Ramananda Raya, hear from Me the symptoms of how one should chant theHare Krsna maha-mantra to awaken very easily one's dormant love forKrsna.
                                   TEXT 21
                              trnad api sunicena
                             taror iva sahisnuna                               amanina manadena                            kirtaniyah sada harih
                                 TRANSLATION     "One who thinks himself lower than the grass, who is more tolerant
than a tree, and who does not expect personal honor but is alwaysprepared to give all respect to others, can very easily always chant theholy name of the Lord.
                                   TEXT 22
                      uttama hana apanake mane trnadhama
                    dui-prakare sahisnuta kare vrksa-sama
                                 TRANSLATION     "These are the symptoms of one who chants the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra. Although he is very exalted, he thinks himself lower than thegrass on the ground, and like a tree, he tolerates everything in twoways.
                                   TEXT 23
                     vrksa yena katileha kichu na bolaya
                      sukana maileha kare pani na magaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "When a tree is cut down, it does not protest, and even when drying
up, it does not ask anyone for water.
                                   TEXT 24
                     yei ye magaye, tare deya apana-dhana
                   gharma-vrsti sahe, anera karaye raksana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The tree delivers its fruits, flowers and whatever it possesses to
anyone and everyone. It tolerates scorching heat and torrents of rain,yet it still gives shelter to others.
                                   TEXT 25
                    uttama hana vaisnava habe nirabhimana
                  jive sammana dibe jani' `krsna'-adhisthana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Although a Vaisnava is the most exalted person, he is prideless
and gives all respect to everyone, knowing everyone to be the restingpIace of Krsna.
                                   TEXT 26
                       ei-mata hana yei krsna-nama laya
                     sri-krsna-carane tanra prema upajaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "If one chants the holy name of Lord Krsna in this manner, he will
certainly awaken his dormant love for Krsna's lotus feet."
                                   TEXT 27
                     kahite kahite prabhura dainya badila
                  `s'uddha-bhakti' krsna-thani magite lagila
                                 TRANSLATION     As Lord Caitanya spoke in this way, His humility increased, and He
began praying to Krsna that He could discharge pure devotional service.
                                   TEXT 28
                  premera svabhava--yahan premera sambandha
                  sei mane,--`krsne mora nahi prema-gandha'
                                 TRANSLATION     Wherever there is a relationship of love of Godhead, its natural
symptom is that the devotee does not think himself a devotee. Instead,he always thinks that he has not even a drop of love for Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura comments that persons who
are actually very poor because they possess not even a drop of love ofGodhead or pure devotional service falsely advertise themselves as greatdevotees, although they cannot at any time relish the transcendentalbliss of devotional service. A class of so-called devotees known asprakrta-sahajiyas sometimes display devotional symptoms to exhibit theirgood fortune. They are pretending, however, because these devotionalfeatures are only external. The prakrta-sahaliyas exhibit these symptomsto advertise their so-called advancement in love of Krsna, but insteadof praising the prakrta-sahajiyas for their symptoms of transcendentalecstasy, pure devotees do not like to associate with them. It is notadvisable to equate the prakrta-sahajiyas with pure devotees. When oneis actually advanced in ecstatic love of Krsna, he does not try toadvertise himself. Instead, he endeavors more and more to render service
to the Lord.     The prakrta-sahajiyas sometimes criticize pure devotees by callingthem philosophers, learned scholars, knowers of the truth, or minuteobservers, but not devotees. On the other hand, they depict themselvesas the most advanced, transcendentally blissful devotees, deeplyabsorbed in devotional service and mad to taste transcendental mellows.They also describe themselves as the most advanced devotees inspontaneous love, as knowers of transcendental mellows, as the topmostdevotees in conjugal love of Krsna, and so on. Not actually knowing thetranscendental nature of love of God, they accept their materialemotions to be indicative of advancement. In this way they pollute theprocess of devotional service. To try to become writers of Vaisnavaliterature, they introduce their material conceptions of life into puredevotional service. Because of their material conceptions, theyadvertise themselves as knowers of transcendental mellows, but they donot understand the transcendental nature of devotional service.
                                   TEXT 29                        na dhanam na janam na sundarim
                          kavitam va jagadisa kamaye                           mama janmani jamanisvare                       bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi
                                 TRANSLATION     "O Lord of the universe, I do not desire material wealth,
materialistic followers, a beautiful wife or fruitive activitiesdescribed in flowery language. All I want, life after life, isunmotivated devotional service to You.
                                   TEXT 30
                    dhana, jana nahi magon, kavita sundari
                 `suddha-bhakti' deha' more, krsna krpa kari'
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord Krsna, I do not want material wealth from You, nor do
I want followers, a beautiful wife or the results of fruitiveactivities. I only pray that by Your causeless mercy You give Me puredevotional service to You, life after life.
                                   TEXT 31
                   ati-dainye punah mage dasya-bhakti-dana
                      apanare kare samsari jiva-abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     In great humility, considering Himself a conditioned soul of the
material world, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu agaln expressed His desire to beendowed with service to the Lord.
                                   TEXT 32
                          ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
                       patitam mam visame bhavambudhau                          krpaya tava pada-pankaja-                        sthita-dhuli-sadrsam vicintaya
                                 TRANSLATION     "Oh, My Lord, O Krsna, son of Maharaja Nanda, I am Your eternal
servant, but because of My own fruitive acts, I have fallen in thishorrible ocean of nescience. Now please be causelessly merciful to Me.Consider Me a particle of dust at Your lotus feet.
                                   TEXT 33
                    "tomara nitya-dasa mui, toma pasariya
                    padiyachon bhavarnave maya-baddha hana
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am Your eternal servant, but I forgot Your Lordship. Now I have
fallen in the ocean of nescience and have been conditioned by theexternal energy.
                                   TEXT 34
                     krpa kari' kara more pada-dhuli-sama
                      tomara sevaka karon tomara sevana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Be causelessly merciful to Me by giving Me a place with the
particles of dust at Your lotus feet so that I may engage in the serviceof Your Lordship as Your eternal servant."
                                   TEXT 35
                   punah ati-utkantha, dainya ha-ila udgama
                    krsna-thani mage prema-nama-sankirtana
                                 TRANSLATION     Natural humility and eagerness then awoke in Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. He prayed to Krsna to be abIe to chat the maha-mantra inecstatic love.                                   TEXT 36
                          nayanam galad-asru-dharaya
                        vadanam gadgada-ruddhaya gira                         pulakair nicitam vapuh kada,                         tava nama-grahane bhavisyati
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear Lord, when will My eyes be beautified by filling with
tears that constantly glide down as I chant Your holy name? When will Myvoice falter and all the halrs on My body stand erect in transcendentalhappiness as I chant Your holy name?
                                   TEXT 37
                   "prema-dhana vina vyartha daridra jivana
                  `dasa' kari' vetana more deha prema-dhana"
                                 TRANSLATION     "Without love of Godhead, My life is useless. Therefore I pray that
You accept Me as Your servant and give Me the salary of ecstatic love ofGod."
                                   TEXT 38
                     rasantaravese ha-ila viyoga-sphurana
                    udvega, visada, dainye kare pralapana
                                 TRANSLATION     Separation from Krsna awoke various mellows of distress,
lamentation and humility. Thus Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke like acrazy man.
                                   TEXT 39
                              yugayitam nimesena
                             caksusa pravrsayitam                           sunyayitam jagat sarvam                             govinda-virahena me
                                 TRANSLATION     "My Lord Govinda, because of separation from You, I consider even a
moment a great millennium. Tears flow from My eyes like torrents ofrain, and I see the entire world as void.                                   TEXT 40
               udvege divasa na yaya `ksana' haila `yuga'-sama
                    varsara megha-praya asru varise nayana
                                 TRANSLATION     "In My agitation, a day never ends, for every moment seems like a
millennium. Pouring incessant tears, My eyes are like clouds in therainy season.
                                   TEXT 41
                    govinda-virahe sunya ha-ila tribhuvana
                     tusanale pode,--yena na yaya jivana
                                 TRANSLATION     "The three worlds have become void because of separation from
Govinda. I feel as if I were burning alive in a slow fire.
                                   TEXT 42
                    krsna udasina ha-ila karite pariksana
                   sakhi saba kahe,--`krsne kara upeksana'               Z64 Sri Caitanya-caritamrta [Antya-lila, Ch. ZO
                                 TRANSLATION     "Lord Krsna has become indifferent to Me just to test My love, and
My friends say,`Better to disregard Him."'
                                   TEXT 43
                     eteka cintite radhara nirmala hrdaya
                   svabhavika premara svabhava karila udaya
                                 TRANSLATION     While Srimati Radharani was thinking in this way, the
characteristics of natural love became manifest because of Her pureheart.
                                   TEXT 44
                 irs ya, utka ntha, dain ya, praudhi, vinaya
                       eta bhava eka-thani karila udaya
                                 TRANSLATION     The ecstatic symptoms of envy, great eagerness, humility, zeal and
supplication all became manifest at once.
                                   TEXT 45
                    eta bhave radhara mana asthira ha-ila
                    sakhi-gana-age praudhi-sloka ye padila
                                 TRANSLATION     In that mood, the mind of Srimati Radharani was agitated, and
therefore She spoke a verse of advanced devotion to Her gopi friends.
                                   TEXT 46
                     sei bhave prabhu sei sloka uccarila
                     sloka uccarite tad-rupa apane ha-ila
                                 TRANSLATION     In the same spirit of ecstasy, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu recited that
verse, and as soon as He did so, He felt like Srimati Radharani.
                                   TEXT 47
                      aslisya va pada-ratam pinastu mam
                       adarsanan marma-hatam karotu va                       yatha tatha va vidadhatu lampato                      mat-prana-nathas tu sa eva naparah
                                 TRANSLATION     "Let Krsna tightly embrace this maidservant, who has fallen at His
lotus feet. Let Him trample Me or break My heart by never being visibleto Me. He is a debauchee, after all, and can do whatever He likes, butHe is still no one other than the worshipable Lord of My heart.
                                   TEXT 48
                "ami--krsna-pada-dasi, tenho--rasa-sukha-rasi,
                           alingiya kare atma-satha                kiba na deya darasana, jarena mora tanu-mana,                         tabu tenho--mora prana-natha
                                 TRANSLATION     "I am a maldservant at the lotus feet of Krsna. He is the
embodiment of transcendental happiness and mellows. If He likes He cantightly embrace Meand make Me feel oneness with Him, or by not giving Me His audience, He
may corrode My mind and body. Nevertheless, it is He who is the Lord ofMy life.
                                   TEXT 49
                      sakhi he, suna mora manera niscaya
                  kiba anuraga kare, kiba duhkha diya mare,                       mora pranesvara krsna--anya naya
                                 TRANSLATION     "My dear friend, just hear the decision of My mind. Krsna is the
Lord of My life in all conditions, whether He shows Me affection orkills Me by giving Me unhappiness.
                                   TEXT 50
                 chadi' anya nari-gana, mora vasa tanu-mana,
                        mora saubhagya prakata kariya                  ta-sabare deya pida, ama-sane kare krida,                            sei nari-gane dekhana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Sometimes Krsna gives up the company of other gopis and becomes
controlled, mind and body, by Me. Thus He manifests My good fortune andgives others distress by performing His loving affairs with Me.
                                   TEXT 51
                 kiba tenho lampata, satha, dhrsta, sakapata,
                          anya nari-gana kari' satha                  more dite manah-pida, mora age kare krida,                         tabu tenho--mora prana-natha
                                 TRANSLATION     "Or, since after all He is a very cunning, obstinate debauchee with
a propensity to cheat, He takes to the company of other women. He thenindulges in loving affalrs with them in front of Me to give distress toMy mind. Nevertheless, He is still the Lord of My life.
                                   TEXT 52
                na gani apana-duhkha, sabe vanchi tanra sukha,
                         tanra sukha--amara tatparya                more yadi diya duhkha, tanra haila maha-sukha,                         sei duhkha--mora sukha-varya                                 TRANSLATION
     "I do not mind My personal distress. I only wish for the happiness
of Krsna, for His happiness is the goal of My life. However, if He feelsgreat happiness in giving Me distress, that distress is the best of Myhappiness.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that a devotee does
not care about his own happiness and distress; he is simply interestedin seeing that Krsna is happy, and for that purpose he engages invarious activities. A pure devotee has no way of sensing happinessexcept by seeing that Krsna is happy in every respect. If Krsna becomeshappy by giving him distress, such a devotee accepts that unhappiness asthe greatest of all happiness. Those who are materialistic, however, whoare very proud of material wealth and have no spiritual knowledge, likethe prakrta-sahajiyas, regard their own happiness as the aim of life.Some of them aspire to enjoy themselves by sharing the happiness ofKrsna. This is the mentality of fruitive workers who want to enjoy sensegratification by making a show of service to Krsna.
                                   TEXT 53                  ye narire vanche krsna, tara rupe satrsna,
                           tare na pana haya duhkhi                 mui tara paya padi', lana yana hate dhari',                        krida karana tanre karon sukhi
                                 TRANSLATION     "If Krsna, attracted by the beauty of some other woman, wants to
enjoy with her but is unhappy because He cannot get her, I fall down ather feet, catch her hand and bring her to Krsna to engage her for Hishappiness.
                                   TEXT 54
                  kanta krsne kare rosa, krsna paya santosa,
                         sukha paya tadana-bhartsane                yatha-yogya kare mana, krsna tate sukha pana,                           chade mana alpa-sadhane
                                 TRANSLATION     "When a beloved gopi shows symptoms of anger toward Krsna, Krsna is
very satisfied. Indeed, He is pleased when chastised by such a gopi. Sheshows her pride suitably, and Krsna enjoys that attitude. Then she givesup her pride with a little endeavor.
                                   TEXT 55                 sei nari jiye kene, krsna-marma vyatha jane,
                          tabu krsne kare gadha rosa                 nija-sukhe mane kaja, paduka tara sire vaja,                         krsnera matra cahiye santosa
                                 TRANSLATION     "Why does a woman continue to live who knows that Krsna's heart is
unhappy but who still shows her deep anger toward Him? She is interestedin her own happiness. I condemn such a woman to be struck on the headwith a thunderbolt, for we simply want the happiness of Krsna.
                                   PURPORT     A devotee who is satisfied only with his own sense gratification
certainly falls down from the service of Krsna. Being attracted bymaterial happiness, he later joins the prakrta-sahajiyas, who areconsidered to be nondevotees.
                                   TEXT 56                ye gopi mora kare dvese krsnera kare santose,
                           krsna yare kare abhilasa                  mui tara ghare yana, tare sevon dasi hana,                           tabe mora sukhera ullasa
                                 TRANSLATION     "If a gopi envious of Me satisfies Krsna and Krsna desires her, I
shall not hesitate to go to her house and become her maidservant, forthen My happiness will be awakened.
                                   TEXT 57
                kusthi- viprera raman i, pa ti vrata-siromani,
                        pati lagi' kaila vesyara seva                  stambhila suryera gati, jiyaila mrta pati,                         tusta kaila mukhya tina-deva
                                 TRANSLATION     "The wife of a brahmana suffering from leprosy manifested herself
as the topmost of all chaste women by serving a prostitute to satisfyher husband.
She thus stopped the movement of the sun, brought her dead husband back
to life and satisfied the three principal demigods [Brahma, Visnu andMahesvara].
                                   PURPORT     The Aditya purana, Markendeya purana and Padma purana tell about a
brahmana who was suffering from leprosy but had a very chaste andfaithful wife. He desired to enjoy the company of a prostitute, andtherefore his wife went to her and became her maidservant, just to drawher attention for his service. When the prostitute agreed to associatewith him, the wife brought her the leprotic husband. When that leper,the sinful son of a brahmana, saw the chastity of his wife, he finallyabandoned his sinful intentions. While coming home, however, he touchedthe body of Markendeya Rsi, who thus cursed him to die at sunrise.Because of her chastity, the woman was very powerful. Therefore when sheheard about the curse, she vowed to stop the sunrise. Because of herstrong determination to serve her husband, the three deities--namelyBrahma, Visnu and Mahesvara--were very happy, and they gave her thebenediction that her husband would be cured and brought back to life.This example is given herein to emphasize that a devotee should engagehimself exclusively for the satisfaction of Krsna, without personalmotives. That will make his life successful.
                                   TEXT 58                "krsna--mora jivana, krsna--mora prana-dhana,
                          krsna--mora pranera parana                 hrdaya-upare dharon, seva kari' sukhi karon,                           ei mora sada rahe dhyana
                                 TRANSLATION     "Krsna is My life and soul. Krsna is the treasure of My life.
Indeed, Krsna is the very life of My life. I therefore keep Him alwaysin My heart and try to please Him by rendering service. That is Myconstant meditation.
                                   TEXT 59
                 mora sukha--sevane, krsnera sukha--sangame,
                            ataeva deha dena dana              krsna more `kanta' kari;, kahe more `pranesvari;,                          mora haya `dasi'-abhimana
                                 TRANSLATION     "My happiness is in the service of Krsna, and Krsna's happiness is
in union with Me. For this reason, I give My body in charity to thelotus feet of Krsna, who accepts Me as His loved one and calls Me Hismost beIoved. It is then that I consider Myself His maidservant.
                                   TEXT 60
               kanta-seva-sukha-pura, sangama haite sumadhura,
                         tate saksi--laksmi thakurani
                 narayana-hrdi sthiti, tabu pada-sevaya mati,                          seva kare `dasi'-abhimani
                                 TRANSLATION     "Service to My lover is the home of happiness and is more sweet
than direct union with Him. The goddess of fortune is evidence of this,for although she constantly lives on the heart of Narayana, she wants torender service to His lotus feet. She therefore considers herself amaidservant and serves Him constantly."
                                   TEXT 61
                  ei radhara vacana, visuddha-prema-laksana,
                          as vada ye sri-gaura-ra ya                bhave mana nahe sthira, sattvike vyape sarira,                          mana-deha dharana na yaya
                                 TRANSLATION     These statements by Srimati Radharani show the symptoms of pure
love for Krsna tasted by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In that ecstatic love,His mind was
unsteady. Transformations of transcendental love spread throughout His
entire body, and He could not sustain His body and mind.
                                   TEXT 62
               vrajera visuddha-prema,-- yena jambu-nada hema,
                        atma-sukhera yahan nahi gandha                se prema jana'te loke, prabhu kaila ei sloke,                         pade kaila arthera nirbandha
                                 TRANSLATION     The pure devotional service in Vrndavana is like the golden
particles in the River Jambu. In Vrndavana there is not a trace ofpersonal sense gratification. It is to advertise such pure love in thismaterial world that Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has written the previousverse and explained its meaning.
                                   TEXT 63
                      ei-mata mahaprabhu bhavavista hana
                     pralapa karila tat-tat sloka padiya
                                 TRANSLATION     Thus overwhelmed by ecstatic love, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke
like a madman and recited suitable verses.                                   TEXT 64
                    purve asta-sloka kari' loke siksa dila
                    sei asta-slokera artha apane asvadila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord had formerly composed these eight verses to teach people
in general. Now He personally tasted the meaning of the verses, whichare called the Siksastaka.
                                   TEXT 65
                  prabhura `siksastaka'-sloka yei pade, sune
                    krsne prema-bhakti tara bade dine-dine
                                 TRANSLATION     If anyone recites or hears these eight verses of instruction by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, his ecstatic love and devotion for Krsna increaseday by day.
                                   TEXT 66
                   yadyapiha prabhu--koti-samudra-gambhira
                     nana-bhava-candrodaye hayena asthira
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is as deep and grave as millions
of oceans, when the moon of His various emotions rises, He becomesrestless.
                                  TEXT 67-68
                      yei yei sloka jayadeva, bhagavate
                       rayera natake, yei ara karnamrte
                      sei sei bhave sloka kariya pathane
                      sei sei bhavavese karena asvadane
                                 TRANSLATION     When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu read the verses of Jayadeva's Gita-
govinda, of Srimad-Bhagavatam, of Ramananda Raya's drama Jagannatha-vallabhanataka and of Bilvamangala Thakura's Krsna-karnamrta, He wasoverwhelmed by the various ecstatic emotions of those verses. Thus Hetasted their purports.                                   TEXT 69
                    dvadasa vatsara aiche dasa--ratri-dine
                     krsna-rasa asvadaye dui-bandhu-sane
                                 TRANSLATION     For twelve years, Sri Caitanya remained in that state day and
night. With His two friends, He tasted the meaning of those verses,which consist of nothing but the transcendental bliss and mellows ofKrsna consciousness.
                                   TEXT 70
                       sei saba lila-rasa apane ananta
                    sahasra-vadane varni' nahi pa'na anta
                                 TRANSLATION     Even Anantadeva, who has thousands of faces, could not reach the
end of describing the transcendental bliss of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu'spastimes.
                                   TEXT 71
                  jiva ksudra-buddhi kon taha pare varnite?
                      tara eka kana sparsi apana sodhite
                                 TRANSLATION     How, then, could an ordinary living being with very little
intelligence describe such pastimes? Nevertheless, I am trying to touchbut a particle of them just to rectify my own self.
                                   TEXT 72
                   yata cesta, yata pralapa,--nahi paravara
                   sei saba varnite grantha haya suvistara
                                 TRANSLATION     There is no limit to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's activities and His
words of madness. Therefore describing them all would greatly increasethe size of this book. book.
                                   TEXT 73
                   vrndavana-dasa prathama ye lila varnila
                    sei-saba lilara ami sutra-matra kaila                                 TRANSLATION
     Whatever pastimes Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has first described
I have merely summarized.
                                   TEXT 74
                    tanra tyakta `avasesa' sanksepe kahila
                    lilara bahulye grantha tathapi badila
                                 TRANSLATION     I have only very briefIy described the pastimes of Srt Caitanya
Mahaprabhu not described by Vrndavana dasa Thakura. Nevertheless,because those transcendental pastimes are so numerous, the size of thisbook has increased.
                                   TEXT 75
                    ataeva sei-saba lila na pari varnibare
                    samapti karilun lilake kari' namaskare
                                 TRANSLATION     It is impossible to describe all the pastimes elaborately. I shall
therefore end this description and offer them my respectful obeisaces.
                                   TEXT 76
                       ye kichu kahilun ei dig-darasana
                        ei anusare habe tara asvadana
                                 TRANSLATION     What I have described gives merely an indication, but by following
this indication one may obtaln a taste of all the pastimes of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 77
                    prabhura gambhira-lila na pari bujhite
                  buddhi-pravesa nahi tate, na pari varnite
                                 TRANSLATION     I cannot understand the very deep, meaningful pastimes of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. My intelligence cannot penetrate them, andtherefore I could not properly describe them.                                   TEXT 78
                     saba srota vaisnavera vandiya carana
                   caitanya-caritra-varnana kailun samapana
                                 TRANSLATION     After offering my respectful obeisances to the lotus feet of all my
Vaisnava readers, I shall therefore end this description of thecharacteristics of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 79
                    akasa--ananta, tate yaiche paksi-gana
                      yara yata sakti, tata kare arohana
                                 TRANSLATION     The sky is unlimited, but many birds fly higher and higher
according to their own abilities.
                                   TEXT 80
                    aiche mahaprabhura lila--nahi ora-para
                    jiva' hana keba samyak pare varnibara?
                                 TRANSLATION     The pastimes of Sri Caltanya Mahaprabhu are like the unlimited sky.
How, then, can an ordinary living being describe them all?
                                   TEXT 81
                     yavat buddhira gati, tateka varnilun
                   samudrera madhye yena eka kana chunilun
                                 TRANSLATION     I have tried to describe them as far as my intelligence allows, as
if trying to touch a drop in the midst of a great ocean.
                                   TEXT 82
                    nityananda-krpa-patra--vrndavana-dasa
                   caitanya-lilaya tenho hayena `adi-vyasa'
                                 TRANSLATION     Vrndavana dasa Thakura is Lord Nityananda's favorite devotee, and
therefore he is the original Vyasadeva in describing the pastimes of SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that all writers after
Vrndavana dasa Thakura who are pure devotees of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuand who have tried to describe the Lord's activities are to beconsidered like Vyasa. Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura is the originalVyasadeva in describing caitanya-lila, and all others who follow in hisfootsteps by describing Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes are also tobe called Vyasadeva. The bona fide spiritual master is called Vyasabecause he is a representative of Vyasa. Worshiping the birthday of sucha spiritual master is called Vyasa-puja.
                                   TEXT 83                    tanra age yadyapi saba lilara bhandara
                      tathapi alpa varniya chadilena ara
                                 TRANSLATION     Although Vrndavana dasa Thakura has within his jurisdiction the
full store of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes, he has left aside mostof them and described but a small portion.
                                   TEXT 84
                   ye kichu varnilun, seha sanksepa kariya
                 likhite na parena, tabu rakhiyachena likhiya
                                 TRANSLATION     What I have described was left aside by Vrndavana dasa Thakura, but
although he could not describe these pastimes, he gave us a synopsis.
                                   TEXT 85
               caitanya-mangale tenho likhiyache sthane-sthane
                     sei vacana suna, sei parama-pramane
                                 TRANSLATION     In his book named Caitanya-mangala [Caitanya-bhagavata], he has
described these pastimes in many places. I request my readers to hearthat book, for that is the best evidence.
                                   TEXT 86
                  sanksepe kahilun, vistara na yaya kathane                     vistariya veda-vyasa kariba varnane
                                 TRANSLATION     I have described the pastimes very briefly, for it is impossible
for me to describe them in full. In the future, however, Vedavyasa willdescribe them elaborately.
                                   TEXT 87
                caitanya-mangale iha likhiyache sthane-sthane
                  satya kahena,--`age vyasa kariba varnane'
                                 TRANSLATION     In Caitanya-mangaIa, Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has stated in
many pIaces the factual truth that in the future Vyasadeva will describethem elaborately.
                                   PURPORT     The statement age vyasa kariba varnane is similar to a text in the
Caitanya- bhagavata (First Chapter, text 180) in which Vrndavana dasaThakura says:     sesa-khande caitanyera ananta vilasa     vistariya varnite achena veda-vyasa"The unlimited pastimes of Sri Caitanya will be described by Vyasadevain the future." Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura says that thesestatements indicate that in the future, other representatives of Vyasadeva willelaborately describe Lord Caitanya's pastimes. The purport is that anypure devotee in the disciplic succession who describes the pastimes ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is confirmed to be a representative ofVyasadeva.
                                   TEXT 88                 caitanya-lilamrta-sindhu--dugdhabdhi-samana
                  trsnanurupa jhari bhari' tenho kaila pana
                                 TRANSLATION     The ocean of nectarean pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is like
the ocean of milk. According to his thirst, Vrndavana dasa Thakurafilled his pitcher and drank from that ocean.
                                   TEXT 89
                     tanra jhari-sesamrta kichu more dila
                     tateke bharila peta, trsna mora gela
                                 TRANSLATION     Whatever remnants of milk Vrndavana dasa Thakura has given me are
sufficient to fill my belly. Now my thirst is completely satiated.
                                  TEXT 90-91
                    ami--ati-ksudra jiva, paksi ranga-tuni
                    se yaiche trsnaya piye samudrera pani
                     taiche ami eka kana chunilun lilara
                  ei drstante janiha prabhura lilara vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     I am a very insignificant living being, like a small red-beaked
bird. Just as such a bird drinks the water of the sea to quench itsthirst, so I have touched only a drop of the ocean of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu's pastimes. From this example, you may all understand howexpansive are the pastimes of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 92
                    `ami likhi',--eha mithya kari anumana
                      amara sarira kastha-putali-samana
                                 TRANSLATION     I infer that "I have written" is a false understanding, for my body
is like a wooden doll.
                                   TEXT 93
                      vrddha jaratura ami andha, badhira
                   hasta hale, manobuddhi nahe mora sthira
                                 TRANSLATION     I am old and troubled by invalidity. I am almost blind and deaf, my
hands tremble, and my mind and intelligence are unsteady.
                                   TEXT 94
                   nana-roga-grasta,--calite vasite na pari
                   panca-roga-pida-vyakula, ratri-dine mari
                                 TRANSLATION     I am infected by so many diseases that I can neither properly walk
nor properly sit. Indeed, I am always exhausted by five kinds ofdisease. I may die at any time of the day or night.                                   TEXT 95
                     purve granthe iha kariyachi nivedana
                      tathapi likhiye, suna ihara karana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have previously given an account of my inabilities. Please hear
the reason why I nevertheless still write.
                                  TEXT 96-98
                  sri-govinda, sri-caitanya, sri-nityananda
                 sri-advaita, sri-bhakta, ara sri-srotr-vrnda
                    sri-s va rupa, sri-rupa, sri-sanatana
                sri-raghunatha-dasa sri-guru, sri-jiva-carana
                   inha-sabara carana-krpa ya lekhaya amare
                      ara eka haya,--tenho ati-krpa kare
                                 TRANSLATION     I am writing this book by the mercy of the lotus feet of Sri
Govindadeva, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Lord Nityananda, Advaita Acarya,other devotees and the readers of this book, as well as Svarupa DamodaraGosvami, Sri Rupa Gosvami, Sri Sanatana Gosvami, Sri Raghunatha dasaGosvami, who is my spiritual master, and Sri Jiva Gosvami. I have alsobeen specifically favored by another Supreme Personality.
                                   TEXT 99
                  sri-madana-gopala more lekhaya ajna kari'
                    kahite na yuyaya, tabu rahite na pari
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Madana-mohana Deity of Vrndavana has given the order that is
making me write. Although this should not be disclosed, I disclose itbecause I am unable to remain silent.
                                   TEXT 100
                     na kahile haya mora krta-ghnata-dosa
                   dambha kari bali' srota, na kariha rosa
                                 TRANSLATION     If I did not disclose this fact, I would be guilty of ingratitude
to the Lord. Therefore, my dear readers, please do not consider me tooproud and be angry at me.
                                   TEXT 101
                   toma-sabara carana-dhuli karinu vandana
                  tate caitanya-lila haila ye kichu likhana
                                 TRANSLATION     It is because I have offered my prayers unto the lotus feet of all
of you that whatever I have written about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu hasbeen possible.
                                   TEXT 102
                      ebe antya-lila-ganera kari anuvada
                     `anuvada' kaile pai lilara `asvada'
                                 TRANSLATION     Now let me repeat all the pastimes of the Antya-lila, for if I do
so I shall taste the pastimes again.
                                   TEXT 103
                  prathama paricchede--rupera dvitiya-milana
                   tara madhye dui-natakera vidhana-sravana
                                 TRANSLATION     The First Chapter describes how Rupa Gosvami met Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu for the second time and how the Lord heard his two dramas[Vidagdha-madhava and Lalita-madhava].
                                   TEXT 104
                   tara madhye sivananda-sange kukkura aila
                    prabhu tare krsna kahana mukta karila
                                 TRANSLATION     That chapter also describes the incident of Sivanada Sena's dog,
who was induced by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to chant the holy name ofKrsna and was thus liberated.
                                   TEXT 105                   dvitiye--chota-haridase karaila siksana
                   tara madhye sivanandera ascarya darsana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Second Chapter the Lord instructively punished Junior
Haridasa. Also in that chapter is the wonderful vision of SivanandaSena.
                                   TEXT 106
                      trtiye--haridasera mahima pracanda
                 damodara-pandita kaila prabhure vakya-danda
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Third Chapter is a description of the forceful glories of
Haridasa Thakura. That chapter also mentions how Damodara Pandita spokewords of criticism to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 107
                  prabhu `nama' diya kaila brahmanda-mocana
                    haridasa karila namera mahima-sthapana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Third Chapter also tells how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu delivered
everyone by bestowing upon the universe the holy name of the Lord, andit describes how Haridasa Thakura established the glories of the holyname by his practical example.
                                   TEXT 108
                   caturthe--sri-sanatanera dvitiya-milana
                    deha-tyaga haite tanra karila raksana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Fourth Chapter describes Sanatana Gosvami's second visit with
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and how the Lord saved him from committingsuicide.
                                   TEXT 109
                 jyaistha-masera dhupe tanre kaila pariksana
                   sakti sancariya punah pathaila vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Fourth Chapter also tells how Sanatana Gosvami was tested in
the sunshine of Jyaistha [May and June] and was then empowered and sentback to Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 110
                 pancame--pradyumna-misre prabhu krpa karila
                     raya-dvara krsna-katha tanre sunaila
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Fifth Chapter, the Lord showed His favor to Pradyumna Misra
and made him hear topics of Krsna from Ramananda Raya.
                                   TEXT 111
                 tara madhye `bangala'-kavira nataka-upeksana
                svarupa-gosani kaila vigrahera mahima-sthapana
                                 TRANSLATION     Also in that chapter, Svarupa Damodara Gosvami rejected the drama
of a poet from Bengal and established the glories of the Deity.
                                   TEXT 112
                   sasthe--raghunatha-dasa prabhure milila
                    nityananda-ajnaya cida-mahotsava kaila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Sixth Chapter describes how Raghunatha dasa Gosvami met Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and performed the chipped rice festival inaccordance with Nityananda Prabhu's order.
                                   TEXT 113
                    damodara-svarupa-thani tanre samarpila
                  `govardhana-sila', `gunja-mala' tanre dila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Lord entrusted Raghunatha dasa Gosvami to the care of Svarupa
Damodara Gosvami and gave Raghunatha dasa the gift of a stone fromGovardhana Hill and a garland of small conchshells.
                                   TEXT 114
                 saptama-paricchede--vallabha bhattera milana                     nana-mate kaila tanra garva khandana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Seventh Chapter tells how Sri Caitanya met Vallabha Bhatta and
dismantled his false pride in various ways.
                                   TEXT 115
                      astame--ramacandra-purira agamana
                  tanra bhaye kaila prabhu bhiksa sankocana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Eighth Chapter describes the arrival of Ramacandra Puri and how
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu minimized His eating due to fear of him.
                                   TEXT 116
                    na vame--gopina tha-pattanayaka-mocana
                   trijagatera loka prabhura paila darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Ninth Chapter is a description of how Gopinatha Pattanayaka
was delivered and how the people of the three worlds were able to seeSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 117
                    dasame--kahilun bhakta-datta-asvadana
                    raghava-panditera tahan jhalira sajana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Tenth Chapter I have described how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
tasted the food given by His devotees, and I have also described theassortments in the bags of Raghava Pandita.
                                   TEXT 118
                    tara madhye govindera kaila pariksana
                    tara madhye parimunda-nrtyera varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     Also in that chapter is a description of how the Lord examined
Govinda and how He danced in the temple.                                   TEXT 119
                     ekadase--haridasa-thakurera niryana
                bhakta-vatsalya yahan dekhaila gaura bhagavan
                                 TRANSLATION     The Eleventh Chapter describes the disappearance of Haridasa
Thakura and how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, showed His affection for His devotees.
                                   TEXT 120
                    dvadase--jagadanandera taila-bhanjana
                     nityananda kaila sivanandere tadana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Twelfth Chapter are descriptions of how Jagadananda Pandita
broke a pot of oil and how Lord Nityananda chastised Sivanada Sena.
                                   TEXT 121
                   trayodase--jagadananda mathura yai' aila
                      mahaprabhu deva-dasira gita sunila
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Thirteenth Chapter, Jagadananda Pandita went to Mathura and
returned, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by chance heard a song sung by adeva-dasi dancing girl.
                                   TEXT 122
                    raghunatha-bhattacaryera tahani milana
                  prabhu tanre krpa kari' pathaila vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     Also in the Thirteenth Chapter, Raghunatha Bhatta met Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who by His causeless mercy sent him to Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 123
                    caturdase--divyonmada-arambha varnana
                `sarira' etha prabhura, `mana' gela vrndavana
                                 TRANSLATION     The Fourteenth Chapter describes the beginning of the Lord's
spiritual trance, in which His body was at Jagannatha Puri but His mindwas in Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 124
                   tara madhye prabhura simha-dvare patana
                    asthi-sandhi-tyaga, anubhavera udgama
                                 TRANSLATION     Also in that chapter is a description of how Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu fell down in front of the Simha-dvara gate of Jagannathatemple, His bones separated at the joints, and how varioustranscendental symptoms awakened.
                                   TEXT 125
                    cataka-parvata dekhi' prabhura dhavana
                  tara madhye prabhura kichu pralapa-varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     Also in that chapter there is a description of how Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu ran toward Cataka-parvata and spoke like a madman.
                                   TEXT 126
                    pan cadasa-paricchede--udyana- vilase
                    vrndavana-bhrame yahan karila pravese
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Fifteenth Chapter is a description of how Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu entered a garden on the shore of the sea, mistaking thegarden for Vrndavana.
                                   TEXT 127
                  tara madhye prabhura pancendriya-akarsana
                    tara madhye karila rase krsna-anvesana
                                 TRANSLATION     Also in that chapter is a description of the attraction of Lord
Caitanya's five senses to Krsna and how He searched for Krsna in therasa dance.
                                   TEXT 128                     sodase--kalidase prabhu krpa karila
                   vaisnavocchista khaibara phala dekhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     The Sixteenth Chapter tells how Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu showed His
mercy to Kalidasa and thus demonstrated the result of eating theremnants of the food of Vaisnavas.
                                   TEXT 129
                       sivanandera balake sloka karaila
                  simha-dvare dvari prabhure krsna dekhaila
                                 TRANSLATION     It also describes how Sivananda's son composed a verse and how the
doorkeeper of the Simha-dvara showed Krsna to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
                                   TEXT 130
                     maha-prasadera tahan mahima varnila
                    krsnadharamrtera phala-sloka asvadila
                                 TRANSLATION     Also in that chapter, the glories of maha-prasada are explained,
and a verse is tasted describing the effect of nectar from the lips ofKrsna.
                                   TEXT 131
                   saptadase--gabhi-madhye prabhura patana
                      kurmakara-anubhavera tahani udgama
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Seventeenth Chapter, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu fell among the
cows and assumed the form of a tortoise as His ecstatic emotionsawakened.
                                   TEXT 132
                  krsnera sabda-gune prabhura mana akarsila
                 "ka stry anga te" slokera artha avese karila
                                 TRANSLATION     Also in the Seventeenth Chapter, the attributes of Krsna's sound
attracted the mind of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who described in ecstasythe meaning of the "ka stry anga te" verse.
                                   TEXT 133
                     bhava-sabalye punah kaila pralapana
                    karnamrta-slokera artha kaila vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     Due to the conjunction of various ecstatic emotions, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu again began speaking like a madman and described in detailthe meaning of a verse f rom Krsna-karnamrta.
                                   TEXT 134
                     astadasa paricchede--samudre patana
                     krsna-gopi-jala-keli tahan darasana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Eighteenth Chapter, the Lord fell into the ocean, and in
ecstasy He saw the pastimes of the water fight between Krsna and thegopis.
                                   TEXT 135
                     tahani dekhila krsnera vanya-bhojana
                   jaliya uthaila, prabhu aila sva-bhavana
                                 TRANSLATION     In that dream, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu saw Krsna's picnic in the
forest. As Lord Caitanya floated in the sea, a fisherman caught Him, andthen the Lord returned to His own residence.
                                   TEXT 136
                 unavimse--bhittye prabhura mukha-sangharsana
                    krsnera viraha-sphurti-pralapa-varnana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Nineteenth Chapter is a description of how Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu rubbed His face against the walls and spoke like a madmanbecause of separation from Krsna.
                                   TEXT 137                     vasanta-rajanite puspodyane viharana
                   krsnera saurabhya-slokera artha-vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     That chapter also describes Krsna's wandering in a garden on a
spring night, and it fully describes the meaning of a verse about thescent of Krsna's body.
                                   TEXT 138
                 vimsa-paricchede--nija- `siksastaka' padiya
                     tara artha asvadila premavista hana
                                 TRANSLATION     In the Twentieth Chapter, Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu recited His
own eight stanzas of instruction and tasted their meaning in ecstaticlove.
                                   TEXT 139
                    bhakte sikhaite yei siksastaka kahila
                    sei slokastakera artha punah asvadila
                                 TRANSLATION     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu composed those eight stanzas to instruct
the devotees, but He also personally tasted their meaning.
                                   TEXT 140
                  mukhya-mukhya-lilara artha karilun kathana
                    `anuvada' haite smare grantha-vivarana
                                 TRANSLATION     I have thus described the principal pastimes and their meaning, for
by such repetition one can remember the descriptions in the book.
                                   TEXT 141
                  eka eka paricchedera katha--aneka-prakara
                 mukhya-mukhya kahilun, katha na yaya vistara
                                 TRANSLATION     In every chapter there are various topics, but I have selected only
those that are principal, for not all of them could be described again.                                 TEXT 142-143
                      sri-radha-saha `sri-madana-mohana'
                     sri-radha-saha `sri-govinda'-carana
                     sri-radha-saha srila `sri-gopinatha'
                    ei tina thakura haya `gaudiyara natha'
                                 TRANSLATION     The Vrndavana Deities of Madana-mohana with Srimati Radharani,
Govinda with Srimati Radharani, and Gopinatha with Srimati Radharani arethe life and soul of the Gaudiya Vaisnavas.
                                 TEXT 144-146
                   sri-krsna-caitanya, sri-yuta nityananda
                  sri-advaita-acarya, sri-gaura-bhakta-vrnda
                     sri-s varupa, sri-rupa, sri-sanatana
                   sri-guru sri-raghunatha, sri-jiva-carana
                      nija-sire dhari' ei sabara carana
                     yaha haite haya saba vanchita-purana
                                 TRANSLATION     So that my desires may be fulfilled, I place the lotus feet of
these personalities on my head: Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, with LordNityananda, Advaita Acarya and Their devotees, as well as Sri SvarupaDamodara Gosvami, Sri Rupa Gosvami, Sri Sanatana Gosvami, Sri Raghunathadasa Gosvami, who is my spiritual master, and Srila Jiva Gosvami.
                                   PURPORT     Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami was the instructing spiritual master
of Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami and has therefore been described as sri-guru.
                                   TEXT 147                     sabara carana-krpa--`guru upadhyayi'
                     mora vani--sisya, tare bahuta nacai
                                 TRANSLATION     The mercy of their lotus feet is my spiritual master, and my words
are my disciples that I have made dance in various ways.
                                   PURPORT     Upadhyayi, or upadhyaya, refers to one who teaches when approached
(upetya adhiyate asmat). In the Manu-samhita it is said:     eka-desam tu vedasya     vedangany api va punah     yo'dhyapayati vrtty-artham     upadhyayah sa ucyate"One who teaches others a part of the Vedas or literatures supplementaryto the Vedas may be called upadhyaya." Upadhyaya also refers to one whoteaches art.
                                   TEXT 148                   sisyara srama dekhi' guru nacana rakhila
                    `kroa' na nacaya, `vani' vasiya rahila
                                 TRANSLATION     Seeing the fatigue of the disciples, the spiritual master has
stopped making them dance, and because that mercy no longer makes themdance, my words now sit silently.
                                   TEXT 149
                      anipuna vani apane nacite na jane
                      yata nacaila, naci' karila visrame
                                 TRANSLATION     My inexperienced words do not know how to dance by themselves. The
mercy of the guru made them dance as much as possible, and now, afterdancing, they have taken rest.
                                   TEXT 150
                    saba srota-ganera kari carana vandana
                    yan-sabara carana-krpa--subhera karana
                                 TRANSLATION     I now worship the lotus feet of all my readers, for by the mercy of
their lotus feet there is all good fortune.
                                   TEXT 151
                      caitanya-caritamrta yei jana sune
                      tanra carana dhuna karon muni pane
                                 TRANSLATION     If one hears the pastimes of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as
described in Sri Caitanya-caritamrta, I wash his lotus feet and drinkthe water.
                                   TEXT 152
                   srotara pada-renu karon mastaka-bhusana
                   tomara e-amrta pile saphala haila srama
                                 TRANSLATION     I decorate my head with the dust of the lotus feet of my audience.
Now you have all drunk this nectar, and therefore my labor issuccessful.
                                   TEXT 153
                      sri-rupa-raghunatha-pade yara asa
                      caitanya-caritamrta kahe krsnadasa
                                 TRANSLATION     Praying at the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Sri Raghunatha, always
desiring their mercy, I, Krsnadasa, narrate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,following in their footsteps.
                                   TEXT 154
                  caritam amrtam etac chrila-caitanya-visnoh
                  subhadam asubhanasi sraddhayasvadayed yah                 tad-amala-pada-padme bhrngatam etya so'yam-                  rasayati rasam uccaih prema-madhvika-puram
                                 TRANSLATION     Caitanya-caritamrta is filled with the activities of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. Itinvokes all good fortune and destroys everything inauspicious. If onetastes the nectar of Caltanya-caritamrta with falth and love, I becomelike a bumblebee tasting the honey of transcendental love from his lotusfeet.
                                   TEXT 155
                            sriman-madana-gopala-
                            govindadeva -tusta ye                           caitanyarpitam astv etac                             caitanya-caritamrtam
                                 TRANSLATION     Since this book, Caitanya-caritamrta, is now complete, having been
written for the satisfaction of the most opulent Deities Madana-mohanajiand Govindaji, let it be offered at the lotus feet of Sri KrsnaCaitanyadeva.
                                   TEXT 156
                          parimala- vasita-bhu vanam
                       s varasonmadita-rasajna-rolambam                           giridhara-ca ranambhojam                       kah khalu rasikah samihate hatum
                                 TRANSLATION     Realized devotees are like bumblebees maddened by their own mellows
at Krsna's lotus feet. The scent of those lotus feet perfumes the entireworld. Who is the realized soul that could give them up?
                                   TEXT 157
                          sake sindhv-agni-vanendau
                           jyaisthe vrndavanantare                           suryahe'sita-pancamyam-                          grantho'yam purnatam gatah
                                 TRANSLATION     In Vrndavana in the year 1537, Sakabda Era, in the month of
Jyaistha [MayJune], on Sunday, the fifth day of the waning moon, thisCaitanya-caritamrta has been completed.
     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,
Antya-lila, Twentieth Chapter, describing the meaning of Siksastaka andhow the Lord tasted it Himself.
                               Concluding Words
     Today, Sunday, November 10, 1974--corresponding to the 10th of
Karttika, Caitanya Era 488, the eleventh day of the dark fortnight, theRama-ekadasi--we have now finished the English translation of SriKrsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami's Sri Caitanya-caritamrta in accordance withthe authorized order of His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiThakura Gosvami Maharaja, my beloved eternal spiritual master, guide andfriend. Although according to material vision His Divine Grace SrilaBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura Prabhupada passed away from thismaterial world on the last day of December, 1936, I still consider HisDivine Grace to be always present with me by his vani, his words. Thereare two ways of association--by vani and by vapu. Vani means words, and
vapu means physical presence. Physical presence is sometimes appreciableand sometimes not, but vani continues to exist eternally. Therefore wemust take advantage of the vani, not the physical presence. Bhagavad-gita, for example, is the vani of Lord Krsna. Although Krsna waspersonally present five thousand years ago and is no longer physicallypresent from the materialistic point of view, Bhagavad-gita continues.     In this connection we may call to memory the time when I wasfortunate enough to meet His Divine Grace Srila Prabhupada, sometime inthe year 1922. Srila Prabhupada had come to Calcutta from SridhamaMayapur to start the missionary activities of the Gaudiya Matha. He wassitting in a house at Ulta Danga when through the inducement of anintimate friend, the late Sriman Narendranatha Mallika, I had theopportunity to meet His Divine Grace for the first time. I do notremember the actual date of the meeting, but at that time I was one ofthe managers of Dr. Bose's laboratory in Calcutta. I was a newly marriedyoung man, addicted to Gandhi's movement and dressed in khadi.Fortunately, even at our first meeting, His Divine Grace advised me topreach the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in English in the Westerncountries. Because at that time I was a complete nationalist, a followerof Mahatma Gandhi's, I submitted to His Divine Grace that unless ourcountry were freed from foreign subjugation, no one would hear themessage of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu seriously. Of course, we had someargument on this subject, but at last I was defeated and convinced thatSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's message is the only panacea for sufferinghumanity. I was also convinced that the message of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu was then in the hands of a very expert devotee and thatsurely the message of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would spread all over theworld. I could not, however, immediately take up his instructions topreach, but I took his words very seriously and was always thinking ofhow to execute his order, although I was quite unfit to do so.      Inthis way I passed my life as a householder until 1950, when I retiredfrom family life as a vanaprastha. With no companion, I loitered hereand there until 1958, when I took sannyasa. Then I was completely readyto discharge the order of my spiritual master. Previously, in 1936, justbefore His Divine Grace passed away at Jagannatha Puri, I wrote him aletter asking what I could do to serve him. In reply, he wrote me aletter, dated 13 December 1936, ordering me, in the same way, to preachin English the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as I had heard it fromhim.     After he passed away, I started the fortnightly magazine Back toGodhead sometime in 1944 and tried to spread the cult of Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu through this magazine. After I took sannyasa, a well-wishingfriend suggested that I write books instead of magazines. Magazines, hesaid, might be thrown away, but books remain perpetually. Then Iattempted to write Srimad-Bhagavatam. Before that, when I was ahouseholder, I had written on Srimad Bhagavad-gita and had completedabout eleven hundred pages, but somehow or other the manuscript wasstolen. In any case, when I had published Srimad-Bhagavatam, FirstCanto, in three volumes in India, I thought of going to the U.S.A. Bythe mercy of His Divine Grace, I was able to come to New York onSeptember 17, 1965. Since then, I have translated many books, includingSrimad-Bhagavatam, Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Teachings of Lord Caitanya (asummary) and many others.     In the meantime, I was induced to translate Sri Caitanya-caritamrta
and publish it in an elaborate version. in his leisure time in laterlife, His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura would simplyread Caitanya-caritamrta. It was his favorite book. He used to say thatthere would be a time when foreigners would learn the Bengali languageto read Caitanya-caritamrta. The work on this translation began abouteighteen months ago. Now, by the grace of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu andHis Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, it is finished. Inthis connection I have to thank my American disciples, especially SrimanPradyumna dasa Adhikari, Sriman Nitai dasa Adhikari, Sriman Jayadvaitadasa Brahmacari and many other boys and girls who are sincerely helpingme in writing, editing and publishing all these literatures.     I think that His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura isalways seeing my activities and guiding me within my heart by his words.As it is said in Srimad-Bhagavatam, tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye.Spiritual inspiration comes from within the heart, wherein the SupremePersonality of Godhead, in His Paramatma feature, is always sitting withall His devotees and associates. It is to be admitted that whatevertranslation work I have done is through the inspiration of my spiritualmaster because personally I am most insignificant and incompetent to dothis materially impossible work. I do not think myself a very learnedscholar, but I have full faith in the service of my spiritual master,His Divine Grace Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura. If there isany credit to my activities of translating, it is all due to His DivineGrace. Certainly if His Divine Grace were physically present at thistime, it would have been a great occasion for jubilation, but eventhough he is not physically present, I am confident that he is verypleased by this work of translation. He was very fond of seeing manybooks published to spread the Krsna consciousness movement. Thereforeour society, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, hasformed to execute the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His DivineGrace Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura.     It is my wish that devotees of Lord Caitanya all over the worldenjoy this translation, and I am glad to express my gratitude to thelearned men in the Western countries who are so pleased with my workthat they are ordering in advance all my books that will be published inthe future. On this occasion, therefore, I request my disciples who aredetermined to help me in this work to continue their cooperation fully,so that philosophers, scholars, religionists and people in general allover the world will benefit by reading our transcendental literaturessuch as Srimad-Bhagavatam and Sri Caitanya-caritamrta.     Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to Sri Caitanya-caritamrta,dated November 10, 1974, at the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, Hare KrsnaLand, Juhu, Bombay.
“Caitanya-caritamrita – Antya Lila ” by His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Summary: Caitanya-caritamrita is the biography of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
written by Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami in the 16
th century, now published
with elaborate translations and commentaries in English by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami. The multi-volume Caitanya-caritamrita is dividedinto three sections, Adi Lila, Madhya Lila, and Antya Lila, representingthe beginning, middle, and concluding pastimes of Lord Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. This file comprises the text of the several volumes thatmake up the Antya Lila section.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluationcopy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyrightinformation intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Caitanya Caritamrita” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1975-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .