DHYANA VAHINI
Chapter I. The Power of MeditationChapter I. The Power of Meditation
Binding actions and liberating actions
People have to be doing some action ( karma ) or other from the moment of waking to the moment of sleep -
ing —that is to say, from birth to death. They cannot sit quietly without doing action. No one can avoid this 
predicament! But each one has to understand clearly which kind of action to be engaged in. There are only two 
types: (1) sensory or binding actions ( vishaya karmas ) and (2) actions that liberate ( sreyo karmas ).
The acts that bind have increased beyond control; as a result, sorrow and confusion have increased. Through 
these, no happiness and peace of mind can be gained.
On the other hand, the actions that liberate yield progressive joy and auspiciousness with each single act. 
They give bliss to the Self ( Atma-ananda ) and are not concerned with mere external joy! Though the acts may be 
external, the attraction is all toward the internal. This is the right path, the true path.
Actions that bind include all activity in relation to exterior objects. Such actions are usually resorted to with 
a desire for the result. This craving for the results leads one to the morass of “I” and “Mine” and the demon of 
lust and greed. If one follows this path, there will be sudden flares, as when clarified butter ( ghee ) is poured in the 
sacrificial fire! Assigning priority to sense objects ( vishaya ) is the same as assigning importance to poison ( visha )!
But while engaged in those activities and in those sense objects, if one has no interest in the result or conse -
quence, then not only can one be victorious over the feelings of “I” and “mine”, greed and lust, one can also be 
far away from all such traits. One will never be troubled by such traits.
Liberating action is pure, faultless, unselfish, and unswerving. Its characteristic is the importance given to 
the idea of action without any desire of the fruits thereof ( nishkama karma ), which was elaborated in the Gita. 
The practice of this discipline involves the development of truth, righteousness, peace, and love ( sathya , dharma , 
santhi , and prema ). While on this path, if one also takes up the discipline of remembering the name of the Lord, 
where else can one acquire more joy and bliss? It will give the fullest satisfaction.
If one treads this holy path, the Lord Himself will bestow all that is needed, all that is deserved, and all that 
will give peace of mind. Offer everything to the Lord without any desire for the result; that indeed yields full joy; 
that is indeed the easiest.
While it is very difficult to speak untruth and act against dharma , it is very easy to utter the truth and walk in 
the path of dharma . It is a very pleasant task to speak out the thing just as it is; one need not spend a moment of 
thought upon it. To speak of what is not, one has to create the non-existent! That plunges one into fear and fantasy, 
in an atmosphere of restlessness and worry.
So, instead of following sensory actions ( vishaya karma ), which offer all these troubles and complications, 
follow actions that liberate ( sreyo karma ), the path of Atmic  bliss ( Atma-ananda marga ), which is true, eternal, 
and holy.
The best means for following liberating actions is meditation ( dhyana ). Today, people with newfangled ideas 
argue how meditation is to be done and even why it should be done. But they know neither its taste nor its pu -9
Dhyana Vahini Chapter I. The Power of Meditationrity. That is why there is so much criticism and cynical laughter. My present intention is to instruct such people. 
Therefore, I am revealing this.
Taming the mind and the intelligence
See! Everyone in the world has the nature of behaving and acting in two different ways: one outside and an -
other inside. This is known to all, though generally people do not show this publicly. Just as people lose even the 
little joy that they have worrying over the factions they may have in their family, so they lose their internal peace 
when faced with physical obstacles and troubles.
For example, consider a cart. It cannot move by itself, can it? It can move only when two bullocks are yoked 
to it. And the cart can move safely only when the bullocks are trained to pull carts and when they are used to the 
road on which they have to walk. Instead, if they are ignorant of the process of pulling carts, if they have not 
walked on the road, if they have never stepped out of their shed, or if they have always moved only round and 
round the post to which they have been tied, in their own mire, the journey cannot proceed! And the cart will itself 
face danger!
So also, the inner consciousness ( anthah-karana ) cannot move of itself; it must be attached to the externally 
related bullocks, the intelligence ( buddhi ) and mind ( manas ). Then only can it move forward, following the bull -
ocks’ tracks.
So, earlier than the journey, the bullocks —intelligence and mind— should be conversant with the road to the 
village that the inner senses are eager to reach. They must be trained to proceed in that direction. If this is done, 
the journey will be easy and safe.
Instead, if the draught animals have no knowledge of the pathways of truth, righteousness, peace, and love 
(sathya , dharma , santhi , and prema ), and if they have never once trodden that path, the cart, the inner senses 
themselves, might come to grief! Even if they are prodded to proceed, they will only drag the cart to the familiar 
post and the accustomed mire of confusion, injustice, cruelty, indiscipline, and falsehood! What then of the jour -
ney? When is the arrival to be?
Therefore, intelligence and mind have to be taught the art of pulling the cart and moving steadily along the 
road. This has to be done by repetition of the Lord’s name ( japa) and meditation ( dhyana ).
One-pointedness and concentration
People are suffering despair and defeat on account of the waywardness and unsteadiness of the inner senses. 
This is the result of inability to control and guide the bullocks of intelligence and mind, unused as they are to 
meditation and repetition of the divine name to the extent of even stepping along that path! At such a time, the 
conflicting desires infecting the mind have to be quenched and controlled. The mind has to be focused in one 
direction. People must walk determinedly, using all their effort for the purpose of the aim and achievement they 
have set before themselves. If this is done, no force can pull them back; they can attain the position that is their 
due.
Plunge the wayward mind, which is fleeing in all directions, in contemplation of the name of the Lord; the 
effect will be like concentrating the rays of the sun through a piece of magnifying glass. The scattered rays de -
velop the power of a flame to burn and consume. So too, when the waves of intellect and the feelings of mind get 10
Dhyana Vahini Chapter I. The Power of Meditationone-pointedness through the converging lens of the Atma , they manifest as the universal divine splendour that can 
scorch evil and illumine joy.
Everyone is able to gain success in their profession or occupation only through one-pointed attention. Even 
the pettiest of tasks needs the quality of concentration for its fulfilment. And even the toughest problem yields 
before unswerving endeavour.
The value of chanting the divine name and meditation
People are endowed with unlimited powers. Not a single person is without them! But the road is missed 
when one is unaware of this truth. To gain awareness of this power, one must join the company of the holy, one 
must strive in spiritual practice ( sadhana ), and one must practise repetition of the divine name and meditation.
Of what avail is it, even though you have each item of provision in plenty, when you do not know how to 
cook them into palatable food? Similarly, people have in themselves all the provisions needed for their upkeep 
and progress, but they discard them lightly and leave them unused because they are ignorant of the process of ben -
efiting by them. People must seek to see and understand the Universal Power ( sakthi ), the One without a second, 
which is the basis of all the multifarious manifestations of name and form in the world.
The mind flies at a tangent all the time. Meditation ( dhyana ) is the process by which it is trained to acquire 
concentration. As a result of meditation on the highest Atma  (Paramatma ), the mind will withdraw from sense 
objects and the sensory world. Just at that time, the intellect ( buddhi ) must assert its authority and command the 
mind ( manas ) not to entertain any feeling except the thought of the Fundamental Basis.
When its basic truth is known, the mind will not be deluded by the evanescent, the untrue, and the unbliss -
ful. Instead, it will welcome the blossoming of joy, happiness, and truth, and it will not be affected by sorrow and 
grief. Nature ( prakriti ) and the life-force ( prana ) are indestructible, right? So, everything that is the product of the 
mingling of these two has a new value inherent in it.
One’s life also assumes a new splendour when one visualises and realises bliss in the awareness of the Su -
preme Reality ( satchidananda ) through a mind and intellect ( manas  and buddhi ) that is purified and transformed 
by means of meditation ( dhyana ). The taste of the fruit is evident when one sees the whole of it is eaten with no 
portion left behind. So too, when the taste of meditation is once discovered, one will discard all doubt and discus -
sion thereon and engage oneself fully in it. Therefore, begin meditation, each one of you, from today —even from 
this moment!
Meditation should be performed enthusiastically, with full faith and care, and strictly according to the dis -
ciplines laid down. If this is done, it will bestow not only all happiness and all victory but even the vision of the 
Lord. This is bound to the science of Supreme Spirituality ( Vedanta ) and also to the science of nature ( prakriti ). 
These two are different in only one respect. The students of nature ( prakriti ) are immersed in the objects of life; 
the students of Vedanta  are immersed in the basic truth of life. And people are bound to both of them! Nature is 
related to sense objects ( vishaya ); Vedanta  is related to one’s Self-reality ( swa-rupa ). If people desire to transform 
their lives, internal as well as external, into one of splendour, meditation is the best spiritual discipline ( sadhana ) 
they can adopt.
The method of meditation11
Dhyana Vahini Chapter I. The Power of MeditationThe place for meditation should be a little elevated — an inch or two— from the ground. Place a mat of 
dharbha  grass (a matty, long grass grown in India) on it, spread a deer skin on the mat, and lay a thin white cloth 
on the skin. Sit on it in the lotus posture ( padmasana ). The right foot must be above the left and the left foot above 
the right. The fingers of the hand must be in close touch with one another and the hands should be placed in front. 
The eyes must be either half open or fully closed.
Then, by means of mental massage, relax the neck, shoulders, hands, chest, teeth, stomach, fingers, back, 
thighs, knees, calves, and feet. After this, one has to meditate on one’s own favourite name and form, with Om 
added. When this is being done, there should be no mental wanderings; one must be stable and quiet. No thought 
of past events, no trace of anger or hatred, and no memory of sorrow should be allowed to interfere. Even if they 
intrude, they should not be considered at all; to counteract them, entertain thoughts that will feed one’s enthusiasm 
for meditation. Of course, this may appear difficult at first.
The best time for meditation is the quiet hours before dawn, between 3 and 5 a.m. One can awake, say, at 4 
a.m. First of all, sleep has to be subdued. This is very necessary. In order to keep the hours unchanged, one may 
set the alarm clock for 4 a.m. and rise. Even then, if sleep continues to bother, its effect can be overcome by means 
of a bath in cold water. Not that it is essential to bathe; it is needed only when sleep gives much trouble.
If in this manner the path of meditation ( dhyana ) is rigorously followed, it is possible for one to win the grace 
of the Lord very quickly.12
Dhyana Vahini Chapter II. Chanting God’s Name and MeditationChapter II. Chanting God’s Name and Meditation
Spiritual aspirants ( sadhakas ) all over the world will naturally be engaged in repetition of the name ( japa) and 
meditation, but first one has to be clear about the purpose of repeating the name and meditation. Without this 
knowledge, people believe them to be related to the objective world, capable of satisfying worldly desires, and 
hope to demonstrate their value by means of sensory gains! This is a grave error.
Repetition of God’s name and meditation are for acquiring one-pointed attention on the Lord, for casting off 
sensory attachments, and for attaining the joy derived from the basis of all sensory objects. The mind should not 
be wandering in all directions, indiscriminately, like the fly. The fly dwells in the sweetmeat shop and runs after 
the rubbish carts; the fly that has such a mind has to be taught to understand the sweetness of the first place and 
the impurity of the second place, so that it may not desert the sweetmeat shop and pursue the rubbish cart. When 
such teaching is imparted to the mind, it is called meditation!
Look at the other type, the bee! It has contact only with sweetness; it approaches only flowers that possess 
nectar; it is not attracted to other places; it does not proceed there at all. Similarly, one has to give up all inclina -
tions toward sensory attraction, toward the rubbish cart of the untrue and the impermanent. As far as possible, 
one has to direct the mind to all holy things, which yield sweetness and the joy associated with the Lord. To attain 
these, time is needed, of course. How long that time will be depends on the activities of thought, word, and deed 
as well as on the motives that impel those actions.
Gauge meditation by its inner impact
The main things to be considered are not at what expense one has prayed to the Lord, nor the number of years 
one has been engaged in it, nor the rules and regulations one has followed, nor even the number of times one has 
prayed over. The main considerations are: with what mind one has prayed, with what degree of patience one has 
been awaiting the result, and with what single-mindedness one has craved Godly bliss, regardless of worldly hap -
piness and delay, with no lassitude and with constant attention to oneself, one’s meditation, and one’s task.
If one examines deeply the success in getting rid of all idea of self, one can oneself gauge the progress made. 
Instead, if one is engaged in counting the rules and adding up the time spent and the expense incurred, such medi -
tation can belong only to the objective world; it can never come into the subjective and spiritual fields.
Repetition of God’s name and meditation ( japa and dhyana ) should never be judged on mere external stan -
dards; they are to be judged by their inner effects. Their essence is their relationship to the Atma . The immortal 
Atmic  experience should never be mixed up with low activities of the temporal world. Such activities deserve to 
be avoided. If room is given for them, and if one sways between impatience and sloth, and if one always worries 
oneself, feeling, “Why has it not come yet? Why is it still far away?” Then it all becomes simply repeating the 
name and meditation done with intent to gain, with an eye on the fruit thereof.
The single fruit of repetition of divine names and meditation is this: the conversion of the out-faced into the 
in-faced; the turning inward of one’s eye, the inward eye seeing the reality of Atmic  bliss. For this transformation, 
one has to be always active and hopeful, regardless of the time taken and the difficulties encountered. One should 
not count the cost, the time, or the trouble. One should await the descent of the Lord’s grace. This patient waiting 13
Dhyana Vahini Chapter II. Chanting God’s Name and Meditationis itself part of the austerity ( tapas ) of meditation. Sticking unfalteringly to the vow is the austerity.
The three paths of meditation
There are three ways by which aspirants try to enter the path of meditation: the path of truth ( sathwika-
marga ), the path of passion and emotion ( rajasika-marga ) and the path of ignorance ( thamasika-marga ).
The pure, serene ( sathwic ) path . On this path, one considers repetition of the name and meditation as a duty 
and suffers any amount of trouble for its sake; one is fully convinced that all this is just an illusion, so one does 
only good under all conditions and at all times. One desires only the good of all and is always loving toward all; 
one spends time uninterruptedly in the remembrance and meditation of the Lord. One does not crave even the fruit 
of repeating the name and meditation; one leaves it all to the Lord.
The passionate, restless ( rajasic ) path . Here, one craves the fruit of one’s act at every step. If the fruit is 
not available, then, gradually, laxity and disgust overpower the spiritual aspirant and repetition of the name and 
meditation slowly dry up.
The ignorant ( thamasic ) path . This path is even worse. The Lord will come into the memory only in times 
of danger or acute suffering or when one is the victim of loss or pain. At such times, such a person prays and vows 
to arrange this worship ( puja), offer this particular food, or build this kind of temple to the Lord. One will be 
calculating the quantity of food placed before the Lord, the tribute offered at His feet, the number of prostrations 
performed, and the number of times the shrine was circled —and ask for proportionate awards! For those who 
adopt this attitude in meditation, the mind and intellect can never be pure.
Most people now follow only the passionate, restless ( rajasic ) and dull, ignorant ( thamasic ) paths in repeat -
ing the divine name and meditation. However, the very intention of repeating the divine name and meditation is to 
purify the mind and the intellect. In order to achieve this, the first path is best: pure, serene ( sathwic ) meditation. 
When the mind and the intellect become pure, they will shine with the splendour of the understanding of the Atma . 
He in whom this understanding shines fully is called a sage ( rishi).
The knower of Atma  becomes the Atma  itself ( Brahmavid Brahmaiva bhavathi ). The goal of life, that which 
makes life worthwhile, is the understanding of the Atma  or, in other words, the basis of the individual soul ( jiva).
The need for bodily and mental training
There is a close mutual relationship between the attitudes of the body and the attitudes of the mind. So, peo -
ple’s inner feelings will be evident from their physical bodies. The stance and the appearance of the body help us 
to discover these feelings. Take one example. With the loins girded, the sleeves of the shirt rolled, and the palms 
rounded into fists, it is not possible to exhibit love or devotion. With bent knees, the eyes half-closed, and the 
hands raised up over the head with the palms joined, is it possible to show one’s anger or hatred or cruelty? That 
is why the ancient sages used to tell the spiritual aspirant that it is necessary during prayer and meditation to adopt 
the appropriate bodily pose. They saw that it is possible to control the waywardness of the mind by this means.
Of course, for the expert spiritual aspirant, meditation is easy in any pose; but for the novice, such physical 
means are essential. This bodily and mental training must be undergone only to be later discarded as but a means 
to attain the true and eternal Atma . Until this is realised, spiritual discipline has to be consistently practised.14
Dhyana Vahini Chapter II. Chanting God’s Name and MeditationUntil the goal of meditation is achieved, the well-established discipline of sitting postures ( asanas ) has to 
be followed. The curriculum has to be adhered to till then. After attainment of the goal —that is, after the mind 
(manas ) and the intellect ( buddhi ) have been conquered and brought under control— one can be immersed in 
meditation wherever one finds oneself: on the bed, in the chair, on a rock, or in a cart.
Once you learn to ride a motorcycle, you can ride on any road and under all conditions. But when you are 
just learning to ride, for your own safety and for the safety of those around you, you have to select an open pa -
rade ground. And you have to follow certain principles of balance; this is essential. So too, those who engage in 
meditational practice ( sadhana ) have to follow a certain course of training. No change can be made in this. So, 
the passionate, restless ( rajasic ) and the dull, ignorant ( thamasic ) forms can never be considered meditation. If 
the spiritual practice becomes fully pure and serene ( sathwic ), that is best.
To describe anything in words is difficult; it might even cause boredom. But to demonstrate it by deed is 
easier and more pleasant! To make people understand by doing meditation is better than by talking about it! My 
writing on it and your reading it will not make it easy.
Through meditation, people reach the divine experience of realising the Atma  within themselves. Through 
meditation, spiritual aspirants are able to cast off sheaths of ignorance, layer after layer. They withdraw their sense 
perceptions from contact with worldly objective experiences. The process that aims at this holy consummation 
deserves to be called meditation.
For this process, one must be equipped with good habits, discipline, and high ideals. One must be full of 
renunciation toward worldly things and their attractions. Whatever the situation, one should conduct oneself with 
enthusiasm and joy. Whatever is done must be dedicated not for the eking out of a livelihood but for earning Atmic  
bliss ( Atma-ananda ). One should train oneself to adopt a good sitting pose ( asana ), to avoid tension of the body, 
and to ease the mind from the weight and pressure of the body. This is what deserves to be called pure medita -
tional practice ( sathwika dhyana sadhana ). Discipline is very necessary for this.
Everyone has the right to spiritual success
The troubles and tribulations that come in the wake of an attempt to destroy the undesirable activities of the 
mind will disappear through the strict course and rules described above. What remains is only putting them into 
actual practice by the spiritual aspirant. Even the most powerful drug cannot effect a cure when it is brought to 
the bedside of the patient. The sufferer has to take it in, little by little, as per schedule, with all the attendant care, 
and try to assimilate it into the system. The healing principle of the drug must pervade the entire body; the body 
must be suffused with the drug. Similarly, the authoritative texts ( siddhanthas ) and the Vedanta  have no power to 
destroy individual faults and 15 weaknesses.
If full results are wanted, then one must give up all false and low feelings and act according to the true teach -
ings of the Vedanta  and the siddhanthas . If one does, one will attain the fruit. The secret of success in meditation 
lies in the purity of the inner life of the spiritual aspirant. The success is proportionate to the importance the spiri -
tual aspirant gives to right conduct ( san-marga ).
Everyone has the right to achieve this high degree of success. I do not say this in just a quiet tone; I declare 
this loud enough for all quarters to hear. Knowing this, meditate and advance! Do meditation and progress! Re -
alise the Atma !15
Dhyana Vahini Chapter III. The Goal of MeditationChapter III. The Goal of Meditation
Living is either pleasant or unpleasant, depending upon one’s basic attitude toward life. See how the same 
object becomes pleasant once and unpleasant on another occasion! The thing welcomed with great fondness 
at one time becomes hateful at another time and there is not even the desire to see it. The condition of the mind at 
those times is the cause of this state. Therefore, it is necessary to train the mind to be always pleasant.
Control the temper of the mind
The waters of a river leap from mountains, fall into valleys, and rush through gorges; tributaries join at vari -
ous stages, and the waters become turbid and unclean. So too, in the flood of human life, speed and power increase 
and decrease. These ups and downs might happen at any moment during life. No one can escape them. They may 
come at the beginning of life, at the end, or perhaps in the middle. So, one has to convince oneself firmly that life 
is necessarily full of ups and downs and that, far from being afraid and worried over them, one should welcome 
them as adding to one’s experience. One should not only feel like this, but one should be happy and glad whatever 
happens! Then, all troubles, whatever their nature, will pass away lightly and quickly. For this, the temper of the 
mind is essential.
Concentration and one-pointedness are the keys
Every minute, from inside and outside, promptings and temptations arise and accumulate in people. One 
cannot attend to all of them at the same time, so one fixes attention on only the most important one. This is called 
concentration ( avadhana ). Concentration is needed to grasp any subject well. Purposefully directing attention on 
a subject and fixing it there is one-pointedness ( ekagratha ). This is also a condition of the mind. Concentration 
and one-pointedness help to focus effort on any selected task.
Concentration is essential for all. It is the foundation of all successful endeavour. It is needed not only for 
meditation but even for worldly affairs and ordinary living. Whatever the task one is engaged in, doing it with 
concentration will develop both self-confidence and self-respect, for they are the result of the attitude of one’s 
own mind. The mind may lean on either the bad or the good, and concentrated attention must be employed to keep 
the mind attached only to good prompting. Success or failure in the good task depends upon one-pointedness.
One-pointedness will increase power and skill. But it cannot be won without conquering the worldly cravings 
that distract the mind. This one-pointedness, this conquest of the mind, is acquired by the exercise of meditation.
Yearn for the right thing!
There are two types of people: one set on accusing themselves as sinners and the other flattering themselves 
as great. Both types are being worried by their own mental aberrations! What they both need is mental satisfac -
tion, and this can be obtained by meditation. Through meditation, understanding will increase and wisdom will 
grow.
For this, a person should develop interest in and a taste for meditation —that is to say, a yearning that admits 
of no other step and that will not tolerate any obstacle. Of course, one may yearn to hear music and derive joy 16
Dhyana Vahini Chapter III. The Goal of Meditationtherefrom, or see the bodies of near relatives who have died and derive sorrow therefrom! Yearning may thus have 
pleasant or even unpleasant consequences! Yearning must have the strength to inspire endeavour. In fact, yearning 
is but dormant endeavour, and endeavour is yearning in action. When yearning is weak, endeavour declines; when 
one is strong, the other is also active.
Meditation gives concentration and success in all tasks. Through meditation alone, great personages and 
sages ( rishis ) have controlled their mental activities, directed them toward the pure ( sathwic ) path, established 
themselves at all times in contemplation of the Lord, and finally succeeded in achieving union with the Godhead. 
First, yearning, then selection of the goal, then concentration, and, through the discipline, conquest of the mind 
—that is the object of meditation.
One must give up the craving for material comfort and the attachment to sense objects. One must direct the 
false fears, the absurd desires, the sorrow, the worries, and the artificial pleasures that now fill mind. That is to say, 
one must discriminate and train oneself to realise that everything is as illusory as the ghost in the well! Everyone 
needs this self-education. The pathetic condition of everyone is due to its absence. Meditation is the remedy for 
this state of mind.
Reaching the goal through meditation
Through meditation, it is possible to bring into memory the paradise that is one’s empire, discarding the 
transitory creations of the mind as a dream and a delusion. By engaging oneself systematically and calmly in 
meditation. Meditation can be made effective and tranquil. Thus, the road toward the highest experience is laid. 
A new understanding dawns, clear and unruffled. When the heights of meditation are reached, this understanding 
becomes so strong that one’s lower nature is destroyed and burned to ashes! Then, only “You” remain! The entire 
creation is a delusion of your mind! One alone IS truth ( sathya ), the Lord, Being-Awareness-Bliss ( satchidan -
anda ), the highest Atma ; the ONE is the Self ( Sivoham ).
The truth ( sathya ) is so subtle and so soothing. Once it is reached, there is no meditation and no meditator; 
all merge into One. That is the fixed, illumined experience. Exulting within that one is pure knowledge, the wise 
one ( jnani ) will be aware only of Atmic  bliss ( Atma-anubhava ). That is the goal, the fruit of immortality. Attaining 
this transcendent experience, the yogi finishes meditation and moves among people resplendent with divinity! In 
the yogi, the Vedas  find fulfilment. The yogi is transformed into a pure being. Only meditation has the capacity to 
make one transcend the vicissitudes of time and space and make one ever the same equanimous individual, as if 
one is another Creator himself.
Once the individual ( jivi) is on the way toward the goal, the individual will derive full contentment from 
themself and discover within themself the source of bliss. The cravings and ambitions, delusions and falsehoods, 
and animal needs and antics that were worrying the individual till then all vanish. Since the Atma  pervades all, 
equally and steadily, the individual also loses the “I-ness” and gets immersed in its inherent divine status. Such a 
person is the real great soul ( mahatma ), a liberated soul ( jivan-muktha ). Fullness is bliss ( ananda ); bliss is peace 
(santhi ).
Those who do not give up the path of discrimination ( vichara marga ) receive the grace of the Lord, and they 
also realise the Atma . They will always be seeking the eternal truth that lies behind the dream-like illusions of this 
world.17
Dhyana Vahini Chapter III. The Goal of MeditationControl the senses ( jnanendriyas ), which run helter-skelter; then, the origins of the disease will be destroyed. 
Let the mind keep a watch over its gymnastics; dam up the mad flood of thoughts and plans and schemes; then 
there will be no room for worries and anxieties in the mind. To diminish the wanderings of your thoughts, repeat 
the name of the Lord; that will keep out your sorrows and troubles. Without the effacement of the mind, spiritual 
wisdom ( jnana ) cannot dawn. The full person is one who has succeeded in this.
Gain inward vision
The spiritual aspirant must first learn the secret of the “inward sight”, the “vision directed inward”, and take 
the attention away from the exterior. You have heard so far little about the inner world, but divine life is nothing 
but this method of “inward living”. Just as the baby, after learning to watch and understands, tries to toddle here 
and there at home, so also the spiritual aspirant learns to toddle in the inner world and understands it. A healthy 
baby in the cradle waves its arms and legs in glee and lisps in joy, watching the lamp on the wall. Similarly, the 
spiritual aspirant, also healthy in body, mind, and soul, lying in the cradle of life, watches the inner world and 
claps the hands ceaselessly in great glee at that inner joy. This has to be done.
Besides, every thought, every word, every deed has to proceed from the full consciousness of knowledge. 
Direct your intelligence not to wander about but to dwell constantly in the inner world! This is the inward quest 
(antar vimarsha ), and meditation ( dhyana ) is the most important instrument needed for this.
The spiritual aspirant can enter the inner quest through the gate of self-examination. That gate accords 
welcome into the highest and holiest status possible in life to every aspirant who is endowed with humility and 
devotion.18
Dhyana Vahini Chapter IV . Promote the Welfare of All BeingsChapter IV. Promote the Welfare of All Beings
The meditator ( dhyani ) considers the realisation of Atmic  bliss as important, but the promotion of the welfare 
of the world is also an equally important aim. For carrying out that aim, one must bring certain physical, ver -
bal, and mental tendencies under control. These are usually known as the tenfold sins: the three physical, the four 
verbal, and the three mental. The physical tendencies are: injury to life, adulterous desire, and theft. The verbal 
sins are: false alarms, cruel speech, jealous talk, and lies. The mental attitudes are: greed, envy, and denial of God.
Eschew the tenfold “sins”
The person intent on following the path of meditation must take every care that these ten enemies do not 
even approach. They have to be eschewed completely. The person needs tendencies that will help progress and not 
those that drag back. One must speak and act only good ( subha ), for good alone is auspicious ( mangala ) and the 
auspicious alone is Siva. This is what the scriptures ( sastras ) also say. The good is the auspicious. The auspicious 
is the spiritually helpful. The good is the instrument for merging in Siva.
Through the good, the meditator can achieve this world and the other; the meditator can promote their own 
welfare as well as the welfare of others. Welfare is the fruit of knowledge; illfare is the fruit of ignorance. Through 
welfare alone can peace, joy, and progress be attained. One’s very basic duty is the welfare of all beings! Promot -
ing it and contributing to it is the right task. Living out one’s span of life in discharging this task is the ordained 
path.
Be unaffected by illusion
The intellect ( buddhi ) in us is the witness of all things in this objective world. These worldly things limit and 
colour the intellect; they affect it and mould it into consciousness ( chaithanya ). Illusion ( maya ) is only the intel -
lect as affected by everything, as warped and twisted by the impressions of everything. Therefore, the spiritual 
consciousness that is unaffected by illusion —i.e. upon which the world has failed to produce any impression— is 
the Lord ( Iswara ).
Therefore, the person who is striving to reach the stage of the Lord must be unaffected by illusion, unim -
pressed by the world! How can one remain so unaffected? Through analysis, ratiocination, fearless inquiry, and 
pure reason. To acquire this analytical reason ( viveka ), sharing in the task of promoting the welfare of every being 
in nature is essential.
First, good qualities; later, the absence of qualities
The passing show, this world ( jagath ), is based on illusions ( maya ). That is why it is branded “false”. But 
do not conclude that mere recognition of the falsity of the world or an awareness that one has certain shortcom -
ings will lead one on the higher path and take one to the highest truth. Without a good character full of sterling 
qualities, one can never achieve progress in the spiritual field. Progress depends on the worth and quality of the 
individual, just as the harvest depends on the fertility of the field. Upon such a worthy piece of land, sow the seeds 
of sterling qualities and irrigate with the waters of reason and analysis; the plentiful harvest will be ready in due 
time! On lands where the seedlings of good qualities are not planted and tended, useless weeds multiply; and 19
Dhyana Vahini Chapter IV . Promote the Welfare of All Beingswhere orderly gardens could have been formed, thorny bushes create a jungle of impenetrable confusion.
Even if a person, through perversity or blind conceit, has thus far not cultivated good qualities, the person 
can at least make a try or make efforts to secure them! If this is not done, the excellence of life cannot be tasted and 
life is a waste; its worth is nil. The mind, by sheer force of these opposing forces, gets lost in false values and is 
unable to develop along the right lines. Such a mind, turned away from good, might cause indescribable evil. All 
progress won by the spiritual aspirant might be destroyed by such a mind in an unguarded moment, like a spark 
falling on a keg of gun powder because of a moment’s negligence!
Some try to be devoid of qualities, but they achieve only living death. Their pale faces reveal only lack of 
zest and interest. This is the result of unreasoned haste in spiritual discipline. Though becoming quality-less is 
ultimately needed, there should be no hurry to reach the goal. Even though a person may have the ardour, it very 
often leads to dilemmas, which many solve by means of suicide! First, one must accumulate wealth of character. 
Many stalwart aspirants have lost their way and not regained it in spite of years of effort because they evinced no 
interest in earning this qualification! Others have slipped into the morass through which they were wading!
You can see that the path of “achieving the absence of qualities” is strewn with dangers. One cannot exist 
without activity, so one must of necessity act through “good” qualities. One must put down all desires and become 
free. The mind filled with good qualities will help in this process, for it will bear other’s prosperity gladly. It will 
give up doing injury; it will seek opportunities to help, heal, and foster. It will not only suffer; it will also pardon. 
It will not incline toward the false; it will be on the alert to speak the truth. It will remain unruffled by lust, greed, 
anger, and conceit; it will be free from delusion. It will always seek the welfare of the world. From such a mind 
will flow an uninterrupted stream of love.
The placid, calm, unruffled character wins out
When this mind matures and attains fruition, it easily becomes free of all qualities: placid, calm, and pure. It 
easily merges in the one Atma  without a second.
Each person has the unique chance to taste the inner peace that such a mind can grant, but, unfortunately, 
most are strangers to the unshakable joy and equanimity that is their birthright. Meditation is the only island of 
refuge in the ocean of life for all beings tossed on the waves of desire, doubt, dread, and despair. This Vedantic  
truth must be present in the mind even while the world of objects ( vishaya ) is being attended to!
Consider the condition of this world hundreds of thousands of years ago. At that time, this globe was the 
scene of only two things. On one side was the fiery lava, which poured forth from the volcanoes and crevices that 
scarred the surface of the earth. The flood of destruction descended on all sides and spread fear and death in the 
regions around, as if the end of everything had come. On another side, the scarcely noticeable molecules of living 
matter, the microscopic amoeba, floated on the waters or clung to the crevices among the rocks, keeping the spark 
of life safe and well protected.
Upon which of these two —one boisterous and bright, the other quiet and secluded— would you have built 
your trust? At that time, surely no one would have believed that the future was with the amoeba or the animalcule! 
Who could have foreseen that these minute specks of life could hold out against the gigantic onslaught of molten 
lava and earth-shaking upheaval? Nevertheless, that speck of life-consciousness ( chaithanya ) won through. Un -
heralded by fire and dust, by swooping gale or swallowing floods, the amoeba, in the process of time and by the 20
Dhyana Vahini Chapter IV . Promote the Welfare of All Beingssheer force of the life-principle it embodied, blossomed into goodness and strength of character, into art and mu -
sic, into song and dance, into scholarship and spiritual discipline and martyrdom, into sainthood and even Avatars  
of Godhead! In all these, the history of the world is found summarised.
In the confusion of overpowering events, we see people sometimes placing faith in loud and noisy men who 
are enslaved by their own passions. But this is a passing phase; it will not last. When things are placid, calm, and 
unruffled, people can merge themselves in the atmosphere of delusionless consciousness, which is the highest 
they can reach. The peace ( santhi ) they taste there is subtler than the subtlest. They must ascend to it through ef -
fort guided by reason, through meditation. When the enjoyment is full and complete, it is no other than the divine 
status, the coveted goal of life. People do not generally strive for it, because they know nothing of its supreme 
attraction. Meditation gives them the first inkling of that bliss.
Meditation is the basis of spiritual experience
Therefore, everyone must now strengthen the mind and make it be aware of the happy moment of bliss. 
Otherwise, there is a likelihood of the mind discarding all effort to reach what is now dismissed as “empty” and 
“useless”. But once the mind is convinced that the moment of attunement with divine consciousness ( chaithanya ) 
is a moment of complete power, suffused with divine power ( sakthi ), then the effort will not be slackened; the 
spiritual aspirant can reach the Atmic  realisation without further interruption.
With this as the ideal, carry on meditation and mental repetition of the divine name from now on. The step 
immediately after meditation ( dhyana ) is total absorption ( samadhi ). Meditation is the seventh of the eight-fold 
yoga . Do not give up this royal road that leads you on to that sacred goal. Meditation is the very basis of all spiri -
tual practice ( sadhana ).21
Dhyana Vahini Chapter V . Cultivate the Blissful Atmic ExperienceChapter V. Cultivate the Blissful Atmic Experience
People are engaged in various forms of cultivation, but the most important of these is cultivation of spiritual 
experiences. All cultivation is based on spiritual cultivation. It is the king of cultures. The king makes laws, 
but he is above and beyond them. So too, all rules and laws, all distinctions of right and wrong, of sin and virtue, 
of joy and sorrow affect only the individual soul ( jivi) that attaches importance to the inexperienced mind ( manas ) 
and intellect ( buddhi ) and not to the Atma . So, cultivation of the Atmic  experience, which is pure, convincing, 
and self-transcending, is essential for all. It is also easy, for the Atma  is as the mother of all, and hearkening to 
the Atma  is like the child hearkening to the mother. Everyone is competent to have that experience; in fact, it is 
everyone’s right to have it. That is why the Atmic  discipline is being treated by me as so important.
The primary qualifications
The Atma  is also known as Brahman, so learning the Atmic  knowledge or Brahman knowledge ( Atma vidya )  
is to be considered as the objective by every student.
Such students have to earn some primary qualifications. Then only do they deserve the status of studentship. 
These qualifications are: discrimination ( viveka ), renunciation ( vairagya ), and the six qualities that constitute a 
good character. Aspirants who have these qualifications can hope to attain the Atma  with confidence and without 
much difficulty.
Lead a dharmic life
The highest Atma  (Paramatma ) has six chief characteristics: complete wisdom ( jnana ), complete renuncia -
tion ( vairagya ), divine beauty, the fullest splendour of power ( iswarya ), undiminished fame, and inexhaustible 
fortune. His nature is full existence ( sat), full knowledge ( chit), and full bliss ( ananda ). These are also related to 
people through the Atma  in them. So all humanity has a right to realise and enjoy these characteristics and this 
nature. That is its ordained duty. The travail of the world today is due to people not performing this ordained duty.
In daily life, the common person acts quite contrary to the dictates of the dharma  of the householder 
(grihastha ). People do not follow the path laid down by the scriptures ( sastras ) and by the law texts of Manu 
(Manusmrithi ). They do not have an iota of truthfulness in them. Truth is the most holy virtue. So, leading a primi -
tive type of life, people lose courage at the slightest upset and give up the adventure of life. People develop a kind 
of pseudo-renunciation. If only they would enter upon the householder’s life with the attitude of performing their 
duty, they would not need to run away from it and seek caves and forests for escape. Each can realise the Lord in 
their assignment of duty, in their dharmic  life.
The contemplation of the Lord must proceed in union with the dharmic  life. This type of life has no need for 
status, scholarship, or vanity. The latter only lead people astray. It is only through this life that the mind and the 
intellect can be controlled, the knowledge ( vidya ) of Atma  cultivated, and the will sublimated.
A good character is essential for the realisation of the Atma . In other words, all evil propensities have to 
be uprooted. Just as the army becomes dispirited and surrenders when the commander falls, so the army of evil 
qualities will surrender its arms as soon as egotism ( ahamkara ) is destroyed. The evil qualities are all natives of 22
Dhyana Vahini Chapter V . Cultivate the Blissful Atmic Experiencethe realm of anger, so if that region is devastated, the soldiers can never again raise their heads. It is enough to ac -
complish this alone, for what can commander Egotism achieve without a single soldier to march under his orders? 
So, all efforts must be directed to destroy the realm of anger so that no commander can venture to let loose the 
hounds of war. Let each spiritual aspirant preserve the region of his mind in peace, by putting a stop to the rise of 
this commander and these soldiers. Let each spiritual aspirant bask forever under the smile of the ruler, the Atma .
The eight gates
The destruction of the modifications and agitations of the mind is the prerequisite for getting an audience 
with that ruler. His reception hall has eight gates through which one has to pass for the audience: control of the 
inner senses, control of the outer senses, sitting posture, breath control, mind control, concentration, meditation, 
and super-consciousness ( yama , niyama , asana , pranayama , prathyahara , dharana , dhyana , and samadhi ).
Of these eight gates, meditation is the seventh and super-consciousnes is the eighth. Meditation is the royal 
road to super-consciousness. 
After the mind has been brought under control by these eight disciplines, the will can easily be developed. 
The will is the nature of the Lord; it is also referred to as the Lord’s ordinance. The Lord, by mere willing, can do 
anything immediately and easily. But one cannot realise this will as soon as it is entertained. The power of the will 
is the deciding factor. The will is generally not so overpoweringly strong; when one achieves that power, one gets 
something equal to the power of the Lord. That is the meaning of merger ( laya). Such merger is made possible 
through meditation ( dhyana ).
Wish versus will
Some people use “wish” and “will” as if there was no difference between the two. This is very wrong. The 
wish is related to the tendencies ( vasanas ) embedded in the mind ( manas ). The will is related to the fundamental 
character of Atma . Wish means the craving to get something; will is the determination to acquire it.
Both wish and will are based on the moral culture of the individual. Once the Atma  is cultivated, they can be 
sublimated accordingly. But if they are cultivated without the Atmic  point of view, the faults and failings of the 
mind will get mixed up with what is wished for and willed for.
Take it step by step
The lower step can be seen from the higher step, not the higher step from the lower. So, one should strive 
to go step by step, higher and higher —in other words, from the culture of the Atma  to the culture of the will and 
thence to the culture of the moral conduct. Then, the enjoyment of the bliss of the Atma  becomes quite easy and 
natural.
When the baby is unable to walk, the mother encourages it to toddle a few steps at a time at home before it 
is allowed to go on the road. Instead, if it is put on the high road first, how can it learn? Besides, what of the dan -
gers of the road? So also, first the internal factors have to be strengthened, and then external factors, like moral 
conduct, become easy. Morals without the basis of internal uplift will not be deep-seated. So the cultivation of the 
attitude of the Atma  is primary.
The aim of spiritual practice is to remove the motive, the wish, the attachment, the yearning for the fruit. Un -23
Dhyana Vahini Chapter V . Cultivate the Blissful Atmic Experiencederstanding this clearly, the spiritual aspirant must not give way to any dispiritedness, despondency, or feeling of 
failure or doubt. The aspirant must be patient and bear things with fortitude. Therefore, the aspirant must develop 
within themself enthusiasm, faith, activity, and joy. Keeping the great big result of effort constantly in view, the 
aspirant must boldly discard all difficulties and temptations. Since the latter are but short-lived and weak, with 
a little patience, they can be overcome with ease. If the aspirant is not vigilant and patient, all already-achieved 
success will melt away in an unguarded moment.
Spiritual aspirants, yogis , and renunciants ( sanyasins ) have to climb a ladder, the steps of which are: argu -
mentation, no argumentation, analysis, non-analysis, agreement, etc. ( sa-vitharka , nir-vitharka , sa-vichara , nir-
vichara , samatha , etc.)
No past or future
The knowledge of the world is not real knowledge. It is relative knowledge, the knowledge of the non-real. 
The knowledge of the eternal Absolute is the real knowledge. It is acquired by meditation. The fire of meditation 
and yoga  will reduce the sapless activities of the mind ( manas ) to ashes. Immediately thereafter, the knowledge 
(jnana ) of the Real will flash; it will shine with undiminished effulgence; its light will never go out. For those 
established in this real knowledge, there is no past and future; all ages are in the present, in the actual moment of 
experience.
Clean and feed the mind
Just as soap is necessary to make this external body clean, repetition of the divine name, meditation, and 
remembrance ( smarana ) are needed to clean the interior mind. Just as food and drink are needed to keep the body 
strong, contemplation of the Lord and meditation on the Atma  are needed to strengthen the mind. Without this 
food and drink, the mind will just totter this way and that. As long as the waves are agitating the top, the bottom 
cannot be seen. When the waves of desire agitate the waters of the mind, how can one see the base, the Atma ? The 
tottering causes the waves and is caused by want of food and drink.
So, clean the mind with contemplation of the Lord. Feed it with meditation on the Atma . Only meditation and 
spiritual practice ( sadhana ) can clean the depths of the mind and give it strength. Without purity and strength, the 
Atma  recedes into the distance and peace flees.24
Dhyana Vahini Chapter VI. Meditation Reveals the Eternal and the Non-EternalChapter VI. Meditation Reveals the Eternal and the Non-
Eternal
The seen is transitory; this is seen through meditation. When people wander helter-skelter in a strange land, 
not knowing the road, and when someone comes to direct them along the right path, it is not right to laugh 
at and dishonour them —it brings about only ruin and confusion! But today, it has become the habit of people to 
curdle the love ( prema ), these embodiments of love, into poison through ignorance of the role of helpfulness that 
these guides have come to play.
Note this! Love and destruction arise from the same native spot. The same sea that yielded gems, the moon, 
nectar, and the goddess of wealth also brought forth the world-destroying halahala  poison. Under these condi -
tions, one must, like Sri Narayana, accept the good and the auspicious; otherwise, one cannot have nectar and 
Lakshmi. The heroic and the adventurous, like Siva, can have the poison as their need.
The Lord’s grace is needed to cross the sea
This sea of life ( samsara ), turbulent with the waves of joy and misery, can be crossed only by those who have 
an unflinching desire for the essence of bliss; the rest will be submer ged.
The capacity to overcome the qualities ( gunas ) of nature ( prakriti ) is not inherent in everyone; it comes to 
one with the grace of the Lord. And that grace is to be won by repetition of the divine name and meditation. This 
must first be clearly understood: it is impossible for everyone to control the tendencies of nature; the power is 
possessed only by those who have nature in their grip and whose commands nature obeys.
Nature ( prakriti ) is the basis of everything in the universe. It is the basis of creation and existence. All this 
is nature: men and women, beasts and birds, trees and plants. In fact, all that can be seen is inseparable from na -
ture. In this endless creation, the active element is the Lord ( Purusha ). This truth has to be experienced, so that it 
will not slip away from consciousness, and the discipline needed for this is also repetition of the divine name and 
meditation. This nature is like an ocean; even if it is agitated a little, millions of living beings will be destroyed. 
When the sea becomes slightly ruffled, ships turn into hollow reeds. You can never cross this sea by your own 
effort, alone. The Lord’s grace is essential. So pray for that raft, and when you secure it, you can reach the shore 
in a trice.
Why worry over short-lived attachments?
Everything in this world is ephemeral, transitory; it is here today but may not be here tomorrow. So, if you 
want to crave something with a full heart, seek the Lord, who has no decline. Instead, if you crave progeny, 
wealth, and all comforts, you will suffer untold misery when you are called upon to leave everything and depart. 
At that moment, you would lament, “oh, did I love so deep that I may weep so loud?” In this transitory life, joy 
and pain are also perforce transitory. So, it is indeed humiliating to get immersed in the search for the evanescent 
and to forget the Supreme and the Everlasting. Ignoring God ( Madhava ), who is free from illusion ( maya ), and 
spending time in things immersed in illusion is fruitless; sorrow alone is the final gain. Nothing here is fit to be 
worshipped as eternal. Whomever you love, that love has to come to an end.25
Dhyana Vahini Chapter VI. Meditation Reveals the Eternal and the Non-EternalThe self-same Lord gives and takes! He gives and takes as and when He wishes. Everything is His, so how 
foolish it is to lament when things belonging to Him are taken back by Him! Therefore, the wise person doesn’t 
pine over anyone or feel undue attachment to anything. Let all the pining and all the attachment be for the Lord; 
He alone is eternal, the source of all joy. For the rest, love a thing as a thing, not more. Love a person as a person, 
not more. If you love them more, it is a sign that you have been deceived about their real nature. You can behave 
only for a short time as if the house you have rented is your own! For as soon as the period is over, it passes on 
to another.
If you think on these lines, you will know that spouse, children, possessions, and relatives are not yours for 
long, but only for a short time. So why waste away, worrying over these impermanent things? A millionaire can 
eat only one bellyful, not more. You have to come to this world like the traveller taking refuge at nightfall in a 
caravanserai; he departs when dawn breaks! You go toward your goal, from caravanserai to caravanserai, stage by 
stage. It is good to take life in this light.
Animals with many legs creep along the ground. People have only two legs, so they can move freely about. 
The larger the number of legs, the greater the bondage, the tighter the restriction. When one marries, one has four 
legs, one has become a quadruped. Later, when one gets sons, daughters, in-laws, and grandchildren, one is trans -
formed into a regular centipede, capable of moving only by crawling along the ground! One cannot stand erect; 
one loses freedom of movement; one has to creep slowly along the mire of material objects; one has no time or 
inclination to secure the Lord’s grace.
The attachments of the world are short-lived. People have been born many times before and have lived out 
their lives, loving and getting immersed in love and attaching themselves to others. But does anyone now have 
a trace of all that? Does anyone know where all that has gone? Does anyone worry about those they loved then? 
Does anyone remember them at least now and then? No. The same type of love and attachment were there then 
also, but with the passage of time, it has been forgotten.
So too, when one departs from this world, the love one had for others and the joy, pain, and happiness one 
had through that love will be forgotten. Like the playgrounds of children, the senses of action of man will also 
change, from here to there and from there to somewhere else! Fixing their minds on the insecure changing love, 
how tragic it is that people forget the cultivation of the disciplines that will give them the permanent bliss of the 
Lord!
Everywhere, people are plunged in worry, all twenty-four hours a day. Is it right to increase their burden? 
Who can be so cruel as to torture instead of lessening the suffering of a dying person? Already, the sea is rough; 
dare we blow a typhoon over it? Therefore learn to spread a smile on the faces of the desperate. Keep smiling 
yourself and make others smile. Why make a sad world sadder by your desperate counsel, your lamentation, and 
your suffering? Adopt repetition of the name and meditation to assuage your own grief, to overcome your own 
sorrow, and to plunge in the cool waves of the sea of the grace of the Lord.
Why should travellers wrangle through the night over useless things, instead of getting ready to leave the car -
avanserai at dawn and starting out on the next stage of their pilgrimage? By wrangling, they lose sleep and deprive 
themselves of rest; they will not have the energy to continue the journey. So do not worry too much about things 
of the world. Worry ends in meaningless hurry and waste of time. That time is better used in meditating on God.26
Dhyana Vahini Chapter VI. Meditation Reveals the Eternal and the Non-EternalWe are actors in the Lord’s play
All living beings are actors on this stage. They take their exit when the curtain is rung down or when their 
part is over. On that stage, one may play the part of a thief, another may be cast as a king, a third may be a clown, 
and another a beggar. For all these characters in the play, there is ONE who gives the cue!
Here, some points have to be understood clearly. The prompter will not come upon the stage and give the 
cue, in full view of all. If He does so, the drama will lose interest. Therefore, standing behind a screen at the 
back of the stage, He gives the cue to all the actors, regardless of their role — be it dialogue, speech, or song— 
just when each is in most need of help. In the same way, the Lord is behind the screen on the stage of creation 
(prakriti ), giving the cue to all the actors for their various parts.
So, each actor must be conscious of His presence behind the screen of illusion ( maya ); each must be anxious 
to catch the faintest suggestion He might give, keeping a corner of the eye always on Him and having the ear 
pitched to catch His voice. Instead of this, if a person forgets the plot and the story (that is to say, the work for 
which one has come and the duties that appertain thereto), neglects to watch the presence behind the screen, and 
simply stands dumb on the stage, the audience will laugh at their folly and charge the person with spoiling the 
show.
For these reasons, every actor who has to play the role of a person on the world stage must first learn the 
lines well and then, remembering the Lord behind the screen, await His orders. The attention must be on both: the 
lines one learned for the role and the stage manager’s directions. Meditation alone gives one this concentration 
and this awareness.27
Dhyana Vahini Chapter VII. Remember God and MeditateChapter VII. Remember God and Meditate
Whatever the tangle in which people are caught, if they get immersed in the Lord’s name, it will make them 
free. Moreover, by this means, they can realise without fail the name and form through which they con -
stantly remember the Lord. There is no iota of doubt in this.
All religions remember the Lord’s name
The spiritual disciplines of yoga , breath control ( pranayama ), and penance ( tapas ) are beset with pitfalls at 
every step, and they are also full of dangers. But in the spiritual practices of repetition of the name ( japa), medi -
tation ( dhyana ), and remembrance of the name ( namasmarana ) there is no likelihood of a fall or of any other 
danger. In the former type of spiritual disciplines, the practices differ according to the caste or religion. In the 
practice of the name ( nama-sadhana ), there is not even a trace of such distinction. Hindus, Muslims, and Chris -
tians may differ on many points, but they are all one in the glorification of the name of the Godhead. All of them 
take the name of the one Lord, though the language through which the name is expressed is different. Each one 
recites, repeats, and remembers the name as formed on his own tongue. Each one turns with his fingers the rosary 
appropriate to their religion. But for everyone there is nothing so fruitful, so universal, or so holy among spiritual 
disciplines as these: repetition of the divine name, meditation, and remembrance of the Lord’s name.
Crave the Lord’s name rather than the form
The Lord and His name are both one, but the sweetness of the name is seldom found in the form. When the 
name of the flower, rose, is remembered, its fragrance, tender petals, and deep colour spring to memory; its thorns 
and the trouble one has undergone to get the flower are all forgotten. Instead, if its origin and previous story are 
considered, and if the plant, leaves, and branches are taken into account, the flower —the most important, most 
beautiful, and most attractive part— is likely to be forgotten and only “the plant” is discussed. 
See this from another angle. As soon as the name mango  is mentioned, one is reminded of an incomparable 
sweetness. Instead, if an actual mango is held in the hand, the doubt first arises in the mind whether it is sweet 
or sour; then one is engaged in distinguishing the skin, fibre, juice, nut, rind, seed, etc. When the name alone is 
repeated, these things do not come to mind. Only the sweetness is brought to memory.
Such is the difference between the Lord and the Lord’s name! The pure essence of sweetness is in the name. 
In the case of the form, there is the chance of dread mixed with respect —sometimes, even attributes causing fear 
show themselves.
Here is another reason why the name of the Lord is to be craved more than the form. Riches are needed to 
secure any article in the world. With riches, articles are acquired, so it follows that the riches are superior to the ar -
ticles obtained by means of them, right? With riches, one can get any article, any time. So too, it is by means of the 
riches of the name that the article, “the form ( rupa ) of the Lord” is to be earned. If the riches called name ( nama ) 
are steadily accumulated, the Lord can be realised through the path of meditation, easily and without difficulty .
Another special thing about repetition of the name ( nama-smarana ) is this: It is possible to acquire various 
occult powers ( siddhis ) through yoga  and penance ( tapas ). And there is every likelihood of the Lord being for -28
Dhyana Vahini Chapter VII. Remember God and Meditategotten when these powers come. Blinded by this pride, a person might even let go the basic victory won by their 
spiritual practices. This is not the case with remembrance of the name, repetition of the name, and meditation; 
no such dangers beset these paths. These three paths make love ( prema ) grow in people more and more. Through 
love, peace ( santhi ) is achieved. Once peace of mind is achieved, all other conditions are automatically attained. 
Through yoga  and penance, extraordinary power; through remembrance of the name, repetition of the name, and 
meditation, extraordinary love —this is the difference between the two.
Do not discuss the path with everyone
However, be careful not to discuss these paths with all and sundry, because each one’s path appears the best. 
If the people consulted are treading another path, they will decry your practice of repetition of the name and medi -
tation and treat them with scant respect. They will look down upon them, as if they were very elementary and as if 
you were but a beginner in school. As a result, you will start doubting the efficacy of your chosen path! You will 
get concern where before you had joy, disgust where before you had love.
Therefore, reflect within yourself which among these is sweeter. Or, you can approach those who have tasted 
the nectar of that name and ask for details of their experiences. Do not argue about these things with everyone you 
meet. The time spent in these haphazard disputations is best used for the cultivation of joy through the repeated 
bringing of the name ( nama ) to memory and meditation on the form ( rupa ) of the Lord.
Mere weighing of the pros and cons, like which is greater among the two, will end only with the quick loss of 
all the success gained after great efforts through spiritual discipline. Until you become an expert, bring the name 
constantly to memory and repeat it firm and unruffled, either alone or in the company of devotees. Then, nothing 
can waver you.
Look at the fish! In early stages, it breeds its newly hatched young ones in a quiet shallow spot. Then, it 
pushes them into the wide open sea, rough and rude with its monstrous denizens! They can then survive there, 
courageously, and grow without fear. If the young ones were bred in the open sea from the earliest stage, they 
would certainly be swallowed up even by minor fishes! So, remembrance of the name ( namasmarana ), repetition 
of the name ( japa), and meditation ( dhyana ) have to be practised with a great deal of care, according to a planned 
routine, and without any discussion with others.
Repeating the name is safest and easiest
Nowadays, many aspirants are discarding the name and taking up yoga  and breath control ( pranayama ). 
These are fraught with many dangers. To follow them correctly is difficult. Even if correctly followed, preserving 
and protecting the fruits achieved is even more difficult.
If people grope in the water while spreading the net on the bank, can they find fish in the net? To give up 
repetition of the name and faith in that path and to sit in yoga  and penance is as foolish as hoping to catch fish by 
this means. If the name is taken as the refuge and support, He can be realised tomorrow —if not today. If the name 
of a thing is known, the thing itself can be easily acquired. But if the name is not known, even if the thing is right 
in front, it cannot be recognised.
So repeat the name without intermission or faltering. By means of the name, love ( prema ) is developed; 
through love, meditation of the Lord can be practised. If love is deeply rooted in you, God, who is composed of 29
Dhyana Vahini Chapter VII. Remember God and Meditatelove, becomes your own. However many the paths for the realisation of the Lord, none is as easy as this.
Note this. When a peculiar disease is prevalent in a country, the drug that can cure it is also found in that very 
country, more so than anywhere else. Though available after vigorous search in other lands, it will not be so good 
or plentiful. Similarly, this specific drug is available now, in the present age (the Kali-yuga )! In this age ( yuga ), 
the ghastly evils of injustice, immorality, and falsehood infect the world. That is why the scriptures ( sastras ) have 
been proclaiming again and again, with greater and greater emphasis, that in this Kali age there is no means of 
salvation other than the name! Of the four ages, the Kali-yuga  is the best on account of this. Remembrance of the 
name, repetition of the name, and meditation strain out the evil in mankind. Human nature is guarded and pro -
tected by these three. Hence, the fruits of meditation are greater than those secured with great difficulty through 
yoga , sacrifice ( yajna ), or breath control ( pranayama ).30
Dhyana Vahini Chapter VIII. One-pointed Attention is Essential for MeditationChapter VIII. One-pointed Attention is Essential for 
Meditation
It is not correct to say that the qualities and attainments needed for temporal progress and spiritual progress 
are different from each other. The spiritual is only the purification of the temporal. Success or failure in both 
depends on one-pointedness ( ekagratha ). For every item of work, one-pointedness is very important. This too is 
but spiritual discipline.
Avoid no-pointedness and many-pointedness
There are two paths along which this spiritual discipline may proceed: no-pointedness and many-pointedness. 
No-pointedness is the stage of sleep; it is also called the quality of ignorance ( thamoguna ). Many-pointedness is 
the result of the restless quality ( rajoguna ), turning the vision of the opened eye on creation and its sights. Avoid -
ing both of these, without falling into these two extremes, if the eye is neither closed as in sleep nor opened wide 
as in the fully awakened stage, but half-opened and directed to the point of the nose, the pure quality ( sathwa-
guna ) will become one’s nature, and concentration of the mind can also be easily acquired.
Of course, this does not mean that mere fixing the sight on the tip of the nose is enough. Fix it there in the 
beginning and then turn the vision to the name and form you have in mind; that is meditation ( dhyana ).
When you are engaged in repetition of the name and meditation, other thoughts might enter you at first, but 
you shouldn’t worry about this. There is no great danger on account of them. When you begin remembering the 
name of God ( nama-smarana ), sit down with enthusiasm. If you enter upon any task with firm determination, no 
impurity can affect you. Your only concern is to see that you are fully pure when you start the repetition of the 
name, etc. Do not worry about formalities for this. Select the name that you like and the form of that name. That 
name is itself the mantra. That mantra is ever pure, ever active, everything.
Stick to one name and form
But do not change the name and form to suit the fancy and have one thing one day and another the next. 
Whatever the name and form that first gave you contentment, hold fast to them without swerving. They will get 
implanted in the heart, without fail. Afterward, everything will happen through His grace. If workers are ordered 
to dig the earth, their work is simply to go on digging. The gardener alone knows how much of the earth is to be 
put under which plant and how the earth is to be so put. So too, the order is to “Constantly dwell on the Lord’s 
name”! Provided you continue to do that work, He Himself will direct where and how that has to be utilised.
Stick to the task of taming the mind
The value of name and form consists in the training that they give to the mind ( manas ). What need is there 
to train a horse that has already been trained? It is the untrained horse that is “broken” through many devices. 
Similarly, it is to tame the unruly mind that we have prayer, devotional singing, repetition of the name, and re -
membrance of the name. In the initial stages, the horse runs in many directions, but the trainer does not worry. He 
should hold fast to the reins. The mind, too, naturally runs in different directions when you begin remembrance 31
Dhyana Vahini Chapter VIII. One-pointed Attention is Essential for Meditationand repetition of the name, but you must not yield to despair, anxiety, or indecision. Hold fast to the reins, the 
name ( nama )! Within a short time, your speech and thoughts will come under your own grip. Only, do not allow 
anything to come near you that might make you forget the name of the Lord. You will realise the profit of that 
name in due course.
Do not crave the fruit the moment the sapling is planted! Do not pluck and chew the leaves and the twigs in 
the hope of inferring therefrom the taste of the fruit! Doing that does not help you enjoy the sweetness of the fruit; 
besides, the plant itself will not survive.
Similarly, your task is simply to cultivate the sapling called name of God  (nama ). While doing so, do not 
doubt and examine whether it has the glory ascribed to it. Without fail, that sapling will grow into a tree and give 
you the fruit you hope to eat. You can achieve it. The name is capable of yielding that fruit. So the purpose of one-
pointed attention ( ekagratha ) is to make you stick to the name, without altering it, and to keep its form always in 
sight. The net of “remembrance of the Lord’s name ( nama-smarana )” should have no torn holes; that is to say, 
it must take place always, with no intermission. If there is any gap, the fruit that falls into the net might escape 
through it! Perform meditation until your mind comes firmly under your control. That is the primary task.
Let the mind run wherever it likes; just be careful not to follow it, seeking to discover where it is going! It 
will then wander about for some time as the fancy takes it; soon, getting tired and exhausted, it will come back to 
you in the end! It is like a little child that knows nothing. Since the mother is following it and calling it back, it 
gets courage and confidence to run forward in any direction, but if the mother does not run behind the child and 
instead retraces her steps quietly, the child too, of its own accord, will run back to the mother!
Do not care for the vagaries of the mind. Carry on remembrance and meditation of the name and form that 
you like best, in the manner you are accustomed to. In this way, you will acquire one-pointedness ( ekagratha ); 
you will realise your heart’s desire.
Everything is pure, everything is God
Do not entertain in your mind the idea of purity or impurity while doing this spiritual practice or medita -
tion. There is nothing impure in the world. When the Lord is immanent everywhere and in everything, how can 
anything be impure? Even if something appears to the ulterior eyes as impure, the moment it contacts the name 
of the Lord, it becomes purified.
Note this point! If someone discovers a treasure while answering the call of nature, will they hesitate to take 
it because he is impure at the time? Purity and impurity are the result of the mental reactions of the particular 
moment. When one is giving money to someone, one talks of the auspicious time and the purity of the hour. But 
when one gets a chance to take money, every moment is auspicious! The mind is the reason for both attitudes.
Similarly, no thought of purity or impurity will bother you if you have full faith in the love of the name of the 
Lord. On the other hand, if you feel some compulsion and some discontent, all kinds of possible and impossible 
obstacles will present themselves. Therefore, give up all such feelings and strengthen the faith in the unshakable 
holiness of the name and its appropriate form. Firmly believe that everything is made holy by His name.
Do not reject Him, cultivate love for Him
Cultivate love ( prema ) for the Lord. It has infinite potentiality. An iron chain can be broken with ease, but not 32
Dhyana Vahini Chapter VIII. One-pointed Attention is Essential for Meditationthe chain of love that binds you to the Lord. The cruelest of animals is also overpowered by love. This is the illu -
sion ( maya ) of the Lord! If only the floodwaters of this love were directed not to the lakes and shoals on the sides 
of the river but to the ocean of the Lord’s grace, what a holy task it would be! Then the individual ( jivi) would 
realise the purpose of life. This is the highest liberation ( moksha ). To direct that love on to the name and the form 
of the Lord without interruption —that is real meditation.
Do not mistake this temporary abode as your eternal dwelling place. Do not lose heart at evanescent troubles 
and short-lived tragedies. Immerse yourselves in the effort to attain the eternal Lord. Everything in this world is 
subject to decay —if not today, at least tomorrow it is bound to disintegrate, right?
It is not right to reject the Lord, who is eternally related to you, and to be misled by this world with which 
one is related for just two days! As already written,
The relatives come up to the outer gate, or maybe up to the burial ground, but your 
real relative is the Lord, beware!
The Lord will never give you up. Considering the number of births you have had, you have had countless 
mothers, fathers, wives, husbands, sons, daughters, friends, and enemies. Do they subsist today? Do they remem -
ber the relationship? You are no one to them, and they are nobodies to you. But you and they have the Lord in 
common as the unchanging relative. He subsists throughout all the births; He is eternal. He watches over you from 
birth to birth. What greater tragedy can there be than forgetting such a Lord?
With the senses weakened and powerless and refusing to function, with the parents, wife, children, and rela -
tions all crowding on one side and the messengers of death compelling you to pack up for the journey without 
delay on the other —who knows when this call will come and how? Before that moment comes, be ready with 
the thought of God.33
Dhyana Vahini Chapter IX. Spiritual DevelopmentChapter IX. Spiritual Development
There are three stages of spiritual development: first, the hazy uncertain stage; then, the active stage of striving; 
and last, the highest stage. These are the stages of passivity ( thamas ), activity ( rajas ), and purity ( sathwa ). 
When growing out of the first stage into the second, it is unnatural for a person not to improve step by step.
Three stages of growth
The period from childhood to adolescence need not be seriously taken into account. One need not worry 
much about it. With the dawn of adolescence, one enters upon the first hazy uncertain stage and engages in many 
fruitless activities. Later, one attains ripeness and strength. This is the stage between the uncertain and the certain. 
It is when one has reached this intermediate stage that one must yearn for the fulfilment that is possible in the final 
stage.
In the rules for penance ( tapas ), this law is also observed. At first, ritual worship ( puja) is associated with 
divine energy ( sakthi ), and the subsequent stage of worship is connected with Siva. That is to say, the period when 
one is under the care of the mother is over and the period of paternal care —the protection of the Renovator and 
Guardian of the universe, Siva— is reached. When the stage of paternal care is come, one should not soil the body 
and mind, as during the period of maternal care.
In the intermediate stage (that is to say at that particular age), one will have certain natural propensities and 
tendencies that are not desirable and have to be eschewed. These are: conceit, mischievousness, obstinacy, in -
quisitiveness, lust, greed, shame, fear, vengefulness, disgust, etc. As long as one has these, one cannot surrender 
oneself to Siva. These tendencies have to be uprooted completely, or at least there should be a systematic endeav -
our to get rid of them. Such aspirants will have to be swimming against the current ( Vyathireka pravaaha gathi ). 
Proceeding against the current is the means to reach the Source; floating with the current means getting farther 
and farther from It and losing sight of the Goal.
Of course, swimming up the river is a bit hard, but every stroke takes you nearer to and not farther from the 
goal. To overcome the strain, one must have the raft called meditation. Through meditation, the weakness of the 
physical frame can be overcome, the wayward speed of the mind can be controlled, and progress toward the seat 
of grace is made easy; one can attain the primordial divine Force ( adi-murthi ). Instead, if one cares more for the 
ease of the journey and floats along the current, one would be travelling away from grace, turning their back on it. 
The primordial divine Force will gradually become distant and disappear. People who float along with the current 
will get lost in increasing misery. And for what profit?
The evil tendencies mentioned above are the causes for this tragedy. If only they had been overcome, the 
divine Source could have been certainly reached. Without striving for that, all activities will end in failure. More -
over, the world loves only good people, people endowed with good qualities; it keeps bad people at a distance. 
Exterior charm attracts the animal; internal charm, resulting from character, pleases the Lord. Do not be tempted 
by the low tastes of the world and the cheap regard that people bestow. Strive for the holy grace and love of the 
Lord. The affection that people shower is inconstant, for it depends on their likes and dislikes. But the love that 
the Lord bears to you depends on your good qualities alone. It can also give you permanent joy. Those who are 
enamoured of the external will tumble into disappointment and sorrow every now and then.34
Dhyana Vahini Chapter IX. Spiritual DevelopmentBeauty consists in character, not in anything else. There is nothing more charming than that.
Discuss the good in others, not the bad
The good should never even discuss the evil that others do, for that will contaminate them. The stories of 
Druva and Prahlada will, if listened to, grant merit and show the path, and the stories of Savithri and Anasuya will 
destroy the roots of evil and strengthen character. How does this happen? What is the explanation? They are all 
holy, and their careers are blameless; therefore, to discuss them and their lives is worthwhile and beneficial. That 
is the explanation.
Some critics of “good people” justify their own carpings by saying that they are trying to correct the good 
people still further and make them even better! No, they are really provoking the good people to evil and drawing 
that evil upon themselves. They are themselves becoming evil people.
Never think about the badness or evil of others. If you can manage it, always keep trying to turn them to 
good ways and giving them good advice. One should cultivate peace of mind, the charitableness and eagerness to 
promote the welfare of all that is necessary for the attitude. These can come only through repetition of the divine 
name and meditation. The wealth derived from repetition of the Lord’s name and meditation is good qualities 
(sadguna ). Good qualities clean the exterior and also purify and ennoble the inner tendencies.
Waves originate in the upper layers of the sea. They are caused by the wind, so the wind can be said to have 
that power. So too, the mind of the intelligent person is full of thoughts and opinions. When the proper atmosphere 
is present, these spring up and roll in from all directions.
The Lord assumes the yearned-for form
In the same manner, the Lord is manifest in the picture or image that one worships, but is this due to any 
special excellence of the picture or image? No. The picture, the photo, the image —these are and remain as pic -
ture, photo, and image. The fact is that on account of the intensity of the devotion of the devotee, the Lord cannot 
desist from manifesting Himself for them. For that reason, He assumes —in stone, wood, or paper —the form that 
the devotee contemplates and meditates upon and worships. He materialised from a pillar for Prahlada’s sake! 
For Vamana, He became visible in a stone! For Markandeya, He issued from a linga (egg-shaped stone)! In order 
to fulfil the yearning of the devotee, Hari, the Immanent Basic Being of the Universe, will come in any form, in 
anything, at any place.
Seek company of the good; a void company of the bad
But you have to pray to the Lord with one-pointed concentration. This type of single-mindedness comes only 
out of the pure quality ( sathwa-guna ), and that again is the product of meditation. Therefore, you must cultivate 
good qualities, and in order to develop these, you should desire the company of the good ( sath-sang ). Your real 
companions, from whom you derive the maximum good, are those who talk and discourse about the Lord, about 
truth, about the service ( seva) of others, and about love that considers all as equal. Association with such people 
is certainly association with virtuous people, for these are the real virtuous people.
Those who never speak of the Lord, or those who are not even aware of Him; who are busy multiplying 
and strengthening the bonds of worldly existence ( samsara ); who preach and practise falsehood, injustice, and 35
Dhyana Vahini Chapter IX. Spiritual Developmentoppression, and who advise you to stray from the path of dharma  —treat those not as your friends but as people 
to be avoided at all cost. Theirs is the company of wicked people. Associating with such leads to committing 
wrongs against your will, uttering words that should not be uttered, doing deeds that should not be done, and, 
consequently, treading the downward road to ruin.
People who fear neither sin nor God are capable of venturing into any wickedness; this is no cause for sur -
prise. So, seek the company of those possessed of these two fears; this is the true good company. The company 
of people who have not even an iota of these two is evil and should be dreaded. The aspirant must always yearn 
for good company ( sath-sang ). In that company, there is no chance for the growth of greed or for will power ( ic-
chasakthi ) to attain anything. Whether easily available or not, seek and join only good company. Seek and realise 
permanent satisfaction and contentment. Do not distract yourself by pursuing temporary satisfaction.
It is profitless for a true aspirant to associate with men who spend their time in worldly affairs. If you don’t 
secure friends of the type I mentioned, be solitary, without associates; you do not lose anything thereby. Never 
even think of the company of the wicked. Do not get entangled in their wiles. If possible, when you get the chance, 
advise them about the right, but do not yield to their words. In fact, do not even entertain the desire to be in the 
place where they are present. If you cultivate these characteristics, then both repetition of the divine name and 
meditation will become easy for you and will yield quick results.36
Dhyana Vahini Chapter X. Innocence, Purity, and HumilityChapter X. Innocence, Purity, and Humility
The realised souls ( jivan-mukthas ) are like lighthouses that point out the way to ships caught in blinding dark -
ness in mid-ocean. The spiritual lighthouses show the way to those who struggle helplessly in the thick night 
of ignorance.
All are born out of the womb of the one Lord. Just as many varieties of fish and crabs and aquatic creatures 
move about inside a big tank, multitudes of human beings move about in the sea called the Lord. This is indeed a 
very awesome scene. Some are undeveloped, some underdeveloped; they swim around, greedy and selfish. In the 
midst of this crowd of ignorant beings are a few highly developed souls, the wise ( jnanis ) and yogis . Since they 
are mixed up with the ignorant crowd, it becomes difficult to distinguish the wise from the others. A microscope 
is necessary to identify the red corpuscles in the blood; similarly, a special microscope is needed to find the wise. 
That microscope is no other than meditation.
This creation, and the wonder with which it is filled, is really a source of amazement. But considering present 
conditions, there are very few who watch for light and are guided by light. So, instead of following this person and 
that, and taking devious roads and getting lost, it is best to place full faith in the Lord Himself and rely on Him 
as the only mother, father, guru, and guide. Then you will never lose the right path. He will never direct you to 
the wrong path. To have that firm faith and that experience, one must take to meditation; that is the one and only 
means. It is enough if the name and form of the Lord is meditated upon with love ( prema ) and faith, and you can 
choose the name and the form that you like most.
Be ever joyful and sweet
For this spiritual discipline, you must cultivate the quality of always being joyful, with a smile on your face; 
this will give you good distinction. People will also like you more. So, the Lord will also have joy upon seeing 
you. Therefore, observe meditation with innocence, purity, and humility.
Then, without fail, you can attain whatever you strive for. Do not lose your temper in any situation; do not 
lose courage in any contingency. Respect everyone, whatever their status. Then the quality of universal love 
(prema ) will develop in you. As a result, meditation will progress without disturbance.
For the cure of illness without resort to drugs, meditation is the only remedy. Even the capacity to discrimi -
nate and analyse will increase, and by means of that, illness, however serious, can be overcome.
In every word uttered, there are two kinds of senses: the obvious and the innate, the native and the qualita -
tive. The Upanishads  take up the second kind and elaborate, clarify, and make the Brahman known. One impor -
tant thing to be remembered is that it is possible and desirable to utilise the full power of words through softness 
and sweetness. If one is anxious to see God in every object, the sweetness of the word will be of immense help. 
Sir, Master, Lord: in these words lie the secret of much affection and regard. Through these and such words, how 
happy you can make others, and how light your minds will become by the practice of softness of expression! 
When meditation is carried on in that happy atmosphere, how quickly concentration can be attained!
Instead, if in conversation you use words that blame others and despise them, in turn you become the target 
of blame, and your mind gets agitated by the effect of both; then the object of meditation is not realised because 37
Dhyana Vahini Chapter X. Innocence, Purity, and Humilitythe atmosphere turns impure. Therefore, if you really wish to be happy through meditation, as a preliminary to 
the process, you must be engaged either in joyful conversation or in happy thoughts or memories. Sweet and soft 
conversation helps meditation a great deal.
You must cultivate such a character, for character outlasts the body. Virtues are your strength and glory. 
Character is power. So train the mind and use it to attain the visualisation of the Lord ( sakshatkara ); hold fast to 
that goal.
Have contentment and desire only the Lord
You must have contentment, whatever the gain or loss or state. This is essential. Contentment grants and 
increases happiness. For the contented mind, life is an endless festival, but the mind worried by desire will have 
no rest. With desire troubling you, concentration is impossible. Desire is the fire in your frame; it reduces you 
to ashes. Contentment is the effective drug to destroy it. Just as a bath in the cool waters of a stream refreshes a 
traveller who is exhausted and perspiring in the burning heat of day, the one suffering from the scorching fire of 
greed will be refreshed by the pellucid waters of contentment.
One should have desire only for the path of realisation. One should not dedicate one’s life for the mean 
desires of the world. Dedicate all to the Lord; that is genuine contentment. That is the result of the acquisition 
of peace of mind ( santhi ), joy ( santhosha ), and discrimination ( vicharana ). Direct visualization of the Lord 
(sakshatkara ) is also possible then.
To acquire these, remembrance of the Lord’s name ( smarana ) and meditation ( dhyana ) are the only means. 
Only they can give you that power. Nowhere else can you get them, nowhere else will you get them.
More than all, if you possess contentment ( santhosha ), the other two will be added to you. Nothing is more 
profitable than contentment. It is a treasure richer than the three worlds. The contented person can experience 
indescribable divine glory. Such a person is more joyful than the owner of the wish-bestowing cow, Kamadhenu, 
and the wish-bestowing tree, Kalpataru. Such a person can immerse themself within themself and discover bliss 
therein. Do not strive for physical joy, discarding the more permanent joy of inner calm and contentment.
Do not get attached to this evanescent body; instead, utilise it as an implement. Consider yourself as sepa -
rate from this destructible body, which was created out of the conjunction of the five elements. Know yourself as 
the indestructible Atma . Just as the house in which you dwell is separate from you, so the body, which surrounds 
you for a little time, is separate. The body is the root cause of all this grief, all this calamity, and all this slavery. 
Understand this well: make the body obey your will, and never bow down to it and follow its whims. Be prepared 
to cast it away; resolve to control it and keep it under strict control. You have to deal carefully with the body; you 
have to train it with great attention.
Though all that was said above related to the Atma , some activities have to be undertaken by everyone. How 
should the body be used as an implement, as a boat for example, to cross the stream of life? Until the other bank 
is reached, or in other words, until the ultimate truth is attained, you must take care to see that it is not damaged or 
broken or leaky. Do not let the boat fall to pieces; be on the lookout for signs of this. That is to say: take moderate 
food of pure ( sathwic ) quality at the correct time, and continue disciplined physical activities for the body.
Such activity directed to the spiritual becomes the discipline needed for real spiritual practice. This is what 
is referred to as meditation, remembrance of the name, ritual worship ( puja), and devotional singing. When the 38
Dhyana Vahini Chapter X. Innocence, Purity, and Humilitydiscipline is practised, as well as later, you must be joyful and not gloomy. This should not be forgotten; never get 
tired or timid. However, if you get tired, then you can eat a few ground nut kernels or almond seeds soaked well 
in water at the end of the day’s meditation. These will cool the body and endow it with strength.
In summary, everyone must develop the virtue of contentment through the practice of meditation ( dhyana  
sadhana ). Contentment is a pure ( sathwic ) quality; it will not transform you into an idler —no, not at all. Instead, 
it will permit the mind to travel toward the Lord, and it will grant peace. It will also hinder unessential activities 
that have profit for oneself as the aim. The contented person will be fully pure ( sathwic ) and will lead an inner 
life, in communion with the Atma . That person can do any work without rest and without complaint. The waves 
of the mind, which sway in many directions, get a single aim.
The sages ( rishis ), religious mendicants ( bikshus ), and yogis  of the past realised the goal of life by means of 
the peace that came to them through contentment. Contentment gives all spiritual aspirants the enthusiasm and 
vigour necessary for treading the path that leads to realisation of God ( sakshatkara ). Contented, the aspirant can 
ignore the dangers and difficulties of the path. The aspirant treats all the impermanent things of this life as poison 
and discards them as trash. Discrimination, renunciation, and the spirit of inquiry develop through contentment. 
The story of Meera is an example of this. Understand well the stories of Radha, Jayadeva, and Gauranga, for they 
will teach you the truth.39
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XI. Liberation: the Goal of MeditationChapter XI. Liberation: the Goal of Meditation
The beneficent and maleficent impulses
The fulfilment of life consists in the realisation of the Atma  (Atma-sakshatkara ). To get this realisation, one 
should be entirely free from impulses ( vasanas ). Liberation ( moksha ) is, in the true sense of the term, lib -
eration from the bondage of these impulses. These tendencies are of two types: beneficent and maleficent. The 
beneficent tendencies are saturated with holiness; the maleficent ones feed the mind and make it more and more 
uncontrollable and unsteady; they spread and strengthen the desire for objective pleasure.
If the beneficent impulses ( subha vasanas ) are encouraged and cultivated, they will not go on multiplying 
and binding the mind indefinitely; they become fried seeds, which will not sprout. If you stick to the beneficent 
impulses, you can easily acquire knowledge of Brahman ( Brahma-jnana ). These impulses are characterised by 
such activities as association with great souls ( mahatmas ), reverence for the great, conversation with them, fol -
lowing their advice, charity, fortitude, love, patience, truth, courage, continence, etc. These are the pure impulses.
The impure tendencies lead one to such vices as craving to see things that cater to the lower desires (like 
cinema pictures); eating dishes that are full of passion ( rajas ), like fish and flesh; drinking intoxicants that ruin 
one’s personality by developing anger, delusion, greed, conceit, deceit, hatred, envy, etc.
Such impure tendencies are of three types: Worldly impulses, scholarly or intellectual impulses, and physical 
or bodily impulses. The physical impulses make men desire a beautiful physique, a strong sturdy build, a glossy 
skin that will never be disfigured by wrinkles, and round hard muscles. The scholarly impulses prompt one to 
crave being known as an unrivaled expert and to crave the defeat of every competitor in the field. And lastly, the 
worldly impulses make one crave glory, power, personal authority, and pomp. All such desires can be grouped 
under this head. They are all impulses. They bind you to the wheel of birth and death ( samsara ) and tie you down 
to this Earth.
Destroy ignorance
The giant tree called mind has two seeds, impulse ( vasana ) and breath ( prana ). The seed becomes the tree, 
the tree yields the seed. The breath moves because of the impulses; the impulses operate because of the breath. If 
one of these is destroyed, so is the other. So, if the mind has to be free from their influence, ignorance ( a-jnana ) 
has to be transformed first.
Ignorance does not exist alone; it has an offspring: selfishness ( ahamkara ). That demon ( asura ) has two chil -
dren, attachment or attraction ( raga ) and impulse ( vasana ); that is to say passion and craving. Passion and craving 
are closely interrelated. As the passion, so the desire. They are sisters.
Through attachment, one gets the feelings of my and mine, the feelings provoke desire, and desires breed 
worry. Therefore, to remove ego ( ahamkara ), attachment and impulse have to be annihilated. That means igno -
rance has to go, for by that means alone can ego be killed.
How to destroy ignorance and develop wisdom ( sujnana )? That is the question! The answer is through 
meditation. The conquest of ignorance, ego, attachment, and impulse brings about liberation ( moksha ) for the 40
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XI. Liberation: the Goal of Meditationindividual ( jivi).
Uproot the impulses that make up the mind, and the mind is no more
The one who is a slave to impulses and tendencies ( vasanas ) is devoid of wisdom ( jnana ). That one is, in 
truth, a weakling! But let me assure you that there is no cause for alarm. As soon as impulses are uprooted, that 
person can earn back the divine nature that was lost by neglect.
The impulses invade the realm of the heart; they cause endless trouble. They remind you of pleasures, agi -
tating the memory of past experiences, and you start craving them again. The cravings make the senses and their 
leader, the mind ( manas ), engage in brisk activities; there is no escape for you from this. So you attempt to collect 
and enjoy the things that you crave. All this takes place in the twinkling of an eye, so to say.
The impulses operate so subtly and so powerfully. Just as the seed contains within itself the trunk, branches, 
twigs, leaves, flowers, and fruits, so too, all this lies dormant in the impulse. The impulses are the cause of all the 
objective unhappiness. If they are absent, the mind is pellucid and pure. If they are present, all purity is ruined; 
they are obstacles in the path of truth, of Atma , and of immortality. A mind free from impulse is transmuted and 
is no longer mind.
Nature ( prakriti ) is the world of impulses ( vasanas ). The mind is attracted toward nature and the external ob -
jects of the world by means of this tendency for attachment and starts contemplating on the objects and dwelling 
on their qualities because of these impulses. Without impulses, the mind will not be affected at all by the objec -
tive world. The mind is like a piece of cloth; it takes on any colour with which it is dyed. Pure ( sathwic ) impulses 
make it white, restless ( rajasic ) ones change it into red, while ignorant ( thamasic ) ones give it a black colour. The 
mind is shaped by the type of impulses with which it is filled. One has to undertake meditation and concentration 
(dharana ) in order to destroy these impulses. The mind is but a bundle of impulses.
Success in meditation from uprooting impulses
Some aspirants say to themselves that in spite of many years of steady practice, they have yet to acquire 
success in meditation and concentration. The reason is easy to point out: they have not been able to uproot the im -
pulses ( vasanas )! Therefore, such practitioners must strive to conquer their innate tendencies. They must fortify 
themselves with greater faith, and act.
The aspirant who is disturbed now and then by impure impulses must overcome them by will power and 
spiritual exercises. The liberated soul ( jivan-muktha ) has burned out impulses, but the householder ( grihastha ) is 
cultivating them. There is no profit in simply controlling them; a cobra becomes harmless only when its fangs are 
plucked out; similarly, their roots must be burned. Then only can the aspirant attain the Brahman.
Of course, even pure desires are a bond. But they are not hindrances, however many they may be. A thorn 
is removed by another and both are thrown out afterward, right? So also, when impure impulses are overcome 
through the influence of pure impulses, one has to outgrow both. This means that even the purest of impulses, the 
craving for liberation ( moksha ), has to disappear in time. Only then can you become That. A shackle is a shackle, 
whether it be of iron or gold. One has to be free from both. That is to say, one should attain a stage when neither 
good nor bad will attract or repel.
Anyone aiming at the realisation of God should practise the diminishing of impulses, the curbing of the 41
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XI. Liberation: the Goal of Meditationmind, and the understanding of the fundamental principle. One of these is not enough for liberation ( moksha ). In 
the liberated soul ( jivanmuktha ), impulses persist, but only as fried seeds. They will not cause further births.
The Atma is free of everything
See, the subtle body is the seat of ignorance ( a-jnani ). It is saturated with impulses and traditions and expe -
riences. The Atma  is free from all these. It is ever pure. It belongs to neither sex and has no mind, no senses, no 
form. Not only that; It has no breath ( prana ), even! It cannot be said to be alive or dead. How can contemplation 
on such an Atma  be anything other than pure? How can light and darkness coexist? How can purity and impurity 
coexist?
Of all the workshops in the world, the workshop of the body is the most wonderful, because it is the taber -
nacle of the Lord. In such a factory, the impulses are sublimated into vows, the impurities are weeded out, benefi -
cent desires are shaped, and good imaginings are brought about. The main aim is the uprooting of impulse, though 
this is a difficult task.
Mountains can be swept away sooner than these deep-rooted impulses ( vasanas ). But with will power and 
zest, supported by faith, they can be overcome in a short time. Just do not give up your determination and faith, 
whatever the loss, hardship, or obstacle. Remember, the impulses overpower you and keep you down as their 
slave. Opium and brandy enslave you and hold you in their full grip only for some time, but impulses grip you 
for a whole lifetime! The entire meaning and purpose of meditation is to attain freedom from these mighty and 
manifold impulses.42
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XII. Do not Be a Slave to ImpulsesChapter XII. Do not Be a Slave to Impulses
Those guided by impulses and instincts wander about the world like drunkards, devoid of discrimination be -
tween right and wrong, true and false. The overpowering influence of these animal impulses makes them for -
get the dire consequences of yielding to them. They have no shame or fear; instead, they simply revel in the search 
for worldly pleasures, in the accumulation of comforts, and in the sheer enjoyment of luxuries. For those plunged 
in these impulses, the intellect is a useless, functionless possession. By constant pursuit of sensory pleasures, the 
impulses become hardened, and they strike deeper and stronger roots.
That is why the advice has been given in the Gita to give up the fruit of one’s actions. The impulses become 
stronger because the fruits are always kept in mind whenever actions are performed. This makes people proud and 
conceited, and they try to thrust their pride in the faces of others. The impulses enslave them, and under their influ -
ence they stoop even to the lowest type of wrongdoing in order to get rich and earn the money needed to satisfy 
them. They start worshipping mammon as their God. Of course, riches are essential, but surplus riches —riches 
that give worry, anxiety, and pain— are not desirable at all. One should not seek to acquire riches to that extent.
Besides, people strive to earn the praise of others and avoid being blamed by others. This too is to be classed 
as an impure impulse.
Seeking praise and blaming others are impulses
The world is a nest of crows; some caw in praise, some caw in derision. But you should be above the reach 
of praise and blame. Make light of praise; treat it as something spat out by others. Then only can you be free and 
enjoy real happiness. About blame: See how the world has not allowed even Rama, Krishna, Vishnu, Siva, and 
(Sai) Baba to escape from its tendency to blame! People talk ill even of the gods, imputing to those perfect beings 
evil motives and actions!
From foul-minded people such as these, can any consideration be expected toward mere “man”? Any excuse 
is enough for them. The white hates the black; the black hates the white. The Shaivite scandalises the Vaishnavite, 
and the Vaishnavite spreads stories about the Shaivite. Everyone loves their own religion, their own native place, 
and themself; one loves one’s own methods of worship and forms and ceremonies. This love takes the form of 
praise of one’s own creed and blame of the other’s faith. Though all this is related to one’s relationship with God, 
such impulses are and must be classed under impure ( malina ) impulses.
Such mean attitudes, saturated with ignorance, have to be removed by repetition of the name and medita -
tion that fill the heart with broad and universal Atmic  wisdom. Then the limited impulses will be transformed and 
transmuted into holy impulses and will vanish.
It is indeed a wonder why people fail to put forth all effort to remove the impure impulses, for by following 
their path they get only pain, sorrow, and agony! The deluding effect of these instincts and impulses makes them 
believe and feel that they are on the correct path toward the goal of happiness. That is why they are reluctant to 
give them up, that explains why they hold on to them so fast. If they read some good books about the supreme 
Atma , the brain could be brightened. They could at least grasp the essence of the scriptures ( sastras ).43
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XII. Do not Be a Slave to ImpulsesMere reading without practice is impure
The number of scriptures are countless. Time is too short to study all of them, and the obstacles in the path of 
understanding them are also too many. Of what use is it to pore over silly books or jaw-breaking scriptures or to 
learn about modes of devotion that are not put into action? It is all wasteful effort. Spending all the time in study, 
apart from practice, also deserves to be condemned as an impure impulse ( malina vasana ).
Listen! Bharadwaja studied the Vedas  for three successive lives. When born a fourth time, he started reading 
again! So Indra came to him and taught him the supreme knowledge of Brahman ( Brahma-vidya ) and confided to 
him the secret of liberation. Then Bharadwaja put an end to his reading and study and entered upon hard, concen -
trated meditation. He realised the Atma .
Study is a purposeless exercise if the essence is not imbibed and practised. The greed to read about all kinds 
of subjects and topics is itself not a very healthy impulse.
Once upon a time, Durvasa, the saint, reached the presence of Siva with a cart load of religious books. Nara -
da then compared him to the proverbial donkey, for too much attachment to books is itself an undesirable habit:
Though one carries the burden of a multitude of books concerning all branches of knowledge, and though 
one might have read all of them, the teaching contained in them cannot be grasped at all without actual practical 
experience. Mere pride in learning is itself an impure impulse, the impulse of greed.
When Durvasa heard such words of advice, he was enlightened; he immediately threw all the bundles into 
the sea and plunged into deep meditation. See how the sages feel that meditation is all-important for attaining full 
knowledge!
It is impossible to know the truth of the Atma  through the study of manifold scriptures ( sastras ), by the ac -
quisition of scholarship, by the sharpening of the intellect, or by the pursuit of dialectical discussions. It cannot 
be realised by these means. Swethakethu, the son of Uddalaka, was a great pundit. One day, the father asked the 
son, “Swethakethu, have you understood that scripture whose understanding allowed all scriptures to be under -
stood?” The son replied that he didn’t know of such a scripture and had not learned it. Then Uddalaka taught him 
the unequalled scripture of knowledge of Brahman ( Brahma-vidya ), which grants one the knowledge of the truth 
of the Atma .
Master the wayward mind through meditation
Hence, one should first grasp clearly the habits and mannerisms of one’s mind and its tendencies and atti -
tudes. Then only can one control it, gain mastery over it, and purify and develop memory, will, and imagination.
Waywardness is the natural characteristic of the mind. It is like the wind. That is why Arjuna described it to 
Krishna thus:
Oh Krishna, the mind is very wayward.
It moves very fast.
It is very powerful.
It is very difficult to bring it under control.
Chanchalam hi manah Krishna
Pramaathi balavath dhridham44
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XII. Do not Be a Slave to ImpulsesThasyaaham nigraham manye
Vaayoriva sudhushkaram.
Krishna replied, “Arjuna, no doubt what you said is correct. But by uninterrupted attention and discipline, 
and by the practice of renunciation, it is possible to control it. Hence, practise meditation as a first step.”
Impulses and desires have to be suppressed in order to get mastery over the mind. Desires excite the mind 
and make it rush toward the senses, as a dog runs behind its master. The individual ( jiva), poor thing, falls into 
the meshes of illusion ( maya ) produced by the illusion-creating senses and the pleasure-pursuing mind! To es -
cape all this agony, one should have recourse to meditation, freed from the clutches of desires and slavery to the 
senses. Do repetition of the name and meditation. Then you can also cultivate and develop your will, memory, 
and imagination along proper lines. Without meditation, it is not possible to control and master the mind. All other 
methods are as useless as the attempt to bind a wild elephant in rut by means of a thin and tiny thread! Meditation 
is essential to immerse the mind in the Atma .
Do not lose heart, but keep up the practice
Therefore, first free yourself from the bondage of desire. Some students and householders reserve a few 
wants and desires for their private satisfaction while giving up the rest. Even householders who are engaged in 
concentration ( dharana ) and the like find it difficult to give up certain desires. They retain them for their secret 
satisfaction. So, their energies get spent and they achieve little progress in the spiritual discipline in which they 
are engaged. These aspirants slide down the ladder they climbed so laboriously. To gain control over such un -
steadiness, meditation is of great help. It is not enough if one sense is conquered; all should be mastered, from all 
sides. Of course, this is a very hard task; you might feel like giving up the entire struggle. But never lose heart. Be 
patient and persevering, and final success will be yours. Only, you should not, like some spiritual aspirants, stray 
from the path of discipline as soon as you feel you are not succeeding as much as you hoped. That is not the road 
to victory. Persevere, be patient, and earn victory in the end.45
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XIII. Developing One-pointednessChapter XIII. Developing One-pointedness
The wayward mind wanders hither and thither, but it is possible to fasten it on one fixed point by means of 
steady discipline and persistent training in spiritual discipline. This condition is called one-pointedness ( eka-
gratha ). It is also referred to as single-mindedness ( dharana ). The uninterrupted flow of oil from one vessel to 
another is a fine symbol of the mental process called single-mindedness.
For novices in spiritual practice, concentration appears to be very difficult to attain because, after some prog -
ress is won, they do not usually keep up the practice. Instead, they give it up; even though they do not have peace 
of mind on days when they desist from spiritual practice.
Concentration endows one with divine joy, wisdom beyond measure, inner vision, insight into the deeper 
truths, clearer understanding, and unison with the Godhead. This science of spiritual discipline ( sadhana ) is more 
wonderful than the three worlds!
Monkey meditation: harmful to spiritual progress
The mind plans and executes innumerable deeds and roams over vast expanses, all in the twinkling of an 
eye! It operates with unimaginable speed. It conceives an object and dallies with it a little, but it soon discards it 
for another more attractive object toward which it flees and about which it begins to worry!
The spiritual aspirant has to be ever watchful of this tendency of the mind. When the mind flits from object to 
object, it must be brought back to the right path and the right object. That is the correct spiritual practice, the path 
of concentration and meditation. If, however, the aspirant does not struggle to achieve this one-pointedness but 
leaves the mind to itself, following its vagaries from this to that and that to this, the process deserves to be called 
monkey-meditation ( markata dhyana ) —a type of meditation that is indeed very harmful to spiritual progress.
Force the mind to be one-pointed
In short, the chief purpose of concentration and meditation is to minimise the travels of the mind and force it 
to stay in one place. Holding it on that fixed stage, one should continue the spiritual practice for a long time. Then 
there is no limit to the peace and joy that one can have. For example, when you meditate on a table, your thoughts 
dwell on the wood, the size and measurements, the style, the mode of manufacture, etc. No other thought pertain -
ing to anything else should be allowed. If the thought hovers round a cot, the idea of a table becomes hazy, and 
the cot is also imagined incompletely. Both get confused. The state of mind must be single-pointed. So too, when 
the Lord’s form is meditated upon, the mind must dwell upon the form of each part and its beauty and splendour, 
and these ideas must be coordinated and combined into the complete picture.
That is the modus operandi of meditation. Persistent performance of this meditation will result in the emer -
gence of a particular form. Contemplating on that form, looking at it and seeing it for days and days, finally a 
stage will be reached when the form will disappear and you will forget yourself. That is the super-conscious 
(samadhi ) stage. In that stage, if one feeling or ideation alone persists, it is called the superconscious state with 
ideation ( savikalpa-samadhi ). If no feeling or thought persists, it becomes what Patanjali, in the text on raja-yoga 
(Rajayoga-sastra ), designated as the end of ideation ( bhava-nasana ).46
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XIII. Developing One-pointednessWhile doing meditation, the mind should not be allowed to wander away from the target. Whenever it flies 
off at a tangent, it must be led back to the form meditated upon. Finally, if you so desire, all things can be sub -
sumed in that form itself. Nevertheless, only one form has to be meditated upon in the beginning. You should not 
change daily from one to another. Again, during the spiritual practice, you should not indulge in thoughts about 
things you do not like, that cause pain, or that shake your faith. If any such peep in, learn gradually to welcome 
them as beneficial and seek to grasp the good in them, instead of the bad.
The inert mind reflects the intelligence
Of course, the mind is inert ( jada). Just as when water, inert matter, begins to shine when it is placed in the 
sun, the inert mind borrows effulgence from the Atma  and appears as if it has consciousness ( chaithanya ). The 
intellect ( buddhi ) gets reflected in the mind, so it looks as if the mind is also intelligent, that is all. Its real nature is 
ignorance. The mind is not self-effulgent, like the Atma . The mind’s splendour is as the luminousness of insects in 
the rainy season. The Atma , however, is the sun of suns, the effulgence of effulgences, the Supreme Light ( Param-
jyothi ), the self-effulgent ( swayam-jyothi ).
Control the senses as well as the mind
The senses can do nothing by themselves. They are not independent. If the mind is brought under control, the 
senses can also be controlled. Some people undergo mere asceticism of the senses in order to control the mind! 
They are ignorant of the real discipline that is necessary. The real discipline is the destruction of desire.
However vigilant warders may be, a clever robber can still steal in a hundred amazing ways. So too, however 
skillfully you may try to control the senses, the mind will drag them to its side and execute its desires through 
them. Note how the sage Viswamitra, in spite of his austerities, fell before the wiles of the celestial nymphs 
(apsaras ) sent by Indra to tempt him.
If only the outer door is closed and the inner door is left unbolted, calamity is certain. But if both the exterior 
and the interior doors are safely bolted, you can sleep peacefully, for no thief, however clever, will find it easy 
to enter and do harm. Therefore, the aspirant should establish mastery over the external senses. Then, the mind, 
immersed in the continuous succession of subject-object ( vishaya ) relationship, has to be controlled by means of 
peace ( santhi ) and renunciation ( vairagya ). When that is done, one can experience real spiritual bliss ( ananda ) 
and visualise the Atma , in its real form. That is why Krishna once told Arjuna, “Those who aspire to have mastery 
over the senses must have full faith in Me.”
The senses are always extrovert in nature; they are greedy for external contacts. Therefore, they drag the 
ignorant perpetually toward external objects. So the spiritual aspirant, endowed with discrimination and renuncia -
tion, must place obstacles in their outward path and suppress their outbursts, just as the charioteer, wielding the 
whip and the reins, does to the raging steeds. Uncontrolled senses cause great harm. People in their grip cannot 
engage themselves in meditation, even for a single second.
Cultivate good habits before concentration
Form ( rupa ) is fundamental for concentration and meditation. Even in the absence of the form in front of you, 
you should have the capacity to visualise it. This is not so difficult for those whose concentration is correct. But 47
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XIII. Developing One-pointednesssome practise concentration without first cultivating good habits and right conduct. That is a sign of incomplete 
knowledge. Concentration must have the pure qualities ( sathwa-gunas ) as the basis. The mind has to be purified 
by proper treatment of the character through good habits. Concentration has to follow this purification process, 
not precede it. All effort for concentration without cleansing the mind is a sheer waste of time. Many great men 
have ruined their careers by aspiring early for concentration, without the discipline of good habits.
Make slow but steady progress
Again, in concentration you must be careful not to have as the object something your mind does not like, for 
however hard you try, your mind will not stay on it. Therefore, in the beginning, have some object that is a source 
of joy.
Sit in the lotus ( padmasana ) pose and fix your eyes on the tip of your nose. In the beginning, for a minute; 
then for three minutes; some days later, for six; and after some time, for as long as nine minutes. Thus, the con -
centration has to be strengthened gradually, without undue hurry. In this way, it can be held for even half an hour, 
with the lapse of time. But do not force the pace. Slowly and steadily, the discipline must be developed.
With practice, the mind will get fixed and the power of concentration will increase. To attain concentration 
and acquire one-pointedness, you must undergo exertion to some extent. You must fasten your mind on the Lord 
and keep off all other thoughts from the mental plane. By constant exercise of this type, your vision will be firmly 
fixed on the Lord residing in your heart. That is, verily, the goal; the full fruition of meditation.
Concentration, according to yoga  scriptures, is the fixing of the mind on one object, without any deviation. 
Concentration alone can make meditation successful. Its very nature is one-pointedness; its power will negate 
hesitation. It is caused by spiritual bliss. The name is essential for meditation, for that alone can insure quick suc -
cess. Even if complete faith is not forthcoming quickly, the practice must not be given up or changed, for practice 
will certainly yield victory. Meditation is spiritual strength, the strength that will keep off the disease of worldli -
ness ( samsara ).48
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XIV . Remove Defects in CharacterChapter XIV. Remove Defects in Character
But you should avoid the difficult obstacles in the path of meditation, viz. anger, pride, conceit, the tendency to 
discover the faults of others, mischief, etc. These operate even subconsciously, as the currents in the depths 
of the ocean.
Spiritual aspirants must be vigilant not to lose their temper on even small things, for that will block their 
progress. They must cultivate love toward all, and meekness. Then, undesirable habits will fall away from them, 
since anger is the parent of all wrong behaviour. Anger can turn any person into bad ways, any moment, and in 
any form. So it should be sublimated first by systematic effort.
Spiritual aspirants must welcome gladly the announcement of their defects by anyone; indeed, they must be 
grateful to those who point them out. Aspirants must never entertain hatred against them, for that is as bad as hat -
ing the “good”. The “good” has to be loved and the “bad” discarded. Remember, the “bad” should not be hated. It 
has to be given up, avoided. Only people who can do this can achieve progress in meditation and spiritual wisdom.
Conceit, jealousy, the passionate ( rajasic ) exhibition of one’s superiority, anger, the craving to inform one -
self of the weakness of others and their failings, trickery —all these are obstacles in the path of meditation. Even if 
these are not patently exhibited, the inner impulses urging one along these wrong directions are latent in the mind.
Just as a room kept closed for a long time is found dust-ridden and foul-smelling, is opened, cleaned, and 
made habitable by elaborate sweeping and dusting, so the mind has to be cleaned by meditation. Spiritual aspi -
rants must, by inward observation, examine the mind and its contents and condition. By proper disciplinary habits, 
the accumulated dirt should be removed little by little, systematically. Conceit, for example, is deep-rooted and 
unyielding. In the passionate ( rajasic ) mind, it puts forth many branches in all directions and spreads everywhere. 
It might appear to be dry and dead for some time, but it will sprout again, easily. As soon as a chance arises for its 
exhibition, it will raise its hood. So, spiritual aspirants have to be ever vigilant.
With regard to anger, spiritual aspirants have to be vigilant even about the most minor matters that might 
provoke them, because if they are careless, they cannot progress in the least. Such people must cultivate a humble, 
loving spirit. Then the bad traits will disappear. Some aspirants become very angry when someone discovers and 
announces to them the bad traits they possess. This makes matters worse!
Eliminate pride
Aspirants must always have the inward look; if they allow the mind to wander outward, they cannot identify 
their own faults. Pride prevents the inward look and confuses the examination of the mind. When aspirants want 
to achieve success, they must bow down to those who point out their faults. That is the way to progress quickly 
and fast in the path of meditation. And they must endeavour not to entertain the faults any longer.
It is hard to get rid of pride and self-love or ego ( ahamkara ), for everyone has been shaping this life from the 
beginningless period of time! Everyone has been allowing their mind to flow in the direction it likes for ages past, 
so it is very difficult now to turn it from its accustomed path and bend its steps in another direction.
Individuals full of I ( aham ) love to exercise authority over others. They will not agree with others that it is 49
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XIV . Remove Defects in Character“bondage”, for the arguments of others are not advanced by them! They see everything through glasses coloured 
by the smoke of selfishness and self-love. “My words are true.” “My opinion is correct.” “My deeds are right.” 
Thus they feel and thus they spend their days. Such behaviour is very harmful for spiritual aspirants. They must 
look forward eagerly to any helpful criticism or suggestion or advice, from whatever quarter.
Besides, aspirants must minimise all discussion and argumentation, for this breeds a spirit of rivalry and 
leads one on to angry reprisals and vengeful fighting. Do not struggle to earn the esteem of the world. Do not feel 
humiliated or angry when the world does not recognise you or your merits. Learn this first and foremost if you 
are an aspirant for spiritual success. Do not become happy when you are being praised; therein lies a deadly trap, 
which might even lead you astray and endanger your progress.
Thus, you must reform your mental traits and habits. Cultivate the habit of never causing pain to others. Try 
to understand others and sympathise with them and do things that will be helpful. Train yourself to take insult and 
criticism as “decorations” awarded to you. Struggle hard to be friendly with everyone, whatever their nature or 
conduct. A sense of joy is necessary for meditation and concentration to progress, but many things deprive you of 
the atmosphere of joy. So you must pray sincerely, in order to be free from such obstacles. The recital or repetition 
of mantras will be of great help.
Follow Krishna’s advice and meditate
In the third age of humans (the Dwapara-yuga ), Krishna said,
When you start fixing your thoughts on Me,  
all thoughts that agitate you will be stilled through My grace.
Mathchiththah sarva dhurgani math-prasaadhaath tharishyathi .
This discipline of meditation must be rigorously followed. In fact, dhyana  (meditation) means “discipline”. 
Discipline, regularity, steadiness —these are the essentials of meditation. A spiritual aspirant who keeps these 
things in view can achieve quick results. Meditation is a first-class cure for the illness of worldly existence ( bha-
va-roga ). Along with it, another drug must also be taken; its name is contentment. If there is contentment in the 
mind, one enjoys an endless festival. Craving makes the mind waver; it is an all-consuming fire that will destroy 
people slowly and surely.
The royal road to meditation is contentment. Just as a traveller who has trudged along for miles in the scorch -
ing sun feels refreshed when taking a bath in the limpid waters of a cool and shady lake, so too the unfortunate 
individual struggling in the scorching heat of desires feels happy and relieved when bathing in the lake of content -
ment.
The three guards: peace, contentment, discrimination
At the gates of liberation ( moksha ) and Self-realisation ( sakshatkara ), three guards are posted to ask you for 
your credentials. They are peace or mental equilibrium, joy or contentment, and inquiry or discrimination ( santhi , 
santhosha , and vichara ). Even if one of the guards is made to become friendly, the others will facilitate your en -
try. First in the series is peace. If you make peace yours, contentment ( thrupthi ) is yours, and contentment is the 
highest source of joy and the most valuable possession. It is as much as an empire.50
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XIV . Remove Defects in CharacterWithout contentment, desire ( kama ) and greed ( lobha ) attain dangerous proportions and will overwhelm 
the power of discrimination itself. Desire easily becomes greed, and greed degenerates into miserliness and lust, 
which make you flit from object to object in mad pursuit of the evanescent sensual joy. How can people with such 
qualities develop the faculty of concentration? And without the capacity to concentrate, how can they engage in 
meditation? And without meditation, no one can get Godhead ( Daivam ).
Advise the mind that flows so swiftly in so many directions: “Oh mind, do not drag me along the floods of 
objects, along the path of sensual desires, and spoil my career. Instead, take me to the Lord. Flow in that direction, 
please.” Giving up all other desires and being ever content, dwell on His name and His form only, to the exclu -
sion of everything else. Meditation on the name and form is real peace ( santhi ), genuine contentment ( santhosha ).
Contentment will not make anyone an idler, remember. It is an attribute of true pure ( sathwic ) character. It 
will make the mind turn always toward the Lord. It will save you from the tribulation to satisfy the unimportant 
wants and to cater to selfish needs. It will direct human talents toward efforts that elevate. The contented person 
will also be truthful and will therefore be in constant communion with the Atma . That is to say, the contented 
person can be immersed in meditation for long periods without rest or the feeling of tiredness. Meditation is the 
only method of counteracting the mental activities that surge forward in a thousand directions; there is no other 
method at all.
Be comfortable in all environments
The capacity to concentrate is a very useful qualification. You must watch the vagaries of your own mind 
—how it travels, what objects it runs after, etc.— and, slowly, by means of meditation, you should teach it to stay 
still and to behave beneficially.
Do not worry about the unsatisfactory environment you may have. Of course, the place may have some 
drawbacks and it may not be ideal. But it is no use trying to run away from all that. You can overcome the draw -
backs by training your own mind. Stay in your environment and pray to the Lord! Pray that He may fill you with 
His thoughts and His vision, making you ignore the defects of the environment. Do not seek comfort, for comfort 
might not be conducive to meditation. Learn to be comfortable in any place; that is better. Live in joy wherever 
you are; that is the way. Revel in the realm of your mind; worship in the mind the Lord you have chosen as your 
goal and be free of all the defects of the natural or human environment! Then, no spot can be irksome to you, nor 
will any place seem disgusting.
Concluding admonitions
Pride is an insidious vice, so at the slightest inkling of the disease, try your best to eradicate it by retiring into 
a lonely spot and engaging yourself in meditation. Delay is dangerous. “Even divine nectar ( amritha ) becomes a 
poison if the dose is delayed,” says the proverb. Remember this and act swiftly. Meditation stills the agitated mind 
and makes it clear and full of joy.
Many in this world, even among the learned, do not spend their allotted span of life in the pursuit of certain 
selected ideals. Hence, their earthly careers are like the voyage of a storm-tossed ship that has lost both its anchor 
and its compass and is caught in mid-ocean. They are torn between opposing ideals and goals; they listen to di -
verse appeals; and their lives end in waste and failure, for they say one thing and do another in their ignorance and 51
Dhyana Vahini Chapter XIV . Remove Defects in Characterfear. Meditation gives them fixity of purpose, courage, and also wisdom.
The feelings that arise in the mind, which are classified as serene, restless, and ignorant ( sathwic , rajasic , and 
thamasic ), also have to be watched and cleansed. The restlessness and ignorance have to be uprooted. Meditation 
is the weapon for this task.
The path of meditation ( dhyana-marga ) will destroy ignorance ( a-jnana ), and it will grant the individual 
union with the Godhead ( Brahmaikyatha ).52
Dhyana Vahini GlossaryGlossary
This glossary contains many Sanskrit words, people, places, and literature that Sathya Sai Baba uses in His Va-
hinis , especially those appearing in this volume. The glossary attempts to provide comprehensive meanings 
and detailed explanations of the more important Sanskrit words, for the benefit of lay readers who are interested 
in Hindu religion and philosophy.
In an electronic version of this volume (e.g. an e-book for the ipad, kindle, nook, or other tablet), you can 
click on most names, places, people, and Sanskrit words within the text in order to immediately access the word 
in this glossary. Your device will also have an arrow or other link to press to get back to where you were reading.
.
adi-murthi . Primordial force.
aham . The knower, the “I”.
Aham Brahmasmi . “I am Brahman .” One of the great Vedic  aphorisms ( mahavakyas ).
ahamkara . Ego, self-love, selfish individuality.
ahimsa . Nonviolence.
a-jnana . Ignorance, stupidity.
a-jnani . Ignorant person.
amritha . Divine nectar (literally, no death or immortal).
ananda . Divine bliss. The Self is unalloyed, eternal bliss. Pleasures are but its faint and impermanent shadows.
Anasuya . Wife of sage Athri  and mother of Dattatreya ; an incarnation of the Trinity.
antar vimarsha . Inner quest.
anthah-karana . Inner psycho-somatic fourfold instruments of mind, intellect, memory, and ego.
apana . The downward air, which goes out through the anus.
apsaras . Wives of the Gandharvas , celestial nymphs.
artha . Wealth, prosperity, material object, thing, aim, purpose, desire.
Arjuna . Krishna’s disciple, in the Bhagavad Gita ; third of five Pandava brothers. See Mahabharatha . 
asana . Yoga  posture or sitting posture.
a-sura . Demon; term arose when Diti’s sons refused to drink the divine liquor ( suraa ) offered by Varuni, the 
daughter of Varuna .
Atharva-veda . The fourth Veda . Atharva  means “fourth”. Steady, unmoved person, of stable nature.
Athri . A sage; father of Dattatreya.
Atma . Self; Soul. Self, with limitations, is the individual soul. Self, with no limitations, is Brahman , the Su -
preme Reality.
Atma-ananda . Atmic  bliss, bliss of Self-realization.
Atma-anubhava . Atmic  experience.53
Dhyana Vahini GlossaryAtma-sakshatkara . Direct vision of Atma .
Atma-thathwa . True nature of Atma , the Atmic  Principle.
Atma-vidya . Knowledge of supreme reality or Atma .
Atmic . Of or relating to the Atma .
Aum . Om; Designation of the Universal Brahman ; sacred, primordial sound of the universe.
avadhana . Concentration.
Avatar . Incarnation of God. Whenever there is a decline of dharma , God comes down to the world assuming 
bodily form to protect the good, punish the wicked and re-establish dharma . An Avatar  is born and lives free 
and is ever conscious of His mission. By His precept and example, He opens up new paths in spirituality, 
shedding His grace on all.
a-vidya . Ignorance.
Bali. Emperor of demons; grandson of Prahlada and son of the demon Virochana. Humiliated by dwarf Vamana, 
who was an incarnation of Vishnu.
Bhagavad Gita . Literally, Song of God. Portion of the Mahabharatha  that is a dialogue between Arjuna , one of 
the Pandava  brothers, and Krishna .
bhajans . Congregational chant group worship by devotees with devotional music in which repetition of holy 
names predominates.
bhaktha . Devotee of the Lord.
bhakthi . Devotion to God.
Bharadwaja . Celebrated sage who taught the science of medicine; seer of Vedic  hymns.
bhava-nasana . The end of ideation.
bhava-roga . Disease of worldliness.
Bhava-roga-vaidya . The Lord; the curer of worldly ills.
Bhima . Second of five Pandava brothers; named for his size and strength. See Mahabharatha .
bikshu . Religious mendicant, who lives on alms.
Brahma . The Creator, the First of the Hindu Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and Siva 
(the Destroyer).
Brahmaikyatha . The Godhead.
Brahma-jnana . Knowledge of Brahman.
Brahma-muhurtha . Sacred period during early morning, when spiritual practices such as meditation are recom -
mended. Approximately 96 minutes hours before sunrise for 48 minutes, but one can also find it defined as 
04:08–04:56. A muhurtha  is approximately 48 minutes.
Brahman  or Brahmam . The Supreme Being, the Absolute Reality, Impersonal God with no form or attributes. 
Identical to Atma . The uncaused cause of the Universe, Existence, Consciousness-Bliss Absolute ( Sat-Chit-
Ananda ); The Eternal Changeless Reality — not conditioned by time, space, and causation.
Brahma Sutra . Spiritual text of Vedantic  teachings in short maxims, attributed to Badharayana or Vyasa
Brahma-vidya . Spiritual attainment, knowledge of Brahman.
brahmin . First of four castes of social order, the priestly or teacher caste; a person belonging to this caste.54
Dhyana Vahini Glossarybuddhi . Intellect, intelligence, faculty of discrimination.
caste . The four castes of social order are: brahmin  (priestly or teacher), kshatriya  (warrior, protector), vaisya  
(trader, merchant, agriculturist), and sudra  (worker, helper). See varna dharma .
chaithanya . Consciousness, intelligence, spirit.
Chaithanya . Fifteenth century Vaishnavite mendicant reformer; taught the path of love and devotion to the 
Avatar  of Sri Krishna.
chit. Consciousness, knowledge, awareness.
chittha . Mind stuff, memory, subconscious mind.
Daivam . Godhead.
Dattatreya . Sage son of Athri and Anasuya.
deva . Deity, celestial being, God.
dharana . Concentration, fixed attention, one of 8 steps in Patanjali’s yoga  discipline.
dharma . Righteousness, religion, code of conduct, duty, essential nature of a being or thing. It holds together 
the entire Universe. Man is exhorted to practise dharma  to achieve material and spiritual welfare. The Vedas  
contain the roots of dharma . God is naturally interested in the reign of dharma .
Dharmaraja . Name for Yudhistira, eldest of the five Pandava brothers. Born to Kunthi by the grace of Yama 
Dharmaraja, Lord of Death. Named for adherence to dharma . See Mahabharatha .
Dharma Sastras . Codes of law and ethics concerning virtuous living.
dharmic . According to dharma , righteous.
Dhritharashtra . Father of Kauravas; holder of ruling power.
dhyana . Meditation.
dhyana-marga . Path of meditation.
dhyani . Meditator.
Druva . Grandson of Brahma and son of Uttanapadha; as a child, he performed severe penance and attained self-
renunciation.
Durga . Goddess of the universe; mother earth; daughter of Himaval and wife of Siva.
Durvasa . Son of Athri and Anasuya; known for quick temper and severe curses with an eventually constructive 
effect of driving home hard lessons of discipline and virtuousness. He granted boons to Kunthi, which result -
ed in the births of Karna and the Pandavas.
dussanga . Company of the wicked.
Dwapara-yuga . Third in the cycle of four ages. See yuga .
Easwara  (Iswara). The Supreme Lord. Easwara is the Lord of every creature in the universe. Hence, the entire 
cosmos is reflected as an image in the Lord. Siva is often called Easwara.
Easwaramma . Sathya Sai Baba’s mother; means the mother of Easwara (God). She passed away on 6 May 6 
1998.
ekagratha . One-pointedness of mind.
Gandharvas . Celestial musicians, a class of demigods; born to the sage Kasyapa and wife Arishta.
Ganga . The 1560-mile-long Ganges river; starts in the Himalayas and flows generally east into the Bay of Ben -55
Dhyana Vahini Glossarygal; the most sacred river of India.
Gauranga . Name for Chaithanya, a great saint.
Gayatri mantra . A very sacred Vedic  prayer for self-enlightenment; it is repeated piously at dawn, noon, and 
twilight devotions.
Gita. See Bhagavad Gita .
grihastha . Householder, one of the four stages of life.
guna . Quality, property, trait; one of the three constituents of nature ( sathwa , rajas , and thamas ). They bind the 
soul to the body. Man’s supreme goal in life is to transcend the gunas  and attain liberation from the cycle of 
birth and death.
guru . Spiritual guide; a knower of Brahman, who is calm, desireless, merciful, and ever ready to help and guide 
spiritual aspirants who approach him.
halahala . A deadly poison, produced by gods and demons at the churning of the ocean.
Hari . God; destroyer of sins; name for Vishnu.
Hiranyagarbha . Cosmic divine mind; cosmic womb; golden egg first created by Brahman from which all cre -
ation issued.
Hiranyakasipu . A demonic person who forbade mention of Vishnu’s name, wicked father of Prahlada, who was 
a great devotee of the Lord; killed by the man-lion Narashimha, an Avatar  of Vishnu.
iccha-sakthi . Will power.
Ikshvaku . Son of Manu and father of Kukshi; first king of Ayodhya and ancestor of Rama’s dynasty.
Indra . Lord of the devas  (celestials). Indra is one of the chief deities in the Rig veda .
indriyas . Senses.
Iswara  (Easwara). The Supreme Ruler, the Personal God. He is Brahman associated with illusion ( maya ) but 
has it under His control, unlike the individual soul, who is illusion’s slave. He has a lovely form, auspicious 
attributes, and infinite power to create, sustain, and destroy. He dwells in the heart of every being, controlling 
it from within. He responds positively to true devotion and sincere prayer.
iswarya . Fullest splendour of power.
ithihasa . Historical legend, traditional account of former events.
jada. Inert matter.
jagath . Cosmos, world of change, creation.
Janaka . A self-realized king; Sita’s father and Rama’s father-in-law. His ancestor was Nimi, a great emperor.
japa. Soft prayer or repetition of the name of God.
Jayadeva . Sanskrit poet; wrote the Gita Govinda , which describes the early life of Krishna.
jiva. Individual or soul, in a state of non-realisation of its identity with Brahman. It is unaware of its own nature 
and is subjected to sensations of pain and pleasure, birth and death, etc.
jivan-muktha . One who is liberated in this life.
jivi. Individual or soul.
jnana . Sacred knowledge; knowledge of the spirit, pursued as a means to Self-realisation. It is direct experience 
of God, as the Soul of the souls. Jnana  makes a man omniscient, free, fearless, and immortal.56
Dhyana Vahini GlossaryJnana-kanda . Portion of the Vedas  that deals with knowledge of Brahman through the path of spiritual wisdom 
or discriminative knowledge.
jnanen-driyas . Five organs of perception: eye, ear, tongue, nose, and skin. Associated with five senses of per -
ception: sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch.
jnani . Wise man, realized soul.
Kali-yuga . Fourth in a cycle of four ages; the evil age; the one we are now in. See yuga .
Kalpataru . Heavenly wish-fulfilling tree in Indra’s paradise.
kama . Desire, lust, worldly fulfillment; one of four goals of humans.
Kamadhenu . Divine cow granting all wishes.
karma . Action, deed, work, religious rite, the totality of innate tendencies formed as a consequence of acts done 
in previous lives. Every karma  produces a lasting impression on the mind of the doer, apart from affecting 
others. Repetition of a particular karma  produces a tendency ( vasanas ) in the mind. Karma  is of three kinds: 
(i) praarabdha , which is being exhausted in the present life: (ii) aagami , which is being accumulated in 
the present life, and (iii) samchitha , which is being accumulated or stored to be experienced in future lives. 
Akarma  is action that is done without any intention to gain the consequences; vikarma  is action that is inten -
tionally done.
Karna . Half-brother of the Pandavas. Valiant but unfortunate eldest son of Kunthi by the Sun deity. Ally of the 
Kauravas in the war with Pandavas.
Kasyapa . Father of all living creatures; son of Marichi and grandson of Brahma.
Kauravas . Family that fought Pandavas. See Mahabharatha .
Krishna . The Avatar  of Vishnu  in the Dwapara yuga , prior to the present Kali yuga .
kritha-yuga . First age of man, Golden age of truth. See yuga .
kshatriya . Protector, warrior; see caste.
Kunthi . Also Kunthi Devi . Mother of Pandavas, wife of King Pandu (the younger brother of emperor Dhrithar -
ashtra), and sister of Krishna’s father (Vasudeva).
Lakshmi . Consort of Vishnu, goddess of wealth.
laya. Merging, dissolution, absorption.
lingam . Also Sivalingam . Egg-shaped stone; symbol of Siva; the form of the formless; symbolizes merger of the 
form with the formless.
lobha . Greed.
Madhava . God (name for Krishna ); Master of illusion ( maya ), Lord of Lakshmi.
Mahabharatha . The Hindu epic composed by Sage Vyasa , which deals with the deeds and fortunes of the cous -
ins (the Kauravas and Pandavas ) of the Lunar race, with Lord Krishna  playing a significant and decisive role 
in shaping the events. The Bhagavad Gita  and Vishnu Sahasranama  occur in this great epic. It is considered 
to be the Fifth Veda  by devout Hindus. Of this great epic, it is claimed that “what is not in it is nowhere .
Mahasamadhi . The conscious departure from the physical body of a realized soul; the shrine where the physi -
cal body is buried. Sathya Sai Baba’s Mahasamadhi  was on 24 April 2011, and His Mahasamadhi  is in Sai 
Kulwant Hall in Prasanthi Nilayam.57
Dhyana Vahini Glossarymahatma . Great soul .
mahavakya . Great aphorism.
malina . Impure.
manas . Mind, the inner organ, which has four aspects: (i) mind ( manas ), which deliberates, desires, and feels; 
(ii) intellect ( buddhi ), which understands, reasons, and decides; (iii) the  ‘I’ sense, and (iv) memory ( chitha ). 
The mind, with all its desires and their broods, conceals the Divinity within man. Purification of the mind is 
essential for realisation of the Self.
mangala . Auspicious, fortunate.
Manu . The first father of mankind; author of the codes of righteous conduct ( Dharma Sastras ); son of Surya 
(the sun) and father of Vaivaswatha Manu, the present progenitor of mankind.
Manu-smrithi . Laws of Manu.
marga . Path.
Markandeya . As a boy, he knew all the Vedas  and Sastras ; at 16, he started meditating on Siva so steadfastly 
that the day of his death passed him by, and he remained 16 for the next 10 million years.
markata . Monkey.
maya . Delusion. The mysterious, creative, and delusive power of Brahman through which God projects the 
appearance of the Universe. Maya  is the material cause and Brahman is the efficient cause of the Universe. 
Brahman and maya  are inextricably associated with each other like fire and its power to heat. Maya  deludes 
the individual souls in egoism, making them forget their true spiritual nature.
Meera . Princess of Rajasthan and queen of Chittor; devoted to Krishna; took poison from her husband without 
any effect; composed devotional songs of exceptional quality.
moksha , mukthi . Liberation from all kinds of bondage, especially the one to the cycle of birth and death. It is a 
state of absolute freedom, peace, and bliss, attained through Self-realisation. This is the supreme goal of hu -
man endeavour, the other three being, righteousness ( dharma ), wealth and power ( artha ), and sense-pleasure 
(kama ).
Nakula . One of the Pandava brothers.  See Mahabharatha .
nama . Name.
nama-sadhana . The practice of repeating God’s name.
namasmarana . Remembrance of God through His Name — one of the important steps of spiritual discipline to 
obtain God’s grace and to make progress in the spiritual journey.
Narada . Sage-bard; traveled the world chanting Narayana . Famous for creating disputes, resulting in solutions 
for the spiritual advancement or victory of the virtuous. Expert in law and author of texts on dharma .
Narasimha . Man-lion. One of the ten Avatars  of Vishnu.
Narayana . The Primal Person, the Lord, Vishnu.
nir-vichara . Not amenable to intellectual analysis.
nir-vitharka . Not amenable to arguments or logic; transcends such logics.
nish-kama-karma . Renunciation of the fruit of action.
niyama . Control of the outer senses.
Om. Designation of the Universal Brahman; sacred, primordial sound of the Universe.58
Dhyana Vahini GlossaryOmkara . The form of AUM , or Om.
padmasana . Lotus-like posture.
Pandavas . Sons of Pandu; family of 5 brothers that fought the Kauravas: Dharmaraja , Bhima, Arjuna , Nakula, 
and Sahadeva. See Mahabharatha .
Param-atma . Supreme Self, Supreme Atma .
Param-jyothi . Highest revelation, supreme light, divine intelligence.
Patanjali . Author of the Yoga Sutras , which form the foundation of the yoga  system of Indian philosophy. See 
raja-yoga .
Pedda Venkama Raju . Sathya Sai Baba’s father.
Prahlada . Son of the demon king Hiranyakasipu. As a boy, he was beaten, trampled, and cast into fire and wa -
ter. But he saw only God everywhere, and repetition of the Name of God saved him. Once, Prahlada asserted 
that God was everywhere, and Narayana appeared in his man-lion form from within a pillar to destroy the 
king.
Prajapathi . Creator of this world; God presiding over creation. Also called Manu, Surya’s son.
prakriti . Nature, the Divine Power of Becoming. Also known as maya , a-vidya , and sakthi ; the world of matter 
and mind as opposed to the spirit. Prakriti  has three dispositions or gunas  (sathwa , rajas , and thamas ), which 
go into the make-up of all living and non-living beings in the Universe, in varying proportions leading to the 
appearance of infinite multiplicity in form, nature, and behaviour .
prana . Life-breath, life force, vital energy, the five vital airs of the body. English doesn’t seem to have names 
for these vital airs, so we list them with their Sanskrit names: prana  (located in lungs), apana  (flatus, which 
moves downward through the rectum), vyana  (diffused throughout the whole body), samana  (navel; essential 
to digestion), and udana  (rises through throat to head).
pranayama . Breath control.
Pranava . Om; the sacred seed-sound and symbol of Brahman. “The most exalted syllable in Vedas ”. It is used 
in meditation on God. It is uttered first before a Vedic  mantra  is chanted.
prathyahara . Control of mind; withdrawing senses from the external world and turning them toward a higher 
consciousness.
prema . Ecstatic love of God; divine love of the most intense kind.
puja. Worship.
Puranas . Any of a number of collections of ancient legends and lore embodying the principles of the universal, 
eternal religion and ethics. There are 18 Puranas , the most famous being the Mahabhagavatham  and the Devi 
Bhagavatham .
Puranic . Relating to Purana .
Purusha . Primeval Person, Supreme Spirit, Lord, God.
Radha . Cowherd maid, a chief devotee of Krishna; one of Lakshmi’s forms.
raga . Sense of attachment, passion, affection.
rajas . One of the three gunas  (qualities or dispositions) of maya  or prakriti . Passion, restlessness, aggressive -
ness, emotions such as anger, greed, grief. Associated with colour red. See guna .
rajasic . Adjective form of rajas , passionate, emotional.59
Dhyana Vahini Glossaryrajasika-marga . Path of passionate action.
raja-yoga . Royal yoga  of meditation, detachment, and desirelessness. Eight-fold path of yoga  developed by 
Patanjali, which includes control of the mind and withdrawal of the senses from the external world.
rajoguna . Quality of passion, restlessness, aggressiveness. Associated with colour red. See guna .
Rama . Avatar  of the Thretha yuga . Hero of the Ramayana ; killed the wicked Ravana  to rescue his wife Sita, 
who had been kidnapped. “Rama” means “he who pleases”.
Ramayana . This sacred epic, composed by Sage Valmiki , deals with the incarnation of Vishnu as Sri Rama , 
who strove all his life to reestablish the reign of dharma  in the world. The Ramayana  has played an important 
role in influencing and shaping the Hindu ethos over the centuries.
Ravana . Lord of demons and king of Lanka, who abducted Sita (Rama ’s wife).
Rig-veda . First Veda  composed by the sages, consisting of 1028 hymns. Oldest religious text in world.
Rig-vedic . Of or relating to the Rig-veda .
rishi . Sage, wise man.
rupa . Form, figure, appearance.
sadguna . Good character, virtue.
sadhaka . Spiritual aspirant.
sadhana . Spiritual discipline or exercise; self effort.
sadhu . Virtuous, wise aspirant; pious or righteous person.
Sahadeva . One of the Pandava brothers.  See Mahabharatha .
sahasra-nama . 1000 names of Siva or Vishnu.
sakshatkara . Divine spiritual experience or vision; direct experience of the Lord.
sakthi . Great universal power, divine energy, strength. Maha  means Great , so Mahasakthi  is great sakthi .
samadhi . Literally, total absorption. The state of super consciousness resulting in union with or absorption in 
the ultimate reality, the Atma ; perfect equanimity. The state that transcends the body, mind, and intellect. In 
that state of consciousness, the objective world and the ego vanish and Reality is perceived or communed 
with, in utter peace and bliss. When people realise in this state their oneness with God, it is called nirvikalpa 
samadhi .
samana . Digestive air; even breath.
samatha . Equal-mindedness, harmony, agreement.
samsara . Worldly life; life of the individual soul through repeated births and deaths. Liberation means getting 
freed from this cycle.
Sanathana Dharma . Eternal religion. A descriptive term for what has come to be called Hinduism. It has no 
single founder or text of its own. It is more a commonwealth of religious faiths and a way of life.
sanmarga  Good conduct.
santham . Equanimity, serenity, tranquility.
santhi . Peace, equanimity, serenity, tranquility.
santhosha . Peace, contentment, happiness.
sanyasin . Renunciant, mendicant.60
Dhyana Vahini GlossarySastras . The Hindu scriptures containing the teachings of the sages. The Vedas , the Upanishads , the ithihasas  
(epics), the Puranas , the Smrithis  (codes of conduct), etc., form the Sastras  of the Hindus. They teach us how 
to live wisely and well with all the tenderness and concern of the Mother.
sat. Existence, being, good, real.
sat-chit-ananda  or satchidananda . Existence-knowledge-bliss, or being-awareness-bliss.
sath-sang . Good company.
sathwa . One of the three gunas  (qualities and dispositions) of maya  or prakriti . It is the quality of purity, bright -
ness, peace, and harmony. It leads to knowledge. Man is exhorted to overcome thamas  by rajas  and rajas  by 
sathwa  and finally to go beyond sathwa  itself to attain liberation.
sathwa-guna . Quality of purity, calmness, serenity, joy, strength, goodness. Associated with colour white. See 
guna.
sathwic . Adjective form of sathwa ; serene, pure, good, balanced.
sathwic marga . Path of serenity, purity, balance, goodness.
sathya . Truth.
Sathyanarayana . Sathya Sai Baba, as an incarnation of Narayana, the Primal Person, the Lord, Vishnu.
sa-vichara . With deliberation and reasoning or enquiry.
sa-vikalpa-samadhi . Subject-object type of superconscious state.
sa-vitharka . With logical argumentation.
Savithri . Brought husband back to life by outwitting Yama , the Lord of Death, by her power of purity and chas -
tity.
seva. Selfless service; service to others while trying to serve the God within them.
Shirdi Sai Baba . First of the triple incarnation consisting of Shirdi Sai Baba, Sathya Sai Baba, and Prema Sai 
Baba. He passed away in 1918.
siddhantha . Authoritative texts; established tenet or doctrine.
siddhi . Perfection; yogic power.
Sita. Wife of Rama; brought up by King Janaka  who found her in a box in the earth. Also, a tributary of the 
Ganga, flowing westward.
Siva. The Destroyer, the Third of the Hindu Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and Siva 
(the Destroyer).
Sivoham . I am Siva, or divine.
smarana . Remembering the name of the Lord.
smrithi . Code of law; traditional law delivered by human authors.
soham . I am God.
sreyo-karma . Actions that liberate.
Sri. Honorific prefix to the name of deities; respectful title of venerated persons and celebrated works.
subha  Good, auspicious.
sudra . Labourer, the fourth caste of workers. See caste .
su-jnana . Good knowledge, ability to distinguish right from wrong.61
Dhyana Vahini GlossarySurya . The sun god, the father of time. A name for the sun. Also, son of Kasyapa and father of Manu.
sushupti . Deep sleep state.
sutra . Concise rule or aphorism; that which, through a few words only, reveals vast meanings; text consisting of 
aphorisms or maxims; a thread; something, like a thread, that runs through and holds everything together.
swarupa . Form, essential nature, true nature of Being, embodiment.
swayam-jyothi . Self-illuminating.
Swethakethu . A great sage; the first person to argue against the evils of drinking and adultery by the brahmins ; 
son of Uddalaka.
tapas . Concentrated spiritual exercises to attain God, penance, severe austerities.
thamas . One of the gunas  (qualities and dispositions) of maya  or prakriti . It is the quality of dullness, inertia, 
darkness and tendency to evil. It results in ignorance.
thamasic . Adjective form of thamas , dull, ignorant, passive.
thamasika-marga . Path of ignorance and passivity.
thamoguna . Quality of dullness, ignorance, delusion, inactivity, inertia, sloth. Associated with colour black. See 
guna .
Thath . That, the Godhead.
Thathwa . Principle, truth, essence. That-this entity. Thathwa  is regarded as made up of That ( Thath ) and you 
(thwam ).
Thretha-yuga . The second in the cycle of four eras. See yuga.
thrupthi . Contentment.
thuriya . “Beyond” stage in samadhi ; fourth stage beyond waking, dream, and deep sleep. Superconscious state.
thwam . Thou, You, This, the individual.
udana . Breath that moves upward from the throat.
Uddalaka . Hermit-sage father of Swethakethu.
Upanishads . The very sacred portions of the Vedas  that deal with God, humanity, and universe, their nature and 
interrelationships. Spiritual knowledge ( jnana ) is their content, so they form the Jnana-kanda  of the Vedas .
vairagya . Detachment, renunciation.
Vaishnavite . A person belonging to Vaishnavism , one of the major branches of Hinduism. It focuses on worhip -
ing Vishnu and his ten incarnations.
vaisya . Business person, trader, merchant. See caste.
Vaivaswatha Manu. Head (Indra) of the present age of Manu ( Manvanthara ); Prajaprathi. Son of Manu and 
father of Ikshvaku.
Valmiki . The saint-poet who wrote the Ramayana .
Vamana . Dwarf incarnation of Vishnu , who asked for three feet of land from Emperor Bali and humbled Bali’s 
pride.
varna . Caste.
varna dharma . The Hindu community is divided into four social groups, or castes ( varnas ), based on qualities 
(gunas ) and vocations: (1) Brahmana  (the brahmins ), the custodian of spiritual and moral role), (2) kshatriya , 62
Dhyana Vahini Glossarythe warrior group, which rules and defends the land), (3) vaisya , the group dealing with commerce, business, 
and trade, and (4) sudra , the group devoted to labour and service to the community. Each varna  has its own 
dharmic  restrictions and regulations that strive to canalise impulses and instinct into fields that are special to 
their place in society, controls pertaining to the duties of the caste.
Varuna . Chief Rig-vedic  god associated with Mitra; god of rain, water, the ocean, night; a great sage.
vasana . Inclination, impression of anything remaining in the subconscious mind from past action.
Vasishta . One of the greatest rishis  (sages) of ancient times; priest of the solar race of kings; revealer of several 
Vedic  hymns. Had sacred, wishfulfilling cow called Nandini.
Vasudeva . Father of Krishna.
Veda . Knowledge, wisdom. This knowledge is generally viewed as being given in the Vedas .
Vedanta . Means “the end of the Vedas ”. It is the essence of the Vedas  enshrined in the Upanishads . The philoso -
phy of non-dualism, or qualified non-dualism, or dualism based on the Upanishadic  teachings, is denoted by 
this term.
Vedantic . Of or pertaining to Vedanta .
Vedas . The oldest and the holiest of the Hindu scriptures, the primary source of authority in Hindu religion and 
philosophy. They are four in number: the Rig-Veda , Sama-Veda , Yajur-Veda , and Atharva-Veda .
Vedic . Of your relating to the Vedas .
vichara . Inquiry, analysis and reflection of the nature of the Self or truth.
vicharana . Enquiry, analysis.
vidya . Spiritual education, spiritual knowledge, learning, that which illumines, that which gives light, supreme 
teaching.
visha . Poison. 
vishaya . Object of perception.
vishaya-karma . Acts that bind, sensory acts.
Vishnu . The Preserver, the Second of the Hindu Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and 
Siva (the Destroyer). 
Viswamitra . Sage; known for his efforts to equal Vasishta. Born as warrior Kausika who by the power of the 
Gayatri  transformed himself spiritually. Early counselor of the young Rama.
viveka . Discrimination.
vyana . One of five vital airs; that which is diffused throughout the whole body.
Vyasa . Compiler of Vedas  and author of the Mahabharatha , Mahabhagavatham , and Brahma Sutra .
yajna . Holy ritual, sacrifice, or rite. Also, personification of rite (when capitalized).
yama . Control of inner senses.
Yama . God of Death; death personified.
yoga . (a) Union of individual self or Atma  with the Supreme Being or Universal Self; act of yoking. (b) Spiri -
tual discipline or exercise aimed at control of the senses. (c) Science of divine communion. (d) self control. 
No single definition of yoga  suffices. Patanjali’s Yoga-sutras  define yoga  as a series of eight spiritual steps 
leading to union with God.
Yoga Sutras . An aphoristic treatise on yoga  by Patanjali.63
Dhyana Vahini Glossaryyogi. One who practices yoga .
yogic . Of or pertaining to yoga .
yogini . Female ascetic or yogi.
Yudhistira . Eldest Pandava brother; also called Dharmaraja.
yuga . Era or age. There is a cycle of four yugas : the Kritha yuga , Thretha yuga , Dwapara yuga , and Kali yuga . 
Present age is the Kali yuga.