at the divine lotus feet of
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai BabaCopyright © 2015 Sathya Sai International Organisation
All rights reserved
sathyasai.org
CONTENTS
Foreword   .................................................................................................................................    1
1 Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba ― Revelation of His Divinity and His Divine Mission
The Revelation   ........................................................................................................................    5
Divine Discourse at the World Conference of Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisations
on May 17, 1968
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s Letter to His Brother  .......................................................   13
May 25, 1947The Message I Bring   .............................................................................................................    15
Divine Discourse in Nairobi, Kenya on July 4, 1968
2 Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba on the Sathya Sai Organisation
The Heart of the Organisation   ..............................................................................................   21  Divine Discourse on November 21, 1968
 
Sathya Sai Seva   ....................................................................................................................    25
Divine Discourse at the First All-India Conference of Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisations
on April 21, 1967
3 Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s Message to Women
When Women Are Honoured  .................................................................................................    33  
Divine Discourse on November 19, 1995
Role of the Mother  .................................................................................................................    37
Divine discourse on November 19, 2000
4 Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s Message to Youth
Always Be Happy and Peaceful  ............................................................................................    45   
Divine Discourse at the World Youth Conference on July 28, 2007 
Youth Should Transform the World  ......................................................................................    51
Divine discourse at the Sri Sathya Sai Second World Youth Conference
on November 18, 19995 Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s Message to Educators
Serve the Child  ......................................................................................................................    59
Divine Discourse at the Fourth All India Conference of Bal Vikas Gurus
on November 20, 1979
“Educare” Is True Education  ................................................................................................    63
Divine Discourse at the First Conference of Sri Sathya Sai Schools on November 20, 2001
True Education Fosters Human Values  ...............................................................................    69
Divine Discourse at the Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning, August 10, 1998
6 Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s Message to Healthcare Professionals
Doctors, Patients and Society  ..............................................................................................    75
Address at the Cardiac Speciality Symposium on February 7, 1993  
Food, the Heart and the Mind  .............. .................................................................................    81
Divine Discourse at the Second International Symposium on Cardio-vascular Diseases
on January 21, 1994
Sathya Sai Ideal Healthcare  ................ .................................................................................   87
Divine Proclamations
7 Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba on Harmony of Religions
Everyone Is a Son of God  ..................... .................................................................................   91
Divine Discourse on December 25, 1982 Attain Enlightenment by Renouncing Desire  .......................................................................    97
Divine Discourse on May 13, 2006
8 Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s Message to Sadhakas (spiritual aspirants)
Kshama, the Grandest and Noblest Virtue  ..........................................................................   105
Divine Discourse on May 25, 2000
How to Become Dear to the Lord  ........................................................................................    113
Divine Discourse on May 24, 2000
Idols  Are Pointers  to Divinity  .................................................................................................    121
Divine Discourse on March 12, 2002
9 Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s Message on Service
Spiritual Significance  of Loving Service  .............................................................................    129
Divine Discourse at the Sixth World Conference of Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisations
on November 21, 1995 
The Spirit of Service  ............................................................................................................    133
Divine discourse on November 21, 1988Om Sri Sai Ram.
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba is the Jagat Guru, Sad Guru, and Guru Naam Guru . He 
is the universal teacher, Divine teacher, true teacher, and teacher of teachers. His 
message is universal and eternal and transcends the limitations of space, time, race, 
gender, ethnicity, nationality, and religion. His life is His message, and His message 
is love. 
His every word is a mantra,  His every sentence is a sutra (aphorism), His every con -
versation is a Gita,  and His every discourse is a Veda . His teachings are the essence 
of all scriptures. Swami’s unique and magnanimous teachings given through His 
discourses, writings, and conversations, as well as His exemplary life, are unparal-
leled in human history, both with respect to their content and their efficacy in trans-
forming countless lives for the better. Loving Lord Sai is indeed the Omnipresent, 
Omniscient, and Omnipotent Lord of the universe, come down in human form for the 
redemption of humanity.
Diving deep into His teachings and practising them in our daily lives, our lives will be 
redeemed and we will reach the summum bonum of life.
On the auspicious and historic occasion of Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s 90th 
Birthday celebrations, we offer at His Divine Lotus Feet a garland of Divine discours-
es in which He has expounded on various aspects of human life and addressed 
them in detail. In His infinite compassion, He revealed His Divinity and His Divine 
mission in these discourses. He also emphasised the harmony of religions and the 
universality of faiths. These discourses also dwell upon His message to the Sathya 
Sai Organisation that bears His name and His message for women, youth, health 
care professionals, educators, leaders, and spiritual seekers in general. We pray to Bhagawan that the readers may drink the Divine nectar of His words, enjoy Divine 
bliss, and redeem their lives by practising His teachings.
Jai Sai Ram.
Narendranath Reddy, MDChairman, Prasanthi Council
1ForewordA ll service should be regarded as an offering to God and every opportunity 
to serve should be welcomed as a gift from God. When service is done in this 
spirit, it will lead in due course to self-realisation.
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba,  
November 19, 1987
3
Chapter
One
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba –– 
 Revelation of His Divinity and
His Divine Mission
4You are engaged in discovering solutions 
to problems, arguments to overcome 
doubts and means to prevent new prob -
lems and fresh doubts from arising; such exer-cises, which all conferences relish, cannot help 
successful navigation across the sea of spiritual 
endeavour. 
These are but frail contrivances, these discus -
sions, resolutions, speeches, and regulations. 
The world is much too stormy and agitated to be 
quietened by these. This is the time for cool calm contemplation, not quick passionate speculation 
and hasty decision.
You need to contemplate once again on the eter -
nal lessons laid down by the sages of India’s 
past, lessons that have been neglected and cyni -
cally forgotten in recent years. The suggestions and solutions that come out of the discussions 
today are all good, so far as they go, but how can 
a person who cannot himself swim teach others 
the art? How can one whose granary is empty pour out in charity? 
Acquire the wealth of devotion, fortitude, and 
peace before venturing to advise others how to 
acquire them. Bharat  (India) has suffered slights 
and disregard as a result of a spate of teachers who have not cared to practise what they teach.
I know you have the enthusiasm to carry My mes -
sage among the people of this country and other countries. Let Me remind you that the best and 
the only successful way in which you can do it is to translate the message into your own lives. 
Your thoughts, words, and deeds must be satu -The Revelation
rated with the message. Then they will spread 
effortlessly and efficiently, and the face of the 
world will be transformed.
Namasmarana, the Only Hope
for Man in This Age
The Presidents, Vice-Presidents, and Secretar -
ies of Sathya Sai Organisations from all over the world are here. You are officers of the Sai Army. 
How can you lead soldiers into the fray when you 
are not aware of the intricacies of warfare, when 
you are yourselves inefficient instruments? 
You can attempt to lead others only after practis -
ing the disciplines to perfection. This is true of all 
fields of human activity. Ananda (bliss) and pras-
anthi (supreme peace) have to be acquired first by you and then can be communicated to others.
Teachers in schools have themselves to be ex-
amples of what they require the pupils to be. 
Men in authority who exhort others to follow the 
paths of love and co-operation have themselves 
to practise those virtues. The people are now not 
willing to be led; the leaders have no capacity to 
lead. Progress is the result of mutual trust be -
tween the leaders and the led. 
The unrest that is rampant now in all sections 
of the people everywhere is due to the irrespon -
sibility of parents, teachers, administrators and leaders, as well as of those who hunger to benefit 
from them.
Namasmarana is one of the basic disciplines to 
which this Conference is paying great attention. 
5The scriptures say that in this age of material -
ism it is the one hope for man. So you should not 
brush aside the Name as a piece of glass or as 
a pebble.
Man Is Using a Gem
to Play Marbles on the Road
There was once a boy who picked up a precious gem, bright and round, and used it for playing 
marbles on the road with his comrades. A mer-
chant dealing in precious stones chanced to pass 
along that road, and his discerning eye fell on the 
gem. He approached the boy, took him aside, and 
offered to pay him fifty rupees in exchange. If the 
boy could know the value of fifty rupees, he would 
have known the value of the gem! He went to his 
mother and told her that a stranger had tempted 
him with fifty rupees in return for the marble he 
played with. She was surprised that it was so costly, and she said, “Do not go out of the com -
pound with it; play in the garden with your friend. ” When the value was revealed, limits were set.
The merchant had no sleep that night; he was 
planning to secure the gem from those simple 
folk so that he could sell it at huge profit to some 
millionaire or Maharaja . He discovered the house 
of the boy and he moved up and down that road hoping to see the boy. When he saw the boy play 
with it as if it was as cheap as a marble, his heart was wrung in agony. The boy threw it on the floor 
just at the moment his mother emerged from the 
inner apartments and it struck her foot and fell 
under a bush. He spoke to the boy, asking for 
the gem in exchange for a hundred rupees, and 
again for 500 rupees! The son ran into the house 
in tears, complaining about the stranger who will 
not let him alone. The mother came out into the 
garden and begged the merchant to go away.
The merchant grasped the chance; he told the 
mother that he was ready to give a thousand 
rupees on the spot, if the marble was placed in 
his hand! On hearing this, she forbade the child 
to play with it outside the house; he could play only within the rooms. The merchant could not 
be shooed off like that; he appeared the next day 
in front of the house and held out 10,000 rupees 
as his offer for the marble. The mother refused to 
part with it but kept it now in an iron safe, under 
lock and key! When the merchant came the next 
day with 50,000 rupees, she took it to a bank and 
deposited it in their safety vaults.
You Are Unaware of the Value
of the Name of God
You are also playing marbles with the Name of God, unaware of its value. Once you realise its 
worth, you will keep it in your heart of hearts as 
the most precious treasure. Know that the Divine 
Name is the key to success in your search for 
consolation, confidence, courage, illumination 
and liberation.
Another illustration can be given from the an -
cient texts. On one occasion, a competition was 
arranged among the gods for the purpose of 
selecting the leader of the ganas (troops of de -
mi-gods who are the attendants of Shiva). Par-
ticipants had to go round the world quickly and 
come back to the Feet of Lord Shiva.
The gods started off on their own vehicles; the 
younger son of Shiva also enthusiastically en-
tered the competition. He had an elephantine 
head but his vehicle was a mouse! Therefore, his 
progress was severely handicapped. He had not 
proceeded far when Narada appeared before him 
and asked him, “Whither are you bound?” The son was very much annoyed and he fell into a 
rage, for, what happened was a bad omen, doubly 
unpropitious for those going on a journey.
It is inauspicious if the first person you come 
across when you are on a journey is a lone Brah -
min. Though the foremost among the Brahmins (he was the son of Brahma Himself), Narada was 
a bad omen! Again it is a bad omen if someone asks you, “Whither are you bound?” when you 
are going somewhere. Narada put him that very 
6question! Nevertheless, Narada was able to as-
suage his anger.
The Name from Which the Universe
Has Emanated
Narada drew forth from Shiva’s son the sad -
ness of his predicament and his desire to win. 
Narada consoled him, exhorted him not to yield 
to despair, and advised him thus: “Rama – the 
Name – is the seed from which the gigantic tree 
called the universe has emanated. So, write the 
Name on the ground, go round it once, and hurry 
back to Shiva, claiming the prize. ” He did so and 
returned to his Father. 
When asked how he returned so soon, he related 
the story of Narada and his advice. Shiva appre -
ciated the validity of Narada’s counsel; the prize 
was awarded to the son, who was acclaimed as 
Ganapathi (Master of the ganas) and Vinayaka 
(Leader of All).
The Name undoubtedly brings in the grace of 
God. Meerabai, the Queen of Rajasthan, gave up 
status and riches, fortune and family, and dedi -
cated herself to the adoration of the Lord, Giridha -
ra Gopala. Her husband brought a chalice of poi -
son and she was ordered to drink it. She uttered 
the Name of Krishna while she drank it; it was 
transformed into nectar by the grace the Divine 
Name evoked!
Keertan is the word used for the recital or sing -
ing of the Name and Glory of God. Sankeertan 
means reciting or singing well or aloud and with 
joy or in ecstasy. We can distinguish four differ -
ent forms of Namasankeertan.  Bhava (mood-filled) 
Namasankeertan, Guna (divine quality–oriented) 
Namasankeertan, Leela (divine miracle–related) 
Namasankeertan, and sheer Namasankeertan; Bha-
va Namasankeertan is the name given to recitals 
where the Name is sung with one or the other bha-
va (emotion or mental attitude) towards the Lord.Different Attitudes One Can Show
towards God
It can be Madhurabhava (sweet emotion), just as 
Radha was over-powered with. She saw, heard, tasted, sought and gained only that sweetness 
at all times and all places. Raso vai sah (Divine 
sweetness is He). She made no distinction be -
tween Nature and Nature’s God; it was all God, 
all Krishna. She felt, experienced, and knew that 
Krishna was ever present in the waking, dream -
ing, and deep sleep stages. She realised the truth of the Bhagavad Gita  declaration of Krishna that 
His hands and feet, His eyes, face and head were everywhere. Her adoration of God is the supreme example of Madhura Bhava Namasankeertan.
Then we have the Vathsalya-bhava (parental feel -
ing) Namasankeertan. Yashoda, the foster mother 
of Krishna, can be taken as the ideal for this type 
of bhava. Though she had a series of experiences 
of Krishna being Divine, she preferred to serve him as mother and to adore Him as her son.
Anuraga-bhava (lover-beloved feeling) Nama-
sankeertan is exemplified best and in the pur-
est form in the Gopis. They installed the Lord in 
their hearts, rid themselves of all earthly attach -
ments, and lived only in His contemplation, with 
all thoughts, deeds, and words dedicated to Him.
Then there is the Sakhya-bhava (comrade-feeling) 
Namasankeertan , as found in Arjuna, who be -
lieved in Krishna as his most intimate friend and 
brother-in-law (for he married Krishna’s sister), 
and confided in Him as a comrade. This too is an 
attitude that will attach you to Divinity and subli -
mate the lower impulses. 
Dhasya-bhava (servant-master attitude) 
Nama-
sankeertan is another type. Serve the Lord as His 
faithful unquestioning servant – this is the path 
of Hanuman in the Ramayana . He had no will or 
wish of his own. His prayer was to be a fit instru -
ment for the purposes of the Master.
78The Name Has the Capacity
to Redeem, Cure, and Save
The last attitude is Shantha-bhava (attitude of un -
ruffled equanimity) Namasankeertan  – praising  
the Lord whatever may happen, unaffected by 
ups and downs, bearing all the vagaries of for -
tune as His play. In the Mahabarata  you will find 
Bhisma saturated with this attitude; he adored 
Krishna, even when Krishna was advancing to -
wards him to kill him.
Another method of Namasankeertan is to remind 
oneself of the various exploits and sports, and 
the various acts of grace and compassion, which the Lord has manifested in the world, while recit-
ing His Name. This is called leela (divine play–
oriented) Namasankeertan. Chaithanya and Thya-
garaja realised the Lord through this path.
Others recollect more of the majesty, the glory, 
the might, the mystery, the magnificence, the 
munificence and the love with which God has 
clothed Himself, while reciting His Name. This at-
titude is spoken of as Guna (attributes, character -
istics) Namasankeertan. Most of the saints grate-
fully honoured in many lands are of this category.
Another category is denoted by seekers who 
attach value to the syllables and sound of the 
Name as such, irrespective of the meaning there-
of. When the Name is pronounced, they say it 
draws towards the aspirant God and His grace – 
whatever may be the bhava and whether the leela  
or guna  is associated with the sankeertan or not. 
The Name has strength, a power, and a capacity 
to redeem, cure and save, alone and unaided.
The Rama Principle Is the Atma,
Source of All Joy
The Name Rama was once indicated by Rama Himself (the son of Dasharatha, hero of the 
Ramayana , the incarnation of the Lord in the 
Thretha Yuga) as a potent liberator. When Rama 
was passing through the forests with Sita and 
Lakshmana, the hermits who recognised Him as Divine gathered around Him with a prayer that 
they be initiated by Him and be given some man-
tra (sacred formula) that they could repeat for 
spiritual uplift and victory. Rama replied that He was a prince in exile wandering in the forests and 
so He could not presume any authority to initiate 
hermits into a spiritual path. He moved on along the jungle tracks. 
Watching Him walking fast, with Sita immediate -
ly behind Him and Lakshmana following behind, 
an aged hermit exclaimed, “Friends! See! Rama is 
initiating us! He is awarding us the mantra! God 
is leading. Nature (His constant companion, His shadow) is following; the jeevi (individual), part 
of the Lord, the wave of the ocean, is in the rear; he can see the Lord only if the deluding Nature is 
propitiated or by-passed. This is indeed a silent lesson in sadhana (spiritual discipline). Ra is God; 
ma is the individual, who has fallen behind. Aa 
is Prakrithi (Nature); Rama, Rama is the mantra 
He is vouchsafing so graciously. Take it and save yourselves. For me, there is no other course. ” 
I am emphasising Rama-Nama (the name Rama) 
because the Rama principle is the Atma. Rama 
means that which is pleasant and which pleases. 
Now, the Atma  is the source of all joy; its nature is 
bliss. Moreover, as Thyagaraja discovered, Rama 
is the Name that worshippers of both Narayana 
(Vishnu) and Shiva can adopt. The syllable Ra is 
the key syllable of the Narayana mantra (Om Namo 
Narayanaya) and the syllable ma is the key sylla -
ble of the Shiva mantra (Om Namashivaya).
God Is the Harmony of
All the Names and Forms
The prejudices and factions among the worship -
pers of Narayana form of God and Shiva form are meaningless because both represent the One ul -
timate Universal. They are distinguishable, it may be said, by the different Divine equipment. 
They are shanka (conch) and chakra (discus) in 
the case of Narayana and damaru (small drum) 9and thrishula (three-pronged spear-trident) in the 
case of Shiva. But the conch and the drum both 
symbolise God’s accessibility through audible 
praise and song; the discus and trident symbol -
ise God’s being the maker and master of time – discus representing the 
wheel of time and the three 
prongs of the trident repre -
sent the past, the present, 
and the future. 
Narayana is referred to as 
Hari and Shiva as Hara . 
Both these Names are de-rived from the same root, 
Har, which means to destroy, 
to remove, to captivate, to attract and to harmonise 
– functions that God has 
clothed Himself with.
Man’s duty is to sanctify his 
days and nights with the 
unbroken smarana (recollec -
tion) of the Name. Recollect with joy, with yearning. If you 
do so, God is bound to appear before you in the 
form and with the name you have allotted Him as 
most beautiful and most appropriate!
God is all names and all forms, the integration 
of all these in harmonious charm! Gods desig -
nated in different faiths and adored by different human communities are all limbs of the One God 
that really is. Just as the body is the harmonious 
blending of the senses and the limbs, God is the 
harmony of all the forms and  names that man 
gives Him!
Do Not Make Distinction
between Different Names
Only those who are ignorant of the glory of God 
will insist on one name and one form for His ado -
ration and, what is worse, condemn the use by others of other names and forms! Since you are all associated with Sathya Sai Organisations, I 
must warn you against such silly obduracy. Do 
not go about proclaiming that you are a sect dis -
tinct and separate from those who adore God in other forms and names. Thereby, you are limiting 
the very God whom you are extolling. 
Do not proclaim in your en-
thusiasm, “We want only 
Sai; we are not concerned 
with the rest. ” You must convince yourselves that all 
forms are Sai’s; all names 
are Sai’s. There is no “rest”; 
all are He.
You must have noticed that 
I do not speak about Sai in 
My discourses, nor do I sing 
of Sai during the bhajan with 
which I usually conclude My discourses. And you must 
have wondered why. Let me 
tell you the reason.
I do not want the impression to gain ground that I desire this name and this form to be publicised. 
I have not come to set afoot a new cult; I do not 
want people to be misled on this point.
I affirm that this Sai form is the form of all the 
various names that man uses for the adoration 
of the Divine. So, I am teaching that no distinc-
tion should be made between the names Rama, 
Krishna, Ishwara and Sai – for they are all My 
names.
When I know that I am the current that illumines 
all the various bulbs, I am indifferent to the bulbs 
that you consider so important. When you pay 
attention to the bulbs, factions arise and sects 
are born. Sathya Sai Seva Samithis  should not 
encourage discord and distinctions; they must adore the One, appearing as many, the basic Di-
vine, which illumines all the bulbs.
Be Conscious of God’s Presence
as the Motivator
I have not the slightest intention of utilising the Seva Samithis (Service Organisations) for 
propagating My Name or canvasing homage for My Name. No! I am content only when spiritual 
endeavours and disciplines to elevate and pu -
rify man are progressing everywhere. It is only through these that My universal reality will be 
revealed. So, do not limit Me to the boundaries 
of any one name and form. Your aim should be 
to see the self-same God in all the forms that are 
worshipped, to picture Him in all the names, nay, 
to be conscious of His presence as the inner mo -
tivator of every living being, in every particle of 
matter. 
Do not fall into the error of considering some to 
be men worthy of reverence and some unworthy. 
Sai is in everyone, so all deserve your reverence 
and service. Propagate this truth; that is the 
function I assign to the Seva Samithis.
You can observe Me and My activities. Note how 
I adhere to righteousness, moral order, truth and universal compassion. That is what I desire you 
to learn from Me. Many of you plead for a mes -
sage from Me to take to the Samithi of which you 
are members. Well, My life is My message. You 
will be adhering to My message if you live so 
that your lives are evidence of the dispassionate 
quiet, the courage, the confidence and the eager -
ness to serve those who are in distress that My life inspires you with.
God is immanent in the world. So, treat the world 
lovingly as you will treat your Master. Krishna 
served the Pandavas and He drove the chariot of 
Arjuna. So, though He was not a King, He became 
much more: a King-Maker! Serve, whatever the 
obstacle and whatever the cynical ridicule you 
may attract. Such reactions are inevitable when one is engaged in doing good. Take My exam -
ple. Praise and calumny have accompanied Me throughout the ages. Opposition and obstacles 
only tend to highlight the good and strengthen 
resolve.
Do Not Exaggerate the Significance
of Miracles
The torture that Prahlada’s father inflicted on 
him to turn his mind away from God helped to 
bring out his unflinching devotion. The wicked -
ness of Ravana served to reveal the might of Ra-ma’s bow. Traducers like Sishupala, Dantavaktra, 
Ravana, and Kamsa are inevitable accessories of 
every incarnation. This Sai Rama, too, has that 
age-old accompaniment. Now too, their brood 
is evident. On one side, adoration and homage 
are piling high into a peak; on the other, abjura -
tion and slander are also peak high. Standing be-tween them, I bless them both with lifted hands for I am not elated by one or depressed by the 
other. For the traducers will be rewarded with the 
crown they deserve; I will be crowned with My 
own glory.
Of what avail is it if you simply worship My Name 
and form without attempting to cultivate the sa-
mathwa (equal love for all) that I have, My san-
thi (unruffled equanimity), My prema (love), My 
sahana (patience and fortitude) and My ananda 
(ever-blissful nature)?
You elaborate in your lectures the unique powers 
of Sai, the incidents that are described as “mira -
cles” in books written on Me by some persons. But, I request you not to attach importance to 
these. Do not exaggerate their significance; the 
most significant and important power is, let Me 
tell you, My prema (love). I may turn the sky into 
earth, or earth into sky, but that is not the sign of 
Divine might. It is the prema and the sahana that 
is effective universally; ever-present, that is the 
unique sign.
10A Unique World Conference
Held for the First Time
When you attempt to cultivate and propagate 
this love and this fortitude, trouble and travail 
will dog your steps. You must welcome them, for 
without them the best in you cannot be drawn 
out. If gold was as plentiful as dust, or diamonds 
as easily available as pebbles, no one would care 
for them. They are won after enormous exertion 
and expense and, therefore, they are eagerly 
sought after.
Since those who have devotion are gathered here 
and people of all nations have come, I cannot but tell you one fact. World conferences dedicated 
to religion or spiritual problems have, no doubt, 
been held before, as have conferences of follow -
ers of particular faiths. But these have been held only after the demise of the founders and Divine 
inspirers. This is the very first time that a world 
conference is being held of devoted persons 
while the incarnation is present before everyone, 
with the body assumed for the purpose bearing 
the Name that is chosen for It by Itself.
I must tell you this fact because ninety-nine per -
sons out of a hundred among you do not know 
My Reality. You have come here drawn by diverse 
needs: a taste for spiritual matters, eagerness 
to develop the institutions to which you are at -
tached, admiration or affection, love or rever-ence, or a spurt of enthusiasm to join others and 
share with others your own exultation.
Don’t Allow Doubt to Distract You
from My Divinity
In truth, you cannot understand the nature of 
My Reality, either today or even after a thousand 
years of steady austerity or ardent inquiry, even 
if all mankind joins in that effort. But, in a short 
time you will become cognisant of the bliss 
showered by the Divine Principle, which has tak -
en upon itself this sacred body and this sacred name.Your good fortune that will provide you this chance is greater than what was available for an -
chorites, monks, sages, saints and even person -
alities embodying facets of Divine glory!
Since I move about with you, eat like you, and 
talk with you, you are deluded into believing that 
this is but an instance of common humanity. Be 
warned against this mistake. I am also deluding 
you by My singing with you, talking with you, and 
engaging Myself in activities with you. But, any 
moment My Divinity may be revealed to you and 
so you have to be ready, prepared for the mo -
ment. Since Divinity is enveloped by humanness you must endeavour to overcome the maya (delu-
sion) that hides it from your eyes.
This is a human form in which every Divine en -
tity, every Divine Principle, that is to say, all the 
names and forms ascribed by man to God, are 
manifest – “Sarvadevataswaroopalanu dharin-chi-
na manavakarame ee akaram.” Do not allow doubt 
to distract you; if you only install steady faith in 
My Divinity in the altar of your heart, you can win 
a vision of My Reality.
Instead, if you swing like the pendulum of a clock, 
one moment devotion, another moment disbelief, 
you can never succeed in comprehending the 
truth and win that bliss. You are very fortunate 
that you have a chance to experience the bliss 
of the vision of the sarvadaivatwa swarupam (the 
form, which is all forms of all Gods) now, in this life itself.
Let Me draw your attention to another fact. On 
previous occasions when God incarnated on earth, the bliss of recognising Him in the incar -
nation was vouchsafed only after the physical embodiment had left the world, in spite of the 
abundance of clear evidence of His grace. And 
the loyalty and devotion they commanded from 
men arose through fear and awe of their super -
human powers and skills, or at their imperial and penal authority. 
11But, ponder for a moment on this Sathya Sai 
Manifestation. In this age of rampant material -
ism, aggressive disbelief, and irreverence, what is 
it that brings to It the adoration of millions from 
all over the world? You will be convinced that the 
basic reason for this is the fact that this is the 
Supra-worldly Divinity in human form.
 
Revival of Vedic  Dharma
is Sai Sankalpa
Again, how fortunate you are that you can wit -
ness all the countries of the world paying hom -
age to Bharat ; you can hear adoration to Sathya 
Sai’s Name reverberating throughout the world, even while this body is existing – not at some fu -
ture date, but when it is with you, before you. And again, you can witness very soon the restoration 
of Sanathana Dharma to its genuine and natural 
status, the Dharma laid down in the Vedas for the 
good of all the peoples of the world.
 
The revival of Vedic Dharma is the Sai Sankalpa 
(the resolve that Sai has) is not only drawing people towards Me, it is also attracting them 
by the manifestation of My shakthi (power), and 
saamarthya (capability). This is not a bhrama 
tatwam (phenomenon of delusion). This tatwam 
(phenomenon) will sustain truth, it will uproot un -
truth, and in that victory make all of you exult in 
ecstasy. This is the Sai Sankalpam.
So utilise the chance of association with Me 
as much as possible, and endeavour as quickly 
and as best as you can to follow the directions that I have been giving. Obeying My instruc -
tions is enough; for it will benefit you more than the most rigorous asceticism. Practise Sathya 
(truth), Dharma (righteousness), Santhi (peace), 
and Prema (love), which are dear to Me. Resolve 
to keep those ideals before you, ever in all your thoughts, words, and deeds. That can confer on 
you the summum bonum of mergence in the Su -
preme Substance of Divinity.
Divine Discourse at the World Conference of  
Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisations  
on May 17, 1968
1213On May 25, 1947, at the age of 20, in re-
sponse to a letter from his brother, who 
was concerned with what He was doing, 
Sri Sathya Sai Baba wrote the following letter. This letter disclosed His mission. 
My dear one! I received the communication that 
you wrote and sent. I found in it the surging 
floods of your devotion and affection, with the 
undercurrents of doubts and anxiety. Let Me tell 
you that it is impossible to plumb the hearts and 
discover the natures of jnanis, yogis, ascetics, 
saints, sages and the like. 
People are endowed with a variety of character -
istics and mental attitudes, so each one judges 
according to his own angle, talks and argues in 
the light of his own nature. But we have to stick 
to our own right path, our own wisdom and our 
own resolution without getting affected by pop -
ular appraisal. As the proverb says, it is only the fruit-laden tree that receives the shower of 
stones from passers-by. The good always pro -
voke the bad into calumny; the bad always pro -
voke the good into derision. That is the nature of this world. One must be surprised if such things 
do not happen.
The people have to be pitied rather than con -
demned. They do not know. They have no pa -
tience to judge aright. They are too full of lust, 
anger and conceit to see clearly and know fully. So, they write all manner of things. If they only knew, they would not talk or write like that. We, 
too, should not attach any value to such com -
ments and take them to heart, as you seem to do. Truth will certainly triumph someday. Untruth 
can never win. Untruth might appear to overpow-
er truth but its victory will fade away and truth 
will establish itself.
It is not the way of the great to swell when people 
offer worship and to shrink when people scoff. As 
a matter of fact, no sacred text lays down rules to regulate the lives of the great, prescribing habits 
and attitudes that they must adopt. They them -
selves know the path they must tread; their wis -
dom regulates and makes their acts holy. Self-
reliance and beneficial activity – these two are 
their special marks. They may also be engaged 
in the promotion of the welfare of devotees and 
in allotting them the fruits of their actions. Why 
should you be affected by tangle and worry as 
long as I am adhering to these two? After all, 
praise and blame of the populace do not touch the Atma , the reality; they can touch only the out -
er physical frame.
I have a ‘task’: to foster all mankind and ensure 
for all of them lives full of bliss (ananda) . I have a 
‘vow’: to lead all who stray away from the straight path again into goodness and save them. I am 
attached to a ‘work’ that I love: to remove the 
sufferings of the poor and grant them what they Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s 
Letter to His Brother
on May 25, 194714lack. I have a ‘reason to be proud, ’ for I rescue all 
who worship and adore me, aright. I have my defi -
nition of the ‘devotion’: I expect those devoted to me have to treat joy and grief, gain and loss, with 
equal fortitude. This means that I will never give 
up those who attach themselves to me. 
When I am thus engaged in my beneficial task, 
how can my name be tarnished, as you appre -
hend? I would advise you not to heed such ab -
surd talk. Mahatmas do not acquire greatness 
through someone calling them so; they do not 
become small when someone calls them small. 
Only those low ones who revel in opium and 
marijuana but claim to be unexcelled yogis, only 
those who quote scriptural texts to justify their gourmandism and pride, only those who are dry-
as-dust scholars exulting in their casuistry and 
argumentative skill – only those will be moved by 
praise or blame.
You must have read life stories of saints and di -
vine personages. In those books, you must have 
read of even worse falsehoods and more heinous 
imputations cast against them. This is the lot of 
mahatmas  everywhere, at all times. Why then do 
you take these things so much to heart? Have you not heard of dogs that howl at the stars? 
How long can they go on? Authenticity will win.I will not give up my mission or my determination. 
I know I will carry them out. I treat the honour and 
dishonour, the praise and blame that may be the 
consequence, with equal equanimity. Internally, 
I am unconcerned. I act but in the outer world; 
I talk and move about for the sake of the outer 
world and for announcing my coming to the peo -
ple. Else, I have no concern even with these.
I do not belong to any place. I am not attached 
to any name. I have no “mine” or “thine. ” I answer 
whatever the name you use. I go wherever I am taken. This is My very first vow. I have not dis -
closed this to anyone so far. For me, the world is something afar, apart. I act and move only for 
the sake of mankind. No one can comprehend 
my glory, whoever he is, whatever his method of 
inquiry, however long his attempt.
You can yourself see the full glory in the coming 
years. Devotees must have patience and forbear -
ance.
I am not concerned nor am I anxious that these 
facts should be known. I have no need to write 
these words; I wrote them because I felt you 
would be pained if I do not reply.
Thus, your Baba
There is no strength more effective than purity, no bliss more satisfying 
than love, no joy more restoring than devotion, no triumph more praise-
worthy than surrender.
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba,  
February 23, 1971Your reality is the Atma, a wave of the 
Paramatma (Supreme Self). The one ob -
ject of this human existence is to visu -
alise that reality, that Atma, that relationship be-
tween the wave and the sea. All other activities 
are trivial since you share them with birds and 
beasts. But this is the unique privilege of Man as 
he has clambered through all the levels of ani -
mality and all the steps in the ladder of evolution in order to inherit this high destiny.
If all the years between birth and death are frit -
tered away in seeking food and shelter, comfort 
and pleasure, as animals do, then man is con-
demning himself to a further life sentence.
Man is endowed with two special gifts: viveka 
(the faculty of reasoning) and vijnana (the fac -
ulty of analysis and synthesis). Use these gifts for discovering the truth of yourself, which is the 
truth of everyone else, of everything else.
All countries are borne and sustained by this 
earth, all are warmed by the same sun, and all 
“bodies” are inspired by the same Divine Prin -
ciple. All are urged by the same inner motivator.
The Vedas are the earliest testaments to the vic -
tory of man over himself, his discovery of the 
underlying Unity in all creation and his pulsating 
contact with the truth that unifies. They declare 
God is Sarvabhuta antaratma (God is the inner Re -
ality of all beings), Ishavasyamidam sarvam (All 
this is enveloped by God), and Vasudevah sar-
vamidam (All this is God, Vasudeva).The Message I Bring
Man Should Have Desire
Only for Liberation
The Divine Principle that is in everyone is like the electric current that illuminates the bulbs before 
Me here, which are of different colours and differ -
ent candle powers. The same God shines in and through everyone, whatever be the creed, colour, 
tribe or territory. The current animates and acti -
vates all bulbs; the Divine animates and activates all. Those who see difference are deluded as they 
are befogged by prejudice, egoism, hatred or mal -
ice. Love sees all as one Divine family.
How does this Atma Principle express itself in 
man? As prema (love)! Love is the basic nature 
that sustains him and strengthens his resolve to 
march ahead. Without love man is blind and the 
world for him will be a dark and fearsome jungle. 
Love is the light that guides the feet of man in the 
wilderness. 
The Vedas laid down four goals before man, two 
pairs of goals, rather: dharma-artha (morality-
wealth), the earning of the wherewithal for living 
through moral means, and kama-moksha (desire-
liberation), the attainment of liberation from the 
twin experience of pain and pleasure, and the de -
sire for that liberation and for nothing less than that supreme treasure.
All these goals are attainable through the prac-
tice of love, love regulated by sathya (truth), dhar -
ma (righteousness) and santhi (equanimity). The 
Vedas teach that man must earn wealth through 
the path of dharma but today that is not taken to 
15heart and wealth is accumulated by any means! 
The Vedas teach that man should have only one 
kama (desire), namely, for moksha (liberation) but 
this too is not respected.
Man is drowning himself in the maelstrom of 
desire but the fulfilment of that desire can never 
quench his deeper thirsts. How can a prisoner 
have any other desire than liberation? The wide -
spread anxiety, fear and unrest evident all over the world are the consequences of this mistaken 
course.
Pursue Nobler Ends,
Have Grander Ideals
The human body, which is so filled with skills and so capable of great adventures, is a gift from 
God to each of you. It has to be used as a raft on 
which you can cross this never-calm sea of sam-
sara (change) that lies between birth and death, 
bondage and liberation. Awaken to this primal duty even when your physical and mental facul -
ties are keen; awaken even while your power of discrimination is sharp. 
Do not postpone the launching of the raft, for it 
may become unserviceable soon. It may be bur-dened with illness so that all your attention will 
have to be spent on its upkeep. Think of the in -
comparable joy that will surge within you when you approach the shore of liberation!
Ride safely on the raging waters of samsara 
(worldly life). Be a witness, do not crave the fruit 
of action and leave the consequences of all acts 
to God’s Will. He is the doer, you are but the in -
strument. Pursue nobler ends and have grander ideals. Sensory pleasures are trinkets and triviali -
ties. The sages have discovered the disciplines 
that will keep you unaffected by defeat or victory, 
loss or gain. Learn them and practise them, and 
establish yourself in unruffled peace.
In homes and schools, training of the minds of 
the young on these lines has to be taken up ear -nestly by teachers and parents; of course, they 
must equip themselves for this work by steady 
practice in meditation and namasmarana (recital 
of the Name of God). In every home, a certain length of time must be fixed every day in the morning as well as evening for readings from 
spiritual books and namasmarana.
Sharing Prema
Is the Best of All Communions
Parents and children must join in singing the 
glory of God. In fact, all of one’s time must be 
dedicated to God. As a first step, a few minutes 
may be devoted to the adoration of His glory or 
the gauging of the depth of that glory. Gradu -
ally, when the sweetness of the habit heartens you, you will devote more and more time and feel 
more and more content.
The purpose of “living” is to achieve “living in 
God. ” Everyone is entitled to that consecration 
and consummation. You are the Truth, do not lose faith and do not belittle yourselves. You are 
Divine even if you slide from humanity to animal -
ity or even lower.
Cultivate love and share that love with all. How 
can you give one person less and another more 
when they are both the same as you? If you for -
get the basic Divinity, hatred sprouts and envy raises its hood. See the Atma  in all then love 
sprouts and peace descends like dew. You are prema-swarupa (embodiments of love). 
You have been sitting here for hours, in the open, putting up with great discomfort , awaiting Me, 
eager to hear Me and see Me. I am speaking to you from this dais only to satisfy that yearning. 
When I sense your prema, I feel I must share it 
and allow you to share My prema: that is the best 
of all communications and communions. The 
mediation of words is then unnecessary.
I have come to light the lamp of love in your 
hearts, to see that it shines day by day with add-
16ed lustre. I have not come to speak on behalf of 
any particular dharma (righteousness), like the 
Hindu dharma. I have not come on any mission 
of publicity for any sect or creed or cause; nor 
have I come to collect followers for any doctrine. 
I have no plan to attract disciples or devotees 
into My fold or any fold. I have come to tell you of 
this Universal unitary faith, this Atmic principle, 
this path of love, this dharma of prema, this duty 
of love, this obligation to love.
All Faiths Glorify
the One and Only God
All religions teach one basic discipline: the re -
moval from the mind of the blemish of egoism, of 
running after little joy. Every religion teaches man 
to fill his being with the glory of God and evict the 
pettiness of conceit. It trains him in methods of 
detachment and discrimination so that he may 
aim high and attain liberation. 
Believe that all hearts are motivated by the One 
and Only God, that all faiths glorify the One and 
Only God, that all names in all languages and all 
forms man can conceive, denote the One and Only God. His adoration is best done by means 
of love. Cultivate that Eka-bhava (attitude of One-
ness) between men of all creeds, all countries and all continents. That is the message of love I bring. 
That is the message I wish you to take to heart.
Foster love, live in love and spread love – that 
is the spiritual exercise that will yield the maxi -
mum benefit. When you recite the Name of God, remembering all the while His majesty, His com -
passion, His glory, His splendour and His pres -
ence – love will grow within you, its roots will go deeper and deeper and its branches will spread 
wider and wider, giving cool shelter to friend and 
foe, to fellow national and foreigner. 
God has a million names. Sages and saints have 
seen Him in a million forms, they have seen Him 
with eyes closed and eyes opened. They have extolled Him in all the languages and dialects of man, and yet, His glory is not exhausted.
Carry on the Quest of Your Own Reality
Select any name of His, any name that appeals 
to you, select any form of His. Every day when 
you awaken to the call of the brightening east, 
recite the name and meditate on the form. Have 
the name and the form as your companion, guide 
and guardian throughout the toils of the waking 
hours. When you retire for the night, offer grateful 
homage to God in that form and with that name, 
for being with you, by you, beside you, before you 
and behind you all day long. If you stick to this 
discipline, you cannot falter or fail.
I must give you one more piece of advice: Endea -
vour always to promote the joy and happiness 
of your fellow countrymen in this continent and 
share in their joy and happiness. Bharat  is so 
called because the people of that country have rathi (great attachment) to Bha (Bhagawan,  that 
is God). They are devoted to God and so to all the children of God. They are afraid of sin and they 
are eager to acquire jnana (spiritual knowledge).
Resolve to carry on the quest of your own reality. Resolve to live in the inspiration of the constant 
remembrance of God. Cultivate love and share 
love.
I bless that you achieve success in this endeav -
our and derive great joy therefrom.
Divine Discourse in Nairobi, Kenya  
on July 4, 1968
1718L ove must be manifested as seva (selfless service). Seva  must take 
the form of food for the hungry, solace for the forlorn, consolation for 
the sick and the suffering. Jesus wore Himself out in such seva. The 
heart full of compassion is the temple of God. Develop compassion. 
Live in love. Be good, do good and see good. This is the way to God.
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba,  
December 25, 1981 Chapter
Two
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba
on the Sathya Sai Or ganisation
20
21I find from the reports and recommen -
dations presented to Me by the Dis -
trict Presidents and as a result of the 
deliberations of the representatives from each 
district that you have recorded therein your own 
hopes and aspirations, and such ideas as will 
make you happy. The main aim of all the activi-
ties in which you are now engaged and which you 
will take up in the future is, let Me tell you, cleans-
ing the mind.
You may note the various items of clothing that 
you hand over to the dhobi,  such as pants, bush 
coats, towel and dhoti,  but the purpose for which 
you pass them on to him and the operation for 
which he is engaged is just cleansing. So too, 
whether it is meditation that you are encourag -
ing, or a discourse that you are arranging, or bha-
jans that you are organising, or clothes that you 
are offering to the poor or worship that you are 
conducting, the object is just cleansing the mind 
of the taint of egoism, greed, hatred, malice, lust 
and envy. The one quality that you must acquire as a result of all this is “mutual love. ” That is the 
sign of the Sai devotee, of devotees of all the 
forms of God.
Men are born, they die; in the interval, they grow 
and fade. The sign of growth is this mutual love, 
expressed through seva  (service). The rich and 
the high-placed have many to serve them. You must serve those who have no one to serve 
them. Serve those who manage to live by serv -
ing others. There are thousands of organisations already working with such aims, but what is the 
special need for an organisation bearing My 
Name? You must realise Me in all, and serve all in 
a spirit of worshipful dedication.
Spirit of Surrender Must
Animate Every Act
On a dry leaf, floating on the waves of the sea, an ant desperately struggled to cling. A dove no -
ticed it, flew over, and clasping the leaf in its beak it transferred it to dry ground. The ant too is Di -
vinity encased in that infinitesimal sheath. It is as important in God’s eyes as many a monstrous 
denizen of the jungle or the sea. God weighs the 
love that prompts you to save, the compassion 
that urges you to alleviate pain. Sathya Sai Or -
ganisations must take up seva  (service) as sad-
hana (spiritual discipline), the members must 
see Me as Sarvantharyami  (indweller of all) and 
do seva  as puja.
The District President and the President of each  
Unit must practise sadhana. They must have 
complete faith in God, and that faith must be 
evident in each word, thought and deed of theirs. 
The spirit of surrender must be animating every 
act of theirs. The Presidents must initiate such 
items of work as will enthuse the members. If 
the organisation must succeed, they should have 
firm faith in this name and form. 
Once, when Garuda was sent by Krishna to bring 
Hanuman to Dwaraka, a regular fight ensued be -
cause Hanuman would obey the behest of no The Heart of the
Organisation22one except Rama. Krishna had to mollify him by 
sending Garuda again, with a request to come 
and meet “Rama” (and not Krishna)!
Do not seek to exercise authority over others. 
Seek rather to discover chances to be useful to 
them. When one neglects his duties, the posi -
tions of authority start causing headaches. Be a servant, a servant of God, then all strength and joy will be added unto you. Feel that you are an 
instrument in His hand, let Him shape you and 
use you as He knows best.
Upeksha Alone Can Save Man
from Entanglement
I find that after these units have started work -
ing, the cordiality that prevailed previously has 
disappeared! Differences of opinion are being 
exaggerated, tempers are getting frayed, and 
misunderstandings and factions are raising their 
heads. Men who were together are drifting apart. 
Tat and Twam (that and this) are the same, but 
you are forgetting it and becoming distant from That. When you approach the senses, the spirit is 
far; when you approach the spirit, the senses will 
be afar. Attach yourselves to the sensory and the 
worldly – that is to say, develop apeksha  – and 
you bind yourselves with the chain of likes and 
dislikes.
Detach yourselves from the craving for fame and 
comfort – that is to say, develop upeksha  – and 
you are free! Upeksha alone can save you from entanglement and reveal the ultimate truth. Man 
must not shape himself into an animal or an ogre. 
He must turn into God. Like a boulder carved by a 
visionary into a charming idol of Krishna with the 
flute, man too must use every blow of fate as the stroke of an artist’s chisel.
I was perusing the reports you gave Me on the 
points I had placed for your consideration. I must 
say that your suggestions regarding the raising 
of funds were uniformly bad. On this point, all of 
you are of one mind and that is not satisfactory to Me. Money is fundamentally rajo guna  (qual-
ity of passion), fraught with danger and harm. Like the bees that collect and store honey for a 
future day, man too stores and collects money. 
But, alas, the bees are smoked out and the honey is stolen. I do not agree with any of your ideas to 
collect and store money. I do not like your going 
about collecting funds or raising donations.
Costly Paraphernalia Are
Superfluous Impediments
I assure you that funds will come, provided you sincerely pray for every worthy cause. Have that 
faith, and watch the funds flow in. The sages of 
ancient times celebrated many yajnas  with no re-
sources other than faith and sincerity. Now you are moved more by pride, by anxiety and by want 
of confidence. So you are not following My sug -
gestion of the box-with-the-slit to be filled secret -
ly by members only.
Moreover, I must tell you that not much money 
is needed for many of the items of work. Yearn -
ing in the heart and Name on the tongue – these 
are enough for bhajan and nagara sankeertan. The 
gopis (milkmaids of Brindavan) sang the name of God when they churned the pots for butter in the 
early morning hours. The bangles on their wrists 
jingled the time, the whirl of the rods in the pots 
provided the background tune and the fragrant 
morning breeze carried the song into every neigh -
bouring ear. You need not collect an impressive crowd and you need no costly paraphernalia for 
they are superfluous impediments.
Do not spend much on lecturers and speakers. 
If any crave monetary rewards or showy recep -
tions, keep such at arm’s length. A chair and a ta -
ble will be quite ample; loudspeakers are a luxury 
for most of your meetings. They have become 
more status symbols than necessities. Set your -
selves as examples to organisations round about you, in the careful husbanding of resources and 
in avoiding wasteful expenditure. Have only as 
many gatherings as you can afford; do not call 23them together because you must! People must 
look forward to them and not feel they are too 
many.
Give Least Importance to Money
for Samithi Work
The fifteen or twenty who constitute a samithi  or 
sangha must be able to put together, without any 
fuss or fanfare, the money needed for all these 
activities. You should not draw in anyone as a 
member of the samithi  for the sake of the money 
that he may have; gunas are more valuable than 
annas (money). You need not have any special 
function in the village, except when I visit it. 
You criticise others who collect by devious 
means vast sums of money for mammoth gath -
erings and waste the funds so collected in shady channels. You should therefore avoid such mis -
takes yourselves.
Uphold by means of your self-esteem the unique 
distinction that you now have; you have a Master 
who does not ask anyone or take from anyone, who only gives, gives in plenty to all who ask. I go into strange lands and among strange peoples with the gift of love. Upeksha is my strength. I 
know no distinction between man and man, on any score. So all love me equally. Money is the root cause of all misunderstandings and fac-
tions. Keep it in the background; give it the least 
importance. Have love, humility, detachment and 
service as your funds.
There is an underlying channel of love that con -
nects the eye and the foot. When the eye sees a 
thorn on the path, the foot moves away - the wel -
fare of the body is safeguarded thus. So too, the District President and the Unit President must 
act as the eyes, look out for thorns and take the feet from harm.
As regards the World Conference, I feel it is to be 
held only once in three years. The All-India Con -
ference is best held in the heart of the organisa -
tion, Prasanthi Nilayam itself.
Divine Discourse  
on November 21, 196824The service attitude is most beneficial to the person rendering it as well as 
to others. Service is the best use to which the body can be put. In fact, you 
are not doing service to others. You are doing it always to yourself, to the 
God in you, the God who is equally present in others.
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba,  
November 21, 198125The Vedas are inspired by the holy spirit 
of Divine Mercy; they seek to transmit 
to humanity the secrets of a happy life 
here and of liberation forever. They reveal the es -
sence of the Divine Glory. They are the source 
of spiritual knowledge over the millennia for all 
mankind. The Vedas and the intellect, which man 
is endowed with as a gift from God to separate good from evil, are the means by which the cul -
ture of this land is to be preserved and promoted. 
When the Vedic treasure house is explored with 
intelligence, the Atma-tatwa (essential nature of 
the Self) becomes clear, and when that is recog -
nised man becomes eternally happy and full of 
peace. This treasure was slighted and neglected 
as a result of the fascination for outlandish ways 
of life, but for some years the feeling of rever -
ence and the readiness to repent have appeared among the people.
This conference is itself a sign of revival. You 
are allotted the task of bringing once again to the homes of the people the message of Atmic 
strength and Atmic unity . Transmuting “man” 
into “God” and experiencing that ananda (bliss) 
is the one and only achievement to which life is to be devoted. The efforts you make in your own 
places are directed to bring this goal into the 
awareness of each person. 
Of course, there are in existence many organisa -
tions and societies engaged in distributing vari -
ous cures for the “spiritual ills” of their constitu -
ents, and therefore a question may arise about 
the need for this additional institution. The need has arisen to emphasise the basic and essential 
discipline which is practical and universal, as 
prescribed for ages for the revelation of the Di -
vine in man.
Bharatiya Culture Has to
Be Fostered First
The entire universe is pictured as but the body 
of Vishnu by the Vedas. And Bharat  (India) is as 
the eye of the universe, the reason being that she has the most correct vision of the cosmos in the 
context of time. The mother desires that the son 
should uphold the honour of the family; the son 
should uphold the fair name of the mother and 
father. So, every Indian has to learn and practise 
the spiritual science that the sages of this land 
have explored and discovered. 
However, due to hostile forces, evil company, 
and ignorant fascination, Indians have neglect -
ed this foremost duty. The infection has come and it is well settled in the organism. Now it has 
to be cast out. This conference and the organi -
sations you represent are attempts to cure that illness. The purpose is the same, whatever the 
name – Prasanthi Vidwanmahasabha, Sathya Sai 
Seva Samithi, Sathya Sai Seva Dal or Sathya Sai 
Bhakta Mandali.
The first aim is to foster and cultivate Bharatiya 
culture. Let its validity be examined through ac -
tual living and one’s own discovery of its values, 
and communicated to others by those who have 
experienced the peace and joy derivable from it. I 
do not want the extolling of the drug by persons 
who have not been themselves cured by it. Sathya Sai Seva26Today, in the very land where this culture grew 
and flourished, immorality and corruption have 
destroyed happiness and contentment. Many 
condemn these things but those are the very 
persons who commit the wrongs they deplore. 
Those who profess to lead the people are them-
selves led astray by the temptation to fall. So, the 
very first ideal you must keep in mind when you 
start and run these organisations is do not crave status or authority or position, do not allow any 
pomp or show and do not compete for publicity 
or recognition or praise.
Unity Consciousness Is the
Heartbeat of India
Duty is God. Do it and be content. You may have yearnings towards self-aggrandisement 
and plans to fulfil them; I know that some people 
have already devised plans for getting into offi -
cial positions. But, you must subdue and destroy those desires. Following My instructions without 
demur is the best plan. While engaged in service 
(seva), it is wrong to yield to lower cravings or 
to follow one’s own impetuosity. The Vedas de-
clare that it is only by thyaga  – renunciation,  sur-
render and submission that immortality can be acquired.
In the history of India, you must have noticed 
that all the great movements and empires were 
motivated by spiritual undercurrents, not by po -
litical or economic stresses. It is only after the advent of the East India Company that politics 
and the struggle for political power predominat -
ed. You must make politics subservient to the need to promote and perfect the fundamentals of 
Indian (Bharatiya) culture.
The universe is the body of God; in the body, the Unity Consciousness is Bharat,  the Eka-bhaava 
(feeling of Oneness). “Ekam Sath” (The Reality Is 
One), the Vedas declared aeons ago! That is the 
heartbeat of Bharat today. This is the reason why 
sages, saints, Divine personages and incarna -
tions of God appear here and proclaim their mes -sage to mankind from this land. The precious message is now being exported but very little 
is used inside the country. That is the tragedy.
Sai Organisations Must Promote
Faith in God
For the influence available from positions of au -
thority and for acquiring and accumulating pow -
er, individuals talk ill of others and breed hate. From dawn till dusk and dusk till dawn, the chief 
occupation of people today is finding fault with 
others, trying to publicise the faults in others. 
This state of things is an insult cast on the face 
of our ancient culture. It springs from the crav -
ing for cheap popularity and temporary fame.
Your organisations must endeavour to promote 
faith in God. If that base is absent, then worship, bhajan, puja and good works all become mean-
ingless automatic rituals done under social com -
pulsion. Inner transformation, which is the fruit, 
can be acquired only when these are done with 
faith. Faith can grow only from the root of in -
quiry. Faith is made firmer by inquiry. You must encourage inquiry by the members whom you 
contact and welcome their efforts to gain first-
hand experience.
Man strives to provide himself with food, cloth -
ing and housing for the sake of the body but he 
must also provide himself with some things to 
keep the mind healthy and happy. It is the mind 
that conditions even the body. The mind is the in -
strument, the flywheel, and the thickest comrade of man. Through it, one can either ruin oneself 
or save oneself. Regulated and controlled, and 
channelled properly, it can liberate, but wayward 
and let loose, it can entangle and bind fast. 
Try to find out when exactly man is having 
peace, full-undisturbed peace. You will see that 
he is at peace only during sushupti (deep sleep). 
For, at that time, the senses are inactive, the mind is inert and unattached to the senses or 
their targets. So, when senses are made ineffec -Hill View Stadium27tive to drag the mind out, man can attain peace. 
That is the real sadhana, the basic sadhana: the 
withdrawal of the senses from the objective world (Nivrithiimarga).
Two Fangs That Make the
Individual Poisonous
Train the mind to dwell on the inner equipment rather than the outer attractions. Use the mind 
to cleanse the feelings, impulses, attitudes, ten -
dencies and levels of consciousness. Let it not accumulate dirt from the outer world and depos -
it the dirt within itself. If it is attached to work (Pravrithimarga) , the consequences of work get 
attached to it. Unattached work is the purest; it does not encumber the mind with elation or dis -
appointment. “I did it” and “This is mine” are the two fangs that make the individual poisonous. 
Pull out the fangs and the snake can be han-dled and played with as a pet. 
These organisations must be vigilant to see 
that egoism and the sense of personal posses -
sion, pride, or achievement do not invade them. That is the goal to be kept in view.
When an organisation is started, it has to lay 
down for itself certain rules and regulations. But 
our rules are of a different nature altogether. Our 
rules emphasise that members must first prac -tise what they stand for. Whatever you desire others to do, you must first put into daily prac -
tice sincerely and with steadfastness. You must do bhajan regularly and systematically before 
you advise others about the efficacy of bhajans. 
When you want to be honoured by others, you 
must learn to honour them first.
Bhagawan Is the Medicine
for Bhava-roga
Service has become a word of common currency, 
but its value is very much reduced by the hypoc-
risy of the users. Really speaking, only those who 
are afflicted with agony, equal agony, at the sight 
of pain and suffering, distress, or disease have 
the right to offer service, for they are not serving 
others, they are serving themselves, serving to 
remove, as fast and as intelligently as they can, 
their own agony. 
Service to others is the medicine one needs to 
alleviate the distress that fills one at the sight of distress in another being. Feel that you are serv-
ing yourself, that you are curbing your own ego. 
Otherwise, service heightens your self-esteem 
and develops a sense of superiority, which are 
both harmful spiritually.
Food is the medicine for the illness of hunger 
and drink for the illness of thirst. For the dis-ease of bhava-roga (birth-death cycle), Bhagawan 
is the medicine. For the disease of desire, jnana 
is the specific. For the disease of doubt, despair, 
and hesitation, which are the occupational dis -
eases of sadhakas, the most effective remedy is 
paropakara (doing good to others). For the ma -
jor infection of asaanthi (anxiety), the course of 
treatment is bhajan. It is to provide these rem -
edies to the sufferers that the organisation has to dedicate itself.
A spiritual organisation is really above all rules 
and regulations; the realm of the Atma is beyond 
the limits of regulations. In this sense, rules are either meaningless or superfluous in Sathya Sai 
Organisations. But at least to satisfy the law of 
the land dealing with associations of this kind, 
some rules have to be adopted. 
For example, who can be members of these or-
ganisations and what are their qualifications? Of 
course, firstly, they must be eager aspirants for 
spiritual progress. Secondly, they must have full faith in the Name that the organisation bears 
and in spreading that Name, in the manner suit -
ed to Its message and majesty. And, finally, the member must have won recognition as a good 
person. That is all the qualification needed, 
nothing else counts. There is no need to have 
money or land, scholarship, influence, authority 
or official position.
An Oath Must Be Taken from the
Very Depths of the Heart
If you have the three qualifications mentioned, 
I assure you, even if you have no place in any 
organisation bearing My Name, you will have a 
place here (Baba indicated His Heart as the place 
where they will be accepted). The organisations 
must be such that members find them congenial 
places to deepen their sadhana, to cultivate their 
virtues and to overcome their ego by contact with workers who are free from the least trace of 
that deadly poison. If this is achieved, their suc -
cess is certain.Secondly, what are the duties of members and office-bearers? You know that the State requires you to take a solemn oath when you take up 
an office or enter upon an assignment. Simi-
larly, each member and office-bearer must take 
an oath from the very depths of the heart before 
engaging themselves in the activities. “Swami, 
save me from any act of commission or omis -
sion which will affect adversely the three quali -
fications You have laid down. Bless me with the 
skill, intelligence, and enthusiasm necessary for 
the task I am dedicating myself to carry out for 
my own uplift. Guide me along the correct path; shower on me Your grace so that I may earn a fair 
name in this attempt; guard me from temptation 
and wrong steps. ” 
When you rise from bed at dawn, pray thus. At 
night, when you go to bed, ponder over your ac -
tivities during the day, examining whether you went against any of the conditions of member -
ship, and if any wrong was committed uncon -
sciously, pray that it may not happen again. 
Decide to dedicate yourself in this manner, with these ideals for the work ahead.
Do Not Develop Fanaticism
in Sai Activities
Another point I want to emphasise is this: There are many other organisations with spiritual ob -
jectives in this land that are run under differ -
ent names and attached to other names and 
forms of God, like Rama or Krishna. You know 
that Indian culture insists that you should offer 
reverence to all the names and forms of the One 
Godhead. 
In your organisations, there may be some who 
insist that only Sai Bhajans should be sung, only 
the name and form of Sathya Sai be used. This 
is a great mistake. You are thereby dishonouring 
Sai. If you attach yourself to Sai and detach your -
self from Krishna, you get a plus there and a 
minus here – the resultant gain is zero. In this 
matter, do not develop fanaticism or sectarian -
28ism. Others may have these but that is no rea -
son why you should meet them with the same 
failings. Try your best to avoid such infection. 
When the other organisations require help, go 
and help them. This will make them realise the 
loving universal nature of your attitude.
Again, do not encourage differences based on 
region, language, religion or any such flimsy 
grounds. For example, people who exaggerate 
these differences argue in Madras that only Tam-
il songs should be sung or in Andhra Pradesh that only Telugu songs should be sung. If such 
ideas are entertained, they will undermine the 
Adhyatmik (spiritual) outlook, the attitude of uni -
ty and oneness that is the keynote of the spirit. This is a field where inner joy, inner satisfaction 
and internal purity are more important than outer 
expression.
I do not like collection of funds. But, since some 
expense has to be incurred, I have to allow it un -
der very stringent conditions. Each organisation 
has as members (of the Samithi) about ten or 
fifteen persons. Whatever expense they decide to incur for the work of the Samithi (Organisation), 
they have to collect among themselves without seeking help from those outside the circle. They 
have, of course, to contribute according to their 
capacity and limit the work to the resources they 
can pool among themselves.
A Word of Warning on Collecting Funds 
and Spending
Do not plan beyond your capacity and move 
about with lists from person to person to get 
funds. By this, the institution gets a bad name, 
and you too will not be spared. You may say, “But, 
when Swami comes to our place, we must spend 
a lot on reception arrangements. ” No, I do not 
need grand decorations, huge pandals, arches, 
flags and such paraphernalia. I require only a microphone to communicate My advice to the 
people. Even a chair is superfluous! I can talk 
standing. Spend sparingly for the minimum needs and do not involve yourselves in expen -
sive luxury. I would like you to spend any extra 
money that you have for the feeding of the poor 
or for any similar beneficial object.
Attempts are being made in many places to 
build Sathya Sai Mandirs (halls of worship). But 
Sathya Sai will be happy if He is installed in your hearts; that is the Mandir I like, not those. When 
you seek to build that other Mandir, you have to go about seeking donations. Religion has de -
clined in this land due to this donation seeking and donation giving. Really speaking, the most precious donation is a pure mind; give that to the 
organisation and it will shine.
I shall tell you a method by which the extra funds 
you may need for any undertaking the Samithi has 
in view are to be collected. Estimate beforehand 
what the expense will be. Suppose it comes to 
a thousand rupees, give that information to the 
fifteen members and fix a day when they shall all 
meet. That day, keep a locked box with a slit in 
the lid in an inner room and let everyone go alone into the room and deposit in the box whatever he 
feels he can. He can come away without deposit-
ing anything; he has the freedom to do so, there 
is no compulsion.
If funds are collected with the knowledge of the 
rest, a person who is unable to give as much as 
another may feel humiliated and so this is the 
best method. When all have finished their turn, 
let the box be opened and the amount counted. 
If it falls short of the estimate, divide the short-fall among all members equally and collect the 
share from each. If there is some surplus, keep 
it for the next occasion.
Fund Collection Campaign
Will Lead to Calumny
Do not have lists, appeals, receipt books and all the cumbrous complex of fund collection cam-
paigns. That way will lead you to stratagems, 
falsehoods, competition and calumny. Do it in 
29this quiet and sacred manner, suited to the holy 
objectives you have.
Some delegates suggested that sub-committees 
be formed and recognised. But that will increase 
the number and so give room for more mis -
takes. Let the responsibility be on a few dedi -
cated persons. The District President must see 
that small associations in the villages are given 
proper guidance and help to carry out the task 
undertaken by them. He must send to those vil -
lages, exponents of Vedic culture in order to in -
struct and inspire them. Attempts should also be made to spread spiritual knowledge and instil 
the yearning for spiritual sadhana among stu-
dents and youth.
Do Not Set Limits on Celebrations
of Holy Days
Sathya Sai Seva Samithis have to bear in mind the 
word ‘Seva’ and take up Seva work enthusiasti-
cally. Seva must be directed towards the remov -
al of physical distress, the alleviation of mental 
agony and the fulfilment of spiritual yearning. 
Some regions are affected by floods, some by 
drought, and so the Samithi must make efforts 
to bring relief to the sufferers from these and other natural calamities.
The Bhajan Mandalis, Satsangs and Bhakta Man-
dalis that are now established must spread the 
message of Namasmarana, Bhajana, and Nama -
sankeerthana at all times and in all places. Jay -
adeva, Gouranga, Thyagaraja, all of them moved 
through the bazaars and streets singing bhajans 
and songs about the glory of God, and their ec -
stasy filled lakhs and lakhs of people with Divine 
fervour.
Yesterday, someone read out a list of Holy Days 
that the associations were to celebrate. That list 
mentioned Shivaratri, Navaratri, Swami’s Birthday 
and Guru Poornima. But you must also celebrate 
the birthdays of the Mahatmas who led man to 
the God within him, and also all days held holy by your brothers. Do not set limits on these 
celebrations and these days. Make every day a 
Holy Day and fill it with the recollection of God 
and His Messengers.
Establish unity among yourselves first and do not 
seek faults in others or excellence in your own 
selves. The Fatherhood of God and the Brother -
hood of Man – have full faith in this and fill every 
act of yours with that reverence and love. Meet 
together once a week or once a fortnight or at 
least once a month. Have someone discourse to 
you, or engage in bhajan or study or dhyana and 
experience the thrill of spiritual comradeship. Ev -
ery member of the association must have some 
item of work allotted to him and he must be pres -
ent whenever such meetings are held, unless of course it becomes physically difficult.
I must tell you about another point also. Wher -
ever you are, whatever work you do, do it as an 
act of worship, an act of dedication and an act 
for the glorification of God, who is the inspirer, 
the witness and the Master. Do not divide your 
activities as “These are for my sake” and “These 
are for the sake of God. ” Even if you divide zero by 
zero, you get one.
When you work, there should be no remainder; 
nothing should remain over. See all work as one. 
You should not, the Shastras say, leave any re -
mainder or balance in debts, in disease, in ven -
geance against enemies or in the cycle of birth-death. Finish all, down to the last. They should 
not recur again. If you offer all activities at the 
feet of the Lord and free them from any trace 
of egoistic attachment, the consequence will not 
bind you – you are free, you are liberated and you 
have Moksha.
Divine Discourse at the
 
First All India Conference of  
Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisations  
on April 21, 1967
30Chapter
Three
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s
Message to Women
32
When Women Are Honoured
Embodiments of Love! In this infinite 
universe, among the myriads of liv -
ing beings humanity is eminent. 
Among human beings, it is a privilege to be born 
as a woman. There are many examples to dem -
onstrate the pre-eminence of women. Was not Rama born as a Divine incarnation in Kausalya’s 
womb? Did Lava and Kusha (the twins) not be -
come great because they were born to Sita? Was it not Jeejeebai’s loving care that made Shivaji 
great? Was it not Putlibai’s piety that made Gan -
dhi a Mahatma?
All the greater sages, saints, heroes, and war -
riors were born to women who made them great. 
Woman is the Goddess of Nature. Gayatri, which 
enshrines the essence of the Vedas, is a goddess 
venerated as Veda Mata (the mother of the Vedas).
It is obvious that feminine birth is estimable, 
adorable and sublime. The Veda also adores the 
feminine principle in various ways. Vedic rituals 
and practices accord a high place to women.Asthiram Jeevanam loke
(Life in this phenomenal world is impermanent)
Yaddhrishyam tannashyam
(Whatever is perceived is bound to pass away some time or other)
Asthiram yauvanam dhanam
(Youth and wealth are transient)
Asthiram dhaara puthraadih
(Wife and children will pass away)
Sathyam Keerthi dhvayam sthiram
(Only Truth and Fame endure)
Feminine Aspect of Divinity
The woman is adored under different names as Sathyavathi, Angavathi, Anyavathi and Nidana-
vathi. Sathyavathi  proclaims the truth that the Di -
vine pervades the cosmos and that God is not separate from Prakriti (Nature). Nature is a form 
of the Divine. The Vedas testify to the omnipres -
ence of the Divine, like the presence of butter in 
every drop of milk.
Next is Angavathi. The five elements are present 
everywhere in the universe: earth, water, fire, air 
and ether. These elements vary in subtlety in a progressive order. The Veda declares that even 
the five elements are manifestations of the Di -
vine. This aspect of Nature is called Angavathi.
The Anyavathi  principle points out which deity 
is responsible for what function and describes the deity’s special characteristics. Ishwara is 
described as Trishula-dhari (the bearer of the 
trident) and Trinetra-dhari (the deity with three 
eyes). Vishnu is described as the bearer of the 
33conch, the discus and the mace. Krishna is de-
scribed as one having the peacock’s feather (on 
his head). Rama is described as the wielder of 
the bow. The Anyavathi  ritual worships the differ -
ent deities with their distinctive features.
The Nidanavathi ritual lays down nine different 
ways in which the Divine can be worshipped, 
such as listening, chanting the name, etc. All 
forms of worship are presided over by these four 
feminine deities. Though the names are different, 
the goal is one.
Women Should Be Revered
From ancient times, the feminine aspect of the Divine has been worshipped in various ways. The 
Vedas declare that where women are honoured 
and esteemed, there Divinity is present with all its potency.
Unfortunately, today men consider it demeaning 
to honour women. This is utterly wrong and is a 
sign of ignorance.
Sthree (woman) is Grihalakshmi (the Goddess of 
Prosperity for the home). She is hailed as Dhar -
mapatni (the virtuous spouse). She is called Illalu 
(the mistress of the house) and Ardhangi (the bet-
ter half). People gloat over petty titles conferred 
on them. But women have been conferred the 
highest titles, which are valid for all time. A home 
without a woman is a jungle.
Men should realise the high status of women 
and honour and respect them accordingly. They 
should not make women weep and shed tears. A 
home where the woman sheds tears will be ru -
ined. Men should give an honourable place for 
women and lead a respectable life.
The archetypal woman is described as Adis -
hakthi (the primal source of all energy) having 
a whole array of powers. She is hailed as the 
mother of the Amritasyaputrah (children of im -
mortality).The Trigunas in the Word “Sthree”
The word Sthree is made up of three consonants, 
“Sa, ” “Tha, ” and “Ra. ” “Sa” signifies the Satwic na-
ture of women. It represents also the triple as -
pects of experiencing Divinity: Salokyam (vision 
of the Divine), Samepyam (proximity), and Sayu -
jyam (mergence). “Tha” signifies the  Thamasic 
quality. But this Thamasic quality is not indolence 
and slothfulness. It includes qualities like humil-
ity, kindness, and modesty. 
This means that women begin with qualities like 
meekness and modesty so that they may serve the family and society in the right spirit. There is 
a saying in Andhra Pradesh: “Judge a house by 
its mistress. ”
“Ra” represents the Rajoguna. This does not mean 
forcefulness and argumentativeness. This qual -
ity signifies the preparedness of women, where 
necessary, even to sacrifice their lives for the 
sake of their honour and the honour of their fam -
ily. Bharat’s history is full of examples of women 
who fought valiantly and gave up their lives to protect their husbands and their honour.
Sthree thus represents the combination of the 
three gunas. Woman, who should be highly hon -
oured for these qualities, is being treated as an 
Abala (weaker vessel) and assigned an inferior 
status.
There are several organisations that are being 
run by women with great dedication and zeal for 
the benefit of the people. Valmiki extolled the 
sweetness of womanhood. What is the cause 
of this sweetness? The spirit of sacrifice is the 
cause, according to Valmiki. 
Spirit of Sacrifice Is Found
Only in Women
A mother is ready to sacrifice everything, even 
her life, for the sake of her child. Such a spirit 
is to be found only among women. If a child is 
grievously ill, the father may say that the child 
34may as well die. But the mother will try to save 
the child at any cost. It is for this reason that 
woman is described as Thyagamurti , the embodi -
ment of sacrifice. Men do not have the same spirit of sacrifice as women. Men may present 
a heroic pose but do not have the determination 
and perseverance to carry on the struggle to the 
end. 
Valmiki described woman as the Bhakti svarupini 
(embodiment of devotion). Man was described 
as Jnanaswarupa. The Jnani has limited access 
to the Divine mansion but the woman devotee 
has access to innermost apartments. 
The pre-eminent status accorded to women will 
be evident from all the ancient scriptures. In this 
context the role of women as mothers should be 
understood. The great hero, Shivaji, was mould -
ed entirely by the teachings of his mother. Rama was taught by his mother Kausalya to follow the 
sacred path of Dharma. The lives of the great 
show to what extent they were the products of 
their mothers.
Gandhiji became a staunch adherent of truth af-
ter a lesson he learnt from his mother, who could 
not bear her son telling a lie even to make her 
break her fast. It is the mothers who make their 
children take the right path, not so much the fa -
thers. Today, we find the fathers teaching the children to utter lies. For instance, when the tele -
phone rings in the house, the father, who is in the house, tells his son to inform the caller that the father is not at home.
The practice of fathers allowing the sons to go 
astray has a long ancestry. It started in the Dwapa -
ra Yuga with Dhritarashtra, father of Duryodhana. 
Whatever evil deeds his son did, Dhritarashtra 
said he was a good man. Fathers who allow 
their sons to go astray are not real fathers at all. 
Prahlada observed, “Only he is a father who ad -
vises the son to seek God. Only he is a true guru 
who instructs the pupil about God. ”The Mother Is the First Preceptor
for the Child
Mothers in ancient days used to teach the chil-dren about right conduct, morality and devotion. 
The first preceptor for a child is the mother. For 
this reason, Bharatiya culture gave the first place 
to the mother among the four persons to be re -
vered as divine: mother, father, guru and guest. 
The mother gets the first place because she bears the child in the womb for nine months and 
nourishes him with her own blood.
Even in mentioning the names of deities, the first 
place is given to the goddess, as in Sita-Rama, Parvathi-Parameshwara and Lakshmi-Narayana, 
and the reason for the feminine name getting pri -
ority is she is Prakrithi swarupini  – the embodi -
ment of Prakriti (nature). The implication in this 
usage is that you should realise God through the propitiation of Prakriti.
Earn the Blessings of the Mother
In this world, all things are transient. Only righ-
teousness and good name endure. How is one 
to acquire a good name? By revering the mother. 
Never go against the wishes of the mother. The 
son who causes pain to the mother can never be 
happy. Hence, earn the blessing of the mother.
In this context, it should be noted that Russians 
observe December 8th as Ladies Day. On that day 
the women have free time. The men have to do 
the cooking. The women go out to do service in 
hospitals and other places.
Men and women have to understand each other 
so that they can live in harmony in the family. To -
day, people want to live happily but not to lead ideal lives. Parents, for instance, do not set a 
good example to the children. In the modern age, 
the father does not instruct the children properly 
and the children do not pay heed to the words of the mother. The vast majority of fathers today 
behave like Dhritarashtra. Where there are some 
good children, leading a pious life, the fathers re -
35buke them, saying, “Have you gone crazy? Don’t 
take part in bhajans or social service. ” 
Parents who behave in this manner are like Hi -
ranyakashipu, who could not tolerate his son 
worshipping Hari. Today, we have many parents 
like Dhritarashtra and Hiranyakashipu, but few 
who encourage their children to adhere to righ -
teousness.
Children today do not relish edifying works like 
the Ramayana,  the Mahabharata  and the Bhaga -
vatam . They waste their time on reading trash. 
Parents should see that children do not read bad books.
Now, for a few words of advice to women. It is 
found that women are given to excessive talk-
ing. From today, you have to take a pledge not 
to indulge in talking. Women are found talking 
not only in the auditorium but even in the bhajan 
mandir. Men are fond of strolling around as they 
please. They observe no restraints as to where 
they should not go and what places they should avoid. If women observe restraint in speech and 
men control their movements, it will be good for 
both.
Ladies Day Should Be Observed
Every Year
If the nation is to prosper, improvement must start with the parents. Without peace and har -
mony at home, there can be no peace in the nation. This message should be propagated 
throughout the country on every November 19
th 
by observing it as Ladies Day. You should teach people how to run their homes well and how to 
bring up children in the right way. You must deal 
calmly and tactfully with the men, if they are not 
co-operating. 
Though Ravana was evil minded, his noble wife, 
Mandodari, tried to correct him as much as pos -
sible. She advised him strongly not to keep Sita in Lanka, but to restore her to Rama. From today learn to see the good in others and 
examine your own defects. Thereby you will benefit both ways. Those who go about finding 
faults in others are like dogs that go after cast-
off shoes.
Call to Women
Embodiments of Love!  Mistakes may sometimes 
be committed in the organisation. See that they 
do not recur. Buddha learnt the proper lesson 
through a single experience of seeing an old 
man, a sick man and a corpse. He understood 
the entire nature of human existence from this. 
People today have similar experiences over and 
over again. But their minds remain unchanged.
Every experience should bring out a change. For 
years you have listened to Swami’s discourses. 
How many have changed? How many have devel -
oped good qualities? Very few indeed. Develop 
pure thoughts wherever you may be. Only then 
your visit to Prasanthi Nilayam at great expense 
would have served a purpose.
As today is a sacred day dedicated to women, they 
should change themselves and help to change 
the men and the children. They should develop 
the qualities of sympathy, compassion, love and 
sacrifice. Study the lives of our great women who 
were models of patience, fortitude, compassion and sacrifice. I desire that you should take up the 
reins of leadership and bring peace and prosper -
ity to the nation by leading ideal lives.
Divine Discourse  
on November 19, 1995
36Role of the Mother
This day of 19th November is celebrated 
as Ladies Day in order to delve into the 
sacred qualities of women and dis-
seminate them. Women are the repositories of truth and culture. Though earth is one, the plants 
vary depending on the seeds sown. The womb 
of the mother symbolises Mother Earth. As is 
the seed of thought sown in it, so is the fruit it 
yields. You cannot expect mangoes by sowing 
a neem seed. So the mother’s womb should be 
filled with good thoughts, good words and good deeds. Only then can she bear virtuous children. Today, we find many children with bad character 
and bad behaviour. The reason for this can be at -
tributed to the bad thoughts of their mothers.
Some Noble and Virtuous Mothers
Aryamba was a woman of virtues of noble char -
acter. She spent all her time in the contempla -
tion of God and undertaking noble deeds. As a 
result, Jagadguru Sankaracharya was born in her 
sacred womb. Noble souls like Vivekananda and 
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa could attain exalted 
positions in their lives only due to the sacred feel -
ings of their mothers. Wife and children come and go; Truth alone is permanent.  
Pleasures of kingdom come and go; Truth alone is permanent.  
Brothers and relatives come and go; Truth alone is permanent.  
Status and power come and go; Truth alone is permanent.  
The path of Truth bestows all the prosperity and auspiciousness.  
In this world there is no prosperity greater than Truth.                                                                                
(Telugu poem)
You must have heard about Putlibai, the mother 
of Mahatma Gandhi, who spent her life in the contemplation of God. She used to observe a 
vow wherein she would not partake of food un -
less she heard the singing of a cuckoo. One day, it so happened that the song of a cuckoo was 
not heard. Seeing his mother sticking to her vow 
and not taking food, Gandhi, who was a small 
boy then, went behind the house and mimicked 
the singing of a cuckoo. He came inside and told 
his mother that she could have her food as she 
heard the song of a cuckoo. Mother Putlibai felt 
very sad as she knew that her son was uttering a lie. She cried, “O God! What sin have I committed 
to give birth to a son who speaks untruth?” 
Realising that he had caused immense grief to 
his mother by uttering a lie, Gandhi took a vow 
that he would never indulge in falsehood thence -
forth. So, it is imperative that the mother gives training in moral values to her children right from 
their childhood. She should not overlook the 
mistakes of her children. She should punish her 
children whenever they stray away from the right path and reward them for their good deeds. It is 
37because of the feelings of the mother that the 
children change either for the good or the bad.
Story of a Noble Son and
a Noble Mother
Here is a small example. After the conclusion of the Rangoon War, one mother and her son some -
how managed to reach Madras, having lost their near and dear ones. They had no shelter over 
their heads, or food to eat. The mother went from 
house to house asking for alms, giving most of 
it to her son and partaking of a little for herself. 
Whenever she did not receive much, she would 
give everything to her son and would starve her -
self. She put herself to many difficulties for the sake of the well-being of her son. Consequently, 
she became emaciated day by day. 
One day, the son, unable to see her suffering, told 
her, “Mother, it is not proper on your part to feed 
me and starve yourself. From today, you take rest 
and I will fetch food for both of us. ” But the moth -
er said she could not bear the sight of her son begging for alms. 
One day, the son went for alms as the mother 
was too weak even to walk. He stood in front 
of the house of an officer and cried, “O sir, I am hungry, I am hungry. ” The officer, who was relax -
ing on an easy chair in the veranda, brought food on a leaf and told him to sit and partake of it. 
But the boy said that he would take it home. The 
officer said, “I don’t think you are really hungry; 
otherwise, why should you take it home?” When 
the officer was uttering these harsh words, the 
boy felt giddy and fell down. He was trying to say 
something but could not say it loudly, as he was 
very weak. The officer went close to the boy and 
tried to hear what he was saying. “Sir, I would like to give to my mother first, only then I will eat. 
First to my mother, to my mother.... ” Saying so, he 
breathed his last. 
Can we find such noble sons today? We cannot 
find such mothers and sons today. It is not mere -ly the effect of Kali Age, but also the result of the 
modern educational system. Today’s education -
al system is meant only for earning a livelihood. 
The educated do not think of the welfare of the 
society and the country at large.
Gandhi’s mother was a strict disciplinarian and 
pure hearted. As the saying goes, “Yatha Raja, 
Thatha Praja” (As is the king, so are the subjects). She had a maidservant named Rambha, who 
used to look after the children with love and care. 
One day, Gandhi came running to her and told 
that he was haunted by fear. Rambha told him, 
“My dear one, where is the need to fear when the 
all-protecting Ramachandra is with us always. 
Recite the name of Rama, whenever you are fear-
stricken. ” From then onwards, Gandhi chanted the name of Rama till his last breath. Can we ever 
find such noble-hearted women today? It is be -
cause of such mothers that the children took to the path of righteousness.
Great Merit Lies in Fulfilling
Your Mother’s Wishes
You all know the story of Ishwarchandra Vidyas-
agar. He was living with his mother in a village 
near Calcutta. They were very poor. She used to 
feed her son with whatever she could earn every 
day and did not care much about herself. Her 
son’s well-being was uppermost in her mind. She 
wanted him to lead a peaceful and sacred life. 
Being a hard-working student, Vidyasagar used 
to study under streetlights. He completed post- 
graduation and took a job. 
Initially his salary was very little, just enough to 
take care of his mother and himself. Gradually, he 
attained a good position. Once, a fair was put up 
in the village and Vidyasagar’s mother wanted to 
pay a visit to it. She wore an old sari and visited 
the fair. Seeing this, Vidyasagar felt very sad and 
immediately bought a few good saris. 
One evening, during the course of their conver -
sation, Vidyasagar asked his mother if she had 
38any desires. She said, “Son, the people of our 
village are facing hardships due to the lack of 
drinking water. I feel pained to see them trek -
king long distances to fetch water. I will be hap -
py if you can get a bore well dug in our village. ” 
Vidyasagar immediately got a bore well dug and 
fulfilled his mother’s desire. Her joy knew no 
bounds. She said, “Son, water is life-sustainer. 
You have quenched the thirst of the villagers. I 
am extremely happy that I have given birth to a 
noble son like you. ”
On some other day, Vidyasagar asked his mother 
if she had any more desires. She said, “Son, the 
children of our village are going to the neigh -
bouring village to attend school. I am unable to bear children walking such long distances every 
day. So please construct a small school in our 
village. ” Accordingly, Vidyasagar established a 
school in the village, giving immense joy to his 
mother. She said, “Son, you have set an ideal not 
merely to our village but to the entire nation. Your 
life is sanctified. ”
After a few days, one evening, when Vidyas -
agar returned home from his office, he found his 
mother in a pensive mood. On being asked for 
the reason, she said, “Son, you have given water 
to the village and also established a school for 
the children. But it is the lack of medical facilities 
in our village that is troubling my mind. Please 
build a small hospital here. ” As per her wish, he 
constructed a hospital. 
The reason for My telling you all this is only to 
emphasise that the feelings of mothers are no-
ble. Each one has to resolve to fulfil the sacred 
desires of his mother. One should never act in 
such a way as to cause pain to his mother. 
Sacred Desires of Swami’s Mother
That which happened in the case of Ishwarch -
andra Vidyasagar happened in the case of this 
body also. One day, while I was having My food 
upstairs, the Griham Ammayi  (mother of Swami’s physical body) came to Me. I asked, “Mother, 
what is the reason for your coming here?” She 
said, “You finish your food first, then I will tell 
you. ” After I completed my meal, she said, “Swa-
mi, ours is a very small village. Here people are 
put to a lot of suffering due to the absence of 
medical facilities. They have to run to Bukkapat -
nam for every small problem. ” Then I assured her that I would build a hospital in the village. As promised, I got a small hospital built imme -
diately.
On some other day, she again came upstairs and 
said, “Swami, please don’t think otherwise, I have 
one more desire. ” I chided her, saying that she 
should not give scope for desires. She said, “Swa -
mi, you are fulfilling the desires of thousands of people who are coming to you. Why can’t you ful -
fil my desire?” Then I said, “Tell me your desire. ” She said, “Swami, the wells of our village have dried up. Please get a well dug in our village. ” As 
per her wish, I got a well dug in our mandir  itself. 
All the people of the village used to take water from this well. 
She said she was extremely happy but added 
that she had one more desire. She said; “Swami, 
the children of our village are going to Bukkapat -
nam for their studies. Poor children, they don’t have the strength even to walk such a long dis -
tance. Please construct a school here. ” I fulfilled 
that desire also. She felt very happy and said that 
she had no more desires left. 
Just as a small seed becomes a huge tree, the 
small school I established then has become 
a big university now. The small hospital that I 
constructed then has become a Super-Specialty 
Hospital now.
The small well that I got dug here in the village 
has assumed the gigantic proportions of a water project for the entire district. If the feelings of the 
mother are sacred, so too will be the feelings of 
the children.
39Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and
His Noble Mother
If the thoughts are sacred, they will certainly be -
come a reality. One need not think that one does 
not have enough money and power. If you resolve 
to do something good, you are bound to succeed. 
The power of noble thought will give you the nec -
essary strength. 
Once Chaitanya went to a temple along with his 
mother, Sachidevi. He prayed, “O Lord, I don’t 
have any worldly desires. You are the master of 
the world. You are the master of the body, life and 
soul. You can grant any wish that I ask for. But I don’t have any worldly and physical desires. I do 
have one desire. You are the embodiment of love. 
Love is our life, so please grant me the strength 
to love You. I don’t want anything else. ” 
Mother Sachidevi said, “Son, you need food, shel -
ter and raiment in order to carry on your liveli -
hood. But you are saying that you do not want 
anything. ” Chaitanya replied, “Mother, though you 
are advanced in age, you have not understood 
even a fraction of Divine Principle. Once you be-come the recipient of God’s love, all your needs will be taken care of. We should not waste our life with petty desires. ” 
Chaitanya used to go round the streets singing 
the glory of Krishna. Good and bad, auspicious -
ness and inauspiciousness co-exist. Where there 
is light, there is bound to be its shadow around. 
Likewise, good people are bound to face difficul -
ties. But those difficulties will enhance the good-ness in them.
“Pleasure and pain, good and bad co-exist, none 
can separate them.
You cannot find pleasure or pain, good
or bad to the exclusion of the other.
Pleasures result when difficulties fructify.”
(Telugu poem)
When Chaitanya was singing the glory of Krish -
na in the streets, some evil-minded people 
snatched away the cymbals from his hands. But 
he was least perturbed. He continued to sing 
the glory of Krishna with firm faith and devo -
tion. Seeing Chaitanya, the children would get inspired, and they too would join him in singing the Divine name. Chaitanya used to make chil -
40dren sit around him and impart sacred teachings 
to them. 
Chaitanya became a noble soul because of the 
noble feelings of his mother. So the mother 
should have pure thoughts and good behaviour. 
Only then will she be blessed with ideal sons.
Service to Villagers is Dear to Swami
Since time immemorial, Bharat  (India) has been 
the land of merit, the land of spirituality and the land of sacrifice. The greater the sacrifice you 
make, the greater will be the Tejas (Divine efful-
gence) around you. I am giving you a small ex -
ample. I always have Tejas around me. But some 
people who came during the last fifteen days said, “Swami, Your Tejas is ever increasing. ” Right 
from the beginning, I have the welfare of the vil -
lagers in view. But as I got involved with educa -
tion, health and water projects, I could not pay much attention to them. 
A month ago, while I was sitting on a chair, I no -
ticed a small piece of paper. When I picked it up, I 
found photographs of the dead bodies of a moth -
er and her son. The mother could not bear the sight of her son suffering from hunger. Neither 
could she go for alms, as there were incessant 
rains. This incident took place just last month. 
As there was no possibility of the rain stopping, 
she felt very dejected and mixed rat poison in wa-
ter, gave it to her son, and drank it herself. As a result, both of them died. 
This was published in the newspaper. The news-
papers ignore the good news and publish such 
bad news items. Their hands do not write and 
their intellects do not function when it comes to 
publishing good news. This is the effect of the 
sins accrued over their past lives. It hurt Me so 
much when I came to know that such an inci-
dent had taken place in this land of Bharat  (In-
dia), which is known as annapoorna (provider of 
food). Immediately, I stopped all other activities and started a village service programme. Food and clothes were distributed in various villages, 
giving encouragement and happiness to people. 
My Bliss is Ever Increasing
Day after Day
Our students are like gold. They worked hard right from morning till night with enthusiasm. They 
went to each and every house in the villages and 
distributed food. I felt very happy. The more one 
sacrifices, the greater will be one’s Tejas. 
Though I eat very little, My Tejas is ever increas -
ing. Immediately after bhajan in the morning, I eat 
a little ragi sankati  and chutney or curry made of 
leaves. This is what I used to eat before, and it is the same now also. There has been no change 
in it. The Tejas comes not because of food but 
because of the spirit of sacrifice.
When I walk slowly among devotees, some used 
to wonder if I have hurt My legs. Neither is there 
pain in My legs, nor do I have any disease. I walk 
slowly among the devotees only to give them dar-
shan for a longer duration of time. I don’t have any pain in My legs, nor do I have any disability. 
I am always blissful. My bliss is ever increasing 
day by day. Consider service to humanity as your 
very life-breath. Then you too will have Divine ef -
fulgence.
Make God’s Name Your Pulse Beat
God is not separate from you. Do not be under the impression that God is present only in tem -
ples. Deho Devalaya Prokto Jeevo Deva Sanatha -
naha (Body is the temple and the indweller is 
God). So you do not need to go in search of God 
elsewhere. Turn your vision inward. Then you will 
find God, who is the embodiment of bliss. You are 
getting drowned in illusion on account of exces -
sive attachment to the body. 
Get rid of body attachment and develop attach -
ment towards God. Then you will become God 
yourself. God and man are not separate from 
each other. They are like image and reflection. 
41God is in everybody. This temple of the body is 
able to move around because God is within. It is 
said, Sathyam Jnanam Anantham Brahma  (Truth, 
wisdom and infinite is Brahma). One has to tread along the path of truth in order to understand the 
principle of Brahma. 
To know the principle of Brahma, you need not 
go here and there. Have total faith that the body 
is the temple of God. Only then will you get infi -
nite bliss and tremendous strength. But it is not easy to acquire this strength. It is acquired as a result of meritorious deeds done in many past 
lives. 
Consider every work as God’s work. Some people 
may wonder how can going to an office be God’s 
work. That is also God’s work because God is all-
pervasive. Sarvatah Pani-padam Tat Sarvathosk -
shi Siromukham Sarvatah Sruthimalloke Sarvama -
vruthya Thishthati (With hands, feet, eyes, heads, 
mouth and ears pervading everything, He perme-ates the entire universe). 
You may undertake any action but do it as an of -
fering to God. Since ancient times, Bharatiyas  (In-
dians) fostered such noble feelings. That is why 
the country Bharat  has attained the exalted posi -
tion of a teacher to the rest of the world.
Some Noble Women of Bharat
This land of Bharat has given birth to many noble 
women like Savitri, who brought her dead husband 
back to life, 
Chandramati, who extinguished wild fire with the 
power of truth, 
Sita, who proved her chastity by coming out of 
blazing fire unscathed, and Damayanti, who re -
duced an evil-minded hunter to ashes with the 
power of her chastity. 
It is because of such women of character that 
Bharat has attained the reputation of being the 
land of plenty, prosperity, and opulence. It is the  
teacher of all nations.  
(Telugu poem)There are many scholars, intellectuals, and edu-cated people in this country. But all their learning 
and intelligence is proving futile because they 
are immersed in selfishness and self-interest.
Embodiments of Love! Foster love, speak the truth. 
Do not waste time in mere acquisition of bookish 
knowledge. One cannot be called educated in the 
true sense just because one acquires degrees. 
True education is that which confers good intel -
lect and noble qualities, like adherence to truth, 
duty, devotion and discipline. Only then the an -
cient culture of Bharat  will be revived. 
Chant the name of God incessantly. It should be like your pulse beat. The body becomes lifeless if 
there is no pulse beat. Likewise, you will become 
a living corpse if you do not chant the Divine 
name. Consider whatever happens as good for 
you. When you foster such good thoughts, they 
will naturally turn into good actions, which will set an ideal to others.
Embodiments of Love! Today, people are prepared 
to undergo many difficulties in pursuit of Sri 
(wealth). But Chaitanya considered Hari  (Lord 
Vishnu) as his only wealth. He gave up Sri and contemplated on Hari . That is why I often sing, 
Hari Nama Bina Ananda Nahi  (One cannot have 
bliss without chanting the Divine name). So 
chant the Divine name and take to the service of 
society. 
Do not make distinctions between your people 
and other people. Consider everybody as a mem -
ber of the universal Divine family. Experience bliss by cultivating the spirit of unity. Do not give 
scope for any differences whatsoever. Treat each 
body as a temple and offer your salutations. 
Have the firm conviction that God is present in 
all. When you cultivate such noble thoughts, God 
will certainly become manifest to you.
Divine Discourse  
on November 19, 2000
42Chapter
Four
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s
Message to Youth
44
Always Be Happy and Peaceful
Every living being in this world, right 
from an ant to an insect, bird, beast 
or an animal, has emerged from 
Truth only! Those who realise this Truth are real yogis. Devoid of Truth, nothing will move in this 
universe. And that supreme Truth is embodied 
only in one person. He is Sathyam.  (Here Bhaga -
wan Sri Sathya Sai Baba materialised a Lingam  
and showed it to all.) Who else can manifest 
such pure consciousness? 
Truth is omnipresent. When you think of it and 
contemplate on it, it can manifest in you also. 
Hence, constantly contemplate on Truth. Why 
was this body named Sathya Sai? Truth alone 
manifests from this Sai. Whoever contemplates 
on Truth, Sathyam  is present in the heart of that 
person. Hence, one should never forget Truth. Dharma  (righteousness) is the reaction, reflec-
tion, and resound of Sathyam  (Truth). In fact, 
Sathyanasti paro Dharma  (there is no Dharma  
greater than adherence to Truth). 
Today, we teach several branches of knowledge 
in secular education. But this is not true edu-
cation. True education relates to the Truth that 
emerges out of one’s heart. It has no name and 
form. What could be the form of Truth? What is 
the form of Dharma ? What is the form of Santhi  The creation emerges from Truth and merges into Truth.
Is there a place in the cosmos where Truth does not exist?
Visualise this pure and unsullied Truth.
(Telugu poem)
(peace)? Sathya, Dharma, Santhi, Prema and Ahim-
sa (truth, righteousness, peace, love and non-
violence) are all formless. One has to manifest 
these human values from out of one’s heart. The 
kind of Divine energy that is not present in a hu -
man being is not to be found in any other living being either. Hence, a human being is verily God. He is God in human form. 
Everything in This World Is Divine
You all consider a human being as a mere human being. That is the reason why you are committing 
so many mistakes. You are not merely a human 
being. You are God, verily. When you think that 
you are God, you will become God. Yad bhavam 
tad bhavathi (as are the feelings, so is the result). When you think of bad things, you will have only 
bad thoughts. 
All people in this world love someone or the other. 
However, there are differences in such love. The 
students love their fellow students. The ladies love other ladies. God is present in this lady as 
well as the other lady. Both are embodiments of 
Divinity. The one God is present in all bodies. We 
must love every human being. Love all, Serve all,  
since God is present in all human beings. There is no place in this universe where God is not pres -
ent. God is present in the sky, in the water, in the 
45sound, and in the light. Thus everything in this 
universe is the embodiment of Divinity.
We forsake such omnipresent Divinity and wor -
ship God in the form of some idol in a temple. 
No doubt, you can worship those idols. There is 
nothing wrong in that. But you must realise the 
truth that the same God in that idol is present in 
every human being, nay, in every living being. I 
don’t say it is wrong to worship those idols. But 
you yourself are God. Consider yourself as God 
first and then begin to see the same God in every living being. 
Your body is a temple. There is Divine energy in 
that temple. However, a little discrimination is to 
be exercised in this context. You have to inquire 
whether this energy is God. In fact, the body is 
also God. God is immanent in every atom and ev-
ery cell of the human body. There is no place in 
this universe where God is not present. Hence, 
you do not entertain any doubt about the exis-
tence of God. 
Do not forget God. In fact, if you forget yourself it 
amounts to forgetting God. Hence, do not forget 
yourself. It is for this reason that one is advised, 
“Always be careful”. You must constantly inquire 
into yourself, “Am I forgetting God?” You must 
always be aware of your true nature and remind 
yourself, “I am I”. If you are firmly established in 
that truth, there will be no scope at all to enter -
tain any evil thoughts about others. Not realis -
ing one’s own true nature, fools and ignoramuses think otherwise. 
God is present in all human beings. All the heads 
of all human beings in this world are God’s own 
heads, verily. That is the reason why God is de -
scribed as Virataswarupa  (embodiment of cos -
mic Divinity). His is the cosmic form. Each one in 
that cosmic form is having a different form. 
However, God is immanent in every form. Krish -
na declared in the Bhagavad Gita , Mamaivamso jivaloke jivabhuta sanathana (the eternal Atma  in 
all beings is a part of My Being). I alone am pres -
ent in each one of you. You are not different from 
Me. Do not entertain any doubts or differences of 
opinion in this regard. Strengthen your love, that 
is the proper sadhana. 
If only the fruit of love in your heart is ripened, 
the juice of that fruit can be shared with one and 
all. Hence, let that fruit of love ripen in your heart 
first. If only you fill your heart with pure love, that 
love can be shared with all. All people then will become embodiments of love. Then there will 
be no scope at all for hatred and violence in the 
world. 
Today, wherever you look you will find hatred and 
differences of opinion among people. In fact, 
they are not differences in the real sense. They 
may appear to be differences in the secular life. 
But all are one from the spiritual angle. Strictly 
speaking, all are zeroes and only God is the hero. 
He alone is one. All others are zeroes standing next to Him. That is the reason why they acquire 
value. Remove that one, all will be reduced to 
mere zeroes! Hence, God is the only important 
entity in our life.
Consider the Mind Also as Divine
The mind alone is responsible for all the sorrows 
and difficulties, as well as happiness, of human 
beings. Several people consider mind as very 
bad and call it monkey mind. In My opinion, it is 
not monkey mind, it is mankind. It is always kind. 
It is the mind that gives you joy and happiness. It 
is also the mind that causes you worry and sor -
row. If only you can keep the mind in a proper state, nothing can be bad. You consider the mind 
also as Divine. Then you will always be happy.
Nityanandam, Parama Sukhadam, Kevalam 
Jnanamurtim, Dwandateetam, 
Gagana Sadrisham, Tattwamasyadi Lakshyam, 
Ekam, Nityam, Vimalam, 
46Achalam, Sarvadhee Sakshibhutam, Bhavateetam, 
Trigunarahitam
(Sanskrit sloka)
(The Atma  is the embodiment of eternal bliss, 
wisdom absolute, beyond the pair of opposites, 
expansive and pervasive like the sky, the goal in-
dicated by the Mahavakya Tatwamasi , one with -
out a second, eternal, pure, unchanging, witness of all functions of the intellect, beyond all mental conditions and the three attributes of Satwa, Ra -
jas and Tamas ).
You call it Atma  or mind or consciousness – all 
are one. We ascribe different names to the same 
principle, according to our convenience for refer -
ence. For example, this body has been given the name Sathya. This name is given to the body and 
not to Me. I am not the body. I am not the mind. I 
am not the intellect. I am not the Chitta. I am not 
imagination. Bhagawan  is Bhagawan . You must 
develop such firm faith. 
It is possible that the minds of some people 
are susceptible to some disturbances due to 
changes in food habits and recreation. It is also 
possible that they may be influenced by some 
friends in this regard. Frequently, I will be repeat-
ing the saying, “Tell me your company, I shall tell 
you what you are. ” Hence, I advise you to join the 
company of noble souls. 
Satsangatwe nissangatwam,
Nissangatwe nirmohatwam,
Nirmohatwe nischalatattwam,
Nischalatattwe jivanmukti. 
 (Sanskrit sloka)
(Good company leads to detachment; detach -
ment makes one free from delusion. Freedom 
from delusion leads to steadiness of mind; steadiness of mind confers liberation.)
It is possible that everyone can attain Mukti  (lib-
eration). But when? The moment you establish 
yourself in the truth that I am Atma , you will at-tain liberation. Always think “Swami is in me, I am in Swami. ” However, it will be of no use if you 
simply repeat, “I am Swami, I am Swami” with a 
fickle mind. Develop firm faith, “I am Swami, I am 
God”. 
It is only when you develop that firm conviction 
that you will attain Divinity, which is Nirgunam, 
Niranjanam, Sanathana Niketanam, Nitya, Shuddha, Buddha, Mukta, Nirmala Swarupinam (God is attrib -
uteless, unsullied, final abode, eternal, pure, en -
lightened, free and embodiment of sacredness). On the other hand, if your mind is polluted with 
bad thoughts, everything will turn out to be bad 
for you. 
Nowadays, even water is polluted. The human 
body will be afflicted with several diseases on 
account of this water pollution. It is, therefore, 
necessary that the physical body is also protect -
ed to a certain extent. What do you think is the purpose for which this body is gifted to you by 
God? It is only to make you realise your own Self. But you forget this purpose and concentrate your 
mind on the physical body. After all, what is there 
in the physical body? 
The body is like a water bubble.
The mind is like a mad monkey.
Don’t follow the body.
Don’t follow the mind.
Follow the conscience.
If only you learn this simple principle, your life will be sanctified. You need not pay heed to whatever 
people may say. Purity of consciousness is the 
fruition of knowledge. It is only when your con -
sciousness is pure that you will attain wisdom. 
Purity of the mind is of utmost importance. Keep 
your mind pure, free from all kinds of pollution. 
Whenever evil thoughts enter your mind, remind 
yourself, “This is not good; this is not mine; not 
mine, ” and drive away those evil thoughts. Tell 
47yourself, “These are all not my property; my prop -
erty is good thoughts and good ideas only. ”
Constantly remember the truth that love is God. 
Live in love. If you can cultivate such positive 
and noble thoughts, everything will turn out to be 
good for you. There are several people here who 
are deluded by ephemeral things. No doubt, you 
are pure at heart. You have only pure thoughts. 
But a certain amount of pollution sets in now and 
then. You must ensure that it does not happen. 
That is sadhana for you. 
What is sadhana? Is it sitting in meditation and 
doing japa (recitation of God’s Name)? No. This 
is not sadhana. What do you think is the meaning of meditation? You think it is sitting in a lonely 
place and contemplating on the Lord’s Name. 
Not at all! Contemplate upon the pure thoughts 
in your mind. Contemplate on the Truth in you. 
If you really wish to know the secret of sadhana, 
it can be explained through very simple methods. 
For example, make your mind steady and still for 
as short a period as eleven seconds. You can at-
tain realisation even in such a short period. Re-
alisation cannot be achieved by becoming rest -
less like a clock. Just eleven seconds of stillness of mind would be enough. But you don’t do even 
that. 
You can achieve a lot during this period. Hence, 
do not trouble yourself unnecessarily. You are, 
at present, putting your body to a lot of trouble. You are wasting a lot of money too. Time waste 
is life waste.  Money waste is an evil. Hence, do 
not waste money and time. Time is God and God is time. Hence, whenever you find time, think of 
Swami. I will certainly appear before you. Not 
only that, I will even talk to you. I have received 
several letters saying that Swami has appeared 
before them and talked to them. You can also do 
such sadhana . Develop such unflinching faith in 
Swami. You will surely succeed in your sadhana. Several people have come here as devotees. They have, 
no doubt, deep devotion towards Swami. But 
what is devotion? What is the hallmark of a devo -
tee? This has to be analysed first. First and fore -
most, you have to develop faith.
Where there is faith, there is love;
Where there is love, there is truth;
Where there is truth; there God is.
Truth is God. You do not have to make any spe -
cial efforts to know Truth. In fact, eleven seconds 
are enough to realise Truth. You just contemplate 
in your mind for a period of eleven seconds on 
Truth and you will be able to have God’s darshan. 
You are unnecessarily taxing your body by sitting for hours together in meditation. At the end, you 
are suffering from pain in your legs and hands 
and backache. Do not give scope for such pain -
ful joints. You ultimately land in a doctor’s clin-ic, who will diagnose your trouble as rheumatic 
pains. They are not rheumatic pains at all. They are the result of misguided sadhana. Stick to the 
time schedule of eleven seconds and you will have no pain. In addition, you also have timely 
food. 
With regard to food, you have to know certain 
subtle things and observe some restrictions. 
You should not consume non-vegetarian food 
like meat and fish. In fact, foreigners are used 
to non-vegetarian food only. This type of food 
causes diseases like cancer. Hence, give up such food, totally. Not only that. They also like cheese 
very much. The more you consume cheese, the 
weaker you become. You should not also take 
milk in excess quantity. Too much milk is very 
bad. It should be limited. The milk should be di -
luted with water in equal proportion. Same is the case with curd. It should not be thick. It should 
be semi-solid. 
Thus, you have to control the food you eat daily. 
Proper food at the proper time is very much nec -
48essary for contemplating on God. If you thus take 
proper food and observe discipline in your habits, 
you are sure to have God’s darshan at that very 
moment. You do not need to undertake rigorous sadhana for months and years. You can always 
be blissful. Bliss is the form of God.
You desire to have bliss. But from where do you 
get bliss? From a shop in the market or by hav -
ing a sumptuous meal in a hotel with a variety of dishes? No, not at all! Bliss has to come from 
within. You are, in fact, the embodiment of bliss. You were blissful at the time of your birth. But, 
once you started developing attachment to the 
world, you began crying. Hence, you have to re -
duce your worldly attachments. 
At present, you have a lot of attachment to the 
world. Thereby you are weakening your body. Ul -
timately you will end up in sorrow. Worry is a very bad quality. Hurry, worry and curry – these three 
together make the heart very weak. Hence, keep 
them at a distance. 
Whenever you are in difficulties, you just assure 
yourself that these are passing clouds and will 
move away, and therefore you will not be worried. 
Whatever comes has to go. They are momen -
tary. The same is the case with the human body. Hence, you have to give importance to the body 
only to the extent required. The body has to be 
maintained within proper limits. Otherwise, it will 
decay. You have to be very careful.
Those who are engaged in sadhana and wish to 
have the darshan, sparshan, and sambhashan (vi -
sion, touch, and conversation) with God, must follow My advice in this regard. You are sure to 
have His darshan and can even talk to Him. 
Devotion is not merely performing certain forms 
of worship or undertaking religious vows or do -
ing japa. Real devotion presupposes unshake -
able love towards God, devoid of delusion. You 
have to cultivate such steadfast love towards God. Then you will certainly attain Divinity. Since people are at present attached to the world, de -
monic qualities are growing in them. Both kama  
(desire) and krodha (anger) are the worst enemies 
of a human being. 
You must always be happy, smiling and loving. 
When you are smiling, love will automatically de -
velop in you. There are, of course, some people who will put up a castor oil face. You must always 
be smiling and cheerful. God is always blissful. 
He does not at all worry for anything. Sorrow and worry are nowhere near God. When you observe 
Me I am always cheerful and smiling. I have no 
pain or suffering. I am revealing the truth. 
Some time ago, I sustained an injury to My leg 
due to a mistake committed by the students. My 
hipbone suffered four cracks. The doctors exam -
ined Me and decided to put My leg in a bandage. I refused. I came to the balcony by walking and 
gave darshan to the devotees. Even now, one of 
My legs is shorter by two inches. 
Several doctors, including Dr. Pillay and his son 
from Singapore, came and wanted to examine 
Me. They are specialists in the branch of ortho -
paedics. Also, several experts from America and other places came. They prayed, “Swami, please 
spare just five minutes for us to examine Your leg. ” I told them, “I will give you five hours for a 
spiritual purpose, if you wish. But I don’t give this 
body even for five minutes for a clinical examina-
tion. ” 
Even now, the students hold My body as I walk. 
I shout at them, saying, “I will not go, if you fol -
low Me. ” Thus, I give strict instructions to the stu-dents accompanying Me. I am able to manage 
Myself. I have no pain or suffering in the least. I 
can walk in the normal way. I do not fumble while 
walking and can keep My normal pace. 
I have maintained the same body weight for 
many years. My body weight then was 110 
49pounds. There was neither an increase nor a de -
crease in the body weight even to the extent of a 
half-pound. I am always hale and healthy. No one 
need to worry about My health. I will always be 
happy. When you look at Swami from an external 
angle, you will think that Swami is perhaps suf -
fering from severe pain. Not at all! I have no pain whatsoever. Even if there is some pain, your love 
for Swami will remove that pain. It is enough if I 
look at you; all My pain is gone! I will be happy 
and cheerful. My pain, if there is some at all, has 
to be removed by your love for Swami  and not by 
the doctors. 
What could be the reason for people in such large 
numbers gathering here today? What does it con -
note? I am extremely happy that I am able to win the love of so many people. You also be happy, 
wherever you are. I am always happy. I am ex -
tremely happy to see you all here. This is your good fortune. This time, the people have all come 
here with intense love and devotion. That makes 
Me very happy and cheerful. I am very eager to walk to the Sai Kulwant Hall tomorrow to give you darshan.
There is no medicine more efficacious than love. 
Your love is My medicine. That is the most power-
ful medicine. Equally, My love is a powerful medi -
cine to all of you. Always be happy and peace -
ful. Live like members of the same family, with 
love and affection. Do not be weighed down by 
petty difficulties and suffering. Do not give scope 
to any worry. Even if your wife or children suffer 
from any disease, do not get perturbed. Go back to your places with firm faith that everything will 
turn out to be good. Lead a happy and peaceful 
life. (Here, Swami , showed the Linga  He had cre -
ated earlier to the audience and inquired) Did you see this Linga?  It is heavy. A much bigger Linga  
will emerge from Swami’s mouth. The Shivaratri  
festival is approaching.
Divine Discourse at  
the World Youth Conference  
on July 28, 2007
50Youth Should Transform
the World
Embodiments of Love! Goodness 
means good behaviour, good con -
duct, good discipline and good char -
acter. Truth, righteousness, peace, love and non -
violence are verily the five life principles (pancha 
pranas)  of man.
Human life is a journey from “I” to “We”. This 
journey is subtle and the goal is very near, but 
man takes many births to reach the destination. 
Why should he take such a long time, undergoing 
hardships to attain the goal, which is so near?
Modern youth are making every effort to know all 
that is happening in the world but are not making 
any effort to understand the fundamental truth 
of human life. No benefit accrues from acquiring 
such information, which does not lead you to the 
goal of life. There are thousands of intellectuals, 
scholars and eminent educationists in the world 
today. But all the worldly knowledge and skills 
will be a mere waste if one does not know one -
self. The primary duty of man is to understand 
who he really is.
In this world, if money is lost,
One need not be worried about it,
for one can earn it again.One who practises and propagates ideals such as goodness,
morality and truth is a youth in the strict sense of the term.
In fact, only such people are your best friends and My best friends too.
(Telugu poem)
If a friend is lost, one can have another.
If one’s wife is lost, one may get married again. If one loses one’s piece of land,
one can purchase another.
All these can be acquired again.
But the body once lost is lost forever.
(Sanskrit verse)
Faith in God Is Very Essential for Man
Man has achieved everything in life but has lost 
human values, which amounts to losing his five 
life principles. As a result, he has become a liv -
ing corpse. Faith in God is very essential for man. You may question who God is and where God is. 
Truth is God. Truth is one and the same for ev -
eryone, irrespective of caste, creed, religion, lan-guage, nationality and ideology.
Sathyannasti paro dharma  (There is no greater 
dharma  than adherence to truth). This fundamen -
tal truth is God. Likewise, love is God. So, live in 
love. True love is related to the heart, not to the 
body. Divine love is “heart to heart, not body to 
body. ” Body is like a water bubble; mind is like a 
mad monkey. Don’t follow the body and don’t fol -
low the mind. Follow the conscience. Only then can you experience the truth.
5152Service Will Lead You to Devotion
You men and women! Your life is a long journey 
and your desires are the luggage. “Less luggage, 
more comfort makes travel a pleasure. ” So, re -
duce your desires. Human birth is gifted to serve others, not just to eat, drink, sleep and make 
merry. The best way to love God is to love all and 
serve all. Man’s foremost duty is to serve his fel -
low men and make them happy. Your life will be redeemed only when you involve yourself in the 
service of society. The highest sadhana (spiritual 
practice) is to transform love into service. Ser -
vice will lead you to devotion.
The Kerala boy who spoke earlier mentioned 
various diseases that affect the body. There are 
many instances in history wherein even mighty 
kings had to leave their mortal coil in spite of 
having access to the best medical facilities and 
the best doctors. Doctors by themselves cannot 
cure diseases. Divine grace is essential. There is 
no point in safeguarding your body if you do not 
uphold morality. For this, lead a life of truth and 
love. Modern youth do have love but their love is artificial. It is limited to saying “Hello, hello, ” and 
is in fact hollow within. So, their life has become 
artificial like a drama.
Man can rise to the level of the Divine only 
through the path of service. When man is not 
able to understand humanness, how can he un -
derstand Divinity? First, know thyself. Human life is noble, since it is essentially Divine. In fact, 
man and God are not two different entities; they 
are one and the same. “Ekam sath viprah bahudha 
vadanti (Truth is one, but scholars refer to it by 
many names). ” Your life will be redeemed once you understand this truth.
The Divine power latent in man is not found in any 
other being. Since man is unable to understand 
his own Divine nature, he is undertaking various 
spiritual practices such as penance, meditation 
and yoga . Spiritual practices bereft of love are a 
mere waste of time. Love is most important in life. Whatever you may say with love, it is bound to be true. Any work you undertake with love is dharma . So, in the first instance, develop love. 
Lust, greed, hatred, jealousy, anger and pride are 
animal qualities. These qualities are the result of 
the impurities in the food man partakes of. These 
are of man’s own making. Man is forgetting his 
Divine nature due to the effect of these evil quali-
ties.
The Words Seva  and Prema
Possess Infinite Power
Man should make proper use of his mathi (mind), 
gathi (destination), stithi  (situation) and sampathi  
(wealth). Wealth here does not mean worldly trea -
sures. It refers to the power of the senses. This power should be utilised for service to society.
Neither by penance nor by undertaking pilgrimages 
nor by going through sacred texts nor by japa can 
one cross the ocean of samsara . Only through ser -
vice of the noble can one redeem oneself.
(Sanskrit verse)
The words seva  and prema may be very small, 
consisting of only two syllables, but they pos -
sess infinite power.
Embodiments of Love!  Inquire and understand 
who you really are. Know yourself, and you will 
know all. Since many of you are newcomers, you 
have to understand simple things to begin with. 
When you say, “This is my handkerchief, ” it means the handkerchief is different from you. Similarly, 
when you say, “This is my body, my mind and 
my intellect, ” it means you are different from all 
these. Then the question naturally arises, “Who 
are you?” Inquire into this. Body, mind and intel -
lect are mere instruments. Identifying yourself with these instruments is absurd. You are the 
master. Master the mind and be a mastermind. 
Never be a slave to your body, mind and senses. 
In fact, they should be under your control; they 
should not control you.53One of the speakers quoted Swami, “My life is 
My message. ” She also referred to the statement, 
“Your life is My message. ” You should understand 
the meaning of these statements clearly. Saying 
that your life is Swami’s message and indulging 
in wicked activities and unrighteous deeds is 
treacherous. That constitutes “your” message, 
not My message. You can declare that your life is 
Swami’s message only when you take to the path of truth and righteousness, install peace and love 
in your heart, and uphold non-violence.
No One Has the Right to Judge Others
All that you see outside is a reflection of the inner 
being. Good and bad do not exist outside; they 
are mere reflections of what is within you. No one 
has the right to judge others. Give up all that is 
bad in you and you will find goodness all around. 
As the colour of the glasses you put on, so is the 
colour of the world you visualise. The defect lies 
in your vision, not in the creation.
The heart is the dwelling place of God. So only 
noble feelings should emerge out of it. If there 
are any evil qualities like lust, greed and anger in it, then it ceases to be a human heart. It is verily 
the heart of an animal. If your conduct is devoid 
of humanness, then you are not a human being. 
Act in a manner that befits your human birth. 
When you are angry, remind yourself, “I am not a 
dog, I am man. ” When your mind wavers, tell your -
self repeatedly, “I am not a monkey, I am man. ” Patiently think about your real nature.
Never act in haste. Haste makes waste; waste 
makes worry. So do not be in a hurry. Take time and think calmly. All these evil qualities can be 
eliminated by developing good thoughts and 
feelings. The remedy for all your mental ailments 
lies within you.
Undertake Service with Love
Only young men and women are capable of eradi -
cating the evils prevailing in society. If we have virtuous youth, all ills of society can be removed. Today the whole world is embroiled in wicked 
thoughts, wicked company and evil acts. Exces -
sive desires are the main cause for the suffering of man. Keep a check on your desires. As a stu -
dent, discharge your duties diligently. Study well and obtain good marks. Respect your parents 
and serve them. Keep in mind the welfare of the 
society and nation at large. Earn a good name in 
society.
Do not feel proud of your education. Your educa -
tion is a mere waste if it is not utilised for the wel -
fare of society. The education you have received 
from society must be dedicated to it by way of 
service. The essence of education does not lie 
in merely acquiring degrees, securing good jobs 
and amassing wealth. Service is the hallmark of 
the educated one. Morality is most essential for 
human life. No doubt money is essential but it 
should be under certain limits. Excessive money 
makes many wrongs. Money comes and goes, morality comes and grows.
Students! Young men and women! First and fore-
most, make an effort to understand your true 
nature. The difference between God and man is 
very subtle. As long as you do not understand the 
truth, you remain a human being. Once you rec -
ognise it, you are God. Service is the best way to understand your innate Divinity. 
Service should be for self-satisfaction, not for 
name and fame. Experience the bliss that you 
derive from selfless service. Share it with others. 
Before serving others, serve yourself by making 
your mind broad and pure. Get rid of the narrow 
feeling of “I” and “mine, ” and extend your love to 
one and all. Love is the binding force that brings 
together the entire world as one family. I wish 
that you develop love and live like brothers and 
sisters.
This body has been engaged in service right from 
birth. You should also spend your life in serving 
others. This is My message. I practise whatever I 54preach. I love all and serve all, and exhort you to 
do the same. You are not able to understand My 
love as your feelings are narrow. That is your mis -
take, not Mine. Today, conflicts are on the rise as there is no proper understanding and adjustment 
among people. Adjustment will be possible only 
when there is proper understanding.
Develop Love and Uphold Truth
Embodiments of Love! Only love has been con -
stantly with you right from birth. It is love that remains with you all the time, not your relatives 
or friends. This love is God. Enjoy the bliss of love 
and share it with others. Absence of love is the 
root cause for all the unrest in the world.
Develop love and uphold truth. Truth does not 
mean describing what you have seen, heard or 
done as it is. Truth is that which is changeless in 
all the three periods of time. The Vedas  call this 
permanent truth rutham. Just as you change your 
dress, you have to change your body one day or the other. That is why it is said, “Death is the 
dress of life. ” Therefore you should have no fear 
of death. 
Life is not permanent. It is like a passing cloud. 
As long as there is life in the body, use it for the 
service of others. Engage yourself in service till 
your last breath. Service to man is service to 
God. Have control over your senses, because 
loss of sense control engenders demonic quali -
ties in man. Service without sense control is an 
exercise in futility.
Cultivate Noble Thoughts
All of you have gathered here without being ex-
tended any invitation. It is your love for Bhaga-
wan and Bhagawan’s love for you that has 
brought you here. If there is love in your heart, 
you will never be put to any hardship whatsoever. 
Your love should be extended to one and all; it 
should not be limited to your family and friends 
alone.Today, we do not have ideal parents. There are no ideal teachers either. We do not have ideal 
friends and relatives too. Then how can we find 
fault with the youth? First of all, the parents should be good. The teachers should also do 
their job of teaching earnestly. Good company is 
very important. Tell me your company, I shall tell 
you what you are. As is your company, so you be -
come. How can one be good if one is always in the company of bad people?
Embodiments of Love! You are all virtuous and 
noble. Make every effort to enhance this good -
ness. Make the best use of your stay here. Run away from bad company and bad feelings. Culti -
vate noble thoughts and noble qualities. Develop 
the Atmic relationship with all, since all are your 
brothers and sisters. Lord Krishna said in the Bhagavad Gita,  “Mamaivamso Jeevaloke Jeevabhu -
ta Sanathana”  (The eternal Atma  in all beings is a 
part of My Being). The sun is one but it has many 
reflections. All that you find in this world is the re-
flection, reaction and resound. Do not get carried 
away by them. Aspire to attain the reality. In or -
der to experience the reality, give up body attach -
ment and try to understand the Divinity within.
Help Ever, Hurt Never
Divinity is latent in everyone but you are not making any effort to realise it because you are 
deeply engrossed in worldly matters. You are the 
embodiment of pure, unsullied, true and eternal 
Atma . Experience this reality. Discharge your du -
ties keeping this truth in view. Help ever, hurt nev -
er. This is the essence of the Vedas  and sacred 
texts such as the Bible, the Bhagavad Gita  and 
the Quran. All these holy texts speak of the same 
fundamental truth.
It is a mistake to entertain differences based on 
religion. There is only one religion, the religion of 
love. There is only one caste, the caste of human-
ity. There is only one language, the language of 
the heart. Travel from “I” to “We” through the path Procession at World Youth 
Conference 2007
55
of service. I will tell you how to go about doing it 
in due course of time.
There are millions of people in this world but only 
you, the fortunate few, have the golden opportu -
nity of coming here. Make the best use of this opportunity and share this joy with everybody. 
Serve the whole world. Understand the truth that 
you are born to serve society. 
Do not lead a selfish life amassing wealth. Do not 
be satisfied by filling your own belly; understand that there are millions in the world who are hun-
gry and suffering. Your life will be sanctified only 
when you help the poor, the sick and the down -
trodden. That is true spirituality. Spirituality is a way of life. It is not something separate from life. That should be your way of 
life. In order to acquire a worldly degree, you 
need to study various subjects. But in spirituality 
there is only one subject, and that is love. Under -
take service activities in a spirit of love.
Being young, you may have a few doubts. I will 
clarify all of them. Do not give scope for hatred, 
jealousy and ostentation. Be a humble devotee 
and render humble service. That is the true hu -
man quality.
Divine Discourse  
at the Sri Sathya Sai Second  
World Youth Conference  
on November 18, 199956
H uman values are in everyone. What we need are persons 
who will provide the stimulus and the encouragement to bring 
them out. If the feeling that the divinity that is present in every -
one is one and the same, is promoted among all, human values will 
sprout naturally in every person.
 –Sri Sathya Sai Baba,  
September 26, 1987Chapter
Five
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s
Message to Educators
58
Serve the Child
Men are proficient in various skills. 
They manufacture and operate di -
verse machines and master many 
fields of knowledge. However, they have not 
acquired the peace that is their due. They are 
carried along by the torrential flood of worldly 
life. Though endowed with human capabilities 
exercisable through a human body, men do not 
choose the straight path of truth. They wander 
about in false and fleeting pleasures and fritter 
their years, forgetting their innate Divine Reality. 
This is far from the fulfilment they should aspire to. 
Mere skill, mere designing and manipulation of 
machines, hollow pomp, boasting and asser -
tions about being a jnani (liberated person) – 
these do not reveal the secret of human nature. 
Has man solved this mystery that includes all 
mysteries? Has he found the answer that is the 
key to all problems? Has he earned the knowl-
edge that can make him know all that he has to 
know?
The solution, the answer and the knowledge is 
one, and only one. Why pluck the leaves, break 
the branches and hew the trunk in order to de -
stroy the tree? Cut the root and it is done! The Vedic seers and the sages who followed concen -
trated on the discovery of this key knowledge, the Atma vidya  (knowledge of Atma ). Seekers 
from overseas also became aware of this vidya  
and the modes of sadhana (spiritual discipline) it 
lays down and have acclaimed it enthusiastically 
the world over.Our Forefathers Revered
the Sacred Texts
But though this vidya  permeated its native home 
and illumined it for ages, Indians were huddled 
within the dark circle of the lamp’s shadow. This 
has been their miserable fate. Our fathers and 
great-grandfathers perused the pages of books 
depicting the sacred culture of our land, assimi -
lated their message, practised the sadhana and 
taught and remembered their teachings with 
gratitude. And, as a result, they enjoyed unruffled 
peace. 
They studied the great classics – the Mahab-
harata,  the Ramayana and  the Bhagavad Gita  – 
and the moral maxims propounded therein were 
imprinted indelibly on their hearts.   They were 
guided throughout their lives by these sacred 
texts, which they placed in their shrines, offering 
them reverential adoration. Their hearts were pu -
rified and sanctified by these acts of worship and work, and they were prompted to render service 
to society as a consequence.
By some stroke of evil fortune, times changed. 
The “modern age” dawned and our people bowed 
slavishly before it. These holy books were ne -
glected and even cast aside as containing “primi-tive” ideals. Western scholars and seekers, on 
the other hand, retrieved them, studied them 
scrupulously and analysed their precepts on sub -
jects as diverse as medicine, armaments, math -
ematics and astronomy, and they in turn spoke 
of them to the very people who had pioneered 
in those fields! We welcome them with glee, as 
5960a man prefers stale food in another’s house to 
fresh dishes in his own!
Cultivate Virtue in the
Hearts of Pupils
In blind admiration of Western ways of life, stu -
dents in India belittle virtue and extol dry scholar-ship. They forget they are human beings engaged 
in the pilgrimage to God. Instead, they engross 
themselves in attempts to squeeze joy out of the 
material world. Therefore, the first task of teach -
ers is the cultivation of virtue in the hearts of the pupils. This is much more vital than the promo -
tion of learning. 
The education system today does not recognise 
or encourage moral or spiritual values. Therefore, the student community has degenerated into a 
socially dangerous element. The students do not 
pay the least attention to promotion of the wel -
fare of society, nor do they have any understand -
ing of their social obligations. Unless the desire 
to do service is earnest and the skill to do service 
is cultivated, students will remain a burden on the 
community, behaving as parasites and exploiters.
A generous heart helps spread peace and joy. Lit-
tle knowledge narrows the mind and limits one’s con -
cern for others. It bloats the ego and feeds selfishness. 
It makes man forget the de -
light derivable from virtue. Such students are unable 
to develop the prosperity of 
the nation or the progress 
of society. The thick veil of 
egoism blinds their sight 
and renders them callous to their own dignity and 
destiny. 
Students should try their 
best to realise their heri -
tage. A mind free from either extreme attachment or detachment, a speech uncontaminated by falsehood and a body unpol -
luted by sin – these are what every student must strive to possess. Teachers must be vigilant to 
help and encourage them to avoid any trace of 
dishonesty in their actions and statements.
Gurus Must Practise
What They Preach
Selfishness, envy and egoistic pride are the three tendencies and attitudes that should not take 
root in tender hearts. Therefore, prompt the chil -
dren in your care to engage themselves in acts of service to others. What a shame it is for man 
to behave selfishly, while his life itself depends 
on the unselfish behaviour of the rest of creation. 
Whatever information, instruction or inspiration 
man has gained, or whatever wealth, riches or 
material possessions he has earned, he should 
share them with others in an unselfish manner. 
This is his primary duty. Teachers must be on the watch for chances to instil this ideal in the hearts 
of their pupils.
India has no shortage of rich persons, nor a short -
age of great philosophers, academicians and 
scholars. In spite of this, the land has no peace 
and the people are afflicted by anxiety and fear. What 
is the reason? The chief 
reason is the greed for self-
aggrandisement and the ab -
sence of virtues like service 
and renunciation. The rich, 
the great, the learned and 
even the monastic heads of 
religious sects are caught in 
the coils of selfishness and 
are unable to manifest the 
Divine virtues latent in them. 
The hearts of the young pu -
pils have to be filled by you 
with noble yearning, so that 
they may be shaped into 61strong and sturdy instruments for raising the In -
dia of the future to the glory that is her right.
Gurus (teachers/preceptors) have to be examples 
who can inspire the pupils. They must practise 
what they preach. As the teacher, so is the pupil. 
When the tap is turned, water flows down from 
the overhead tank. The quality of the tap water is 
the same as that of the water in the tank. When the heart of the guru  is full of goodness, selfless -
ness and love, the pupils will express these vir-tues in every act of theirs.
Teachers Should Not Form
Rival Groups
There are, it is said, more than 5,000 Bal Vikas  
gurus in the land. If each one corrects and im-
proves a hundred children, the nation would in -
deed be transformed. You must examine what exactly has been attained during the four years 
that have elapsed since the Bal Vikas came into 
being. This analytical study has to be made con -
stantly. When the gurus cultivate a satwic (pure) 
nature, students too will grow into embodiments of that nature. The gurus should be alert so that 
the weeds of hatred, envy and similar vices do not take root in their own hearts. These weeds are rampant in the political field and they creep 
into other fields too. 
Teachers should not form rival groups – some 
proud of their achievements, some envious of the 
praise others earn – that engage themselves in 
recrimination. See others as your own brothers 
and sisters, for all are One when viewed as Atman.
Somehow, somewhere and at intervals, you may 
be confronted by wrong traits. But remember that you have entered the circle of Sathya Sai Bal 
Vikas  gurus. It may not be serious if these traits 
enslave teachers in other circles, but your mis -
sion is much more fundamental and the hope that you arouse much more heartening. These 
traits will hamper and pollute your efforts.Be conscious of the sacred significance of the name, guru , by which you are known. “Gu” means 
“darkness” and “ru” means “removal. ” So the guru  
has to illumine the intelligence of the child and 
remove the ignorance that is obstructing its full development. Diving deeper, we find that guru  
also has another meaning. “Gu” means “not lim -
ited by attributes” and “ru” means “not affected 
by appearances. ” That is to say, the guru  must be 
free from prejudice and must treat all pupils with equal love.
Remove the Primeval Ignorance
Pour out all your love on the children around you 
and instruct them gladly and sincerely. This atti -
tude alone can justify association with the Sath-ya Sai Bal Vikas . Of course, Sai is not unaware 
that the Bal Vikas gurus are now heartily engaged 
in their sacred task and are contributing their 
best to the progress of the movement. But just 
as a battery has to be charged occasionally, I am 
now pointing out certain defects and dangers 
that might tarnish. 
It is imperative that you should discover the right 
path and pursue it steadily with faith. Take, for 
example, the petromax lamp. It requires some 
quantity of kerosene and also pumping now and 
then. A pin has to be used sometimes to clear 
obstructions. The kerosene is faith, the pin is the 
love that urges you to do your duty, and pumping 
is the will that sustains you in your task. Besides 
these, the lamp needs a wick. The name of the 
Lord, which is your constant inspiration, is the 
wick. Endeavour, in the light of the Atmic unity of 
all, to remove the primeval ignorance from your -
selves and from your pupils.
A Bad Teacher Can Ruin
Thousands of Lives
Discuss and discover during this conference how 
far you have succeeded in this holy mission and, 
as a result of that discovery, lay down before 
yourselves the ways and means by which greater 
success can be achieved. Communicate your 62experience to others and also your ideas on im -
proving the curriculum, the method of teaching 
and the means of assessing the progress made. 
I would advise you to pay special attention to the 
activities and methods by which you can contrib -
ute, through the Bal Vikas, to the blossoming of 
talents latent in the children, the expansion of 
prosperity of the nation and the security and wel -
fare of society. 
A bad pupil causes harm only to himself but a 
bad teacher can ruin thousands of lives. Be 
steady and stable in your efforts. A guidepost 
that changes direction with every gust of wind 
only adds confusion for the confounded traveller. 
You have also to cultivate prema and expand your 
desire to do seva .Most of all, fill your mind with God and transmit 
God to the children. Look forward to no remu -
neration or reward, except the joy on the faces of the children. Nowadays, teachers are more at -
tached to their salaries than to their duties. They are centred more on their own lives than on their 
sacred task. Give up the mad rush in pursuit of 
degrees. 
Pursue, rather, chances to serve others and to 
promote the prosperity of the nation. Indian cul -
ture has declined so far and so much because teachers, who are its guardians and promoters, 
are content merely to feed themselves and their 
families and to cultivate their own fame and for -
tune. 
The Vedas  tell us: Na karmana  (not by 
acts), na prajaya  (not by progeny), na dhan-
ena (nor by riches), thyagena ekena  (only 
by renunciation) amritatwam anasuh  (can 
immortality be attained). So renounce, re-
nounce! Serve and give your knowledge, 
your delight and your love gladly to the 
children. Serve thus the society and the 
people.
The Sathya Sai Bal Vikas  gurus are do-
ing this service wholeheartedly. I believe 
they will continue their efforts even more 
sincerely and gladly. The resolutions you will arrive at in this conference should not 
only be inscribed on paper, but also must 
be followed and practised in actual day-
to-day teaching in the classes. I am sure 
each one of you is determined to do your 
best in the service of the children, the so -
ciety, and the precious heritage of Indian culture.
Divine Discourse at the  
Fourth All India Conference of  
Bal Vikas Gurus  
on November 20, 1979“Educare” Is True Education
63Embodiments of Love! First and fore-
most, we must investigate into “pan-
chatantra,”  or the five principal as -
pects of education. These are as follows:
1. What is education?
2. What type of education should we pursue?
3. What is the main aim of education?
4. What is the uniqueness of education?
5. What are we gaining from present-day educa -
tion?
Only when we recognise the inner significance 
of these “panchatantra”  can we know what true 
education is. What is education? It is of two types. The first type is collection of facts and 
knowledge about the external world, and sharing 
them with students. The second type is educare. 
Educare involves the deep understanding of the 
knowledge that springs from within and impart -
ing it to students. But today’s education gives the students’ knowledge only about the external 
world. 
Only culture or refinement can develop good per -
sonality and not this type of education. So both 
education and culture are important. No harm can ever befall a person whose heart is full of compassion,
whose words are adorned by truth,
and whose body is dedicated to the welfare of others.
(Telugu poem)
Today’s education is devoid of culture and is like 
a counterfeit coin. Even a beggar does not accept a counterfeit coin. Then how can experienced 
and intelligent people accept such education? 
So to satisfy everyone we must develop educare. 
Education without refinement is like a dark room. 
Only bats can live in dark rooms; such rooms are 
filthy. So, by pursuing such education devoid of 
culture, our hearts have become dark rooms and 
hence many animal qualities find their way into 
them. 
Education without culture is like a kite with a bro-
ken string. No one knows where it will fall and 
what damage it will cause to others. Therefore, 
such education does not benefit anyone.
Proceed from Superficial to
Practical Knowledge
Only if education is blended with culture will it shine forth as true education.  What is culture? It is the 
cultivation of discrimination between good and evil, sin and merit, and truth and untruth that we 
experience in our daily life. It is also removal of 
one’s evil thoughts, feelings and qualities, and 
cultivation of good thoughts, feelings and quali -
ties. Not only this, culture makes one broad-mind -
ed by getting rid of one’s narrow-mindedness. This morning, a song “I and you are one!” was 
sung. Even this is also a kind of narrow-minded -
ness. It will be better to say, “All are one!” A celes -
tial voice told Jesus, “All are one, my dear son, be 
alike to everyone!” Educare develops such broad-
mindedness. Today’s education comprises only 
bookish knowledge. It is only superficial knowl-
edge and it changes every moment. So we must 
add Educare to this bookish knowledge. Educare 
is practical knowledge. 
There are a few steps between superficial knowl -
edge and practical knowledge. From superficial 
knowledge we must proceed to general knowl-
edge. After analysing this general knowledge one 
gains discrimination knowledge and knows the 
difference between good and evil. From this dis -
crimination knowledge we proceed to practical knowledge. This practical knowledge is change -
less. 
True and eternal education never changes when 
the heart is filled with compassion; it becomes sacred and aspires for the welfare of one and 
all. An educated person should not have bad 
qualities and must not indulge in bad deeds. 
Today’s education imparts only bookish knowl -
edge, which really degrades a person. How long will this bookish knowledge last? It lasts as long 
as we keep it in our mind. It is not possible to 
put bookish knowledge into practice. We fill our 
heads with bookish knowledge, go to the exami -
nation hall, fill our answer paper with it and return with empty heads! In effect, the head always re -
mains empty.
To acquire discrimination knowledge one re -
quires general knowledge, which consists of 
ordinary cleverness and intelligence. Discrimi -
nation knowledge also has in it common sense. Both are essential for life in this world.
Students and Teachers! What we need today is 
not bookish knowledge, though we require it to 
a certain extent to cope with life in this world. But what is essential to us is the knowledge of the Atma . Spiritual education is the highest edu-
cation, says the Bhagavad Gita . It starts with dis -
crimination knowledge, which is like a perennial 
river. In perennial rivers the quantity of water may 
vary but not the quality. Thus, students should 
understand that quality of education is more 
important than its quantity. Degrees are not im -
portant, but the knowledge accomplished out of education is important. 
What is the meaning of education? Education is 
not mere knowledge, it includes action too. Edu-
cation that originates from within has a sound 
basis and is permanent. It is referred to as sath-
yam. A step higher than sathyam is ritam, as pro-
claimed in the Vedas . What we normally refer to 
as truth in daily life is merely a fact.
Education is for Life, Not for Living
People mistake bookish knowledge to be true education. No one today bothers about the aim 
of education. Education is for life and not for living.
Today’s education is aimed at merely eking out a 
livelihood. If mere living is the purpose, then how 
do birds and beasts live without any education? 
Even ants and mosquitoes, which do not have any 
education, live their lives. Is education for merely 
earning one’s bread? What is the essence of edu -
cation? The essence of education is the concen -
tration of the mind and not the collection of facts. 
Mere collection of facts will not serve any pur -
pose. For example, a washerman in a village goes 
from house to house collecting clothes for wash -
ing. In each household the number of clothes that are given for washing is noted down in a 
notebook. But the washerman does not have an 
account. By evening he returns the clothes to the 
respective houses. This is general knowledge. 
For acquiring this general knowledge education 
is not necessary. Even a washerman possesses it. Many educated men lack the acumen of even 
a washerman. General knowledge cannot be ac -
64quired by mere study. It is learnt from the book 
of life.
What is the end of education? People answer 
this question by saying there is no end to educa -
tion.
Definitely there is an end to what we study from 
books. The end of education is character. Educa -
tion without character is useless.  Earlier in guruku-
las the sages took the students along with them 
wherever they went and taught them without conforming to any time schedule. This education 
was a continuous learning process. But today 
in schools and colleges education is limited to 
strict time schedules. Therefore, education has 
become limited. 
But true education, which moulds character, has 
no limits. When we learn about that which is “lim-
itless, ” we attain the end of education. Our char -
acter is reflected in our words, behaviour and conduct in daily life. So we should speak pleas -
antly and not hurt others with our harsh words. It 
is true that we cannot always oblige, but we can 
speak obligingly.
While cooking, ladies select appropriate vessels 
according to the quantity of rice to be cooked. It 
does not make sense if a large vessel is chosen 
to cook a small quantity of rice. Discrimination 
should be used to select the vessel and the in -
tensity of the flame required for cooking. In the same way, discrimination should be used to en -
rich one’s character.
Fact, Truth, and Absolute Truth
When elderly guests visit the house, even if one cannot offer them anything to eat, one should 
at least welcome them inside, speak affection -
ate words and make them happy. Instead, if one asks them rudely, “Why have you come?” it is not 
good. Even when the father is at home, one tells 
them that he is not there. This is not proper edu -
cation. Speak good words and tell the truth. There are three types of truth. They are fact, truth and absolute truth. To say as it is what you have 
seen is a fact. Suppose I see you wearing a white 
dress and say, “You are wearing a white dress. ” 
This becomes a fact. Later at home you might wear a blue shirt. Then what I had said earlier 
does not hold good anymore. Thus, a fact is sub -
ject to change.
Truth, on the other hand, does not change with 
time. A person may change any number of dress -
es but the person remains the same. Thus, truth is the same at all times. I often say that you are 
not one but three. The one you think you are: the 
physical body. The one others think you are: the 
mind. Mind is invisible. One’s happiness or mis-ery is based on one’s actions. 
Ritam  (absolute truth) transcends both good 
and evil. This is the one you really are, the Atma . 
You are a combination of body, mind and Atma . 
Body is subject to change. It is Atma that is eter -
nal. This is referred to as ritam in the Vedas . It is 
changeless and has no attributes. It is described 
as attributeless, pure, eternal highest abode, per-
manent and unsullied. 
One may say that one has acquired three post-
graduate degrees. But what are these degrees? 
These are mere certificates. Who is the one who 
has earned all these degrees? It is “I. ”
This “I” is the absolute truth. Only when you are 
awake you travel physically, see many sights, eat 
many dishes and experience many things. But 
in the dream state you create yourself! You do 
your work and travel to far-off places like Delhi or 
America, without even purchasing a plane tick -
et. In the deep sleep state one does not go any -
where. It is a changeless and steady state, which remains a witness. 
The same “I” experiences all these three states. 
In deep sleep you enjoy bliss. In the dream state 
you create various scenes and experience them. 
65But in the wakeful state you experience every -
thing physically through the senses.
Adi Shankara has cautioned us about the truth 
of what we experience through the senses. Va-
garies of the mind are many. In order to control 
them, Shankara introduced a practice in his ash-
ram. The disciples would walk from one end of 
the ashram  to the other repeating, “Be careful! Be 
careful!” Once a feeling arose in Shankara’s mind that he was the head of the ashram  with a large 
income. At that moment he heard the sentinels 
cautioning, “Be careful! Be careful!” This alerted 
him and brought about a change in his feelings.
Birth is a misery, old age is a misery,
family is a misery, 
the last moments are full of sorrow,
so Be careful! Be careful!
(Telugu poem)
One might consider oneself to be great. As of now, one might be enjoying name and fame. But 
what will happen when one is faced with misery 
towards the end of one’s life? Shankara wondered 
who would come to one’s rescue at the very end 
of one’s life.
Neither mother, nor father, nor relatives,
nor brothers, not even wealth or possessions
will come to your rescue in the last moments. 
Hence be careful!
(Telugu poem)
In earlier days, this was taught in the gurukulas to 
the students by the preceptors. This ancient edu -
cational system originated from absolute truth. This is what is “Educare. ” It is also reflected in 
the letters ABC as “Always Be Careful. ” Shankara 
preached the same principle. 
So it is necessary to impart spiritual education 
along with secular education. General knowledge 
devoid of spiritual education is negative. General 
knowledge is like the bulb and spiritual knowl -
edge is like the current flowing through it. Only when positive and negative meet is darkness dis -
pelled. So we must develop positive along with negative.
It would be enough if we have only positive as -
pects. The Divine power is latent in every being, 
which is positive. Man today accumulates nega -
tive aspects in excess. Birth, growth, sustenance, 
and death are all negative.
He is the Eternal One with no birth and death,
He who is the Primordial One does not have
a beginning or an end,
He is neither born, nor does He die,
nor is He slain by anyone.
He is the Atma, which is the Eternal Witness.
(Telugu poem)
Spiritual Knowledge is
Foremost and Fundamental
Hence, the path of spirituality forms the basis for 
all forms of knowledge. The fundamental knowl -
edge, which comprises spiritual knowledge, is greater than both practical knowledge and gen -
eral knowledge. So this should be imparted along with the secular education. How long can we lead 
a truthful and ideal life in the world without trying 
to discover the Absolute Truth (ritam) ?
We are making a mistake by identifying ourselves 
with the body. For example, a mother died leav-
ing behind her fifteen-year-old son. The son was grief-stricken since there was no one to look af-
ter him. The body of the mother was right in front 
of him; then why was he sad? It was because life 
had left the body of his mother. So, mother is not 
the body but the life principle. 
Life principle has no death. Body is like the dress; 
death is like a change of dress. Everything in this 
world undergoes change. But there is one thing 
that is changeless. That is the Fundamental 
Truth. We should learn that fundamental educa -
tion. Once you have mastered it, it follows you 
wherever you go. Gradually you should get rid of 
attachment to the body and develop Atmic con-
sciousness.
66You are pursuing differ -
ent types of education 
in different countries. 
But ultimately educa -
tion should converge into educare. That can 
be achieved gradually. 
Therefore, mere acquain-
tance with books and 
what is written on the 
blackboard cannot con -
stitute education. True 
education throws open 
the doors of the mind. 
How can you enter a 
house with the doors 
closed? You desire many 
comforts and pleasures 
and also aspire for vir-
tues. For that you have 
to open the doors of your 
mind first. Only then will absolute truth manifest in us. This absolute truth 
is all pervasive. In our organisation, we should 
not only wear a uniform dress, we should also 
develop a uniform mind. The basic thing to be 
achieved is purity of mind.
Embodiments of Love! There are many aspects in 
the modern educational system that we must un-
derstand. But we are not learning what we ought 
to. Instead, we are gathering irrelevant informa -
tion. Mere learning of the contents of a book 
constitutes secular education. Education must 
be combined with educare. Only then will you ex -
perience the bliss. 
What is the difference between “education” and 
“educare”? Education is like insipid water, where-
as educare is like sugar. Merely adding sugar to 
water does not make it sweet. It is only on stir -
ring that the sugar mixes with the water, making it sweet. The heart is the tumbler, Divinity is the 
sugar and secular education is tasteless water. With intelligence as the spoon and inquiry as 
the process of stirring, 
we experience the all-
pervasive Divinity. That 
is true wisdom, which 
enables us to recognise 
the unity of all creation.
This is a cloth. It is not 
just cloth. It is a bundle 
of threads, and more fundamentally it is cot-
ton. The cotton, thread 
and cloth are one and 
the same. Without cot -
ton, there is no thread, and without thread, 
there is no cloth. Rec -
ognition of the unity in multiplicity is the ulti -
mate goal of education.
You should learn to face adversities boldly with -
out blaming God. God would have planned to grant you some benefit through the hardship. 
You should accept both pain and pleasure as 
gifts of God and develop the attitude “whatever 
God does is for my own good!”
You will have many discussions in the confer -
ence. Let the discussions be filled with love and 
not with criticism. You should not criticise any 
religion, because it is the same God whom you worship, be it in a church, a temple or a mosque. 
A true devotee of God will not criticise anyone. 
Share your love equally with everyone. Tomorrow 
I shall answer any doubts or questions that may 
arise in your discussions today.
Divine Discourse at the  
First Conference of Sri Sathya Sai Schools  
on November 20, 2001
67W hat is the end of education? Character is the end of education. What is the 
essence of education? Concentration is the essence of education. What is the aim 
of education? The aim of education is not only cultivating human qualities, but 
attaining divinity. Education is meant for life, not only for a living.
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba,  
September 26, 2000
6869True Education Fosters
Human Values
Students! Embodiments of Love! Teach -
ers and promoters of education!  Today, 
people have not understood Divinity, 
they have not understood the meaning of God and are wasting their bodies, their time and all 
precious things in life.
Human values do not depend on education alone. 
They depend more on culture. What do you mean 
by culture? Culture means giving up one’s bad 
conduct, bad behaviour and bad deeds, and cul -
tivating good thinking and fostering good senti -
ments that lead to good actions. 
The state of the whole world depends on human 
activity. When the actions of the people are no -
ble, the country is equally noble. The people’s be -
haviour and conduct depend on their thoughts. 
Thoughts depend on the mind. Good thoughts 
are the basis of human values.
Good Thoughts Yield Goodness
Because human values are not practised, the 
world is in a mess. The head and the heart are 
two important organs in every human being. 
Thoughts that arise in the head are worldly and 
fickle. They are influenced by external activi -Daivaadheenam Jagathsarvam Sathyaadheenamtu
Daivatham That Sathyam Uthamaadheenam Uthamo Paradevatha.
(Sanskrit sloka)
(The whole world is under the control of God. God is subject to truth. Truth is subject to 
noble souls. Such noble people are the embodiments of Divinity.)
ties. Reading, writing, eating and earning are all 
outward activities. They are the products of the 
head.
All sacred feelings arise from the heart. Sacred 
qualities like compassion, love, sympathy, for-
bearance and truth emanate from the heart. 
They are all called inward qualities. The world is nothing but a combination of external and inter -
nal tendencies. Just as a sapling grows into a huge tree giving you flowers and fruits, likewise, 
thoughts that are sacred lead to actions that 
yield fruits of all goodness.
Man is a combination of three entities: the body, 
the mind and the Atma  (Spirit). First comes the 
body. It is the instrument of action. The mind thinks. The conscience is the Atma,  or Spirit that 
exists as consciousness. So human life is a com-
bination of these three aspects: action, thinking 
and consciousness.
If the body functions independently without con -
sulting the mind and the Spirit, the activity will 
be animal activity. If the mind acts independently 
without coordinating with the body and the Spir -
it, the activity is likely to be demonic. If the Spirit 70acts independently, the actions will transcend 
the body and the mind.
The true mark of a human being is goodness. 
Goodness is not a product of academic educa -
tion. Can bookish knowledge be called true edu -
cation? Without spiritual knowledge and wisdom, 
can a person be called educated?
Every Student Must Cultivate
Human Values
Education must inculcate respect for human values like truth, righteousness, love and peace. 
Education is for life. Life is for man. Man is there 
for society. Society is meant for spirituality. The 
spirituality is there for the nation. The nation is 
part of the world, and the world is for peace.
Today everyone wants peace. In fact, you can 
attain and acquire peace only out of human val -
ues. For peace and happiness, human values are most important. Bereft of human values, man 
can never be at peace.
Without understanding this principle, man tries 
to acquire education. Man today considers that 
receiving information is education. It is not infor -
mation that confers human values. Modern edu -
cation makes a man machine, a computer. 
Greatness lies in becoming not a computer but 
a composer. You have to acquire education to 
make your life ideal.
Modern education tends to make men selfish. 
There should be a limit even for selfishness. Ev-
ery student must necessarily cultivate human 
values. The government, by establishing edu -
cational institutions in every village and street, thinks that the education in the country has pro-
gressed.
What are the qualities of education? Virtues, 
good intellect, adherence to truth, devotion, dis -
cipline and duty are essential qualities. Educa -tion must teach these values. Students have to 
learn these things.
What is the progress in modern education? In 
fact, they harm those who help them. They make 
fun of those who teach them. This is the progress 
in “modern” education. Students have to foster 
obedience, humility and human values and attain 
Divinity. This is true education. 
Modern students do not understand what true 
education is. As a result, society is polluted. Truth and other human qualities have been dis -
torted and perverted altogether. Sanctity and the sacred quality of human nature are fast disap-
pearing.The practices of righteousness and com -
passion are viewed as bad practices. Do you call this “progress” in education? No. You should ex-
press human values by practising righteousness 
and cultivating compassion.
The True Meaning of Education
With a good education, you will have culture. 
When you have culture that is true life.
If you have a good education, you will be happy.
When you are happy, you will be peaceful. 
When you have a good education,
you will be in good company.
When you are in good company,
you will have good qualities. 
When you have a good education,
your life will find fulfilment.
Thereby, you can attain liberation.
(Poem)
Students should adhere to the twin ideals of 
sathya and dharma  (truth and righteousness). 
In this world, there is nothing greater than truth. You should become embodiments of truth. In 
your daily life you should follow the path of truth 
and realise the Divine.
You have to water a sapling to get fruit and 
seeds. Love, which is natural to human beings, 
should be watered with faith to sustain it. We 
should make an effort to attain peace in the true 71sense of the word. The peace that we get today 
is momentary. We cannot call it peace anyway.
The History of Bharat
Is One Long Saga of Sacrifice
In the modern world, Bharat  stands for all that is 
sacred. Since ancient times, it has been a model 
and an ideal for the rest of the world. There is Truth 
in the air of Bharat . There is dharma  in the dust of 
Bharat . There is love in the sands of Bharat . And 
there is compassion in the water of Bharat .
Forbearance is the core of Bharatiya  (Indian) cul -
ture. In order to enjoy and experience these val -
ues, even foreigners have decided to come and 
settle down in Bharat . In ancient times, Bharati -
yas were determined to follow the principle of 
sacrifice. They were dedicated to righteousness and truth.
Having been born in the sacred land of Bharat,  
you should not forget this important aspect. If 
you go through the history of this sacred land, 
you will certainly understand that Bharat  never 
tried to invade or conquer any country. They had to resist foreign invaders. Bharatiyas  stand 
for selflessness. They were never selfish at any point in time. Bharatiyas  never coveted the lands 
of others. The history of Bharat  is one long saga 
of sacrifice.
Emperor Harischandra was prepared to give up 
everything for the sake of Truth. Emperor Sibi 
sacrificed his own flesh and blood to save a 
dove. Bharat  has given birth to men and women who stood for sacrifice. Modern students are try-ing to change this land of sacrifice from a land of 
spiritual practices into a land of pleasure seek -
ers. But all pleasure is transient. You should seek the bliss that is enduring by realising your inher -
ent Divinity.
Yesterday an American boy came to Swami. 
Bhagawan asked him, “How old are you?” The 
boy said, “Seven years. ” Swami asked him, “How 
do you know?” He said, “My mother and father 
told me. ”
Swami said, “It is only one that has become 
seven. One plus one plus one… comes to seven. ” 
Without one, there cannot be seven. All numbers 
come out of one. Truth is one; scholars call it by many names. Names and forms differ, but Divin -
ity is one and the same in all. First, have faith in yourself. Without self-confidence, you cannot 
have faith in yourself. Then how can you have 
faith in others? Let this visvasa  (faith) become 
your svasa (life-breath). Let our education be -
come true education. Education that is not prac-
tised is bookish knowledge.
You should have love for your country. Rama 
said, “Motherland is greater than heaven itself. ” That spirit of patriotism is very important.
Divine Discourse at the  
Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning on  
August 10, 199872
H ands that serve are holier than lips that pray.
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba,  
April 27, 1990
Chapter
Six
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s
Message to Healthcare Professionals
74
Doctors, Patients
and Society
75Embodiments of the Divine Practitio -
ners of Modern Medicine!  It is charity 
that lends adornment to the hand. 
Only truth lends beauty to speech. The scriptures 
serve to adorn the ears. Man needs no more 
beautiful ornaments than these. The glory of Di -
vinity consists in sanctifying human existence by these ornaments.
The human body is a thing of marvellous beauty. 
Men cannot easily comprehend the secret of God’s 
creation. No one can explain how the eyes have acquired the power of seeing this phenomenal 
world. The beauty of all the organs in the human 
body is a secret of creation. Doctors try to find out 
how each sense organ and each limb functions. 
No one tries to find out why they are functioning 
in this manner. This secret can be grasped only 
through the Atmic, or Divine, Principle.
Human life is based on six constituents in the 
pancha bhuthas (five basic elements) and the 
Atma . To recognise this fact, three paths have to 
be pursued. One is to recognise within one’s self 
the presence of Nature and the Divine. A second 
path is to recognise the cosmic creation and one’s 
self in God. The third path is to see the presence 
of God and one’s self in Nature. It is only when 
knowledge is acquired by these three paths that 
Atma  jnana  (knowledge of the Self) arises. Charity is the ornament for the hand. Truth is the adornment for the tongue.
The scriptures are the ornaments for the ears. Of what avail are other ornaments?
This threefold path is termed prajna  (integrated 
awareness). Every man should try to understand 
this threefold path. This can be done at all times 
in all places. It has universal application. It has 
permanent validity everywhere but man gets in-
volved in what is impermanent and ever-changing.
Treat the Patient, Not the Disease
There are in the world today highly intelligent and experienced doctors of great renown. They 
are, however, concerned only with the cure of dis-
eases and not the redemption of the patient. It 
is more important to cure the mental condition 
of the patient than to relieve his physical illness. 
Doctors treat the disease and not the patient.
During the past two days, the doctors have been 
discussing how to cure diseases. They have 
presented statistics as to the number of cases 
handled, the number of cures effected and the incidence of mortality. The doctors have had 
some doubts about how all diseases are cured in 
our Sathya Sai Hospital. How does this happen? 
There is a good answer for this doubt. In regard 
to any action, if it is done with a pure heart and 
good intentions, it is bound to be successful. 
Man today regards self-interest as a way of life. 
This has become the philosophy of the modern 
world. But, we should consider tyaga  (sacrifice) 
76alone as the true philosophy for the world. When 
you approach the patient in a spirit of sacrifice, 
the patient’s feelings get purified.
Vibrations of Light around the Body
Our body is surrounded by Divine vibrations. If you look at the thumb, there are vibrations of light 
around it. Few attempt to recognise this phenom -
enon. The body is surrounded by vibrations of light. When these vibrations of light from one per -
son meet another’s, several good things happen.
There are two important organs for man. One is 
the heart and the other is the hand. The head is 
preoccupied with enquiring into mundane phe -
nomena. It is concerned with the external. Its fo -
cus is on objects outside. The heart looks at what is within. The concern with the external has been 
termed pravriti marga  (the path of externals). All 
man’s actions today, including the knowledge he acquires and the wealth he gets, are related to 
the pravriti marga . The six vices of kama (lust), 
krodha (anger), moha (infatuation), lobha (greed), 
madha  (pride), and mathsarya  (jealousy) are relat -
ed to the pravriti marga . These undergo constant 
changes. Because the body is associated with 
these qualities, it is also subject to change.
But the heart remains unchanging. It is associ -
ated with the nivriti marga  (the inward path). 
What are the qualities associated with the heart? 
Truth, compassion, love, forbearance, sympathy 
and sacrifice. These human qualities emanate 
from the heart. So, in human life, the head and 
the heart play crucial roles. These two are kept 
in balance by the hand. Thus, the heart, the head 
and the hand are the three Hs that are important 
in studying the human predicament.
Close Nexus between the
Mind and Prana
What are the causes of diseases of the heart? All 
diseases are a reflection of pravriti, the disposi -
tion of the mind. Hence, in worldly matters, man should follow the right path. In this context, two elements among the five basic elements are im -
portant. “Bhikshannam Deharakshartam, Vastram 
Seetha nivararanam”  (Food is essential for pro -
tecting the body; raiment is necessary for protec-tion against cold). Associated with food is water. 
These two occupy pride of place in human life.
Life is the subtle form of the water consumed by 
man. The mind is the subtle form of the food tak -
en by man. Hence, a close nexus should be es -
tablished between the mind and prana  (life force). 
As is the food, so is the head. Man’s thoughts, 
desires, and aspirations are related to the kind 
of food he consumes. For instance, you may dis -
cern from practical experience how food affects the mind. The cyclic process that starts with the 
formation of clouds and ends in the harvest of 
grain determines the kind of food one can have.
Heat (or fire) is the basis of this process. This fire 
is present within man as jatharagni , the digestive 
fire, which accounts for the conversion of the food consumed by man into various forms of en -
ergy. This fire has to be in proper balance. When the balance is upset, you have illness. The state 
of man’s body depends on the maintenance of 
this balance. Man’s entire life depends on pre-
serving this balance. 
When is the balance upset? When there is no 
mental steadiness. Men today develop all kinds of intellectual abilities but they have not learnt 
how to keep the mind steady. When serenity of 
mind is achieved, there will be no disease. Illness 
will not approach you at all.
Importance of Food in
Maintaining Health
There should be some regulations with regard to 
food. Many doctors emphasise the value of pro-
teins and recommend meat, eggs, etc. But pro-
teins obtained in this form serve only to build the 
body, but they do considerable harm to the mind. 
Doctors are primarily concerned with the gross 
physical body. They pay little attention to the 77subtle form of the mental makeup. Most of the 
diseases that are prevalent in the world today are 
related to the mind. Mental illnesses seem to out-
number physical ailments. The Vedanta  has de-
clared that the mind is the cause of man’s bond -
age or liberation. This means that the mind has to 
be used properly and turned Godward. Equally the 
mind is responsible for health or sickness.
In this context, food is all-important. Proteins are 
present in milk, curds and vegetables as much as 
in meat. If in the matter of diet the doctors give 
the right prescription, diseases can be averted.
Prevention Is Better Than Cure
In my view, instead of treating people after the 
onset of illness, it is better to ensure that they do 
not fall ill at all. Both doctors and the authorities 
should educate pregnant women about prenatal 
care of children in the womb. It is distressing to 
find that new-born babies suffer from congenital 
heart diseases. Dr. Iyer showed the picture of a 
smiling child that had grown up after a heart op -
eration shortly after birth. While one rejoices at such a sight, it is frightening to think of the oper -
ation that had to be done on a ten-day-old infant. 
In the case of congenital heart diseases, neither 
the parents nor the child can be happy. Nor can 
society be happy with such a situation. Some-
thing must be done to prevent heart troubles de -
veloping during pregnancy. There are medicines for preventing congenital heart ailments. For in -
stance, if the mother is given various vitamins, the child’s heart can be strengthened. The moth -
er should be taught all about prenatal care and given the necessary medicines. Pregnant women 
should be periodically checked in the hospital. It is better to take all preventive measures before 
the birth of a child than to carry the burden of 
bringing up a weak and crippled child all his life.
Doctors alone cannot impart this message to all 
women. They can only advise those who come to 
them. But doctors can bring home to the authori -ties their responsibility in the area of preventive 
measures. What is the use of spending crores on 
curative measures without promoting health? It 
is a waste of money. There are many hazards in 
the use of antibiotics in the treatment of certain diseases like tuberculosis and the use of pesti -
cides in agriculture.
Doctors Should Be Grateful to Society
Doctors should realise what they owe to society, which has preserved and imparted to them their 
knowledge of the medical sciences. Medical 
knowledge has been enriched by the contribu -
tions of dedicated investigators over centuries. Doctors should be grateful to society for all the 
knowledge and skills they have acquired from 
the dedicated labours of others. They should re -
alise their deep indebtedness to society for all they have received from it. Only then will they use 
their knowledge and skills in the right way.
People today think in terms of only their per -
sonal interests. They should develop a social 
consciousness, realising all they owe to society. 
Men today have become so utterly selfish that 
they behave in inhuman ways. They do not make 
proper use of their talents and resources in the 
service of their fellow men.
Doctors are embodiments of the Divine. As such, 
it is their duty to see that people do not shed 
tears of grief. They may doubt how far this is possible. Do as much as it lies within your power. 
What happens thereafter need not bother you. 
Treat duty as God and work as worship. If you 
carry on your work in this spirit, the world will be 
a happier place for all.
I have to give a word of advice to the doctors 
present here. There is a tendency to specialise 
in the treatment of heart diseases that has gone 
to absurd lengths. I would advise the doctors to 
treat the heart as a whole and not fragment ev -
ery part of it for specialised treatment. Speciali -
sation has grown to alarming proportions in the 78world today. Doctors should be “generalists, ” who 
know how to treat different ailments of a patient.
The heart teaches an important lesson to man. It 
appears to beat tirelessly without stopping. But, 
in fact, it is able to rest in brief intervals between 
one beat and another. The heart teaches you how 
to take rest even while at work. I often tell the 
students that “change of work is rest. ” This is the way the heart functions when it pumps the blood 
from one chamber to the other.
Lessons from the Human Cell
Few can realise the limitless potentialities of 
each cell in the human body. It is one of the great 
secrets of creation. The cells teach man the les -
son of tyaga  (sacrifice). For the progress of hu-
man life, sacrifice is essential.
The scripture declares that immortality can be 
attained only through sacrifice. Immortality 
means the removal of immorality. The various 
cells in the body account for the performance of 
various functions by the senses and the limbs of 
the body. The power of the cells comes from the Divine. No one can explain it. Modern scientists 
term it as a “law of Nature. ” But from where has 
this “law” emerged? There should be someone 
who has laid down the law? For every product, 
like this silver tumbler, there is a maker. 
Silver is God’s creation. The tumbler has been 
made by a goldsmith. It has not come as a ready-
made tumbler. You have on the earth water and 
clay. They are God’s creation. By mixing them 
both, the potter makes pots out of them. The cre -
ator of the pot is the potter. God is the Creator of the five elements – space, air, fire, water and 
earth. No one else can create these elements. But man makes use of these natural elements for 
making objects for his enjoyment. One man pro -
duces an aeroplane for flying and another makes a parachute for safety if something happens to 
the plane. Scientists should be concerned with 
producing things that ensure safety.How the Divine Works
In this connection, I should like to tell you some -
thing. Whether you believe it or not, I do not have any worry. When I embarked on the construction 
of such a big hospital (the Super Specialty Hos -
pital), Joga Rao used to say, “We are drawing up such gigantic plans. We don’t have enough mon -
ey. How are we going to construct this hospital?” He was highly apprehensive. I told him, “What we 
are undertaking is good work for the welfare of 
others. There is no selfishness in Me. We are do-
ing everything for the well-being of the world. Do 
not give room for these depressing thoughts. It is bound to come up. Have this confidence. ”
When does such confidence arise? When you 
know you are engaged in a good cause. There is 
a difference between an optimist and a pessimist 
when they view a glass half-full of water. The op-
timist is glad that the tumbler is half-full, while 
the pessimist is sorry that the tumbler is half-
empty. You should not give way to pessimism. 
You must feel content with whatever you have. 
With contentment, anything can be achieved.
Medical Education Should Lay Stress
on Quality
The plight of doctors (in India) deserves sympa -
thy. Many of them have to spend large sums to 
get seats in medical colleges and to complete 
their education. The doctor is worried how to 
recover the money that has been spent on his 
education. Something must be done to solve this 
problem. For instance, no one should be admit -
ted to a medical college merely because he is able to pay a large capitation fee (of lakhs). Only 
those who have the talent and aptitude for medi -
cal studies should be admitted. Such students 
will immensely benefit from medical education and will be of use to society. 
Today you must have either plenty of money or 
influential backing to get into a medical college. 
Students who get admitted this way take even 
twelve years to complete the five-year medical 79course. Of what use are such men? The stress 
should be on quality and not quantity in the 
sphere of medical studies.
In earlier years, medical students used to work 
hard, spending even 18 hours a day. Without such 
hard work, no one would get his degree. Alas! To -
day, things are otherwise. Students pass without much study. Such ill-educated doctors are a ca -
lamity to the nation. Not all doctors are of this 
kind. There are quite a few competent doctors. 
It is the duty of the medical profession to rectify 
this situation. They should contact the authori -
ties to bring about reforms. Only then will the na-tion progress.
We do not need many hospitals. Patients can be 
treated easily. In my view, there is no need for you 
to worry about money and resources. Treat your 
patients with love, Duty is God. This love should be mutual give-and-take. You may charge fees for 
your services, but do it with love. This is the right 
course for you. When you render service in this 
spirit, you will be successful in all cases. When 
you treat the patient with love, you will win the 
patient’s love. Hence your motto should be “Start 
the day with love, fill the day with love, and end 
the day with love. ” This is the way to God.
Our American doctor, who addressed the vale-
dictory session, said that doctors should speak sweetly to patients. Whatever you do should be 
filled with love. A patient feels reassured when he 
sees the smiling face of a doctor.
Tribute to Participants of the
Medical Conference
Embodiments of Divine Love!   You have come from 
long distances, undergoing many strains. Confer -
ences and symposia of all kinds are held all over the world all the time. But none of the decisions 
arrived at these gatherings are implemented. Our 
symposium is different. You have all come in a 
spirit of dedication. The decisions taken here 
should be implemented. You came here to learn from others as well as to share your experiences 
with others. You should return all the better for 
your visit. You should feel encouraged by your 
experiences here. Elated by this experience, you 
should be able to achieve many things. Return to your countries with joy in your hearts. You have 
had edifying experiences. 
It is fortunate that highly experienced doctors 
have been able to participate in this symposium. 
They have also visited our hospital and given 
many useful suggestions for enlarging its useful -
ness in the years ahead. We shall try to give ef -
fect to these suggestions. We are making plans 
for developing the urology and neurology wings. 
Please convey your experience and suggestions from time to time, and encourage our doctors to 
do better. 
We wish that you would also make occasional 
visits to our institute and hospital. You are always 
welcome. Do not have any hesitation. This is your 
hospital! Not mine. You are my property. Do not 
wait for invitations from here. There can be no ob-
jection to your coming to your own home.
Highly experienced professional men have come 
here. No conference could have taken place in 
such a peaceful atmosphere as here with such 
pure-hearted participants. In most conferences 
there are heated debates. Here everything was 
peaceful and calm. It was a sacred exercise. As 
Dr. Somaraju said, we have here a temple, where 
proper prayers should be offered. What should 
this prayer be? It is that all patients should get 
well. “Lokah Samasthaa Sukhino Bhavanthu!” (Let 
all people be happy).
I conclude my discourse with the benediction 
that in the years to come all people should lead 
healthy and ideal lives.
Address at the  
Cardiac Speciality Symposium  
on February 7, 1993 80
Food, the Heart and
the Mind
Embodiments of Divine Atma! It is es -
sential to observe the principle of 
moderation in food habits, work and 
sleep. The Buddha preached the same principle of moderation to his disciples. “Be always mod -
erate, never indulge in excess, ” proclaimed the Buddha. In fact, moderation is the royal road to 
happiness.
The modern man who flouts the principle of 
moderation in every aspect of life endangers 
his health and well-being. The food consumed by man should be proper, pure and wholesome. 
But nowadays people eat whatever they get 
and wherever they get it, and thereby spoil their 
health. Food plays a major role in the preserva -
tion of health. Care should be taken to see that the food consumed does not have much fat 
content, for fats consumed in large quantity are 
detrimental not only to one’s physical health but 
also to one’s mental health. Meat and alcoholic 
drinks take a heavy toll on man’s health, causing 
many a disease in him.
The Efficacy of Cardiac Surgery
This international symposium has for its theme “The Heart and Its Ailments. ” Also on the agenda 
are discussions about the preventive aspects of 
diseases as well as the treatment and cure of 
heart diseases. Questions are raised about the 
efficacy of cardiac surgery and its related ef -
fects. The heart is a special organ in the human system. It is pulsating ceaselessly unlike the 
other organs. Heart surgery is a highly complex 
operation, as the surgery has to be performed 
without arresting the heartbeat. At the same time, the functioning of the lungs also has to be 
kept up.
Medical men of genius invented the heart-lung 
machine in 1956 to carry on the activities of the 
heart as well as the lung during cardiac opera -
tions. The machine takes upon itself the function of the heart and the lung, ensuring purification of 
the blood and keeping up circulation of the blood. 
The details of the functioning of this heart-lung 
machine are well known to doctors. The tube 
that is fitted connecting the heart and the ma -
chine should be airtight and should be fixed with great care, for any lapse in the fitting of the tube 
may cause air bubbles that will endanger the pa-tient’s life. Unfailing power supply is most crucial 
for the success of the operation, as any inter -
ruption in power supply will stall the operation. Therefore, we have to depend on generators for 
ensuring uninterrupted power supply during the 
course of the operation.
Prevention Is Better Than Cure
Questions are posed whether heart surgery en-
sures a permanent cure. Cardiac surgery is help -
ful insofar as it enables the patient to carry on his daily activities and lead a normal life. But it 
is wrong to conclude that surgery is the only way 
of curing heart diseases. Some of the diseases 
can be cured even by medicine. In my opinion, it 
is the primary responsibility of every individual 
to prevent becoming a victim of heart disease by 
regulating his food and other habits. Prevention 
is better than cure. There will be little room for 
cardiac ailments if one’s food habits are properly controlled and regulated.
81Research has revealed that nonvegetarian and al -
coholic addicts are more prone to heart ailments 
than vegetarians. If the vegetarian food that is 
consumed should be balanced and wholesome, 
it should contain liberal doses of vitamin C and 
vitamin E, which are available in vegetables like 
carrots. The presence of these vitamins prevents 
heart ailments in a large measure. Every effort 
should be made to keep the human body healthy. 
Health is wealth. A person with poor health can -
not enjoy wealth. Health is more important be -
cause it gives physical and mental strength to a person.
Birds and beasts do not suffer from cardiac and 
digestive ailments to which man is prone. The 
cause can be traced to the natural food that the 
animals consume, unlike human beings who con -
sume all sorts of fried and cooked items of food, being slaves to the palate. Modern man con -
sumes many artificial foodstuffs and a variety of alcoholic drinks, which are injurious to health. 
Birds and beasts lead natural lives, while the ar -
tificial lifestyles of man today take a heavy toll 
on his health. When man observes moderation in 
diet, he can be saved from most diseases. 
In the entire range of God’s creation man alone 
is endowed with the faculty of discrimination. It 
is this faculty that sets him apart from animals. 
Man should exercise his discretion and discrimi -
nation in regard to food habits.
How to Bring about
Mental Transformation?
The progress of the universe is bound up with the 
progress of man. Any amount of development 
in the areas of scientific, economic and social 
spheres will not be of much use without men -
tal transformation. How can we bring about this transformation? It is by restraining passions and 
emotions. Since mental tension is most detri-
mental to man’s health, man should learn the art 
of controlling his passions and emotions, which 
cause stresses and strains. It is also essential to keep our mind serene and 
peaceful while eating food. We should not in -
dulge in discussion of topics that will cause 
agitation and excitement, and disturb our men -
tal peace while we are taking food. Mental ten -
sion is responsible for ill health. We should also 
avoid viewing TV, videos, etc., while eating food, 
as they may cause mental disturbances.
Today, there is pollution in everything, such as 
the air we breathe, the water we drink, the sounds 
that are jarring to the ears and the food we con-
sume. Because of this all-round pollution, man’s 
health is affected. Apart from this, man’s mind is also polluted, making him susceptible to dis -
eases. Man should make an earnest endeavour to lead a serene and pure life. He should realise 
the truth that troubles and turmoil are temporary, 
like passing clouds. There is no scope for agita-
tions to arise if one realises this truth. 
One who realises this truth will not allow his mind 
to be swayed by the passions of anger, cruelty, etc. 
Passions yield only temporary satisfaction but 
cause serious emotional disturbances. Hence, it is imperative on the part of man not to yield to 
any unbecoming passions while taking food. The 
observance of the three Ps, namely, purity, pa-
tience and perseverance, vouchsafes permanent 
happiness and good health free from diseases.
The Three Root Causes of
Cardiac Ailments
It is not only unbridled passion that damages the health of man. Living on ill-gotten money 
also causes ill health to some extent. Living on 
earnings gotten by unjust means causes many 
unknown diseases to take root in us. It is said:
As is the food, so is the mind;
As is the mind, so are the thoughts;
As are the thoughts, so is the conduct; 
As is the conduct, so is the health.
82Man today is a victim of worry. What is the cause 
of this worry? Lack of contentment is the cause. 
The rich man is not contented in spite of the ac -
cumulation of wealth. Worry causes hurry, and both together bring about ill health. So, worry, 
hurry and curry (fatty foods) are the root causes 
of cardiac ailments.
The consumption of large quantities of fat is 
the cause of cardiovascular diseases. Doctors 
advise against the consumption of fatty food -
stuffs, which cause an increase in weight, re -
sulting in susceptibility to cardiac diseases. The presence of toxins also inflicts equal damage. 
So one should eat the right type of food in mod -
erate quantity and avoid intoxicating drinks to safeguard his health. The intake of food should 
be gradually reduced after crossing 50 years.
Some people consume food indiscriminately, un -
mindful of the caloric content of the food taken. 
For example, people eat pappads (thin circular 
flour preparations) fried in oil, which have high 
calorie content. People also consume ghee , 
which is also a high-calorie food. A single pap-
pad has 100 to 150 calories of energy. A single 
spoonful of ghee  has 100 calories of energy. Even 
when the quantity of food intake is reduced, re -
duction in the calorie content is not ensured.
There are some doctors who advise their patients 
against smoking and addiction to alcohol, but 
they themselves smoke and drink! This gap be -
tween precept and practice raises doubts in the 
minds of patients about the value of the medical 
advice given by them. Such doctors, who do not 
observe harmony in speech and practice, mis -
lead the patients.
Triple Qualities That a Doctor
Should Reflect
Embodiments of Love! You have high degrees 
such as MD, FRCS, MRCP , etc., as a result of your 
sincere striving. But it is a mistake to think that 
these degrees are yours. In fact, these degrees have been conferred on you for your study, skill, 
memory power and knowledge. These degrees 
will truly belong to you on the day you apply this 
knowledge in practice. Unfortunately, in this mod -
ern age all activities and professions are tainted by a commercial outlook and greed for earning 
money. Even the sacred profession of a doctor 
has degenerated into a business. 
A doctor should reflect the triple qualities of 
sacrifice, love and compassion in treating his 
patients. But some doctors do not have these 
virtues at all! They misuse their Divine and sa -
cred knowledge for the sake of money. Money is important but we must exercise discretion in this 
regard. You can charge the correct fees for the 
wealthy but be kind and considerate while deal -
ing with the poor. Try to give free treatment to the poor. It is said, “Vaidyo Naarayano Hari”  (the 
doctor is equal to God). As the Lord has love and 
compassion, doctors too should have these Di -
vine virtues of the Lord. A doctor devoid of these virtues is not a doctor at all!
Doctors should win the hearts of the patients by 
talking to them with compassion and concern. 
Diseases are half cured when the doctors talk 
to the patients with love and consideration. The 
sick and the diseased respond favourably to your 
treatment once you start talking to them with 
love and with a smiling face. But, if you wear a grim expression, the patient loses heart. Doc -
tors should administer the injection of courage and encouragement, as calcium is administered 
to the weak. It is essential that doctors should 
have the sterling virtues of love and compassion. 
Compassion is more important than money.
Swami’s Example to Lead a Healthy Life
How to lead a healthy life? Let Me tell you about 
My own health. I am sixty-eight years old and, be-
lieve it or not, My weight since my fourteenth year 
of age has been constant at only 108 pounds. It 
never went up to 109 pounds nor came down to 
107. You can lead a healthy life once you achieve 
83this kind of balance and moderation. I never eat 
even a little bit excess. I observe the principle of 
moderation whether I am invited for food by a 
millionaire or a pauper. Even though I am sixty-
eight years, My body is in perfect trim! I do not 
suffer from aches and My heart is as sound as a 
rock. There is no one who can work like I do and 
exert himself as much as I do! The secret of My 
sound health is My regulated food habits. This is 
how one has to achieve the unity and harmony of 
food, head and God.
Spirit of Sacrifice of Some Doctors
The foremost quality of a doctor is the spirit of sacrifice. We have organised this symposium to 
explore ways and means of rendering help to the 
sick and the diseased. We have in India some doc -
tors who lead lives of sacrifice, like Dr. Venugopal, Dr. Bhan and Dr. Sampath from the All India Insti -
tute of Medical Sciences. These doctors, who are committed to the cause of service, come to our 
hospital without even charging their travelling ex-
penses. Their sacrifice contributes to the sanctity 
of this Institute of Higher Medical Sciences. 
There is an atmosphere of infective joy and good 
cheer that pervades our hospital. Everybody is in 
smiles – the patients, their relatives, the nurses, 
the doctors, everyone! They are all like flowers 
in full bloom. It is not the same with most other 
hospitals.
The essential mark of a hospital is its cleanli -
ness. Clean toilets are an index of the cleanliness 
of a hospital. Our hospital is as clean as a mirror, 
as it is kept always clean by the team of dedi -
cated seva dhal volunteers who relentlessly work 
hard with a spirit of service and sacrifice. It is not the service of one, but the service of many that 
has contributed to the rapid development of our 
hospital! A single flower cannot make a garland.
All the people – the patients, doctors and work -
ers – work in a spirit of harmony and unity. It is 
this sense of unity that contributes to purity, and this purity of heart secures Divinity. This hospital 
is a direct proof of the presence of purity, unity 
and Divinity. It is our fond hope that such purity, unity and Divinity should prevail in other hospi -
tals as well! Unity is most essential in all fields of activity – moral, scientific and spiritual. Purity 
vanishes in the absence of unity. Divinity will be 
absent when there is no purity and unity. Human -
ity will be healthier if doctors resolve to offer two days of free treatment every week.
You Can Work Wonders
with Purity of Heart
Some doctors wonder how we are able to give free treatment, free operations and free meals 
to our patients. To be frank, there should not 
be any room for wonder in this regard. You can 
work wonders with purity of heart. Any work that 
is started with purity of heart is bound to suc -
ceed. Money flows if your work is suffused with love and sacrifice. People will provide munificent 
funds to support any noble endeavour.
The land of Bharat  (India) has been a punya bhumi 
(land of sanctity), tyaga  bhumi (land of sacrifice), 
yoga  bhumi (land of spiritual austerities) and kar-
ma bhumi (land of righteous action). In fact, there 
is no dearth of money in India.Doctors should, first and foremost, have faith in 
spirituality. Faith in spirituality alone can bring 
about the transformation of humanity. Spiritual-
ity is not the celebration of festivals, not even the 
performance of rituals. True spirituality calls for 
earnest endeavour to eradicate all animal quali -
ties. Today humanity has descended to such a 
degrading level that men see evil in good, without 
trying to see good in evil.
Doctors who are eminent experts in their fields 
have come to participate in the symposium here. 
Sincere efforts should be made to put your great 
talents and skill to good use. The climes and 
countries from which you have come may be dif -
84ferent but all of you have one thing in common – noble feelings. These noble feelings are God’s gift to 
man and come by Divine grace.
Treat the patients as your own kith and kin. The help that you extend in good faith to your patients will 
be rewarded in the course of time. It is My wish and blessing that you will have useful discussions and 
come out with ways and means of helping mankind to be free from heart ailments.
Divine Discourse at  
the Second International Symposium on Cardio-vascular Diseases  
on January 21, 1994
Sathya Sai International 
Medical Conference
85D octors should infuse courage in the patients and speak soothingly, 
radiating compassion and love. While you are examining the patients, you 
should have smiling faces and talk to the patients sweetly.
-Sri Sathya Sai Baba,  
February 6, 1993
86Sathya Sai Ideal Healthcare
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s vision of ideal healthcare is predicated 
on six principles. These principles are based on a strong commitment to 
universal state-of-the-art healthcare.
871 Universal Healthcare : Bhagawan has re-
peatedly emphasised that state-of-the-art 
healthcare should be available to all people and 
especially the poor. In keeping with this commit-
ment, He has established a chain of super-spe -
cialty and general hospitals, delivering the best medical care to all. In addition, with His guidance 
and blessings, healthcare professionals provide 
free healthcare in over 30 countries.
“Doctors should serve the poor with a spirit of 
sacrifice. There is no greater service than this. As man is the embodiment of God, it is his primary 
duty to help the destitute and the forlorn. Medicine 
should not be commercialised. It is meant to pro -
mote a heart-to-heart and love-to-love relationship between doctor and patient. A true doctor is one 
who realises this truth and conducts himself ac -
cordingly.”
    –Sri Sathya Sai Baba, 2003
2 Free Healthcare : Bhagawan has deemed 
that high-quality healthcare should be deliv -
ered free of cost to all patients so that no one 
is prevented from receiving the highest benefits 
of healthcare. Every Sri Sathya Sai Hospital and 
the international Sri Sathya Sai clinics and medi -
cal camps deliver such care free of cost to the patients.“Welfare services should be free for all. There are numerous people who cannot afford the costs of 
medical treatment. Doctors should render free ser-
vice to such persons.”
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba, 1995
3 Loving Healthcare : Bhagawan has pre-
scribed that healthcare workers should de-
liver this care with love and compassion, thereby elevating the healthcare worker to a healer.
“If the doctor is full of love and compassion, God 
works through him. Doctors therefore have to en -
deavour to become the receptacles of Divine Power during their healing process.”
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba, 1980
4 Comprehensive Healthcare : Medical care 
is for the whole patient. Ideal healthcare 
encompasses treatment of the body, mind and 
Spirit.
“Man suffers from two types of ills, physical and 
mental. They are caused by disequilibrium of the 
three tempers and three gunas. Physical health is 
a prerequisite for mental health, and mental health 
ensures physical health.”
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba, 1959885 Preventive Healthcare:  Bhagawan Sri Sath-
ya Sai Baba has said that the duty of the 
physician is not only to treat with love and com -
passion but also to educate patients in healthy 
living and thus prevent frequent visits to the phy -
sician and hospitals.
“The current belief is that medicine is to be valued 
for its use during illness. But this point of view has 
to change. Medicine is used to see that one does 
not fall ill, just as the purpose of truth is to so live 
that one is not subjected to birth again.”
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba, 19806 Immediate Healthcare: Bhagawan Sri Sath-
ya Sai Baba emphasises that state of the 
art healthcare should be delivered with love and compassion promptly and immediately to serve 
the patients in distress.
“Sick people must be given immediate medical at-
tention.”
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba, 1967Chapter
Seven
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba
on Harmony of Religions
90
Everyone Is a Son of God
Embodiments of Love!  Nature confers 
heat and cold, and joy and grief. In 
one season, cold is most welcome 
as a source of comfort. Another season, warmth is equally welcomed. Both give comfort to man 
when he needs it. Hence, both heat and cold 
have to be welcomed by man. Both contribute 
to man’s comfort and contentment. Time, space 
and circumstance decide their use and their val -
ue. This attitude of accepting the inescapable fact is what is proclaimed and praised as se -
renity, equanimity, Samathwam , in the Bhagavad 
Gita. The Bhagavad Gita  says, Samathwam Yogam 
uchyathe (Equanimity, equal-mindedness and 
steadiness is known as yoga ).
The Bhagavad Gita  also declares, Yogah Karmasu 
Kousalam ( Yoga  is the quality of excellence that 
has to characterise every act). Happiness and misery, success and failure, obstacles and ob -
struction, defaming and denigration, and praise and criticism are all intertwined; they can nev -
er be experienced singly. But man is elated by 
gain and depressed by loss. When praised, he is He who is known as Allah by Muslims,
As Jehovah by Christian aspirants,
As the Lotus-eyed Lord by the worshippers of Vishnu,
As Sambhu, by those who revere Shiva.
Howsoever He is worshipped,
He gladly responds, grants the grace of fame and fortune,
And showers happiness and joy.
He is the One, the Supreme Self.
Know Him as Param-Atma.
elated; when blamed, he droops. But man has to keep in mind that these are only phenomena like 
heat and cold.
Discrimination is the
Distinct Feature of Man
That is the prescription for mental peace and 
social serenity. Consider the reality of things 
– mountain peaks are only heaps of rocks, the 
ground on which we dwell is only a mound of soil, 
the body we carry about with us is but flesh and 
bone, composites of the five main elements – 
space, air, fire, water and earth. New forms and 
names are assigned to distinct patterns of the 
same forces and things that demonstrate dis -
tinct characteristics. Over millennia, Bharat  has 
been proclaiming and propagating this holistic 
spiritual truth and the consequential outlook of renunciation and serenity. “Through renunciation 
alone, can you attain immortality, ” declare the 
Veda! This truth must be implanted in the mind 
by discriminating reason. That is why Sri Krishna 
says, “I am discrimination in the human being. ” 
That is the distinct feature of man.
91In the Bhagavatha  Purana  it is said each living be-
ing has to journey back to the source from where 
it sprang. Real joy is available only there. A man 
may travel on business through many lands and 
stay in several towns in great comfort, but he 
gets rest and peace only when he reaches home. 
The earthly career is but a stage in his long jour-
ney, where he has camped for a while. The camp 
is not to be confused with the home but many do 
and refuse to remember the home. 
All that concerns the Atma  is delight and all that 
concerns the self is misery. This is the Upani-
shadic declaration. Man loses himself in fights 
and factions, greed and gain, and ignores the 
source, the substance that he is. 
Be Ever Watchful of
Mind’s Machinations
The trouble starts with his habit of fixing his 
thoughts on some thing or person. The thought 
becomes a thorn, a theme, a trap and, finally, an 
enslaving desire. When the desire meets with ob-
stacles, anger wells up and emotions are aroused, 
which might even overwhelm the humanness of 
the individual. The person loses the capacity to 
distinguish between right and wrong and slides 
into sin itself.
How can the mind that leads us along the path 
of desire, anger, passion, prejudice and sin be kept under control? The senses that tempt and 
tarnish the mind have first to be monitored and 
mastered.
Cultivate the style of speech uncontaminated 
by falsehood, the bodily activity unpolluted by 
violence and the mental process unsullied by at-
tachment or hatred. Also, direct the senses along 
the path towards God. The mind robs you of the 
precious treasure of spiritual wealth. Be ever 
watchful of its machinations.
In the Bible, it is said that God seeks His own. 
Ponder over this. God is everywhere at all times. He need not be sought anywhere, anytime. But 
God has to seek those who seek Him and strug-
gle to become aware of Him. Whom does God 
seek? He looks for a sincere, genuine, selfless 
and steady devotee. 
Besides, He seeks an ideal son who can be held 
before mankind as an example and an inspira -
tion. Such persons have become extremely rare 
nowadays. They style themselves devotees but 
they weep and wail when they really ought to be 
exulting; they exult when they have every reason 
to weep and wail! So, the Lord says:
I am searching, I am searching, still searching.
I searched in the past, I search, and search now,
For the man knowing and observing
his Dharma true.
Christ announced Himself as the Messenger of 
God. He identified His body as having been given 
to Him for alleviating human misery and serving 
the helpless and the homeless. He denied the 
demand of the flesh and devoted His skills and 
strength to relieving agony and pain. Then when 
the consciousness rose to the level of the mind, 
He became aware that He was the Son of God. 
He strove hard to discover the distinction be-
tween appearance and reality, between truth 
and mental image, and He became aware of the higher level of consciousness that transcends 
the vagaries of the mind. From that peak of intel-
ligence, He became aware that “I and My Father 
are one. ” And both are one single manifestation 
of the Divine Essence, the Holy Spirit.
Lessons that Jesus Taught
and Symbolised
The birthday of every great person is celebrated by those who adore and follow him. This day be -
ing the birthday of Jesus is a holiday when offic -
es and factories do not work. It is not sanctified 
as a holy day. People attend church and join the 
rituals but return home to revel, drink and dance. 
92The Cross is forgotten when the Christmas sea-
son is on. The day must be dedicated to the puri-
fication of one’s passions and emotions through 
meditation on the virtues and values that Jesus 
taught.
Today, man runs after desires and he does not 
pursue ideals. He yearns for long life, not for a 
life lived in God. He does not recognise or follow 
the footprints of the great. Man has reduced him -
self to the position of a servant of the household who has no means of knowing where the master has treasured his most precious gems. If he is 
the master, he ought to know. But having failed to 
rise to that status, he is unaware of the treasure 
he can command.
Each one has to examine for himself whether he 
is clinging to trinkets or conserving gems. A lamp 
kept on a mound illumines the area; if kept in a 
pit, it is as if it were not. A virtue that is practised 
is a lamp that shines for all – good thoughts and 
good deeds have a way of influencing others. The gems of wisdom, the light of intuitive experi -
ence, should not be kept away from fellow men. 
They have to be shared even at the cost of one’s 
life. That was the lesson Jesus taught and sym -
bolised.
Love Binds One Heart to Another
Derision and denunciation follow the footsteps of the great in all ages. They haunt them like 
the shadow that cannot be avoided. His own 
disciples turned against Jesus, even those who 
adored him and hung on his words. They did evil 
to him who did them good. But Jesus wished well 
for those who insulted and injured him. 
This is a lesson badly needed today. No one 
should count the harm inflicted on him and plan 
revenge. He must on the other hand return love 
for hatred and fraternity for enmity. To behave otherwise is a sign of weakness, of want of cour -
age and of lack of faith in human goodness. Je -
sus won in this holy struggle. On this day, we 
Christmas Celebrations
93must cultivate in ourselves that conviction and 
that courage.
Far more beneficial than honouring the great is 
the practice of loving them. Praise, glorification 
and eulogy raise them onto an unreachable ped -
estal. Love binds one heart to another. Gratitude for the inspiration and instruction received must 
bind the hearts in love. The celebration of Christ-
mas should not conclude with some carols, tab -
leaux, and made-up trees and Santa Claus. It must be soaked in the resolution to practise at least a few of the lessons Jesus taught us. The 
very first need is faith in God and in our own Di -
vine Nature.
Where there is Faith, there is Love, 
Where there is Love, there is Peace, 
Where there is Peace, there is Truth, 
Where there is Truth, there is Bliss, 
Where there is Bliss, there is God.
The yearning for bliss is the best proof of our 
holy nature. Man is bliss and he seeks bliss; bliss 
is blessedness for him. Since God is bliss, happi -
ness is union with God. Nothing else can award that joy, which is unaffected by whatever hap-
pens or does not happen. 
The heart of Jesus was pure and calm. Hence, it 
is honoured as sacred. We must make our hearts 
sacred so that either we merge in Jesus or Jesus 
merges in us. When we merge, it is called bhak-
ti; to have Jesus awakened in us is the path of 
jnana . Jesus was a messenger of God, but note 
this: all of you are also messengers of God. Je-sus was not the only Son of God; you are all His 
children. Jesus and His Father are one. You and 
God are also one, and you can be aware of it.
You Are with God but
Not Aware of the Fortune
Today, people from many lands have gathered at Prasanthi Nilayam. Having come from such 
long distances, undergone so much trouble on the way, and stayed here, you have to take with 
you from here at least a few sublime, sustaining 
lessons for spiritual progress. Instead of going 
round India, as tourists do, and collecting im-
pressions of places as thus and thus, imbibe the 
sacred and the holy, and transform your lives on 
more worthwhile lines.
You must pay attention to one slight fact. Indi -
ans are not eager to identify and benefit from 
the lessons of their Divine culture! Right under 
the lamp that is lit there is bound to be a patch 
of darkness. If one spends all twenty-four hours 
in an air-conditioned room, he cannot appreci -
ate or evaluate its blessing. But if he has to walk through the hot sun for an hour, he will surely be 
grateful and gratified. 
There are thousands in this Nilayam who keep 
on exclaiming, “Swami! Swami!” but who have 
not recognised the immense boon they have se -
cured.
When a baby gulps down the first morsel of 
cooked rice that is ceremonially placed in its 
mouth, everyone is happy; the parents are 
pleased and the child is admired. When the child 
grows and consumes plates of rice, no one ex -
presses wonder, pride or admiration. Why? The person is the same and the thing eaten is the 
same. The eating has become routine, repetitive, 
mechanical, a kind of compulsive habit.
You too, like everyone else, are with God, in God. 
But, you are not aware of that fortune. You are 
struck with strange wonder and joy when you see 
God during meditation; you are overcome with 
ecstasy. You have been looking at me for such 
a long time now here in front of you. Yet, believe 
me, when you go back to your rooms and when 
I give you darshan (audience) even for a second 
while you sit for meditation, you are beside your -
self with joy: “O! Swami gave me darshan!” 
94The fact is that it is only something beyond the 
natural, above the ordinary, that arouses interest. 
So one must overcome this failing. Spiritual joy, 
wonder, appreciation, the darshan of God must 
become the life, the natural breath of life, the 
very raison d’ etre of existence in the body. This 
is what Jesus taught by precept and example to mankind, the Atmic Principle that is the eternal 
source of bliss.Embodiments of Love! Whatever activity you may 
be engaged in, wherever you may be, however you may fare, be convinced that you are ever in 
God, that all is Divine, that all acts are offerings 
to the glory of God, and thus make your lives full 
and fruitful.
Divine Discourse  
on December 25, 1982 
95The hallmark of love is tyaga (selfless sacrifice). Love seeks nothing from 
anyone. It bears no ill-will towards anyone. It is utterly selfless and pure … 
Love has to be cherished with feelings of selflessness and sacrifice. It raises 
the human being from animality to Divinity. It transforms gradually all forms 
of worldly love to Divine Love. To experience this Divine Love, people must 
be prepared to give up selfishness and self-interest. They must develop purity 
and steadfastness. With firm faith in the Divine, they must foster the love of 
God regardless of all obstacles and ordeals.
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba,  
June 20, 1996
96Attain Enlightenment
by Renouncing Desire
Embodiments of Love! On this sacred 
day of Buddha Poornima,  we talk 
about Buddha and Poornima (full 
moon). But we seldom inquire into Buddha’s 
teachings, his virtues and the exemplary way in 
which he led his life. 
King Suddhodhana and his wife, Mayadevi, per -
formed many spiritual austerities such as japa, 
tapa, vratas and yajnas for years together with 
an aspiration to have a son. They also consulted 
many astrologers. Suddhodhana had no peace of mind as the worry of not having an heir to the 
throne haunted him day and night. At last, their 
prayers were answered when Mayadevi gave 
birth to a son at Lumbini. Unfortunately, May -
adevi died soon after giving birth to her son, who was named Siddhartha. Gautami, the second 
wife of Suddhodhana, brought up the child with 
loving care, like her own son. That is the reason 
he was also called Gautam. 
The astrologers predicted that Siddhartha would 
not rule the kingdom — he would leave the king -
dom and become a renunciant. The prediction of the astrologers was always ringing in the ears 
of Suddhodhana and caused him anxiety as he All the names and forms are but the manifestations of the Supreme Being
Who is Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute and non-dual.
He is the embodiment of Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram (Truth, Goodness, Beauty).
                (Sanskrit Verse)
watched his son grow. He took all precautions 
to see that his son did not step out of the pal-
ace and get into the company of others lest he 
should be influenced by them. Thus, he protected 
his son from the influence of others for twenty 
long years. 
Siddhartha’s Yearning for
Ultimate Truth 
One day, the parents of a girl came to Suddhod -
hana and expressed their wish to give their 
daughter in marriage to his son, Siddhartha. The 
name of the girl was Yashodhara. Suddhodhana 
accepted their proposal and performed the mar-
riage of Siddhartha with Yashodhara. Owing to 
their loving insistence, Siddhartha continued to 
stay with his parents in the palace even after the 
marriage. One year after the marriage, they had 
a son, who was named Rahul. Both the husband 
and wife spent their time happily with their son. 
In spite of all the comforts of the palace and a 
happy married life, Gautam’s mind became rest -
less when he saw people afflicted with old age, disease and death after he ventured out of the 
palace one day. One night, there was a sudden 
transformation in his mind. As his wife was fast 
97asleep, he got up at midnight, caressed his son 
and left for the forest. He had to undergo numer -
ous hardships and difficulties in the forest. But he faced all ordeals with forbearance and deter-
mination. His parents were immersed in sorrow, 
unable to bear the pangs of separation from their 
son. Though Siddhartha was also undergoing a 
lot of anguish, he marched on his path of attain -
ing self-realisation. 
During the course of his journey, he once met a 
holy man. The holy man told him that the cause of his anguish was actually within him, and it 
was his anguish that was coming in the way of 
his self-realisation. So saying, he gave him a tal -
isman for protection and asked him to wear it around his neck. (At this point in time, Bhagawan 
materialised that talisman and showed it to the 
congregation amidst thunderous applause). This 
was the talisman given by the sage to Siddhartha. 
When Siddhartha put it around his neck, all his 
anguish disappeared instantaneously. Till the last moment of his earthly sojourn, Buddha had 
the talisman around his neck. When he shed his 
mortal coil, the talisman disappeared.
Siddhartha started doing intense penance, which 
went on for a long time. He kept questioning him -
self, “Who am I? Am I the body? Am I the mind? Am I the buddhi  (intellect)? Am I the chitta (mind-
stuff)?” He came to the conclusion that he was none of these. Ultimately, he experienced the 
truth, “I am I. ” 
Recognise the Unity of All Creation
The Vedas  declare, Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brah -
man) and Tattwamasi  (That Thou Art). Even these 
two Vedic declarations state two things: I and 
Brahman; That and Thou. True wisdom lies in 
seeing oneness. Advaita Darshanam Jnanam  (ex-
perience of non-dualism is true wisdom). It is a sign of ignorance to see duality, ignoring the 
underlying unity. Duality is not the truth. In this 
manner, Buddha inquired deeply and ultimately had the experience of “I am I. ” That is true reali -
sation. You may do penance for many years, you may do meditation and perform many yogic prac-
tices, but all these spiritual practices give only 
temporary satisfaction, not everlasting bliss. 
Some people talk about meditation. Even Buddha 
advocated the practice of meditation. What is it 
that you have to meditate upon? What is meant 
by meditation? Does it mean concentrating upon 
a particular object? No, no. That is not medita -
tion at all. To contemplate on the principle of “I am I” is true meditation. No other sadhana (spiri-
tual practice) can match this. 
So long as you have the dualistic feeling of “you 
and I, ” you cannot experience unity. Buddha 
recognised the principle of unity and based his 
life on this truth. Under the direction of many yo -
gis, he had performed various kinds of meditation and penance, but ultimately he found them to be 
a mere waste of time, as none of these could lead 
him to the ultimate experience of oneness. He re-
gretted having wasted his time in such a manner. 
One should find fulfilment in life by making prop -
er use of time. This is the primary duty of man.
Embodiments of Love! Many people perform dif -
ferent types of spiritual practices such as japa 
and dhyana without recognising the principle of 
unity. The tongue utters the name of Rama but 
there is a void in the heart. This is just a waste 
of time. Instead of wasting your time in such a 
manner, undertake social service, seeing God in 
everyone. That is true spiritual practice. Recog -
nise the innate Divinity of all beings. 
In creation, there appear to be two entities, you 
and I. But you and I are in reality one. Vyashti (in-
dividual) is a part of samashti  (society), and sa-
mashti is a part of srishti  (creation), which emerg-
es from Parameshti  (God). This Parameshti
 is 
Parabrahma Tattwa  (principle of Brahman). That 
is the fundamental basis of the entire creation. 
In this way, you have to recognise the unity of all 
98creation. Only then can you attain Parameshti , 
or the principle of Brahman. Everyone has to re -
peatedly remind himself, “I am Parameshti,  I am 
Parameshti .”  
All are the embodiments of the Atma , and all 
are sustained by the Atma . Buddha experienced 
the unity of all creation. There was a total trans -
formation in him once he attained the vision of 
ekatma  (oneness of the Atma). He realised that all 
worldly relations like mother, father, wife and chil-dren were false. He transcended body conscious -
ness. That is why he earned the appellation Bud-
dha (enlightened one). Man should use his buddhi  
(intelligence) to understand this principle of unity. 
Buddhi  is of two types. The buddhi  that sees di -
versity in unity is worldly knowledge. Man should 
develop adhyatmic buddhi (spiritual knowledge) 
in order to realise the underlying unity of all cre -
ation. It gives you the experience of the Atmic  
principle, which is the same in the entire creation. Buddha attained the vision of the Atma . After this 
experience, he went on teaching that there exist -
ed only one Divine Principle in the world. 
Buddham Saranam Gachchhami, 
Sangham Saranam Gachchhami, 
Dhammam Saranam Gachchhami. 
Buddha taught that the principle of unity of the 
Atma  was the only true principle in the world. One 
who realised it by using his spiritual intelligence was true Buddha, He said. Other than the Atma  
nothing existed in this world. 
In this transient and ephemeral world, there is 
one thing that is true and eternal. That is Divin -
ity. That is what everyone should aspire to attain. Sathyam Saranam Gachchhami  (I take refuge in 
truth). Ekam Saranam Gachchhami  (I take refuge 
in the principle of oneness). Everything is the 
manifestation of Divinity in this world — there is 
no second entity other than Divinity. It is the Di -
vine Principle that governs the entire world. Having realised this truth, Buddha, along with his 
disciples, went from village to village to propa -
gate it. He never felt the need to take rest. He thought that it was his duty to share this su -
preme knowledge with his fellow men. Even his father Suddhodhana came to him. He also recog -
nised this truth and was transformed. 
What did Buddha teach? Buddha taught that ev -
eryone was endowed with the same principle of 
Divinity. Ekam Sath Viprah Bahudha Vadanti (Truth 
is one, but the wise refer to it by various names). 
The same message was conveyed by Lord Krish -
na in the Bhagavad Gita  when He said that all be-
ings were His own reflection, and no one was dif -
ferent from Him. 
Buddha had to undergo great hardships to re -
alise this truth. Many noble souls who were the 
contemporaries of Buddha acknowledged the 
greatness of Buddha. They said that Buddha had 
experienced the truth that they were unable to re -
alise. As he gave up all desires, Buddha became 
an epitome of total renunciation. There was noth-
ing in him except love. He considered love as his 
very life-breath. Bereft of love, the world would 
turn into a void. 
Try to Understand the Profundity of 
Buddha’s Teachings
When you offer your salutations to someone, un -
derstand that you are saluting your own self. That someone is none other than your own reflection. 
See others just as you see your own reflection 
in the mirror. This is the message conveyed by 
the mahavakya (profound statement), Aham Brah-
masmi. Names and forms may be different but all beings are part and parcel of the same Divine 
Principle. You may call this a handkerchief. You may call this a robe. But both are made out of 
cotton. Likewise, Divinity is the underlying prin-
ciple in the apparent multiplicity of this world. 
Many so-called scholars are preaching only mul -
tiplicity today. They claim to have mastered the 
99scriptures and try to interpret them in their own 
way with their limited knowledge. Their interpre -
tations do not correspond to the reality. They only add to the confusion. 
Buddha taught that we should not have anger, we 
should not find others’ faults and we should not 
harm others, because all are the embodiments 
of the pure, eternal principle of the Atma . Have 
compassion towards the poor and help them to the extent possible. You think those who do not 
have food to eat are poor people. You cannot call someone poor just because he does not have 
money or food to eat. Truly speaking, nobody 
is poor. All are rich, not poor. Those whom you 
consider as poor may not have money, but all are 
endowed with the wealth of hridaya (heart filled 
with compassion). Understand and respect this 
underlying principle of unity and Divinity in all, 
and experience bliss. 
Do not have such narrow considerations as so-
and-so is your friend, so-and-so is your enemy, so-and-so is your relation, etc. All are one, be alike to everyone. That is your primary duty. This is the most important teaching of Buddha. But 
people do not inquire into the teachings of Bud -
dha and do not understand the sacredness of his heart. They only talk about his story. 
Truly speaking, Buddha is not just one individual. 
All of you are Buddhas. You will see unity every -
where once you understand this truth. There is unity in the apparent multiplicity. When you are 
surrounded by many mirrors, you see a number 
of your reflections. Reflections are many, but the person is one. Reactions, reflections and re-
sounds are many, but the reality is one. When I 
am speaking here, My voice is heard through 
each and every loudspeaker in this hall. In the 
same manner, there exists the principle of unity 
in our hearts that we have to recognise. 
Man’s life finds fulfilment only when his mind ex -
periences the principle of unity. There is no point 
in bringing about unity among people without 
uniting their minds. Mana Eva Manushyanam Ka-ranam Bandhamokshayo  (Mind is the cause for 
100bondage and liberation of man). You see some -
one and say he is a bad person; you see another 
person and call him good. But, in reality, good 
and bad are present in your mind and not in the 
people around you. 
You call this handkerchief white and this micro -
phone black. The difference in colour is perceived 
by your eyes but essentially black and white are 
one and the same. Everyone should make efforts 
to visualise unity in diversity. Only then can one 
experience Divinity. 
The principles taught by Buddha have profound 
significance but people are not trying to under -
stand them. You might have observed that Bud -
dha had curly hair on his head. One lock of hair 
was entwined with the other. There is an under-
lying message of unity in this. He had only one 
feeling in his heart, the feeling of love. He taught, 
Dharmam Saranam Gachchhami  (I take refuge in 
righteousness) and Premam Saranam Gachchhami  
(I take refuge in love). Bereft of love, humanness has no existence. We should love all, irrespective 
of whether one is a pauper or a rich man. 
Money should not be the criterion to share your 
love with your fellow men. Money is not impor-
tant. Money comes and goes, morality comes 
and grows. Do not hurt others. Help ever, Hurt 
never. Only then can you attain the state of Bud-
dha. There is little use in giving lengthy lectures 
if you do not realise the principle of unity in Divin -
ity. You may call God by any name such as Rama, 
Krishna, Buddha, Sai, etc., but all of them embody 
the same Divine Principle. 
Keep the flower of oneness in the altar of your 
heart and let its fragrance spread everywhere. 
Spiritual practices such as japa and tapa  will not 
yield the desired result unless you recognise the principle of unity. Many people count the beads of 
the rosary. But what is the use of rotating the ro -
sary if the mind also keeps going round the world? Understand that the mind is most important. You should have a steady mind. Only then will your 
life be redeemed. What is the use if your mind 
hovers around on each and every object like flies 
that hover on dirt as well as laddus (sweets)? 
Do not allow your mind to vacillate between 
good and bad, unity and multiplicity. Focus it on 
all that is good and realise the principle of unity. 
That is the royal road that will lead you to the ex -
perience of truth. On the other hand, if you allow your mind to follow the crooked path, it will not lead you anywhere.
Embodiments of Love! The same Divine Principle 
of love is present in all of you. When you take to 
the path of love, you will become Buddha your -
self. Today is Buddha Poornima.  Poornima means 
full moon. The underlying message of Buddha 
Poornima is that the mind should shine with total purity like the full moon. It should unite with its 
source, i.e., the Atma,  which is pure and effulgent. 
There is no darkness on the full moon night. 
On this auspicious day of Buddha Poornima,  we 
should attain full purity of the mind.
Poornamada Poornamidam,
Poornat Poornamudachyate,
Poornasya Poornamadaya,
Poornamevavashishyate.
(That is full, this is full. When the full is taken out of the full, what remains is again the full.)
We have to recognise this truth.
Embodiments of Love! It gives Me great joy to see 
that all of you have gathered here today. You are 
united with each other with the bond of love. 
Love is only one; it is not different in you, Me and 
others. You have unified your love with that of Swami. Love is one. Live in love.
Divine Discourse  
on May 13, 2006
101102
Chapter
Eight
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s Message
to Sadhakas  (spiritual aspirants)
103
104Kshama , the Grandest and
Noblest Virtue
Embodiments of Love! Boys and Girls! 
True and selfless love manifests as 
sacrifice. Such love knows no hatred. 
It envelops the entire universe and is capable of drawing near even those who are seemingly far 
away. It is love that transforms the human into 
the Divine. It can transform pasu (a bestial per -
son) into Pasupathi (Divinity). 
In the phenomenal world, you come across many shades and derivatives of this primordial 
love. You love your father, mother, brother, sis -
ter, friends and so on. In all such cases, there is 
always a tinge of selfishness somewhere or the 
other. Divine love, on the other hand, is totally 
free of even the slightest trace of selfishness. 
You must surrender to such love, become com -
pletely submerged by it and experience the bliss it confers.
Kshama  Is the Breath of Life
For acquiring such love, the quality of kshama, 
or forbearance, is a vital necessity. (Kshama is 
a word rich in meaning. Besides forbearance, it also implies extreme patience and an enormous Love being His form,
He is present everywhere as Love;
Become bonded to this Love
And strengthen your spirit;
For this will lead you to
The Pure Bliss of non-duality.
capacity to forget and also forgive. In view of this, the word kshama is directly used in most places 
in order not to dilute Bhagawan’s emphasis.) Ev -
ery individual must cultivate this noble quality. 
Kshama is not achieved by reading books or 
learnt from an instructor. Nor can it be received 
as a gift from someone else. This prime virtue 
kshama can be acquired solely by self-effort, by 
facing squarely diverse problems, difficulties of 
various sorts, anxieties, and suffering, as well as 
sorrow. In the absence of kshama, man becomes 
susceptible to all kinds of evil tendencies. Hatred 
and jealousy easily take root in a person lacking 
this virtue.
Divinity is nothing but the combined manifesta -
tion of prema and kshama. At one stroke, kshama  
subsumes  sathya, dharma  and the entire Vedas . It 
is the greatest among tapas (penance). It is the 
grandest and the noblest among virtues. It is all 
encompassing. The Mahabharata  and the Srimad 
Bhagavatam  both contain many episodes that il -
lustrate the disaster that befalls when kshama is 
lost. 
105Jealousy is the first bad quality that makes its 
entry when kshama makes its exit. The Mahab-
harata  gives a graphic portrayal of how life that 
is otherwise smooth can be totally shattered by 
jealousy. The golden island Lanka was like the 
very heavens, but Ravana’s jealousy reduced it 
to ruins. Whereas kshama can give complete pro-
tection, its absence can plunge one into distress and disaster. 
Impatience breeds selfishness and promotes 
jealousy, which together spur infighting and di -
visive tendencies of various kinds. The troubles 
the country is currently passing through are 
largely due to the absence of this noble quality of 
kshama. Impatience has ruined even very great 
spiritual aspirants. 
Likewise, kings have been reduced to beggars. 
Absence of kshama can make yogulu (yogis) into 
rogulu (sick persons). Without kshama,  mankind 
becomes degraded and starts declining, but if it 
has this quality, then it can progress by leaps and bounds. Kshama is thus the very breath of life.
Can there be smoke without fire?
Can a car move without a driver?
Can a traffic light flash without a bulb?
How then can there be Creation without a Creator?
Everything must have a basis. For spiritual prog-ress and advancement, kshama is the real basis 
or foundation. When kshama disappears, distur-
bance sets in and there is a decline.
Great countries have lost their glory, prestige and 
reputation for this reason. Therefore, patience 
is a vital virtue that must be assiduously culti -
vated if one is to successfully face troubles and tribulations. Without patience and the capacity 
for forbearance, one becomes spiritually weak. 
Such weakness leads to bad feelings, undesir -
able thoughts and unbecoming actions. When patience is gone, the greatest of men get reduced 
to utter fools.The importance of kshama cannot be over-stressed. This virtue is best cultivated under 
adverse circumstances and one must, there -
fore, gladly welcome troubles instead of regard -
ing them as unwelcome. Difficulties help one to 
nurse and build the capacity for patience, as the 
example of the Pandavas clearly shows. When 
they were in power and authority, the Pandavas 
were somewhat deficient in kshama, but once 
they went into exile and had to face numerous hardships, kshama automatically began to de-
velop in them. 
Thus, times of distress offer the ideal opportu -
nity for the development of patience and for -
bearance. In fact, pain and kshama go together, 
because kshama grows best in an environment 
of sorrow and misery. However, because of 
mental weakness as well as ignorance, we in -
variably shun painful experiences and distress. You should not be weak; be brave and welcome 
troubles. Let them come, the more the merrier. 
It is only with such a courageous attitude that you will be able to bring out the kshama hidden 
within you. 
Can you get promoted to a higher class without 
passing an examination? It is only when you se -
cure the prescribed marks and pass the exami -
nation that you are declared eligible to advance 
to the next higher class. While preparing for the 
examination you have to face stress and many 
difficulties, but how sweet is the promotion! So, 
welcome troubles as tests that prepare you for higher things. Some people may wonder, “If I de -
velop kshama as Swami says and my life gets 
packed with troubles, how then will I survive?” 
Well, it all depends on what is meant by survival. 
Kshama is the true breath of life. It is the great -
est ornament that one can acquire. It is kshama  
that enables you to develop equanimity and go 
beyond duality. Going beyond duality is the real 
purpose of life, and this cannot be done with -
out kshama. You must therefore be happy when 
106troubles descend on you because that is when 
kshama truly blossoms.
How Doubts Arise
Students! Often you are seized with doubts. You wonder, “We are happy here because we are close 
to Bhagawan and are able to have great devotion 
to Him. But the moment we leave from here, our 
devotion and love both diminish. Why?” This hap -
pens because one is deficient in kshama. 
Doubts arise frequently in an impatient person. Such a person has no tolerance, and intolerance 
is a fertile breeding ground for doubts. An impa -
tient person is drowned in doubts about God. Dev -
otees with great faith too are sometimes gripped by doubts. Why? Because of lack of kshama. It 
is, therefore, important to continuously assess 
the state of your patience and your capacity for 
forbearance. You must constantly ask yourself, 
“Is my kshama getting strong or weak?” You must 
then say, “Patience is my very life breath and I cannot afford to let it slacken. ”
Kshama is no ordinary thing. It is the consolida -
tion of sathya, dharma, ahimsa  and all such values 
that the Vedas  extol. It is the ultimate in happi -
ness and also an incomparable treasure. It is the 
most valuable asset and property that one can 
acquire. When people abandon kshama,  politics 
becomes degraded, criticisms and accusations are exchanged freely and there can even be tur-
moil. This is what happens when forbearance 
gets eclipsed.
When Kshama  Is Absent,
Jealousy Takes Root
The moment kshama makes its exit, asuya  (jeal -
ousy or envy) makes its entry. The opposite of 
asuya  is anasuya . These two qualities are like 
two sisters, but with diametrically opposite ten -
dencies. In the scriptures, there is the story of 
a woman named Anasuya who had three sons. 
They were no ordinary sons for they were none 
other than Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara. Swami has already told you that in the individual, 
Maheshwara represents a Pure Heart, Vishnu 
represents a Pure Mind and Brahma represents 
Pure Speech. Thus, if a person’s nature is ana-
suya, then that person will have a pure heart and 
a pure mind; moreover, the speech of the person 
will be pure and sweet. 
If anasuya  has three sons, so has asuya: the three 
offspring are hatred, pomp and anger. Why is 
there such a huge difference between the two sis -
ters? Because one is courageous, while the other is not. Anasuya is courageous; it is her courage 
that enables her to face all difficulties, and it 
is also her courage that is the fountainhead of 
kshama. One must always be courageous for this is the only way to acquire kshama.
Remember how mighty Ravana was? He pos-
sessed enormous physical strength, worldly in -
telligence and various related capabilities in an abundant measure. In spite of all this, because 
of the total absence of kshama,  his heart became 
polluted with envy and hatred.
Now, love has the extraordinary capacity to draw 
near even those who are far to start with. Hatred, on the other hand, drives away even those who 
are near. Ravana had no love. He lacked kshama  
but was rich in asuya; as a result, he eventually 
had to pay a very heavy price. 
Is it possible to have kshama if one’s looks are 
bad, if one lends one’s ear to foul words and if 
one’s actions are rooted in evil? No! Man today 
is seeing what he ought not to, hearing what he 
should not and doing what is most undesirable. 
How can there be peace in such a polluted heart? Ravana’s heart was completely polluted, which is 
why Hanuman, that great devotee of Rama, ad -
vised Ravana thus:
O Ravana, I shall teach you a lesson! 
Lanka is no longer yours, O evil one!
Listen carefully and waste not this opportunity. 
107Ignoring the intellect,
And becoming a slave to evil tendencies,
You have gotten yourself into the clutches of death!
Sita is the Mother of all beings; 
She is your mother too.
By abducting her,
You have committed a terrible sin.
One arrow of Rama
Will remove all your ten heads!
O sinner!
I destroyed your minions holding Sita a prisoner,
And in retaliation you have set fire to my tail.
Now watch while I make Lanka burn,
Before putting out the fire in my tail.
Hanuman said, “Ravana, your discrimination has 
been totally warped by jealousy. ” Jealousy is the 
greatest enemy of man and it takes root when 
kshama is absent. If you possess the virtue of 
kshama,  then none of these enemies can come 
anywhere near you. If the hearts of today’s stu-
dents are polluted, it is because of the absence 
of kshama.
This is a quality that has to be painstakingly cul-
tivated by self-effort and cannot be acquired as 
a gift from others; nor can it be obtained from 
books or even a teacher. It is only your own te-
nacity and firm determination that will help you 
cultivate this virtue. You must be resolute and 
ready to face any difficulty in the quest of your 
goal. Life is a challenge; meet it! In fact, it is a se -
ries of challenges and not just one or two. Face 
them squarely, resist the obstacles and firmly 
march forward. Such determination alone will 
take you to your goal. 
If the heart is devoid of kshama,  it becomes vul -
nerable to doubts. Man today does not even know 
what to doubt and what not to doubt! Caught in 
the whirlpool of doubts, modern man sometimes 
sinks to depths much lower than that of animals. 
In fact, at times he makes animals look better! Animals behave within certain bounds and the dictates of season and reason. Man, on the other 
hand, knows no such bounds; for him, there is 
neither reason nor season. Absence of kshama  
is responsible for all this. Cultivation of kshama  
must, therefore, be an important priority. 
No doubt you will face many difficulties on the 
path but they should not deter you. Knock them 
aside and bravely march on, taking courage from 
the fact that once you have kshama there is noth-
ing that you cannot achieve.
Embodiments of Love! On occasion, you might 
fail in the class tests or in the examinations but 
that should not plunge you into depression. Re -
alise that your failure is simply the result of lack of sufficient effort on your part. Tell yourself, “I 
did not work hard enough. Had I done so, I would 
certainly have passed. It is all my fault entirely. ” 
Own up to your mistake, resolve to try again and 
be determined to succeed next time. 
Do not try to cover up your lapses by seeking 
imaginary excuses as such excuses serve no 
purpose. Your failure was simply the result of 
your neglect, that is all. With firm determination, 
you can achieve anything in life. When difficul -
ties come, do not hide; confront them bravely and squarely. Difficulties are inevitable and they 
will come in all shades – personal, financial, 
academic, professional and even spiritual. Face 
them all.
Students sometimes start earnestly on medita -
tion but after a while they lose their seriousness. 
As a result, whatever progress was made initially 
is wiped out. Whose fault is it? Can you blame 
God? No! You alone are responsible for whatever 
has befallen you.
Instead of facing the impediments to your medi -
tation, you become impatient, and once you be-
come impatient, you start having doubts about 
the utility and the efficacy of meditation. After that 
108your interest starts slackening – all this because 
of the lack of patience. So, kshama is indispens -
able. Kshama is life itself and the very breath of 
life. Life bereft of kshama is meaningless and one 
who lives so is no better than a corpse. Therefore, 
acquire and protect kshama at all costs.
Kshama  Must Be Cultivated
When Young
Students!  The stage of life you presently are in 
is most important. This is when you can easily 
overcome all sorts of obstacles and tide over all 
difficulties. If you miss this chance to cultivate 
patience, when do you think you are going to 
do it? Is it after becoming old? Habits must be 
formed when one is young. You cannot acquire 
the habit of thinking about God in your old age.
When the messengers of death
are at your doorstep,
When your relatives have given up hope
And are preparing for your last journey,
When your wife and children are lamenting about 
your imminent departure,
Is it possible to acquire in that last moment
The habit of chanting God’s Name?
Impossible! Such a thing cannot be done. Good 
habits must be cultivated in the stage of life you 
are in now. This is when you should start stock -
piling patience and accumulate a lot of it! This is the stage when kshama becomes the principal 
weapon of your life. If bad thoughts arise in you, 
resist and say, “These thoughts are coming be -
cause I am deficient in kshama. Let me counter 
the deficiency. ” Bad thoughts cannot penetrate 
one who possesses kshama. If the doors are 
slammed shut, can anyone enter? For aspirants on the spiritual path, kshama is indispensable.
Be Ever Ready for the Tests of God
In life, your capacity for forbearance will be con -
stantly put to the test and you must, therefore, be 
very careful. In class, you are expected to be ever 
ready for surprise tests. You cannot excuse your-self saying that you have not prepared and are 
not ready. The teacher will not accept that plea 
because you are always expected to be ready. 
You know what photographers do before snap -
ping a group photo. Just before clicking they say, 
“Ready. ” The Divine Cameraman, however, does 
not follow this practice. With Him, you have to be 
ever ready for no one can say when He will click the shutter. If you are not ready, the picture will 
not be good. So, in life you must always be ready 
for tests; achieving this preparedness is true sad-
hana (spiritual discipline). 
Do not imagine that sadhana is a drill performed 
according to a set timetable. Time is not behold-
en to you and will, therefore, not oblige you. Time 
will not follow you, rather you must follow Time.
Determination Is a Must for
Acquiring Kshama
The Vedas  declare:
Uttisthata jagrata prapya varannibodhata.
(Arise, awake, and stop not till the goal is 
reached!)
Drowned in foolishness, you are sleeping sound -
ly! Get up from this slumber of ajnana (ignorance), 
enter the realm of prajnana  (consciousness) and 
experience sujnana (enlightenment). This really 
is the type of sadhana you ought to undertake.
People do not understand this and simply declare 
that they are doing sadhana. Everyone is trying; 
trying, trying all the time! What is all this busi-
ness about trying? Meek and puny efforts cannot 
be called sadhana. To qualify for that name, the 
effort must be strong and made with firm deter-mination. You must be firmly resolved to achieve 
the goal.
In life, actions must be accompanied by firm re-
solves. God too is firmly determined about the 
things He chooses to do. In the Bhagavad Gita  He 
says:
109Paritranaya Sadhunam Vinasaya Cha Dushkritam. 
Dharmasamsthapanarthaya Sambhavami
Yuge Yuge.
(“For the protection of the virtuous, for the de -
struction of the wicked, and for the re-establish-
ment of dharma,  I am born from age to age. ”)
Next He says: 
Ananyaschintayantomam Ye Janah Paryupasate. 
Tesham Nityabhiyuktanam Yogakshemam
Vahamyaham.
“As for those who exclusively worship Me, who meditate on Me with no other thought and who 
are ever steadfast – I bear entirely the burden of their welfare. ”)
If God Himself can make resolutions, why not 
you? What are the spiritual goals you have re -
solved to attain in life? If you have not set any such goals for yourself, then your life will be 
empty and meaningless. Life must have goals 
and must be a brave journey involving the con -
quest of (spiritual) obstacles. Life’s journey is full 
of bumps and jumps, without resolve and deter -
mination these bumps can produce confusion and depression. When confusion and depression 
march hand in hand, life becomes a total waste.
Students!  In every one of your spiritual endeav -
ours, you must make the resolution, “This I MUST 
achieve; this virtue I SHALL acquire. ” This is the 
way to prema and kshama. If you proceed in this 
manner with unshakeable faith and idealism, 
then without any doubt your life will be fully re -
deemed. All your actions and feelings must be dripping with kshama, prema and daya  (compas-
sion). 
Love knows no hatred and is totally free from de -
sires. Thus, God is said to be Love personified. 
Kshama will grow if you have unshakeable faith in 
God. Once you have learnt to be infinitely patient, 
Love will walk in almost immediately. Prema  com-
bined with kshama is the surest way to fulfilment. Therefore, when you worship God make sure you 
repose total faith in Him. Without faith, what is 
the use of worship? Faith alone will take you be -
yond worries.
Kshama  Leads to Bliss
Life is full of worries. They seem to come in an 
endless procession. What is it that does not 
cause anxiety?
Birth is a worry, and so is existence itself;
Family life is a worry, death is a worry,
Childhood is a worry, old age is the same,
Living is a worry, working is a worry,
Pain causes worry, pleasure too causes worry,
Worry, worry, all the time!
You are plagued by multiple worries all the time. 
In this world, troubles will come for sure but 
one must learn to rise above worry; this is pos-
sible only with kshama. Welcome troubles with 
a smile, saying, “Come my friend, you are the bearer of joy!” Truly speaking, it is not friends but 
enemies who give one bliss. Do you know how? 
Enemies put you on your guard and help you to 
develop kshama. When one is filled with kshama,  
one cannot help being blissful. That is why Swa-mi is stressing so much the acquisition of this 
incomparable virtue.
Embodiments of Love! Along with love, also culti -
vate kshama. What is normally professed to be 
love is not real love because it invariably tends to 
be narrow, restricted and tinged with selfishness. 
Do not mistake this distorted feeling to be love. 
This so-called love is based on selfishness and 
self-interest. Liberate this shackled love from the 
various clutches, purify it and then direct it toward 
God. Once you have gone through this cleansing 
process, kshama will grow automatically.
The absence of kshama is responsible for most 
of the problems the world over and the decline 
in the innate humanness of man. Where virtues 
and values are concerned, man is able to achieve 
110hardly anything. When blades of grass stand all 
by themselves, they become a ready meal for 
cattle, but when stranded and plaited into a rope, 
even a mad elephant can be tied down – that is 
the power of unity. Therefore, you should always 
be united.
Unity promotes patience and strengthens it. 
What is the type of unity that Swami wants from 
you? Unity in matters relating to God and good 
activities. Such unity will develop purity and once 
purity is attained, Divinity becomes accessible.
Kshama  Develops Courage
Students!  In matters spiritual, make sure that you 
get a firm grip on whatever it is that you are seek -
ing. No matter what the obstacles or troubles, do not ever be afraid. Your steps must always be 
forward and never backward. But that is not what 
one finds amongst students of today. When will 
you start moving ahead? Go forward, trampling 
over difficulties. 
To reach great heights, you must have courage. 
And how does one become courageous? When 
the heart is full of kshama,  the spirit of courage 
will automatically makes its appearance.
Vibhishana provides the classic example. It 
was through kshama that he acquired the cour -
age to defy Ravana and cross over to the side of Rama. He arrived in Rama’s camp chanting 
“Rama, Rama, Rama. ” Seeing Vibhishana in the 
distance, Rama immediately raised His hand as 
a gesture of grace and protection. However, the 
people around Rama said, “Lord, that person is 
a rakshasa, a demon. He is the brother of your 
enemy. You must, therefore, not grant him pro -
tection. ” Meanwhile, Vibhishana kept on telling Rama, “I am Yours, I am Yours. ” 
Rama then said, “The moment a person tells Me 
‘I am Yours, ’ that person shall receive My protec-
tion, come what may. ” Such was Rama’s determi -
nation. You too must have similar determination in every spiritual endeavour of yours.One day during the Lanka War, there appeared a 
young man on the battlefield. Vibhishana drew the 
attention of Rama to this warrior, saying, “Rama, 
this person is mighty, powerful and valorous. He 
is stronger than most and You must slay him 
without fail. ” In response, Rama despatched an arrow felling the rakshasa warrior; the young man 
was dead. Vibhishana then went near the dead 
body and began weeping profusely. Rama gen -
tly lifted Vibhishana and said, “What is all this? Why are you crying over this man?” Vibhishana 
replied, “This is Neeludu, my only son. I urged You 
then to kill him since he was with the enemies, 
but now my emotion as a father is overwhelming 
me. I am unable to bear the sight of the death 
of my dear son right before my eyes. So, please 
grant me the power of patience and forbearance so that I can rise above such tragedies. ” 
Notice how unique is Vibhishana’s prayer. He said 
to Rama, “Kshama  is my sathya  and dharma;  it is 
also Rama for me! Kshama is my God and I can -
not ever afford to forget it. ” This episode reveals 
how even great men suffer pain if they lose their 
grip over kshama. On the other hand, with kshama, 
there are no limits to what can be achieved.
Kshama  and Bad Company
Do Not Go Together
These days, it is not uncommon to see evildoers 
(seemingly) get away with it while good people 
suffer. It appears as if someone commits the 
crime and someone else gets punished. This is 
how things are in the world. Here is an example. 
You are sleeping in your room at night but mos -
quitoes disturb you. So, next day, you use a mos -
quito net but it still does not help because a few 
mosquitoes have sneaked into the net. You now 
resort to a drastic remedy, you spray Flit all over. 
You cannot identify the specific mosquitoes that 
bit you but you are not bothered; you spray over 
all the mosquitoes you can see. Only one or two 
mosquitoes bit you but now hundreds are dying. 
Why is this so? Because of friendship. Even if you 
111are innocent, you have to suffer if you keep the 
company of evildoers. 
It is to drive this home that Swami often says, 
“Tell Me your company, and I shall tell who you 
are. ” Once bad thoughts get in, they multiply rap -
idly and soon drive out kshama,  and kshama once 
lost is not easily regained. You must, therefore, 
protect this virtue at all costs and see that you 
never lose it, especially because with kshama you 
can achieve anything.
Embodiments of Love! Students!  During the Sum-
mer Course, you will receive such advice from el-
ders and from Swami. Treasure it in your hearts. 
However, it is not enough to merely place on re -
cord the advice heard, you must make every ef -
fort to put it into practice. It is no use locking it 
up all inside, its impact must be made manifest 
through good actions. 
A villager was once walking, carrying a bundle of 
food on his head. After some time, he found the bundle to be a burden. So he made his way to 
the bank of a river, sat down there, opened the 
bundle and ate the food in it. In a few minutes, 
the burden disappeared and the food consumed 
gave him fresh energy. In the same way, it is only 
when you put into practice what you have learnt 
that you will gain experience and strength. In 
turn, this will lead you to success.
Embodiments of Love!  Drive away bad thoughts 
and make room for good and noble ones. Through 
sacred thoughts, foster kshama. This will give 
you multiple capabilities, enabling you to trans -
form your life into an ideal one. Study of books alone will not enhance your capability, they will 
merely provide you with superficial or bookish 
knowledge. This obviously is not enough. 
Real capability and strength come by tapping the 
Inner Power latent in you. All that is outside is arti -
ficial. Real truth and power are both inside, in your heart. It is the heart that must be strengthened but unaware of this fact people become furiously active in the external world, only to get lost there.
There are many types of food catering to the 
needs of the gross body but what about food for 
the heart? That food can be obtained only when 
you turn your head toward God. You must under -
stand the subtle linkages here – food, head and God. Thus, along with the acquisition of worldly 
knowledge, you must also give importance to 
culture and refinement. 
Earlier, the Vice Chancellor spoke about the cul-
ture of Bharat . He crisply summarised the es -
sence of many ancient texts. Bharatiya  (Indian) 
culture is timeless, sacred, deep, profound, full of 
inner strength and provides full protection. Today, 
we are losing our grip over such a great culture. 
Instead of ignoring and brushing it aside, we must 
do everything possible to nurse and foster it. Re -
finement accumulates and manifests as culture.
Here is a cloth (at this point, Swami showed 
His handkerchief). It has been woven from yarn. 
Where did the yarn come from? From cotton. By 
processing cotton, one gets yarn. By further pro -
cessing yarn, one gets cloth. Likewise, this table has come from wood that has itself come from a 
tree. Refinement comes about only through pro -
cessing and shaping. 
Farmers grow paddy. Can you eat raw paddy? No. 
It has to be polished first and then cooked before 
it is eaten. In life too, refinement is necessary. And culture is nothing but accumulated refine-
ment. Bharatiya  culture is ideal in this respect and 
worthy of being followed by everyone at all times.
Therefore, with God’s Name on your lips and un -
shakeable faith in your heart, acquire kshama,  al-
lowing it to manifest as daya , or compassion. 
Divine Discourse in Brindavan  
on May 25, 2000
112How to Become Dear
to the Lord
Embodiments of Love!  God loves dear-
ly those who possess the qualities 
enumerated in this sloka (verse) of 
the Bhagavad Gita.
The Qualities Needed
to Become Dear to the Lord
Anapeksha  means that the devotee is beyond 
apeksha,  i.e., desires or expectations. Is it ever 
possible for man, bound as he is by the body and 
the senses, to be without desires? Hardly. Some 
desire or the other will always be there. However, 
there must be control over the desires that one 
has. What sorts of desires are permitted? Recall 
what Krishna has to say about this matter. He 
says that all righteous actions are divine. Thus, 
among the permissible desires, the best is the 
desire for tyaga  or sacrifice. The yearning for 
dharma  also is important. The desire for God is 
mandatory. 
Although what must truly be desired is very clear, 
people have widely different types of expectations 
and desires. While some consider being righteous 
as very important, others think that achieving Anapeksha Suchir Dakshah Udaaseena Gatavyathah 
Sarvarambha Parithyaagi Yo Madbhaktah Sa Me Priyah
 (He who is totally devoid of desires, absolutely pure, firm in 
determination, completely detached, immune to the play of time, and 
has renounced pomp and ostentation; such a one is dear to Me.)
Bhagavad Gita (12:16)
(worldly) greatness is the best. Some even try to 
combine these two objectives. Truly speaking, no 
one has the freedom or the authority to do as one 
likes. One must do exactly as the Lord says.
The Lord has stated very clearly that He wants 
you to attain the state of anapeksha. How does 
one do that? One does this by strictly confining oneself to righteous activities alone, performing 
such actions exclusively for the pleasure of the 
Lord, and by offering all such actions in their en -
tirety to the Lord.
Actions performed in this spirit rise well above 
worldly desires and expectations. Thus the word 
anapeksha ought not to be interpreted in a very 
rigid sense. What it really means is having the 
irresistible urge to work only for the Lord and for 
His sole pleasure. 
However, that does not mean one can do any -
thing and everything. Our actions must be such 
that they please Him and would secure His ap-proval. If a devotee conducts himself in this fash -
ion, he becomes dear to the Lord.
113The second quality that the devotee must pos -
sess is suchi , or cleanliness. What sort of clean -
liness does the Lord expect from us? Is it out -
er cleanliness or inner cleanliness? Both are 
required. God loves cleanliness; cleanliness is 
Godliness. However, one cannot confine oneself 
to external cleanliness alone since inner purity 
also is very necessary. In fact, it is of prime im -
portance. God is omnipresent. He is present both outside and inside. However, we must first try to 
recognise the Divine Principle within.
Here is an example. There is a brass vessel and 
you are using it to prepare soup. If the vessel is 
not tinned inside, the soup would get spoilt and 
even poisoned. Our heart is like the brass vessel. 
This vessel must be coated inside with prema. If 
this precaution is taken, the inside will be clean. Inner purity is essential for achieving external pu -
rity. What exactly is meant by external purity? It does not mean washing yourself with soap and 
water. It means performing selfless service to 
society and doing such action for the pleasure of God. 
It is such service alone that produces external 
purity. If inner purity is lacking, the service ren -
dered would inevitably be tinged with selfish -
ness, thereby diminishing external purity.
The third quality that the devotee must have is 
daksha, or strong and unshakeable determina -
tion. What sort of determination must you have? You must say, “Come what may, I shall not rest till I accomplish this or achieve this. ” This is the sort 
of resolve you ought to have. Swami occasion-
ally says:
Having resolved what ought to be done, 
Hold on till you succeed.
This is determination.
Having desired what ought to be,
Hold on till it is fulfilled.
This is determination.Having asked what you want, 
Hold on till you get it.
This is what is meant by determination.Having thought what you wish to have, 
Hold on till the thought is realised.
Such is the quality of determination.  
In the end, what should happen?
Due to your perseverance,
the Lord must yield to your wishes!
Persevere, be tenacious, and never give up.
It is not the characteristic of a devotee to retreat, Abandoning his resolve.
What is meant by determination? It means hav -
ing the firm resolve: “I should definitely see God, 
have God, and secure His Grace. ” God loves dear -
ly the devotee who has such firm determination.
Next comes udaasina, which means detachment. 
You must be totally detached with respect to 
whatever you are doing. You can do any kind of 
work — you may, for example, be engaged in ser -
vice activity — however, you should not have ex -
pectation of any type (including of the outcome) and also not seek any reward, praise, apprecia-
tion, etc., for what you are doing. 
Especially while working for service organisa -
tions, you should be very careful — you must not 
have any craving for fame and name. You must 
not seek praise and respect. You should not la-
ment, “I am working so hard and doing so much, 
but there is no mention of it whatsoever in the newspapers!” If you do your work with such crav -
ings and expectations, then the good that you might be doing is nullified and the sanctity of 
the work is destroyed. Therefore, you must do 
service work sincerely, being immune to success 
and failure, praise as well as criticism.
After this is gathavyathah , this means being im -
pervious to the ups and downs brought about 
by time. Acquisition of this particular virtue also 
calls for strong determination. You should nei -
114ther brood over the past nor worry about the fu -
ture. Why all this pointless contemplation? No 
matter how much you think, reflect and brood, 
the miseries of the past cannot be corrected nor 
set right. As regards the future, no one can say 
anything definite about it since it is so very un -
certain. You are keen about achieving something tomorrow; is there any guarantee you would be 
alive then? Are you sure you would be alive? No 
one can speak with certainty on such matters. 
Therefore, what is the point in worrying about the 
future? The future is hidden in the womb of time, no one can see it. So why spend time imagining 
all sorts of future scenarios? 
As for the past, it is gone and lies buried in the 
sands of time. The past cannot be revived, recov-
ered or resurrected. The future belongs to time. 
Why, therefore, waste time reflecting about both 
the past and the future? If you do want to think, 
then do so about the present. Man cannot live 
without thinking. Waves of thought constantly 
assail you. Channel your thought to the present. Why? Because both the past and the future are 
contained in the present. The present is a seed 
that came from a tree called ‘The Past’. This seed 
also contains the tree called ‘The Future’. Thus the 
present is very important, being the embodiment 
of both the past and the future; therefore go by it.
He who speaks and conducts himself,
Judging properly the situation and circumstance,
And without wounding or hurting others;
And without himself being hurt in the processSuch a one is wise and blessed.
Don’t worry about the future but concentrate on 
the present. If you take proper care of the pres -
ent, the future is bound to be bright. Of that you can be sure.
Lastly, sarvarambha parithyagi , which implies to-
tal renunciation. Who is a true renunciate? He 
who remains perfectly calm at all times and un -
der all circumstances is the one who merits such a description. Such a one is beyond pomp and 
ostentation. God distances Himself from the os-
tentatious type. In fact, exhibitionism is the first 
thing that one must renounce. Pomp is a sure 
sign of rajo guna  (tendency to be pushing and 
aggressive). The craving for ostentation is the starting point for all desires. Seeking publicity 
is a reflection of worldly desires. Do not go after 
worldly goals for they represent the temporary 
and the evanescent. Shun pomp, show and pub -
licity. Krishna declared that it was such a recluse that was dear to Him.
Today, everywhere it is a case of show and pub -
licity. The person may spend just 5 rupees on 
charity, but he is prepared to invest 500 rupees 
on publicising his act in the newspapers. Is this 
not show? It is only the one who seeks fame that 
needs publicity; on the other hand, the one truly 
interested in service has no need for it. Never 
hanker after publicity. As long as you are after 
pomp, you would never be able to experience At-
mic Bliss. How can one who is ignorant of the Self 
ever earn God’s love? While seeking God’s grace, 
one must be very patient in everything and in ev -
ery aspect. Then alone can it be said that one is treading the spiritual path; then alone would one 
become eligible for God’s attention.
Selfless Service Alone
Begets God’s Love
Embodiments of Love! If you wish to become eli -
gible for God’s love, then your actions must be 
consistent with love. It is impossible to secure 
God’s love without appropriate and sacred ac -
tions. Can the one who is always hankering after rewards be ever truly happy? The only compen -
sation you ought to seek is the pleasure and joy of doing your duty properly. The joy of service is 
the true reward. If you go against the command 
of God, then everything is bound to go wrong.
Yad bhavam tad bhavati.
115As is the feeling, so is the result. If you desire God’s 
love, then your actions must match and be com -
patible with your desire. If you do not want God’s love, then you are at liberty to do as you please. 
However, if God’s love is what you want, then you 
must act in an appropriate manner. In this world, 
you first have to pay the price before you acquire 
the authority to possess what you desire. You go 
to a shop to buy a towel. The shopkeeper quotes 
a price of twenty rupees. When you pay twenty 
rupees cash, the shopkeeper packs the towel 
and gives it to you. No cash, no towel! God also follows a similar “transaction” procedure. What 
kind of “business” does God do? Divine business! 
If you lovingly obey God’s command, then you are 
sure to receive love. God’s love has no limitations 
or stipulations. Only one condition: you give and 
then you receive. As Swami said earlier:  offer self -
less service and receive love.
Without offering selfless service, how can you 
expect to receive God’s love? To receive God’s 
love, you must be totally free from worldly de-sires and constantly engage in selfless service. 
The service must be of a pleasing nature. All ac-
tions must be performed exclusively for God’s 
pleasure. For this, you do not have to give up any -
thing. Just keep on doing your normal duty in the manner ordained by destiny. You wish to study; 
by all means do so. But in what manner should 
you study? You should do it for God’s pleasure. 
You are employed in some place. How should you 
do your work? Do it as if you are trying to please God. Tell yourself, “I am doing this job as an offer -
ing to Him. ” Install this feeling in your heart and do whatever you want to or have to. However, be -
fore rushing to adopt this course, pause, reflect and make sure that God would really be pleased 
with what you are trying to do and offer to Him! 
You cannot do all sorts of silly and stupid things, 
claiming that you are doing it for God’s pleasure. 
If you act just according to your fancies, do you 
think that God will accept your actions as an of-
fering? Every action of yours must have the stamp of quality that is acceptable to God. Without that 
stamp, your action would be a counterfeit. God 
should acknowledge that your action is good. 
When you affix the proper postage stamp, your 
letter can go to far-off places. But, if there is only 
an address on the envelope and no stamp, it is 
of no use. An unstamped letter dropped into the 
mailbox would end up only in the dead-letter of-
fice. Therefore, if you really want your offering 
to reach God, then you must affix the stamp of 
prema. It is only when prema saturates every ac -
tion of yours that God will shower His grace. He 
will do so in many forms too.
Nothing Comes without Perseverance
Slowly, but surely, you must develop all the quali -
ties enumerated in the Bhagavad Gita sloka. Do 
not ever doubt that the acquisition of these vir -
tues is possible. 
Go on rubbing two pieces of wood,
Fire is sure to emerge.
Go on churning curd,
Butter is sure to be formed.
Engage constantly in enquiry,
Wisdom would certainly blossom.
Sparks of fire are produced when two pieces of 
wood are rubbed hard together. Butter is formed 
when curd is churned in a sustained manner. 
Similarly, in spirituality, sustained inquiry leads 
one to wisdom and Divinity. You realise the truth: 
Tat Twam Asi – That thou art. Is it possible to get 
fire without rubbing and butter without churning? 
The fire is latent in the wood and is not visible. 
You have to rub hard to make the fire emerge. 
Butter is latent in the curd and you have to churn 
hard to make it come out. In the same way, if you want God’s love, you must constantly do good 
work, do it solely for God’s pleasure and offer it 
all to God. 
It is only when you work with such a spirit of sur -
render that you become eligible for God’s love. 
116Surrender does not mean that you are vanquished 
and that the other one has emerged victorious. In 
spirituality, it means that the two merge into one 
– there is nothing like giving or receiving. Recog -
nise the Cosmic Unity that pervades everywhere. Recognise that this substratum of unity is noth -
ing but God. You will then automatically experi-ence God.
Students! All this may sound very difficult to 
practise. Know the truth that happiness comes 
only after hard effort. Without difficulty, there cannot be joy.
Na sukhat labhyate sukham.Happiness does not beget happiness; happiness 
is born only out of difficulties. If there are no 
difficulties to start with, how can you enjoy the 
sweetness of pleasure? So, you must struggle to 
some extent and face difficulties. Without dark -
ness, does brightness have any value? Without hunger, does food have value? Similarly, you must discover the true taste and value of happiness. 
In what way must you do this? Discover first the 
love within you, and then use it to receive God’s 
love. Once you tap the pure and unpolluted love 
within you, you will become the recipient of God’s 
love. God would even overlook and forgive your 
mistakes. However, do not take this for granted 
and commit mistakes endlessly! You have to safe -
guard all the treasures God has deposited in you.
God Is Everywhere but You Must
Make an Effort to Recognise Him
The gopikas (cowherd maids) constantly wor-
shipped Krishna. They became very depressed 
when Krishna went away to Mathura. They were 
so absorbed in the thought of Krishna that they 
constantly called out His name, no matter what 
task they were engaged in. Once, a gopika was 
carrying on her head pots containing milk, curd and butter. She was heading for the bazaar and 
her intention was to sell the dairy products there. Normally the village vendor calls out loudly, 
“Milk! Butter! Curd!” etc., to announce the prod -
ucts available for sale. But, this particular gopika  
was so absorbed in the contemplation of Krishna that she completely forgot to call out the name 
of the products she had brought to sell. Instead, 
she wandered up and down the bazaar street cry -
ing out, “Govinda, Krishna, Madhava, … ” etc. She went on repeating the Lord’s name. She com-
pletely forgot everything about vending and re -
turned home without selling anything. Such was the intensity of devotion in those days.
A gopika once told Krishna, “O Krishna, in what 
way am I to see You? How am I to recognise You? 
It is not possible! You are in everything, and yet 
You are invisible! When we declare You to be in -
visible, then You suddenly manifest Yourself. And when we say You are present, you suddenly 
vanish!”
Krishna, can we ever know You?
Subtler than an atom,
Bigger than biggest,
You are in every one of the eighty-four lakh species,
And You dwell in each and every living being of ev -
ery species.
Can we ever know such a One as You?
People in those days believed that there were 84 
lakh living species. God is present as the Indwell -
er in every living being belonging to each of these very large numbers of species. Why? Because He 
is the One who became many. When the forms 
of God are so numerous, in what particular form 
should we worship God? By what name should 
we call Him? Forms are the result of our physical perception and names are what we have given 
to these various forms. By Himself, God is just 
Truth.
Here is a flower, a pad and a cloth (Swami points 
to various objects on the table before Him). To 
the eye, they all appear quite different. The flow-
er is a flower, the cloth is cloth, and the pad is a 
117pad. Despite the varying names and forms, there 
is common underlying factor – they all exist. 
This existence is the basic Truth. It is the unify -
ing substratum behind the different names and forms. IT IS! It is the same with God.
God there certainly IS, and visible also He is! God 
IS, IS, IS! He exists!! You should have complete 
and total faith in His existence. If you have this 
faith, you can see Him everywhere. How is it that 
you have faith in your mother? Do you ever doubt 
whether she is your mother or not? Never! How come you have faith in your father? Do you ever 
have doubts about his being your father? You pre-
fer to believe in all worldly things but are unwilling 
to accept spiritual truths. This is the biggest mis-
take and the weakness of modern man.
Bhrama – Brahma
The warden (of the Brindavan Campus, who spoke earlier) referred to the Ramayana . Rama, 
Lakshmana, Bharata, and Shatrughna, repre -
senting the four Vedas,  took birth as Emperor 
Dasaratha’s sons. Rama was the embodiment of the Rig Veda,  Lakshmana represented the Sama 
Veda,  Bharata stood for the Yajur  Veda  and Sha -
trughna represented the Atharvana Veda. Thus, 
the four Vedas  manifested as four royal princes. 
Sage Viswamitra was performing a yaga  (Vedic  
ritual). He knew very well that only Rama, Him -
self the embodiment of the Vedas,  could protect 
the ritual he wished to perform. So, Viswamitra 
went to the palace of Dasaratha to seek the as -
sistance of Rama. The emperor was very pleased to see the revered sage and said, “O sage, what 
brought you here?” Viswamitra replied by asking 
a question, “Will you do what I ask you to do?” 
Without taking even a second to think about 
it, Dasaratha replied, “Of course, without fail. ” 
Dasaratha thus committed himself and became 
bound to his word.One’s action must match one’s capacity,
Must be pre-determined,
Taking all aspects into account,
Both good and bad,
Must never be in haste,
And also be consistent with the goal.
Otherwise, it can prove deathly and dangerous.
Before you give your word, you must think care -
fully. You should not glibly or blindly give your 
word and then regret as well as retract. Dasaratha 
gave a promise because of his immense faith in 
sage Viswamitra. The sage said, “O King, I want 
you to send your son Rama with me to the for -
est in order to protect the yaga  I am performing 
there. ” Dasaratha was stunned. He thought, “This 
son Rama was born to me after countless prayers, 
after observing so many austerities and after per-
forming so many yajnas . Is it possible to send 
such a dear and tender son to the forest to fight 
demons and protect the yaga?  Rama is so young. 
He has never seen a demon. He may be frightened by those terrible creatures. ” Dasaratha’s love for 
Rama produced in him a surge of such thoughts. 
Viswamitra sensed Dasaratha’s misgivings and 
severely reprimanded the emperor, “You have no 
idea who your son is. He is the very incarnation 
of God. Do not consider Him to be your tender 
son! It is your attachment that is blinding you to 
the Absolute Reality that Rama is. Give up this bodily attachment and replace it with devotion. ” 
Viswamitra sent for sage Vasishta (Dasaratha’s 
resident preceptor). Vasishta said, “O Dasaratha, 
do you know why I am serving as a priest in your 
royal household? I am not here because I am en -
amoured by your wealth, fame and power. I knew that God was going to take birth here in human 
form. I wanted to sanctify my life by having the 
darshan of that Divine boy, spending time with 
Him and experiencing bliss. That is the reason 
why I am here, and not for any worldly gains. Why do you entertain doubts about Rama? Send Him 
immediately with Sage Viswamitra to the forest. ” 
With great reluctance, Dasaratha yielded to Va -
sishta’s command.
118Viswamitra was no ordinary sage. As his name 
implies, he was a friend to the whole world. How 
did he achieve this status? By giving human -
ity the priceless gift of the Gayatri Mantra.  This 
great Viswamitra, widely reputed for his intense 
penance, who possessed extraordinary spiritual 
powers and who was the guru of so many, was 
now taking the young royal princes Rama and Lakshmana to the forest. 
The party penetrated deep into the jungle and ap -
proached the river Sarayu. It was evening time, 
and the sage told the princes, “Offer your evening 
prayers now. ” After Rama and Lakshmana did so, 
Viswamitra pointed across the river and said, 
“We are going over there. That is where I shall 
be performing the yaga . It is becoming dark and 
You will see terrible demons there. To ensure that You do not get frightened, I shall teach You two 
mantras:  Bala  and Athibala. Come and sit near me 
and receive the instruction. ” The sage taught the two mantras . You see how illusion blankets clear 
thinking! 
Here is the great sage who, in the court of 
Dasaratha, emphatically declared and hailed 
Rama as God Incarnate. But now in the forest, 
that feeling has gone. He is imagining Rama to be 
a tender young prince, likely to be frightened by 
demons. This shows that no matter how evolved, 
when one has bodily relations, doubts can and 
do arise about Incarnations. Such doubts are the 
result of delusion. Bhrama  (delusion) can eclipse 
Brahman (God)! 
Delusion is born of tendencies accumulated 
over many births. Divine feelings and the ability 
to recognise God in human form, on the other 
hand, is the result of sacred actions performed. 
What an ocean of difference separates bhrama  
and Brahman! Even a great sage like Viswamitra could come under the grip of bhrama!God Can Be Bound Only with Love
You too occasionally have such delusory expe -
riences. Questions like “What is Divine? How should one relate to Divinity? Who is human? 
What is a demon? What is an animal?” and so on 
arise. The answers to these are simple. Divinity is 
pure love. He who follows the path of righteous -
ness is a human. Cruelty reflects demonic nature and the presence of animal qualities in a person 
brings that one down to the level of an animal. Di -
vinity can be fully experienced only through love and no other way. God cannot be bought with 
money, as many foolishly imagine.
You all know the story of Sathyabhama (one of 
the consorts of Krishna). She wanted Krishna all 
for herself and did not want Him to go anywhere. 
She asked Sage Narada how she could achieve 
this. Narada is the one who offers instruction in 
spiritual knowledge. Recognising that Sathyab -
hama’s ego was responsible for her unreason -
able desire, he decided to teach her a lesson. For 
this purpose he devised a plan and asked Sathy -
abhama, “Do you have the wealth that can match 
the weight of Krishna?” She replied, “I have with 
me the magical Syamanthaka jewel. I can create 
wealth, and any amount of it. Therefore, do not 
entertain any doubts about my affluence. I will 
certainly be able to match Krishna’s weight with 
gold, precious stones and jewels. ” 
Narada then called for a large balance and sent 
word to Krishna to join him. When Krishna came, 
Narada asked the Lord to sit on one of the pans. 
He then asked Sathyabhama to pile her gold, etc., in the other pan. No matter how much gold was 
placed, the pan carrying Krishna remained down; 
it did not show any tendency to go up even a tiny 
bit. Sathyabhama became scared. She ordered 
all her wealth to be placed on the other pan but 
there was no effect. Finally, she placed even the 
treasured and magical Syamanthaka jewel. Even 
then the balance remained stuck. 
119120She ran to Rukmini (the other consort), calling 
out loudly, “Sister! Sister!” Up to this time, she 
never cared for Rukmini or bothered to look at her 
face. It was Rukmini’s birthday but the jealous 
Sathyabhama had prevented Krishna from visit -
ing Rukmini even on that day. Rukmini is a com -
passionate one. She asked Sathyabhama, “Sis-
ter, why are you so agitated? What happened?” 
Sathyabhama narrated all that transpired and 
then said, “It is all the work of that Narada!” 
Rukmini went worshipfully around the tulsi  plant 
in her garden, plucked a leaf, kept it in her palm 
and came with Sathyabhama to where Krishna 
was. Narada was waiting for the two with a broad 
smile on his face. Krishna too was full of smiles. 
He said, “I am ready to offer Myself for sale, to 
whosoever is prepared to buy Me. ” Rukmini then 
said, “Narada, Krishna can be matched only by 
His glorious name and not by material wealth. I 
am therefore simply going to chant Krishna!”
Narada replied, “How can one balance the One 
with Form with a word that is formless? I cannot 
accept this kind of balancing. You must place 
some object on the empty pan and try to tilt 
the balance. Sathyabhama tried putting all her 
wealth, but it was of no use. What are you going 
to place on the pan?” 
Rukmini then sang:
O God Who is worshipped with leaf, flowers,
fruits, and water,
If it be true that You submit YourselfWhen You are offered Pure Love
instead of all these,
I pray that You be balanced by Your Name,
And then tilt the scale with this Tulsi leaf.
So saying, she chanted the name Krishna and 
then placed the tulsi  leaf on the empty pan. The 
balance immediately tilted, with the pan carrying Krishna going up. Krishna had been more than matched! Narada observed, “The name Krishna 
made the scale even and thereafter the tulasi leaf 
was enough to tilt the balance. ”
God yields only to love. Anything you offer to 
Him, no matter how inconsequential it might be 
in a material sense, is acceptable to Him, if the 
offering is accompanied by pure love. Even a sin -
gle tulsi  leaf is enough. God cannot be secured 
with wealth but only with love. There is in fact no 
wealth greater than love. So, offer love to God. 
If you offer Him pure love, then God will be very pleased and will always be with you. If you want 
to be worthy of God’s love and the recipient of 
His grace, then you must obey His command. 
What does He say?
Anapeksah Suchir Daksah Udaasinaa Gatavyathah
Sarvarambha Parityagi Yo Madbhaktah Same Priyah
He says, “If you have all these qualities, then you 
become dear to Me. ” God would readily claim you 
if you do what He says. You must understand ful -
ly what God wants of you and conduct yourself 
accordingly.
Embodiments of Love!  
How to grasp God’s teachings? How to develop 
and sustain faith in Him? Swami will speak to 
you on these topics tomorrow.
Divine Discourse in Brindavan  
on May 24, 2000Idols Are Pointers
to Divinity
Embodiments of Love!  Our ancients 
inquired into the nature of Divinity 
through many paths but were not 
successful in recognising the reality. Hence, they started worshipping Prakriti (Nature). Thereafter, 
the Bharatiyas took to murthi aradhana (idol wor-
ship). Every creature that takes birth in this uni -
verse has a form ( murthi). Idols are inert in nature 
and do not possess the qualities of compassion, 
love, forbearance, etc. It is for this reason that 
some people are against idol worship. This is ig -
norance. 
You use your forefinger to point to a specific ob -
ject, say, a flower or a tumbler. Similarly, idols are 
like pointers to Divinity. Once you recognise Di-
vinity, you don’t need the pointers, such as idols. 
Such being the case, is it not foolish to object 
to idol worship? Are you not worshipping the 
pictures of your parents and grandparents? Do 
these pictures have life in them? No. Nor do they 
have the qualities of compassion, love, sacrifice, 
etc. Then what is the point in worshipping them? It is through these pictures that we are reminded 
of their virtues and the ideals they stood for. 
Take for instance a 100-rupee note with dimen -
sions of 6 inches by 4 inches. There is neither 
life nor virtues of love, compassion, etc., in this God is the basis of the universe. Truth is the essence of God.
The virtue of noble souls is truth. Such noble souls are verily Divine.
(Sanskrit v erse)
currency note. Yet, people love it and would like 
to possess it. Is there anybody in the world who 
dislikes money? Irrespective of the country or re-
ligion, everyone loves money. There are innumer -
able instances wherein people gave up their lives for the sake of money. Money is valuable because 
it bears the government’s seal. Similarly, we re -
spect the national flag for the value it stands for, though it is merely a piece of cloth, which is in -
ert. If idol worship is considered foolish, then the same should apply to love for money and respect 
for the flag, which are also lifeless. Man’s beliefs are based on his likes and dislikes.
Names of Gods Have Deep
Inner Meaning
Isavasyam Idam Jagatam (The entire world is per-
meated by God). Every being is an embodiment 
of Ishwara. It is also said, Ishwara sarva bhutanam 
(God is the indweller of all beings). He is present in all beings in the form of Consciousness. Ish -
wara is the master of six forms of wealth ― dhar -
ma (righteousness), aiswarya (wealth), yashas 
(fame), shakti (power), jnana  (wisdom) and vai-
ragya (detachment). Ishwara has another name, 
San(m)kara. “Sam” refers to chidanandam (eternal 
bliss) and atmanandam (bliss of the Self). “Kara” 
means one who bestows. Therefore, Sankara is 
one who confers eternal bliss.
121Every word has a deep inner meaning. Take for in -
stance the name Sathya Sai. “Sathya” stands for 
Rig Veda . “Sa,” “Aa” and “Ya” in Sai stand for Sama 
Veda , Atharvana Veda and Yajur Veda , respective -
ly. Therefore, Sathya Sai is the very personifica -
tion of the four Vedas . What is the meaning of 
the term Linga ? It is the symbol of Divinity, as it 
has neither beginning nor end. Divinity is imma -
nent in the heart ( hridaya) of every man. Hridaya 
means that which is suffused with compassion. So Divinity is the embodiment of compassion.
Today people are unable to understand the 
principle of Divinity. Though the modes of wor -
ship vary, they all are directed towards different forms of the same God. You may call Him Rama, 
Krishna, Ishwara, etc. All are one. They refer to 
the same God. Each person worships a particular 
form according to his or her likes. Some people 
worship Rama because they are attracted by 
Rama’s Name and Form. It is said, Ramayate Iti 
Rama (Rama is one who captivates the hearts of 
one and all).
Today is Shivaratri,  meaning auspicious night. 
Shiva symbolises the breathing process, “Soham,” 
that takes place in every man. This is referred to 
as Hamsa Gayatri . “(A) Ham” refers to “I” and “So” 
means “That” (God). This message of “I am God” is conveyed through this breathing process — 
21,600 times a day. Such teachings have been 
propagated and practised since ancient times. 
It is the finger that points to a flower. Likewise, 
idols point to the Divinity. So idol worship cannot 
be considered foolish. Never disregard idols be -
cause they are inert. Even in inert objects, there is chaitanya (consciousness). Anoraneeyan ma-
hato maheeyan (Brahman is subtler than the sub -
tlest and vaster than the vastest). This chaitanya 
is present in the smallest to the biggest. From your point of view, an object may appear to be in -
ert, but from the Vedic point of view everything is chaitanya. It is foolish to overlook the existence 
of chaitanya. One may question why, if chaitanya is all-perva -
sive, is it not visible to the naked eye? You are 
all well aware of the fact that there is butter in 
every drop of milk. Can you deny its existence 
merely because it is not visible to the naked eye? 
The process of obtaining butter involves curdling 
the milk and then churning it. Man is unable to 
perceive this chaitanya principle because of two 
defects:
1. He overlooks his innumerable mistakes; and
2. He magnifies the minutest mistake of others.
One can attain Divinity only when he stops hiding 
his mistakes and highlighting the faults of oth -
ers. It is a great sin to search for others’ faults. Instead, look for your own. Consider your small -
est defect as a great blunder and try to rectify the same.
Ignore the faults in others, however big they may 
be. Do not criticise others, instead criticise and 
question yourself ― Is this the way I should be -
have, having been born as a human being? True 
spiritual practice lies in finding out one’s own 
mistakes and correcting them.
It involves giving up evil tendencies and devel -
oping noble traits. That is “Sa” “dhana” (spiritual 
practice). “Sa” symbolises Divinity, which is the 
embodiment of all forms of wealth ( dhana). To-
day, the people who seek the faults of others are 
on the rise. This is the cause for restlessness 
in society. All who aspire to be peaceful should 
eradicate all their defects. Only then can you re -
alise Sivatwa (Divinity).
Use Your Power of Discrimination
Man is falling prey to anger. Who is affected by 
this anger? It is not others but he himself. It is 
said, “Anger is one’s own enemy, peace is the 
protective shield, compassion is the true rela-tion, happiness is verily the heaven and misery is 
the hell” (Telugu poem). Therefore, make efforts 
122to control your anger. Do not consider yourself to 
be superior to others.
Where is God? He is present in every human be -
ing and in every living creature. That is why it is 
said, Ishwara sarva bhutanam (God is the indwell-
er of all beings). Daivam manusha rupena (God 
takes the form of man). When you consider all 
as Divine, you will never indulge in criticism. God 
judges a person by his feelings, not by his ac -
tions. God is Bhavapriya, not Bahyapriya . So make 
efforts to turn your vision inward. Pashyati iti pa -
shuhu (One who goes purely by external vision is 
an animal). 
A true human being is one who looks inward. The 
moment an animal spots a green patch of land, 
it immediately rushes to that spot without weigh -
ing the pros and cons. It is the duty of man to use his power of discrimination and act accordingly. 
Man should be conscious of his duties always. 
Otherwise, he has to pay a heavy price. Whenever 
there is a delay in the arrival of a bus or a flight, the passengers start criticising all those respon -
sible for the delay. This is because duties were not carried out diligently. Likewise, man becomes 
an object of criticism if he does not discharge his 
duties properly.
Man cannot be called a human being unless he 
practises human values – Sathya , Dharma , San-
thi, Prema and Ahimsa. These are like the five 
life-breaths of man. The absence of these life-
breaths amounts to living death. Each one is re -
sponsible for his own downfall. Man kills himself 
by not practising these human values.
Embodiments of Love! Love is your greatest asset. 
Develop love and always speak the truth. Truth 
sounds bitter, whereas people are easily pleased 
by falsehood. People do not relish milk, which is 
brought to their doorstep, whereas they are pre -
pared to traverse miles together to consume a bottle of liquor. Falsehood has become the or -
der of the day. Falsehood may please others but not your conscience. Strive to satisfy your con -
science before satisfying others. Under all cir -
cumstances, follow the path of truth. In case the 
utterance of truth is likely to lead to some danger, 
remain silent. 
A hermit was deeply engrossed in the contem -
plation of God. He had vowed to speak “truth al -
ways. ” Lord Ishwara wanted to subject him to a 
test. He assumed the form of a hunter and start -
ed chasing a deer, which, out of fear, hid in a bush close to the hermitage. This was noticed by the hermit. On being questioned by the hunter about 
the whereabouts of the deer, the hermit was in 
a dilemma. He could not feign ignorance and 
say that he had not seen the deer, as that would 
amount to uttering a lie. At the same time, he 
could not reveal the whereabouts of the deer, lest 
the hunter should kill it. In that case, he would be 
a party to the crime.
He prayed to Lord Ishwara fervently to show him 
a way out. A brilliant idea flashed in his mind by God’s grace. God is always with you, in you, 
around you, above you, guiding and guarding you. 
Why fear when He is near? The hermit replied, “O 
hunter, that which sees cannot speak; that which 
speaks cannot see. ” By such a tactful answer, the 
hermit not only upheld his adherence to truth but 
also protected the life of the deer. Then, Lord Ish -
wara manifested in His true form and declared, “Such yukti (tact) that safeguards your interests 
as well as those of others is true yoga.” 
Therefore, it is said, truth is the life of the tongue. 
Righteousness is the life of the hands. Non-vio -
lence is the life of the heart. Shivaratri  is celebrat -
ed to teach man the significance of these values.
Develop Positive Tendencies
Siva also stands for humility. A person with hu-
mility is one of Sivam (auspiciousness). On the 
other hand, a person with ego is verily a Savam 
(corpse). By constant prayer, man can overcome 
any difficult situation. You should develop noble 
123thoughts and help the needy. Do not harm anyone. 
The harm that you inflict on others will boomer -
ang on you. Criticism and accusation are worldly traits and negative in nature. Develop positive 
tendencies. What is the use of all your education 
if you cannot give up your evil tendencies?
In spite of his education and intelligence,
a foolish man will not know 
his true Self and a mean-minded person
will not give up his wicked qualities. 
Modern education leads only to argumentation,
not to total wisdom.
 What is the use of acquiring worldly education
if it cannot lead you to immortality?
Acquire knowledge that will make you immortal.
(Telugu poem)
Paropakaraya punyaya, Papaya parapeedanam 
(One attains merit by serving others and com -
mits a sin by hurting them). Help ever, hurt nev -
er. This is the essence of the 18 Puranas. Never 
mind if you have to suffer, but do not make others suffer. God will take care of you.Your behaviour should be befitting human birth. 
Neeti (morality) and nijayati (integrity) are the life 
principles of manava jathi (the human race). De -
velop morality and lead an honest life. Only then 
can you attain Ishwaratwa.
The main teaching of the “Culture of Bharat” is 
to realise unity in diversity. But today man frag-ments unity into diversity because of his narrow-
mindedness
Embodiments of Divine Atma!  Never give scope to 
feelings of I and mine. First know yourself. Ques -
tion yourself, “Who am I?” Once you know who 
you truly are, you will realise the oneness of all. 
Once you realise that you are the embodiment of 
Atma,  you will know that all others are also em-
bodiments of the Atma . However, in daily life, it is 
difficult to recognise this equality.
What is adhyatmikam (spirituality)? Weeding out 
animal qualities and rising to the level of Divine 
constitutes true spirituality. Adhyatmikam refers 
to Adhi  (eternal) and Atma. Therefore, true Adhy-
124atmikam  is that which relates to the eternal Atma . 
Recognising the fact that I and you are one is 
true Adhyatmikam. 
When Dharmaraja offered Krishna the agratambu -
lam (prime offering), the wicked Sisupala felt that 
Krishna did not deserve it. He abused Krishna 
endlessly and said, “Do you think that you deserve 
this honour because you stole the saris of Gopikas 
when they were having a bath or do you think that 
you deserve this because you played pranks with 
the Gopikas. Stop this self-aggrandisement and shut up!” (Telugu poem)
Krishna smilingly replied, “Yes, you are right, you 
speak truly. ” Dharmaraja felt deeply hurt and fell at 
Krishna’s Feet, whereupon he said, “O Lord! How 
is it that you continue to smile in the face of such 
harsh criticism? You may be smiling, but I am 
shedding tears of sorrow. ” Then Krishna replied, 
“Dharmaraja, praise or blame relate to the body, 
not to the Atma . Why should one feel depressed 
when criticised and elated when praised? In fact, 
we criticise our own body because it gives scope 
to various diseases and makes us suffer. Hence, 
understand that whoever criticises your body is 
in fact doing you a favour. ” 
Dharmaraja was immensely satisfied with Krish -
na’s reply and said, “Because there is a shortage 
of such teachers, people are afflicted by igno -
rance. ” What about Duryodhana? He was not ig -
norant. But in spite of knowing all (about right 
and wrong), he fell into the path of ignorance. He also asked Dharmaraja to keep his mouth shut.
What is silence? One should never speak ill of 
others. Mounam kalaham nasthi (Strife does not 
arise out of silence). Salute those who offend you. Don’t return offence with offence. If you act 
in the same manner as your opponent, how can 
you become greater? While saying that the other 
is acting wrongly, will you be right if you act in 
the same manner? Never act in this manner. Let those who commit offence continue their offen -
sive behaviour. Never react. 
Wish for the welfare of everyone. Our daily prayer 
is Loka samastha sukhino bhavantu (May the 
worlds be happy). When all are happy, you are included. We pray for the welfare, wealth and 
health of all. Never wish for the misfortune of any 
other person. There is no room for hatred in this 
world. All are friends.
If you persist in this manner, wishing well for ev -
eryone, praying for their prosperity, you become 
an ideal for the whole world. You are born in this 
world for this ideal only. There is a purpose be-
hind the creation of every individual. That is why 
God created you. And for this you have been 
gifted with the capacity to love. Act according to 
your conscience. Consecrate to God every action 
of yours.
“O Lord! That heart which You have gifted me,
all its actions are being offered back by me.
What else is there for me to worship
Your feet with?
Please accept this with my humble salutations.”
(Telugu poem)
“The one valuable gift that You have bestowed 
on me is love. It is my duty to share this love 
with all my fellow beings. That is the sign of my 
understanding Your gift. ” One who is filled with anger, hatred and envy will be shunned by all 
those who are near to him, including his wife 
and children. Hence, you should avoid these evil 
tendencies. Once you understand the principle 
of love, all these evil tendencies leave you by 
themselves. 
Humanness is Divinity in essence. When a child 
is born, he is naturally pure; but, as he grows, he 
starts accumulating these evil tendencies more 
and more. The evil tendencies are of your own making. They will ultimately destroy your human -
ness itself. Don’t ruin your human nature. How sacred, how noble, how humble and how valu -
125able is humanness! Such a noble humanness is 
wilfully ruined by you.
Never harm others for the sake of your selfish 
and greedy desires. Be happy at the happiness 
of others. Only then will you realise humanness. 
Being born a man, don’t turn mean. Cruelty is the 
nature of animals. By hurting others, you lose 
your humanness and become a beast. When you 
threaten others, you become a wild beast. If you 
are scared by somebody, you become an animal 
of prey. 
You are neither a hunting beast nor an animal 
of prey. You are a human being. Never hurt any -
body; cultivate an attitude of happiness in your -
self. Then you will be doubly happy. The Lord is 
constantly saying, Thathastu, Thathastu! (So be 
it!). As you wish, so will it happen. 
From evil intentions, evil results. If you are al-
ways filled with good intentions, they are equally 
blessed by God. The consequences of all your actions will result in reactions. Maybe not imme -
diately, but definitely sooner or later. Therefore we should live without hurting others or being 
harmed by others, and thus lead a blissful life. 
Put your learning to good use. Give respect and 
receive respect. This is true humanness. Love 
and be loved in return. Your education is meant 
to cultivate such virtues.
Study Positive Things,
Worship God and Nature
Students study some limited subject or the oth -
er. Of what value is such specialisation? All such academic undertakings are essentially negative. 
There is a saying in Telugu that a washerman is 
better than a scholar. When the washerman col -
lects clothes from your house, you make a de -
tailed record of the number and type of clothes, 
if nowhere else, at least by a few marks on the 
wall. But the washerman does not need any such 
devices. He carries all the information in his head 
and will return your clothes to you duly washed and pressed. What study has he made? This is 
not the only type of studies one should under -
take. You should study positive things. Your edu -
cation should benefit the society at large. Only when you help others do you become pure.
Our ancients worshipped Nature. It is Nature that 
gives us food, raiment and shelter. Not merely 
that, it also gives us precious metals like gold 
and silver. So, what is wrong in worshipping Na -
ture? All the modes of worship that our ancients practised were highly sacred. Bhumatha (Mother 
Earth), Gomatha (cow), Vedamatha (the Vedas ) 
and the Dehamatha (physical mother) are to be 
revered. 
As people have stopped worshipping God, we find 
chaos all over the world. People are plunged in 
sorrow as they have lost faith in the Self. What is 
the use of life without self-confidence? Worship 
of God alone can safeguard the nation. The coun -
try will be blessed with plenty and prosperity and people will lead a happy life once they start think -
ing of God. We repeat the Santhi Mantra  thrice 
in our daily prayers. What does this mean? We should attain peace at three levels, that is, physi -
cal, mental and spiritual. There is no peace in the external world; we find only pieces. Peace is in 
fact within you. Make efforts to manifest your in -
ner peace.
Embodiments of Love! Spend the whole night in 
chanting the holy Name and spread this spiritual 
energy to the world at large. Who is Ishwara? He 
is all-pervasive. Just as the wind blows freely ev -
erywhere, so do we find the principle of Ishwara 
pervasive. Share your love with all and propagate 
the Divine Name to the entire world.
Divine Discourse  
on March 12, 2002
126Chapter
Nine
Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba’s Message
on Ser vice
127To discard the evil in our thoughts is itself true sacrifice 
and the highest form of self-control.
–Sri Sathya Sai Baba,  
November 21, 1988
128Spiritual Significance
of Loving Service
Embodiments of Love! “A pure, unwav -
ering, compassionate heart, truthful 
speech and use of the body for dedi -
cated service to others are sublime qualities in a hu-man being,” says a Sanskrit poem.
Mankind has been engaged in the quest for truth 
from the earliest times. Bharat  (India) is the birth -
place of many sages who explored the realms of the spirit, discovered the highest truths and 
proclaimed them to the world. In more recent 
times, others have been engaged in pursuing scientific investigations to discover a different 
set of truths. Whatever the truths discovered by 
science or spirituality, the ultimate reality is the 
energy of the atom. All that is perceived or ex-
perienced in the manifested cosmos is the com-
bination of atoms. The five basic elements are 
made up of atoms. The food you eat, the water 
you drink, the air you breathe and the sounds you 
hear are all expressions of atoms. The cosmos is 
made up of atoms.
It has taken science a thousand years (of inves -
tigation) to discover this truth. But many millen-
nia ago, a young child, Prahlada, proclaimed this 
truth. He told his father, “Do not have any doubts 
as to whether Hari (the Supreme Lord) is at one 
place and not at another. Wherever you search for Him, you will find Him. ” (Swami recited a poem 
from the Bhagavatam. ) Prahlada taught that the 
Divine permeates the entire universe in the form of atoms. This omnipresence of the Divine was 
also proclaimed in the Bhagavad Gita.See the Divine in All 
What pervades the entire universe is a manifes -
tation of the Divine Energy. To experience this 
omnipresent energy, certain spiritual processes 
have been indicated. One of them is to see the 
Divine in whatever you do, whatever you perceive 
and whatever you experience.
“Love and Service represent the same truth”  (Telu-
gu saying). For man, love and service are like two 
wings with the help of which man should strive 
to realise the Spirit. The quest for truth really 
means discovering one’s own inner reality. This eternal Divine Principle is in one and all. To ex -
perience this Divine, one has to develop certain sacred qualities.
Morality is a mark of a human being. Truth is the 
rule. Righteousness is the path. Sacrifice is the 
glory. These three are the hallmarks of humanity. 
Mankind is distinguished by these three quali -
ties. Man today has lost the spirit of sacrifice. Morality has been undermined. There is no con -
cern for truth. He is lost totally in mundane pur -
suits, forgetting his Divinity. 
The Sai Organisations were set up to make peo-
ple realise their true Divine nature. What is the 
primary purpose of the Sai Organisations? It is to 
make the people realise that they are sparks of 
the Divine and not embodiments of the physical 
products of Nature. The inherent Divinity of man 
has been clearly proclaimed in the Bhagavad Gita . 
This truth is not subject to changes.
129Spiritual Value of Service
Some of the speakers at the conference have 
stated that Swami is bringing about transfor-
mation in individuals. When does transforma -
tion take place? After a person has received in -
formation. Therefore, the first requisite is to get 
the information about the presence of the Divine 
Principle in all. The Sai Organisations have been 
engaged in propagating this “information. ” Seva 
(service) is the ideal means by which this mes -
sage can be conveyed. You should all realise that 
the human body has been given to you solely to 
render selfless service. Such service broadens the heart, destroys the ego and generates bliss. 
Service also helps to promote consciousness of 
the brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of 
God. Your task does not end there. You have at 
the same time to propagate the idea of Ekathma-
Bhavam (spiritual oneness of all mankind). Man -
kind has to be led from dualism to non-dualism.
Arguments over the existence or non-existence 
of God are entirely futile and foolish, as Buddha pointed out. According to the minds of differ -
ent persons, views and beliefs are bound to dif -
fer. But irrespective of these controversies, the 
truth is one. That Truth is God. Dharma is God. 
Ahimsa is God. Adhere to these three: truth, righ -
teousness and non-violence. Follow the path of 
truth. There is no greater virtue than truth. The 
truth you speak must emanate from the heart 
and should be filled with love. Where there is love 
there is truth.
Stick to truth in whatever you do. This may not be 
easy. But through persistence truth will become 
a natural habit. Act according to the dictates of 
your conscience and not the promptings of your 
senses.
Love Is the Basis for All Actions
Make love the basic impulse for all your actions. Share your love with others. Be unselfish. Self 
lives by getting and forgetting. Love lives by giv-ing and forgiving. Develop confidence in yourself. 
Through self-confidence you can achieve self-re -
alisation.
The Sai Organisations have been enjoined to car-
ry out a programme of ceiling on desires. Every -
one should try to control desires as much as pos -
sible. The promotion of human values is another 
item in the programme. These human values are 
inherent in every person. All that is needed is for 
everyone to manifest them in his daily life. Truth, 
righteousness and peace are all in you. You are 
the embodiment of truth, peace, love and God. Recognise this fact. 
Members of Sai Organisations should cultivate 
certain desirable practices. For instance, they 
should regulate their diet, because one’s food in-
fluences one’s thoughts. Smoking and intoxicat -
ing drinks have to be given up. They are ruinous for the health. Meat eating should also be given 
up because eating animal food promotes animal 
tendencies. The fourth evil that has to be elimi-
nated is gambling. Those who take to the spiritu -
al path should avoid as much as possible these 
four bad practices. 
It is sinful to slaughter poor animals for one’s 
food. Sai members should follow the motto “Help 
ever, hurt never. ” There is no meaning in profess -
ing to respect human values without observing the rule that you should cause no harm to others 
in any form whatsoever.
God loves those who serve others because He 
is in all of them. Whomever you may serve, con -
sider it service to God. Divinise all your actions. Treat every action you perform as God’s work.
Love to Love; Heart to Heart
Sai Organisations have not been set up for pro -
paganda purposes. We do not need any publicity. 
Who invited all of you here? You came out of your 
love. It is an outpouring of your love for Swami. 
What is the nature of your relationship? Love to 
130love; heart to heart. It is your love for me, and my 
love for you, that has brought about this enor -
mous gathering here today.
You have to bear in mind yet another fact about 
our Organisation. The services rendered by the 
Seva Dal to maintain cleanliness and security in 
the Nilayam campus are beyond praise. They are true sevaks. In our seva organisations there are 
hundreds of thousands of workers who are ren -
dering service of various kinds. The office bear-
ers should not feel that they are apart from the workers. All are workers. No one can consider 
himself a master. 
Service can assume any form. What a mother 
does for her child is service. A husband and wife 
render mutual service. In this sense all are ser -
vants. God is the only Master. All others who call themselves “masters” like postmaster, station -
master, etc., are not masters at all.
In rendering service, see that you do it for the 
satisfaction of your conscience and not to im -
press others. Treating service as an offering to the Divine, do it perfectly. Remember that God is 
watching every one of your actions. Be your own 
watchman to scrutinize what you do. When you 
do everything to satisfy your conscience, you are 
well on the way to Self-Realisation.
Sadhana of Overseas Devotees
I am well aware that our Sai members are doing excellent work. Without boasting about it, we can 
claim that there are no organisations in the world 
like the Sathya Sai Seva Organisation. The way 
the sevaks have been serving food and water to 
lakhs of people is inconceivable elsewhere.
Moreover, you have to appreciate the patience 
shown by overseas devotees. They are used to 
living in spacious houses with all amenities. Here 
they have been living in sheds adjusting them -
selves to the lack of many amenities. That ad -
justment is an index of their devotion. The adjustment is itself a form of spiritual sadha-
na. Adjustment is possible when there is under-
standing. It is because they cherish the feeling “Here is our Swami, our God” that they are able to 
adjust themselves. This understanding is also a 
form of sadhana. Acquire this understanding and 
then act on that basis. Then you will experience bliss. 
There is no use merely going on reading books. 
Practising what you have learnt is more impor -
tant than filling the mind with book knowledge. 
In our organisation, all are well-read persons who 
are keen to practise what they have learnt. You 
are all treading the path of truth. The whole world 
is one. Respect all faiths alike. The world is like a 
veena with many strings. When the strings are in 
harmony, the world will be happy. 
All should behave fraternally towards each other. 
There should be no differences on grounds of 
religion. All worship the same God. No religion preaches hatred. Truth and righteousness are 
common to all religions. Adhere to them. Ob -
serve morality and integrity in daily life.
Love for Swami Is Cause
for Transformation
Today everyone in Prasanthi Nilayam is living 
as a member of one family. Whatever your lan -
guage, religion, nationality or custom, you feel as one here. This is great spiritual sadhana. No one 
brought about this transformation. It was an indi -
vidual transformation, each by himself or herself. 
How did they effect this transformation? Out of 
their love for Swami. That love accounts for this 
prodigious transformation.
In the Sai Organisation, because it functions in 
the workday world, some regulations have been laid down. Rules and regulations are essen -
tial. First of all, whatever resolutions have been passed at this conference, they should be carried 
out wholeheartedly. All sorts of conferences are 
held all over the world. Resolutions are passed. 
131132But they are ignored after the conference is over. 
In the Sai Organisations, this should not happen. 
Having passed a resolution, you must “pass” in 
it! You would have scored a “pass” only when you 
implement the resolution. Therefore, you must 
carry out the decisions you have taken. 
That is the meaning of discipline. Discipline 
grows out of devotion. Devotion stems from 
duty. Observe the three Ds: Discipline, Devotion 
and Duty. This is true spirituality. In the perfor -
mance of every duty there should be devotion. 
There should be devotion and not diversion!
Devotion signifies love. Love for the Divine is the 
only true love. All other expressions of love are 
merely attachments of one sort or another. Love 
is God. Live in love. Start the day with love. Fill 
the day with love. End the day with love. That is 
the way to God. This love should be considered 
Divine by people of every faith. Manifest your 
love regardless of how others behave.
Share Your Bliss with Others
Cultivate this love. I am not concerned about the 
numerical growth of centres or devotees. I want 
only quality. Increase in quantity should be ac -
companied by improvement in quality. This is the service you have to render. The bliss that you ex -
perience should be shared with others.
Do not violate the rules of the organisations. 
Thereby your love will grow. It is that love that 
is responsible for your putting up with all incon -
veniences and discomforts. Develop the spirit of sacrifice.
Realise that true happiness consists in union 
with God. You need not wish me Happy Birthday. I 
am always happy. I am a tank of happiness. Draw 
from it as much as you wish. Drink that water and 
sanctify your life. It was the thirst for Divine bliss that drew you here. Drink deep and experience 
that bliss. Live in peace in Prasanthi Nilayam, ig -
noring the attractions of the outer world. When you return to your respective countries, share 
your experience with your countrymen. 
Enjoy the love I confer on you. It is totally free 
from self-interest. Receiving selfless love, make 
your love unselfish.
Divine Discourse at  
the Sixth World Conference of  
Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organisations  
on November 21, 1995The Spirit of Service
Embodiments of the Divine! Selfless 
service enables man to elevate him -
self to lofty heights and blesses him 
with Divine splendour. Selfless service is also 
responsible for empowering man’s mind and in -
tellect with vitality, and awakening the human -
ity in man. For attaining progress in any sphere, 
it is not sufficient to put in dexterity and hard 
work. Love, compassion, morality, work ethics, 
understanding and tolerance are also needed to 
achieve accomplishment. Without these essen -
tial qualities, it is impossible to perform selfless 
service. 
The joys and sorrows experienced daily by man, 
the desires and hatred that he develops through 
his daily living and the indulgence that his sense 
organs crave – these are all responsible for the 
perversions and diversions of his mind.
For ages, they have only fostered the feeling of 
duality in him – classifying everything into frag -
ments of ‘mine and thine’. They have intoxicated 
him with the feelings that are totally self-centred 
and bereft of any iota of concern for the world 
and his surroundings. This feeling of duality has 
further had a cyclic effect in man, enhancing neg -
ative sentiments like desires and hatred. 
He who is incapable of thinking beyond himself, 
his family, his wealth and status, and is steeped 
in the mire of duality is a selfish man to the core. 
He will always visualise and be convinced that 
the truth is untruth and conducts himself by be -
lieving that the untruth is true!Service to Oneself
If such a blinkered person seeks to cleanse his heart of all such grime, then selfless service is 
the only way for him. It is vital to realise that hu -
man life is presented to indulge in selfless service and not in selfish pursuits. Such service is not 
meant to be performed to obtain name and fame, 
or to exhibit the status and power of an individ -
ual. Service should not be performed to achieve one’s own selfish needs and self-interest. Such 
service cannot even be considered as selfless in 
nature. Most men do not come forward to partici -
pate in selfless service because they are unable 
to recognise the sanctity and Divinity associated 
with such activities. 
It is wrong to assume that one is doing service 
because such an act would benefit the society or 
the nation! One has to believe that selfless ser -
vice facilitates emancipation to the doer and not anyone else. To the contrary, believing that the 
service one is doing is benefiting others and not 
recognising the Divinity associated with selfless 
service only fosters a feeling of ego in the doer. 
This ego in turn develops a selfish outlook in him. 
That is why it is said: “He who does not have 
good qualities, spirit of sacrifice, sanctity of pur -
pose and pious intent is as good as a dead per -
son. ” A life that does not involve itself in selfless service is only an existence in total darkness, 
without any life.
Service to Society
We owe our existence to the society. All the 
name, fame, joy, happiness, wealth and prosper -
133ity that we enjoy are obtained from the society. 
Society helps in solving an individual’s problems 
and confers all happiness on him. It helps the 
flower of humanity to blossom in an individual. 
It is, therefore, essential that man serves such a 
society. It is important that man serves nature, 
through which he learns the highest truth of Di -
vinity. 
When someone lifts the handkerchief we drop 
and gives it to us, we do not forget to express 
our gratitude and say “thank you. ” However, we pay no attention to expressing our gratitude to 
nature and the society that are responsible for 
giving us so many comforts and facilities. Such 
a life that fails to express its gratitude is worse 
than the life of a beast.
Service should be the prime goal of human exis -
tence, and its primary task. To the contrary, we 
are discarding our main goal, placing our faith 
and vision on transient objectives and, thus, 
wasting our life.
Service and Sacrifice
Service does not mainly require wealth, riches, grains and other ingredients. Service indulged in 
by a heart bereft of any love is only going to be 
a wasteful exercise, despite all the other ingredi -
ents. It is, therefore, important that we first fill our hearts with love. 
The spark of conscience in us is not wasteful. 
When associated with ego, it takes a distorted 
form. When associated with the Spirit, it takes a 
splendorous form. Human life is blessed with the 
ability to recognise this sacred reality. Sadly, we are discarding this quality in human life. The con -
sequence is we exist as human beings only in the form, but not in the quality. 
Every man only yearns to acquire wealth, power, 
authority and worldly indulgence, but nothing 
else. He is firmly convinced that wealth alone 
can give him emancipation and liberation. To the contrary, it is responsible for destroying human -
ity in man! Wealth does not foster us and neither does it protect us. Wealth is certainly essential, 
but the secret is to lead a moral life with wealth that is limited to only the amount required. 
It is observed openly today that any act of service 
by an individual or an organisation is steeped in 
ego, pomp and show. As long as pomp and show 
are present, the splendour of the spirit will remain 
in the dark. Without experiencing the splendour 
of the spirit, the true human nature will never 
blossom. Existence as a human being is not pos -
sible unless humanity blossoms. A person will exist as a man in human form but will not be able to profess any quality associated with man. 
It is, therefore, important to understand that ser -
vice first requires a spirit of sacrifice. The ego in 
man is the first distortion that must be sacrificed. 
“To discard the evil in our thoughts is itself true 
sacrifice and the highest form of self-control. 
Nothing is achieved by merely deserting one’s 
wealth and family and proceeding to the forests!”
Serving God Present in Everyone 
What is the reason for the society to degrade 
itself to such a sorry state today? It is because 
there are no experienced scholars who can cor-
rectly interpret the teachings of our great culture 
and disseminate the information to the people. 
Considering that we are serving some unknown 
person is a grave error of judgment. Instead, one 
should entertain the sacred thought that he is 
serving Divinity embodied as that person. We 
need to strengthen the feeling that the same Di -
vinity resides in one and all. 
Avoid Criticising Others 
It is correctly said: “Criticising and slandering 
others accrues sin, the effect of which will never 
leave you in this world. Recognise that others are 
not unknown entities but Divinity itself. ”
134Therefore, never hurt or criticise anyone. Doing so 
is a sure sign of exhibiting the evil nature of your 
own self that has been lying suppressed. When 
you find a single fault with one person, others 
are instantly ready to point out ten faults within 
you! He who recognises this truth will never com-
mit the mistake of pointing out faults in others. 
Those who indulge in projecting themselves as 
superior and degrade others are only showing 
the despicable side of their nature. 
A human can be termed as man only when such 
mean mentalities and qualities are driven out of 
him. Therefore, see the Divine in each and every 
individual. It is only then that the true fruits of 
service can be obtained. Never aspire to obtain 
the fruit or result of your service. Instead, con -
sider it as an opportunity given to you to seek your salvation. A service undertaken with such 
a sacred feeling and with such a pure intent be -
comes selfless in nature.
Service Leads to Purity
Embodiments of the Divine!  Understand that the 
service activities you are undertaking today are all planned by you since you aspired to taste the 
sanctity of such tasks and thus progress in the 
path of spirituality. But they do not affect Me in 
any way and are not concerned with Me! Swami 
always preaches that selfless service should be 
taken up by all those who seek to wash away the 
filth covering the subconscious mind, and thus 
attain a purified state. 
Recognise the fact that all service activities 
achieve only this purpose. Many consider that 
service gives liberation and thus sanctifies their 
lives. But this is not so! How can your life be sanc-
tified without first purifying your subconscious 
mind? You must therefore implant in your hearts 
the knowledge that all activities performed are 
meant only to purify the subconscious mind. Un -
derstand and believe the truth that human life is given to undertake such sacred activities that 
purify and sanctify.Seva  with Sincerity
From birth comes activity; from activity comes 
righteousness; from righteousness comes Di -
vinity – Janma, Karma, Dharma and Brahma. This 
is the link between the four – one must emerge 
from the other.
Some people claim that they cannot indulge in 
service activities because they are short of time 
or because they are tied up with their official 
duties, or that they have other responsibilities. 
Such excuses are only signs of weakness. It is a 
misconception to think that service means only activities like hard labour or sweeping the streets 
or such. Discharging your official duty sincerely 
and using your authority at work with proper work 
ethics – these also constitute selfless service! 
People who are employed in a position of author -
ity should always ask themselves if they are dis -
charging their duty sincerely, in accordance with 
the salary that they are being given. Constantly 
thinking thus is also equivalent to doing self-
less service. It is a sad commentary that today no employee is discharging his duty with such 
sanctity. Everyone yearns to accumulate wealth 
and get more money, but none pauses to intro -
spect and ask if they are working sincerely in ac -
cordance with the salary that they are receiving. 
It is akin to being a traitor who has betrayed his 
country. 
Whose hard earned money is being given to you 
as salary? It is your own countrymen’s earnings. 
Hence, when you behave in a way that harms your countrymen, it is against the principles of 
service. As an example, let us consider a teacher. 
When he ensures that his best effort is put into 
teaching and that the students learn well, he is 
actually doing a service. Similarly, we can con -
sider a trader. It is not essential that he goes into the market and sweeps the streets. If he can en -
sure that he makes just the required profit and does not exploit the customers that too is an act 
of service. 
135One must act in a way that satisfies his own con -
science. His conscience must be the judge for 
his act. You may ask what does Swami like? I will 
say that one must discharge his duty sincerely. 
That is service. Do some form of community ser-
vice to the society whenever you can. Instead of 
stopping with an individual, true service must 
span the entire society and then the nation. It 
is only in such service that one can experience 
Divinity. 
There are no set rules and regulations for ser-
vice. Wherever you feel some kind of service is 
required, you may bend your back and indulge in 
that activity. Do not give place to sundry thoughts 
during such times. Do not discriminate between 
the poor and the rich. Whoever he may be, wher -
ever or whatever it may be, if there is a need, then act! Difficulties, sorrows and pain are common 
for one and all. Therefore it is futile to discuss 
the situation before doing service.
Serving in the Villages
Importantly, it is being noticed that those resid -
ing in our villages are today undergoing lots of 
hardships. Under such circumstances, it would 
be advisable to go to the villages, encourage 
them to participate in selfless service activities 
by explaining the situation clearly to them, and 
thus give them succour. 
There are some who focus on cleanliness-related 
activities in the villages as a part of service. How 
long can you continue to do this? Instead, we 
may educate the villagers about the benefits of cleanliness and the need to keep dirt away from 
living areas. It can be clearly explained to them 
that because of the filth their health will suffer, 
thus impacting their capacity to earn a livelihood. 
If it is emphasised to them that health is wealth, 
then they will themselves put in efforts to keep 
their surroundings clean. On the contrary, if we 
make appearances once in a month or two and 
clean the villages, is it going to be of much use 
at all? One could instead encourage and educate the villagers themselves to keep their neighbour -
hoods clean.
Ceiling on Desires 
In the past, a topic was discussed called “Ceiling 
on Desires. ” What is the inner significance of this 
phrase? Due to the pressure of limitless desires, 
the mind of man suffers from serious delusions. 
He is living in a world of fantasy and craze, and 
is totally alienated from Divinity. It is, therefore, 
essential that some kind of limit be set on the de-
sires that man has. Thus, the concept of “Ceiling 
on Desires” came into being. 
There are also people who are spendthrifts and 
waste their money. It was our wish that such wealth, instead of being frittered away, could be 
spent for the poor, needy and destitute. However, 
people have misunderstood the concept of ceil -
ing on desires. They think it is sufficient to do -
nate some amount for such charity whilst they 
continue to have limitless desires.
The correct process is to first reduce our own de-
sires. As long as we infuse excessive desires of 
the world into ourselves, peace will continue to 
evade us. That way, man only binds himself more and more to the world. Breaking free from these 
bonds will require man to reduce his desires and 
limit them to only those that are essential.
Do Not Waste Food 
How does one reduce his desires? Eat only to the extent you need to. If you serve yourself large 
portions of food out of selfishness, you will only 
end up with the sin of wasting food. The wasted 
food could have easily been served to another 
person who needed it. Hence, the first principle is 
“Do not waste. ” Food is God, life is God. It is from 
food that man gets life that sustains his body 
and mind. The gross part of the food taken gets 
excreted as stool. The molecular part of the food 
goes to the blood. The subtle part of the food 
goes to the mind. It can, therefore, be concluded that man’s mind is shaped by what he eats. The 
136food that is being consumed today is primarily 
responsible for the demonic nature of man. 
There is no compassion, mercy, tolerance and 
love. Instead hatred, jealousy, attachment and 
other evil qualities have taken their place. The 
responsibility for this lies with the food that we 
eat. Therefore, the food that is consumed should 
be pure and sacred. Such food fosters good feel -
ings in man. The gross part of the water that we drink is excreted as urine. The subtle part is 
transformed into the spark of life. It is, therefore, clear that food and water are directly responsible 
for making man reach the state of Divine. It is 
said that food is God. Hence, if you waste food, 
it amounts to wasting God. Ensure that you eat 
pure food and in limited quantities only. Do Not Waste Money
The second quantity is WEALTH. Indians have always considered wealth to be the very embodi-
ment of goddess Lakshmi. Elders have, therefore, 
advised that wealth must never be misused since 
it would foster bad thoughts and intentions. It is 
for this reason that it is said: “Do not waste mon-
ey. Misuse of money is evil. ” Squandering away 
money only makes man take the wrong path. 
Do Not Waste Time 
The third essential and important quantity is TIME. Time should never be wasted. Time should 
always be well spent since everything revolves 
around time. It is for this reason that the ancient 
Vedas  have extolled God as time, the one beyond 
time, the controller of time, the embodiment of 
137time, etc. Time has been equated with God. Man’s 
life and death are governed by time; his growth 
in between the two extremes of life and death is 
also dependent on time. 
Wasting time, therefore, amounts to wasting God. 
Do not indulge in needless gossip – talk only to 
the extent required. Do not defile time by using 
it to vilify others. Not indulging in such slanders 
and gossip is itself the main requirement of “Do 
not waste time. ”
Do Not Waste Energy 
The fourth quantity is ENERGY or STRENGTH. 
Energy here refers to physical, mental and spiri-
tual strength. All three should not be wasted. 
How does this energy get wasted? Seeing evil, 
hearing evil, speaking evil, thinking evil and do -
ing evil – these five contribute to slackening our energy. Using these five properly contributes to 
enhancing our energy and making us realise Di -
vinity. That is why it is said:
See no evil, see what is good;
Hear no evil, hear what is good;Speak no evil, speak what is good; 
Think no evil, think what is good;
Do no evil, do what is good;
This is the way to GOD.
Do Not Waste Energy
on Sensual Pleasures
When our entire energy is draining away in 
wasteful expenditure, it impacts our memory and 
intellect. It also affects our discrimination. This 
is the reason why we find people totally bereft 
of any semblance of discrimination today. When 
discrimination is thus affected, how can man be 
expected to discharge his actions properly? 
Let us consider a radio as an example. We are 
tuning it to some station and listening to news. 
Whatever be the volume level you use, as long 
as the radio is on, some units of electrical power will certainly be consumed. Our human body is also like a radio. Whether you think or talk, some 
energy from inside you is surely going to be 
consumed. Until you go to sleep, your mind has 
some thought process going on in it. Why not en -
sure that the thoughts are good and sacred? This ensures that the energy consumed is for a good 
cause. In this way, whatever be the thought you 
are thinking, whatever be the activity you are do-
ing, we can ensure the proper use of energy. 
In this way, “Ceiling on Desires” points to the prop -
er use and limiting of the four important quanti -
ties of food, wealth, time, and energy. These are 
essential for those who wish to enter into service. 
Service Is More Important Than Money 
However, today, such a ceiling is not visible. Peo -
ple dodge the main issue of limiting their desires 
and instead donate some token amount for the 
activities taken up by Sathya Sai Organisations. 
Money was never desired by Sathya Sai Organi-
sations. The main agenda of our organisation is 
to ensure that people stand as ideals for others 
to emulate. We should change our mind set grad -
ually to be able to achieve this. Sathya Sai Organ -
isations should work for this with unity, without 
any discrimination of caste, creed or nationality.
Inculcate Virtues in  Life 
Embodiments of Divinity! Morality and ethics are 
more important than our caste or creed. Foster -
ing love should be of higher priority than religion. 
Hankering after religion without first developing 
a feeling of love will only succeed in distorting 
the mind of man. There is only one religion, and 
that is the religion of mankind. Love is the high -
est morality that one needs to adopt. One should foster love and take morality and ethics as ideals 
of life, and then make efforts to guide his fellow 
men towards the right direction. 
Sathyam Vada, Dharmam Chara 
Since time immemorial, India had always been 
the teacher who propagated truth and righteous -
ness to the world. This is the reason why the 
138dictum “Speak the truth, practise righteousness” 
reverberates through every corner of this coun -
try. Our countrymen should realise that the great-est welfare of the country is ensured when such 
sacred virtues, like truth and righteousness, are 
propagated with tolerance and understanding. 
One should expand his heart with such sacred 
virtues. Hankering after scientific knowledge 
without focusing on wisdom is certain to be of 
no use. That is why it is better to have one person 
with a kind heart than a hundred intellectuals. This single person with a good heart can bring 
about a far greater change for the better in the 
world.
Being in the Sai Organisation,
Purify Your Hearts 
Man is shaped by his mind. Hence, when the mind is pure and influenced by good ideals, man 
too becomes worthy of his humanity. Everyone 
should aspire to experience that humanity. One 
may possess sense organs that are sharp, alert 
and fully developed. His mind may be of the high -
est degree of intellectual achievement. He may also be blessed with good wisdom. Along with all 
these, it is also important to aspire for spiritual 
awakening. Without spiritual awakening within, 
the senses, intellect and wisdom are sure to 
transform into artificial entities only. As a conse -
quence, one will lead his life like an automaton. 
Our life is not a machine, it reverberates with the 
sacredness of Divinity. Sathya Sai Organisations 
have been established to enable man to redis -
cover the path to his Divinity. Every member of this organisation is encouraged to enter into ser -
vice activities for his fellow man as per his own potential and capabilities. Do not enter the or -
ganisation seeking fame, pomp and show. Never give scope for ego to infuse into the organisa -
tion. Just accept your role as a servant of the Di -
vine, engaged in Divine activities. You are not the master. Remember that unless you are a servant 
first, you cannot be a master. Each member of the organisation should stand like the backbone 
to the organisation.
Office Bearers Should Be Humble 
Embodiments of Love!  It is important for those 
who are office bearers of the organisation to al-
ways tread the right path. If they take to wrong -
doing, it would influence all others to follow suit. Hence, if the organisation aims at emancipating 
the world, then the office bearers and the mem-
bers of the organisation have to first be ideal in 
their outlook and selfless in their approach. Nev -
er give scope for selfishness and self-interest to creep into the service activities. Pomp and show 
must not even be encouraged to approach any -
where near. These two qualities have infused 
into every aspect of our lives and have become a 
fashion to be imbibed. They will only succeed in 
harming the nation but are of no use whatsoever. 
Those who wish to be of constructive help to 
the nation should involve themselves only with 
selfless service. Pomp and show are destructive 
influences on the country. Our Sathya Sai Organi-
sations should cultivate love by being selfless 
and without any trace of selfishness, self-inter -
est, pomp or show. They should be pure in nature 
and encourage the spirit of sacrifice thus. 
We should put into practice tolerance and under -
standing. These are the attributes of a person 
who genuinely wishes to indulge in service ac -
tivities. One should not seek to use the power of authority on others. All are equally empowered. 
It is only the task distribution that puts us at dif-
ferent levels. One should limit oneself to only su -
pervising the work aspect of those whom he is responsible for.
Ideals of Sai Organisation
Love does not depend on or give any authority. Our discipline should be associated with love. 
None of the procedures laid down in our organ -
isation should be rigid and enforced like in the military! The only “force” to be used here should 
139be that of love. Speak with love. If a fault is de -
tected, it should be addressed and corrected 
with love. Love should play the dominant role in 
everything. That is why it is said:
Start the day with love
Spend the day with love
Fill the day with love
End the day with love
This is the way to God.
Love should be in all aspects of our life. Love is 
God, and God is omnipresent. You are all embodi -
ments of Love! You should, therefore, live in love and serve with love. Enjoy with love. You must 
ultimately merge with love. This is the ultimate 
goal of service with love.
Sathya Sai Organisations must not involve them-
selves with other issues; they must focus only 
on love and connect with the hearts of others 
through love. They should not seek wealth or au -
thority, and should seek to progress only through 
love. I do not desire temples or places of worship; 
I do not wish for rituals and worship. Our actions 
should be our ritual and our service should be our 
worship. 
Seeking to mobilise and collect funds for build -
ing temples or other service activities is a despi -
cable act that must never be encouraged in our 
organisation. I have often cautioned you to keep 
the organisation away from wealth and money. 
Instead, we should focus on associating our -
selves with good ethics and behaviour. It is un -
fortunate that some in the organisation are dis -
counting this caution and resorting to collection 
of money, thus opening themselves to the sins of 
connections and relationships. There are others 
who falsely claim that Swami has blessed them 
with special powers and thus collect money! 
There is nothing more demonic in quality than 
this kind of behaviour.You have all observed that for all these years I have never interfered with the activities of any 
person or persons. However, these people are us -
ing Sai’s name to indulge in such shameful acts and, thus, defaming the name of Sai. They have 
converted the sacred purpose of the organisa -
tion into a business. In retrospect, it is indeed a business – but what kind of business? It is a 
business where only love has to be given and 
taken in return! 
It is sad to note that, despite my repeated coun -
selling, some in the organisation defile this sanc -
tity, accumulate wealth in the name of the organ -
isation and show favouritism by helping some 
and putting down others. Such behaviour is not 
expected. It is not that our organisation is filled 
with poor people – there are several rich people 
as well. Would it not be better for such people 
to volunteer and come forward from within the 
organisation itself to contribute to the service 
activity, instead of mobilising funds from others? 
Why should these rich people in the organisation 
resort to the disgraceful act of begging for funds? 
Are they not satisfied with what they have? Do 
not indulge in such perverse ways to make mon -
ey. It will only bring the Sathya Sai Organisations a bad name. My message to you all is this – do 
not bring a bad name to the Sathya Sai Organi -
sations. Apart from this, I am not involved with the organisations in any way. To me everyone is 
a devotee and all can join the organisation. 
In the Sathya Sai Organisations, there must be 
no discrimination between members and office 
bearers. This organisation has been established 
solely for the devotees and with no other purpose 
or intent. Every individual has equal authority in 
this organisation – and that authority is to work 
and enhance his humanity and uncover his true 
nature. Human values should be enhanced and 
fostered, and not the worldly values and vices. 
Rest assured that wherever funds are collect -
ed in the name of service activities, rituals and 
140prayers, it cannot have any relation to the Sathya 
Sai Organisations.
It is sad to see that several devotees indulge 
in this business of collecting money. There is 
nothing wrong if a few people with the required 
means get together and decide to undertake 
some service activity. But do not go from door to 
door and solicit donations. Sai only desires the 
welfare of the entire world. Everyone should be 
happy; everyone should foster human values in 
themselves. Every man should be able to help the 
other. This feeling of unity and tolerance should be developed within us. That is the real worth of 
taking a human birth and is the meaning of the 
statement “Human life is the most difficult to ob-
tain among all. ”
Be Independent 
Embodiments of Divinity! All of you must resolve 
that Sathya Sai Organisations must not have any-thing to do with wealth and money. Members of 
the organisation can plan among themselves and 
execute service activities. Understand that there 
are only two important aspects associated with 
our organisation. Do not have anything to do with 
wealth and do not have anything to do with the 
government. Let us do whatever we can as per 
our own capacity. 
The government is anyway undertaking its own 
welfare schemes. Let them continue to do it. We 
should not use their name and resources and un -dertake those activities already under consider -
ation and execution by them. We will do what we 
can with our own resources and might. 
Do whatever little you can in service. You will 
then see that the government will itself come for -
ward to help us. But we should never go to seek their help for our service activities. Resources 
will come in from any direction because there are always good people who appreciate the good 
work done by us. If you seek the help of the gov -
ernment, a new official on transfer may not help or support us like the previous official. Then what 
happens to the service activity we have under -
taken by depending on the government’s help? 
Hence, we should depend on our own strength 
and resources. Never depend on someone else’s 
strength to discharge your service. That is true 
reliance on the strength of your own spirit. Place full confidence in the strength of the spirit since 
that is the true strength – the rest are all false 
sources only. 
With this confidence, involve yourself in service 
and put the world on the right path. You will then 
see the real resplendent form of India. Do not 
hanker after name and fame. Seek love instead. 
Know that this is the true mission and task of 
Sathya Sai Organisations.
Divine Discourse  
on November 21, 1988
141