 
14. GARUDA  PURANA  
I. INTRODUCTION  
LORD VISHNU'S  INCARNATIONS  
 
Sutji  once  reached  Naimisharanya  in course  of his pilgrimage.  There  he found  numerous  sages 
engaged  in austerities  and penance.  All of them  were  delighted  to find Sutji  in their midst  
and consi dered  it as a God sent opportunity  to get their doubts  related  with religious  topics  
cleared. Sage Shaunak was also present there and he asked Sutji -- 'O revered sage! Who is the 
creator  of this world? Who nurtures it and who annihilates it in the end? Ho w can one realize the  
supreme Almighty?  How  many  incarnations  the Almighty  has taken  till now?  Please  enlighten  
us on all these things, which are shrouded in  mystery.'  
 
Sutji  replied -- 'I am going  to reveal  to you the contents  of Garuda  Purana,  which  conta ins the 
divine  tales of Lord  Vishnu.  This particular  Purana  is named  after Garuda  because  he was the 
one who first narrated these tales to sage Kashyap. Kashyap subsequently narrated them to  Sage 
Vyasa.  I came  to know  about  these  divine  tales from  Sage  Vyasa. Lord  Vishnu  is the supreme 
almighty  and the source  of all creations.  He is the nurturer  of this world  and the annihilator  as 
well. Though he is beyond the bondage of birth and death yet he takes incarnations to protect  the 
world from the tyranny of sin ners. His first incarnation was in the form of the eternal  adolescent 
Sanatkumar and others who were all celibates and extremely  virtuous.'  
 
'Lord Vishnu took his second incarnation in the form of a boar (Varaha) to protect the Earth  from 
the mighty  demon  named  Hiranyaksha,  who had abducted  her to Patal  loka (Nether  world).  In 
his third  incarnation  as Narada,  he propagated  the virtues  of 'nishkam  karma'  (performing  one's 
duties without bothering about the results). In his fourth incarnation as Nar -Narayan,  he 
performed arduous austerities for the protection and propagation of Dharma or  religiousness.  
 
Lord  Vishnu's  fifth incarnation  was as Kapil,  which  he took to protect  the Sankhya  shashtra, 
which  was on the verge  of becoming  extinct.  He took his sixth  incarnation  in the house  of Atri 
and Anusuya as Dattatreya with the specific objective of propagating the most secret  Brahma 
vidya  to worthy  people.  His disciples  included  virtuous  souls  like Prahalad  and others.  Lord 
Vishnu  took his seventh  incarnation  as the son of Ruchi  Prajapati  and Akuti  and was known  as 
Yagya deva. His eighth incarnation was as Rishabh deva - the son of Sage Nabhi and  Merudevi.  
 
In this incarnation  he established  the norms  for Grihashtha  ashram,  which  later on became  the 
guidelines for eve ry householders. Lord Vishnu took his ninth incarnation as Prithu and  'milked'  
(extracted) various nutrients (cereals, pulses etc.) from the Earth who had disguised herself as  a 
cow and thus protected the populace from getting starved to  death.  
 
In his tenth incarnation  as Matsya  (fish),  he protected  the life of Vaivaswat  Manu,  who would 
not have survived otherwise. Lord Vishnu took his eleventh incarnation in the form of a  tortoise 
(kurma)  and held the Mandarachal  mountain  on his back  at the time when  the ocean  was being 
churned. His twelfth incarnation was as Dhanvantari and thirteenth as the most  enchanting 
beauty - Mohini to retrieve the ambrosia pot from the possession of the demons. He  subsequently 
distributed it among the deities as the result of whic h they became  immortal.  
 In his fourteenth  incarnation,  Lord  Vishnu  manifested  himself  as 'Nrisimha'  (partly  human  and 
partly  lion)  and to protect  his devotee - Prahlad  killed  the wicked  demon  Hiranyakashipu  by 
tearing apart his abdomen with his sharp claws . His fifteenth incarnation was as Vaman  (dwarf) 
in which  he demanded  all the three  worlds  from  Bali-the most  benevolent  demon  king and then 
sent him to Patal loka. In his sixteenth incarnation as Parshuram, he wiped out the whole caste  of 
kshatriyas from the face of the earth for twenty -one times, as they had all become  immoral.  
 
In his seventeenth incarnation he was born as Vyasa to Parashar and Satyavati and  accomplished 
his mission  of propagating  the knowledge  of Vedas  by categorizing  them  into four parts. In his 
eighteenth  incarnation  he manifested  himself  as Sri Ram.  His nineteenth  incarnation  was as 
Krishna  and his twentieth  incarnation  as Balram.  He will take his twenty -first incarnation  as 
Buddha to bring the mankind back to virtuous path by preachi ng against the rituals and  proving 
that it is not proper  for a seeker  to get bound  by them.  Lord  Vishnu  would  take incarnation  as 
Kalki and will be born to a Brahmin named Vishnuyasha to liberate the earth from the  sinners.'  
   
 
HOW GARUDA PURANA WAS  PROPA GATED  
On being  asked  by the sages  as to how did he come  to know  about  the contents  of Garuda 
Purana, Sutji told them --'Once, I had gone to Badrikashram, where I met Sage Vyasa. I  requested 
him to enlighten  me on various  spiritual  matters  to which  he agreed  saying  that he was going  to 
narrate  the tales of Garuda  Purana  which  was first told by Lord  Brahma  to Narada,  Daksha 
Prajapati  and myself.  Sage  Vyasa  then told Sutji  how once  he along  with Narada,  Daksha  and 
Bhrigu had gone to Brahma loka to see Lord Brah ma. After reaching there, all three of  them 
requested Lord Brahma to shed light on the essence of the real  knowledge.  
 
Lord Brahma revealed to them that Garuda Purana contained the essence of all the scriptures  and 
Lord Vishnu himself had narrated its divi ne tales to him (Brahma). Describing the incident  when 
Lord  Vishnu  had told the divine  tales of Garuda  Purana  to him as well as Shiva,  Lord  Brahma 
said-- 'I once went to Kailash mountain accompanied by Indra and other deities. We found  Shiva 
engrossed in h is meditation. We were amazed and asked him as to who was he meditating  upon.  
 
Lord Shiva told us that he was meditating upon the omnipresent, omniscient and the  omnipotent 
Vishnu - in whom  the entire  universe  exists.  Lord  Shiva  also revealed  to us that this was all he 
knew of Vishnu's power and also that if we wanted to know more about him then we will have  to 
ask Lord  Vishnu  himself.  So, all of us including  Shiva  went  to Vishnu  loka and requested  Lord  
Vishnu  to clear  our doubts  on various  topics  which  confused us. Lord  Vishnu  gave  a long 
discourse covering all the major religious  topics.  
   
 
LORD VISHNU REVEALS HIS OMNIPOTENT  NATURE  
Dwelling on length about his power, Lord Vishnu told Shiva -- 'O Rudra! I am the lord of all  the 
deities. I am the one who cont rols each and every event that occurs in the Universe. I am the  one 
whom mortals worship with the desire of attaining salvation. The universe would have ceased  to 
exist  but for me. I am the creator,  the nurturer  as well as the supreme  annihilator.  I manife st 
myself in the sacred mantras as well as their meanings. People meditate on me. Matter is  nothing 
but a medium through which I manifest  myself.'  
   
 
LORD VISHNU BLESSES  GARUDA  
 
Describing how Garuda pleased him with his deep devotion, Lord Vishnu said -- 'During  ancient 
times Garuda once did an austere penance to please me. I appeared before him and expressed  my 
willingness  to fulfil  anything  that he wished  for. Garuda  wanted  to liberate  his mother,  Vinta 
from the slavery of Kadru -the mother of serpents. H e also wanted to avenge his  mother's 
humiliation at their hands. He also expressed his desire of becoming immortal by having  a 
Purana  credited  to his name  and finally  he requested  me to give him the privilege  of becoming 
my mount.  I blessed  Garuda  as the result  of which  all his wishes  were  fulfilled.  Once,  on being 
requested  by sage Kashyap,  Garuda  narrated  the divine  tales of Garuda  Purana  to him. Sage 
Kashyap had once brought back a dead tree back to life with the help of Garudi Vidya - a sacred 
mantra  found in Garuda  Purana.  Similarly,  Garuda  too had brought  numerous  dead  creatures 
back to life with the help of same  mantra.'  
  THE BEGINNING OF  CREATION  
Lord  Shiva  requested  Vishnu  to shed light on different  topics  like Sarga  (world),  Pratisarga, 
Vansh (dyn asties), Manvantar (fourteenth part of Brahma's day) and  Vanshanucharit 
(genealogy). Lord Vishnu replied --'O Rudra! Lord Vasudeva in his incarnation of  Nara -Narayan 
performs his responsibilities of the creator, protector as well as the annihilator. Each p article  that 
is found in this universe whether perceptible or imperceptible is nothing but the medium  through 
which the Almighty makes his presence felt. In the beginning of the creation, on account of  His 
will subtle  matter  of nature  (imperceptible)  came  into being.  He is the one to whom  'Atma'  or 
'Purusha' owe its existence. Subsequently, intelligence or 'Buddhi' manifested itself from the 
subtle  matter  of nature,  mind  or 'Mun'  from  intelligence,  space  or 'Akash'  from  mind,  air or 
'Vayu' from Space, Fire or 'Teja' from air, water from 'Teja' and finally the earth manifested  itself 
from  water.'  
'O Rudra! Then came into existence an enormous sized egg. I dwell within that egg and so do all 
the other  deities.  In fact, the whole  universe  is situated  within  that egg. The almighty  Vishnu 
creates  in the form  of Brahma,  nurtures  in the form  of Vishnu  and annihilates  in the form  of 
Shiva  at the end of each kalpa.  The creations  of the almighty  are known  as 'Sargas'.  First of all, 
the almighty creates the Mahat tatva,  which symbolizes his gross  quality.  
Since it was his first creation therefore it was called the first Sarga. The second Sarga  consisted 
of the creation  of the Panch -Tanmatras  or the five basic  elements - Earth  (Prithvi),  Water  (Jala), 
Fire (Teja), Air (Vay u), and Sound (Shabda). These five basic elements are the stuffs from  which 
matter  is made.  The third  Sarga  namely  Vaikarik  sarga  comprising  the creation  of all the sense 
organs and the organs of the actions, is basically intelligence oriented, because the  sense  organs 
can not function without intelligence. All these above mentioned three sargas come under  the 
category of Prakrit sarga or natural creation.' 'The fourth sarga is known as Mukhya sarga or  the 
main  creation  and consisted  of immovable  things  like mountains,  trees,  etc. The fifth Sarga  is 
known as Tiryak sarga and consisted of animals and birds. The sixth sarga  comprised  the 
creation  of the deities  and other  celestial  beings  and hence  it is also known  as Deva  sarga.  The 
seventh  sarga  comprised  the creation  of human  beings  and hence  it was called  Manush  sarga. 
The eighth sarga, which is also called Anugrah sarga, consisted of creations that are both  'satvik' 
(pure) and 'tamasik' (dark) in nature. The ninth sarga is called Kaumar  sarga.'  
'Lord  Brahm a commenced  his creation  of supreme  entities  by expressing  his will resulting  into 
the manifestation of all the ten Manasputras. Subsequently, Lord Brahma created different  other 
entities like deities (deva), demons (danav), ancestors (pitra) and human -beings (manushya).  He 
then created the Ashuras from his thighs and subsequently abandoned his body. The  dark 
qualities  emanating  from  the body  resulted  into the creation  of night,  a creation  that immensely 
pleased the  demons.'  
'Lord  Brahma  then attained  a new physical  form,  which  was pure (satvik)  in nature.  He created 
the deities from his mouth and once again abandoned his body resulting into the creation of  day 
this time.  All the deities  became  extremely  pleased  by this particular  creation  of Brahma.  Once 
again Lord  Brahma  attained  another  form  and created  the 'pitras'  and when  he abandoned  that 
body, 'sandhya' (evening) manifested from  it.' 
 
'Lord Brahma then attained a form that was 'Rajomaya' in nature and created human beings.  His 
abandoning that particul ar form resulted into the creation of 'Pratahkal' (dawn).  Subsequently, 
Lord Brahma created the different species like 'yaksha', 'sarpa', 'Gandharva' and 'Apsaras'  and 
many  more  creatures  from  the different  parts  of his body.  All the four Vedas  namely  Rigv eda, 
Yajurveda, Samveda and Atharvaveda manifested themselves from each of Brahma's  four 
mouths. Similarly, all the four castes such as Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and  Shudra 
manifested from Brahma's mouth, arms, thighs and feet  respectively.'   
THE BEGINNI NG OF COPULATIVE  CREATION  
'Having created Daksha Prajapati and his wife Prasuti from his right and left thumb  respectively, 
Lord Brahma instructed both of them to make their contribution in increasing the population  with 
the help of copulative creation. In  course of time, Daksha Prajapati begot numerous daughters  all 
of whom were given in marriage to ten  Manasputras.'  
 
'Once, Daksha Prajapati had organized a grand Ashwamedha Yagya to which he had invited  all 
his daughters  and son-in-laws except  Sati and Rudra. Sati eventually  reached  her father's  place 
much  against  the advise  of Shiva,  who was strictly  against  going  to a place  uninvited.  Shiva's 
apprehensions were not unfounded supposition, as Sati was indeed humiliated by Daksha in  front  
of all the esteemed  guests. Sati was so deeply hurt by her father's rude behaviour and the  manner 
in which he made fun of her husband that she gave up her life by jumping into the sacrificial  fire. 
When Rudra learnt about Sati's death he cursed Daksha by saying that he would  loose his  divine 
status  and would  be born as a human  being  in the lineage  of Dhruva.  In her next birth,  Sati was 
born as the daughter of Himalaya and Mainak. She was once again successful in getting Shiva  as 
her husband by virtue of her deep devotion towa rds Shiva.'  
   
 
THE DHRUVA  DYNASTY  
Lord  Vishnu,  continuing  with the tales of Garuda  Purana  told Shiva --'Uttanpad  had two wives - 
Suruchi and Suniti. From his former wife he begot a son named Uttam, while Suniti gave birth  to 
Dhruva, who became immortal beca use of his unflinching devotion in me. Dhruva had a  mighty 
son named 'Shlishta'. Prachinvarhi was Shlishta's son and Dhruva's grandson. Few  other 
prominent  personalities  coming  from  the lineage  of Dhruva  were - Udardhi,  Divanjaya,  Ripu, 
Chakshush,  Ruru,  Anga, Ven etc. Ven was an atheist  and was eventually  killed  by sages  for his 
immoral deeds. Since Ven had no progeny, his death put a question mark on his successor.  Sages 
tried to solve this problem by churning his thighs, which resulted into the emergence o f Nishad. 
But, Nishad  went  to Vindhyachal  to do penance.  Seeing  their whole  effort  go in vain,  all the 
sages once again churned Ven's hands. This time Lord Vishnu himself incarnated as  Prithu.'  
 
'Prithu  was an extremely  kind hearted  king and cared  for his subjects.  Once,  when  his kingdom 
was experiencing an acute famine, he successfully extracted the essential nutrients from the  earth 
and thus saved  his subjects  from  starvation.  Prithu  had ten sons prominent  among  whom  were 
Antardhan, Havirdhan, Prachinvarh i and Prachetas. In course of time Prachetas  married 
Marisha.'  
 
'Just according  to the curse  of Shiva,  Daksha  Prajapati  was reborn  in the clan of Dhruva.  His 
father's  name  was Prachetas  and his mother  was Marisha.  In the beginning,  Daksha  Prajapati 
tried to do creation  by merely  expressing  his will but his efforts  went  futile  because  of Shiva's 
curse.  So, he had no option  but to take the help of copulative  creation  and to meet  his objective 
he married Asikni - the daughter of  Viran.  
 
In course of time he be came the father of one thousand sons, all of whom perished while on  their 
impossible  mission  of finding  out the circumference  of the earth.  Actually  sage Narada  had 
incited all of them to undertake this impossible mission. Daksha though angry did not loose  heart 
and in course  of time he once  again fathered  one thousand  sons.  Once  again,  Narada  was 
successful in convincing them to emulate the deeds of their elder brothers. All of them set out  on 
an impossible mission never to return. Now, Daksha's anger cros sed all limits and he  cursed 
Narada  by saying  that he would  take birth  as a human  for inciting  his sons'  to death.  This is the 
reason why Narada was born as Kashyap's  son.' 
 
'In the years  to follow,  Daksha  Prajapati  begot  sixty  beautiful  daughters  from  Asikni among 
whom  he gave  away  two daughters  in marriage  to sage Angira,  two to sage Krishashva,  ten to 
Dharma, fourteen to sage Kashyap and twenty -eight daughters to Chandrama. The names  of 
Krishashva's wives were Supragya and Jaya while Dharma's wives were Arundhati, Vasu,  Yami, 
Lamba, Bhanumati, Marutvati, Sankalpa, Muhurta, Sadhya and Vishva. The names of  Kashyap's  
wives  were  Aditi,  Diti, Danu,  Kala,  Anayu,  Sinhika,  Muni,  Kadru,  Sadhya,  Ira, Krodha,  Vinta, 
Surabhi and  Khaga.'  
 
Dharma's wives Vishva and Sad hya gave birth to the Vishvedevas and Sadhyaganas  respectively. 
Similarly,  Marutvati  gave  birth  to Marutvans  and Vasu  to Vasuganas.  Dharma's  wife named 
Bhanu gave birth to twelve Bhanus while Muhurta gave birth to Muhurtaganas. Lamba  gave 
birth to Ghosh wh ile Yami gave birth to Nagvithi. Sankalpa gave birth to  Sankalpa.  
   
 
Kashyap's  wife Aditi  gave  birth  to twelve  Adityas  while  Diti gave  birth  to two sons (demons) - 
Hiranyakashipu  and Hiranyaksha.  Diti also had a daughter  named  Sinhika,  who was married  to 
Viprachiti.  Hiranyakashipu  had four sons- Anuhlad,  Hlad,  Prahlad  and Sanhlad.  Ayushman, 
Shibi and Bashkal were the sons of Sanhlad. Prahlad had a mighty son named Virochan  who 
himself  had a son named  Bali.  Bali had one hundred  sons in all and Ban was the eldest among 
them.  Hiranyaksha  had six sons all of whom  were  very brave  and valiant.  Their  names  were 
Utkur, Shakuni, Bhutsantapan, Mahanam, Mahabahu and  Kalnam.  
 
Danu had numerous sons who were all very brave -Dwimurdha, Shankar,  Ayomukh, 
Shankushira, Kapil , Shambar, Ekachakra, Mahabahu, Tarak, Mahabal, Swarbhanu,  Vrishaparva, 
Puloma, Mahasur and the mightiest among them -Viprachiti. Puloma and Kalka, both  daughters 
of Vaishwanar were married to sage Kashyap. Kashyap had sixty thousand sons (demons)  from 
both of them.  Demons  such as Nighat  Kavach  came  from  the lineage  of Prahlad.  Tamra  had six 
daughters and their names were Shuki, Shyeni, Masi, Sugrivi, Shuchi and Gridhika. Shuki  gave 
birth  to numerous  species  of birds  like Shuka  (Parrot),  Uluka  (owls)  and Kak(crows).  Similarly 
Shyeni gave birth to Shyen (hawks) and Gridhika to Gridh (vultures). Shuchi was the mother  of 
aquatic birds while Sugrivi gave birth to various animals like, horses, camels, donkeys, etc.'  Arun 
and Garuda were born to Vinta while Sursa and Kadru gave birth to serpents. Krodha gave  birth 
to powerful  Pishachas,  Surabhi  to cows  and buffaloes,  Era to various  vegetation  like, creepers 
and grass, Khaga to Yakshas and Rakshas, Muni to Apsaras and Arishta gave birth  to 
Gandharvas.  Diti gave  birth to fourty -nine Marutganas,  all of whom  are in fact the incarnations 
of Lord  Vishnu.  
   
 
II. POWERFUL  MANTRAS 
NAVGRAH  MANTRA  
Describing the significance of worshipping Navgraha (nine planets), Lord Vishnu told Rudra  -- 
'One who worships the Navgraha with appr opriate rituals attains all the four  'purusharth' 
(objectives of man's life) - dharma (religion), artha (money), kama (sex), and moksha  (salvation).' 
He then went on to give various mantras related with the Navgrahas, which a devotee  should 
chant while wors hipping them  -- 
 
Surya (Sun) -- Om Surya Murtaye  Namah. 
Om Hram Hrim Sah Suryay  Namah.  
Chandrama (Moon) -- Om Somay  Namah.  
Bhaum (Mars) -- Om Bhaumay  Namah. 
Buddh (Mercury) -- Om Buddhay  Namah.  
Brihaspati (Jupiter) -- Om Vrihaspataye  Namah. 
Shukra (Venus) -- Om Shukray  Namah.  
Shani (Saturn) -- Om Shanaishcharay  Namah. 
Rahu (Dragon's Head) -- Om Rahave  Namah. 
Ketu (Dragon's Tail) -- Om Ketave  Namah.  
   
SHIVA  MANTRA  
 
There  are various  mantras  used in the rituals  of Shiva  worship.  A devotee  should  begin  by 
worshipping  the 'Asan' (the pedestal) on which the deity is seated. There is a specific mantra  for 
this particular ritual - Om Hram Shivay Namah. Subsequently, a salutation to lord Shiva is  made 
by chanting - Om Shiva Murtaye Namah. A special ritual named 'Shadanganya s' is then 
performed  by chanting  different  mantras  associated  with the specific  parts  of the deities'  body 
such as  - 
 
Om Hram Hridayay  Namah, 
Om Hrim Shirse  Swaha,  
Om Hoom Shikhayai  Vashat, 
Om Hraim Kavachay  Hoom,  
Om Hraum Netra Trayay  Vaushat, 
Om Hrah Ast ray Phat.  
Having accomplished the above mentioned rituals, a devotee should then worship each of  the 
five faces of Shiva by chanting the following mantras  - 
 
Om Hram Saddyojatay  Namah 
Om Hrim Vamdevay  Namah, 
Om Hoom Aghoray  Namah, 
Om Hraim Tatpurushay  Nam ah, 
Om Hraum Ishanay  Namah.  
   
VISHNU  MANTRA  
 
While  worshipping  Lord  Vishnu,  first of all a devotee  should  worship  the 'Asan'  of the deity  by 
chanting -- 
 
Om Vasudeva Asanay  Namah.  
 
He should then make salutations to Lord Vishnu by chanting the following  mantras -- 
Om Vasudevay Murtaye  Namah,  
Om Aim Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevay  Namah, 
Om Am Om Namo Bhagavate Sankarshanay  Namah, 
Om Aim Om Namo Bhagavate Pradyumnay  Namah, 
Om Ah Om Namo Bhagavate Aniruddhay  Namah  
Subsequently, a devotee should worship the various  incarnations of Lord Vishnu, his weapons  as 
well as his different mounts by incorporating the rituals of 'Shodashopachar' and by chanting  the 
following  mantras -- 
 
Om Narayanay  Namah,  
 
Om Tatsad Brahmane  Namah, 
Om Hoom Vishnave  Namah,  
Om Hraum Namo Bhagava te Nrisinhay  Namah,  
 
Om Bhuh Om Namo Bhagavate Varahay Namah,  etc. 
   
 
SARASWATI  MANTRA  
 
A devotee should begin his worship by making salutations to goddess Sarswati by chanting -- Om 
Hrim Sarswatyai  Namah.  
 
He should  then perform  the rituals  of 'Shadangnya s' by chanting  the following  mantras -- Om 
Hram Hridayay  Namah,  
 
Om Hrim Shirse  Swaha,  
 
Om Hoom Shikhayai  Vashat,  
Om Hraim Kavachay  Hoom,  
 
Om Hraum Netra Trayay  Vaushat, 
Om Hrah Astray  Phat.  
   
LAKSHMI  MANTRA  
 
A devotee desirous of acquiring wealth and pros perity must worship Goddess Lakshmi  with 
appropriate rituals. He should begin by making salutations to the goddess by chanting  the 
following mantra  -- 
 
Om Srim Hrim Mahalakshmyai  Namah.  
 
Then  follows  the rituals  of 'Shadangnyas'  that is performed  by chanti ng the specific  mantras 
meant for  them.  
   
 
III. ASTROLOGY IN GARUDA  PURANA 
THE CHARIOTS OF  NAVGRAHAS  
While  describing  the chariots  of all the nine planets,  Lord  Vishnu  told Rudra --' The chariot  of 
Surya deva (Sun) has an unbelievable expanse stretching up to n ine thousand yojans. The axle  of 
the chariot  is one crore  and fifty seven  lakh yojans  long and wheels  are fixed  at both its ends. 
The wheels have six circumferences symbolizing the six main seasons and five  spokes 
symbolizing the five different units of ti me measurement in them. The chariot of Surya (Sun)  is 
pulled  by seven  horses.  These  horses  symbolize  the seven  'chhands'  (stanzas  used in poetry) - 
gayatri, vrihati, ushnik, jagati, trishtup, anushtup and  pankti.  
 
The chariot  of chandrama  (Moon)  has three  wheels  in it. It is pulled  by ten white  horses.  The 
color of Mangal's (Mars) chariot is golden and is pulled by horses of dark red color.  Buddh's 
(Mercury)  chariot  is of brown  color  and is pulled  by eight  horses  of the same  color.  The chariot 
of Brihaspati  (Jupiter)  is made  of gold and is pulled  by eight  horses  of yellowish  complexion. 
Jupiter remains in each of the twelve zodiacs for a  year.  
 
Shukra's  (Venus)  chariot  is well escorted  by his army.  The chariot  has a mast  on it's top and is 
pulled by horses th at are found on  earth.  
 
Horses  pulling  the chariot  of Shani(Saturn)  are of varicolored.  The chariot  of Rahu  is pulled  by 
eight  horses,  which  are of the color  of smoke.  The chariot  of Ketu  is pulled  by eight  horses, 
which are red in  color.  
   
 
DESCRIPTION O F YOGAS AND  MUHURTAS  
 
Giving  elaborate  description  of inauspicious  days on which  one should  not undertake  travels  or 
journeys, Lord Vishnu told Shiva --'Various Yoginis (goddesses) dwell in different directions   on 
specific days and one should never set ou t on journeys on those days. A yogini named  Brahmani 
dwells in the East on Pratipada(first) and navami(ninth) of both the fortnights of each month  and 
nobody should travel on both these dates towards east. Maheshwari dwells in the north on  second 
and ninth  of both the fortnights of each month and hence nobody should travel towards north  on 
both these  dates.  Varahai  dwells  in the south  on the fifth and thirteenth  of both the fortnights  of 
each month and hence it is unadvisable to travel towards south on the above mentioned dates.  In 
the same manner, Indrani dwells in the west on sixth and fourteenth of both the fortnights of  each 
month and therefore nobody should travel in this direction on both the above mentioned  dates.'  
 
While  giving  names  of some  auspicio us Nakshatras  suitable  for undertaking  journeys,  Lord 
Vishnu said --'Constellations like Ashvini, Anuradha, Revati, Mrigashira, Mool,  Punarvasu, 
Pushya, Hast and Jyeshtha are auspicious for undertaking  journeys.'  
 
Lord Vishnu, giving some specific combinati ons of days and tithis considered to be  inauspicious 
said--'One should never travel on the following inauspicious days: Dwadashi falling on  Sunday 
or Ekadashi falling on Monday or Navami falling on Wednesday or Ashtami falling on  Thursday 
or Saptami fallin g on Friday and Shashthi falling on  Saturday.  
 
Amrit  Yoga  -- It is the most  auspicious  yoga  for commencing  any work.  The conjunction  of a 
particular day and specific nakshatra constitute this yoga. Few examples of Amrit yoga are  Mool 
nakshatra falling on S unday, Shravan nakshatra on Monday, Uttara bhadrapad on  Tuesday, 
Kritika on Wednesday, Punarvasu on Thursday, Purvafalguni on Friday and Swati  nakshatra 
falling on  Saturday.  
 
Visha  Yoga  -- It is considered  to be an inauspicious  yoga  and unsuitable  for comm encing  any 
important  work.  Few examples  of this particular  yoga  are Bharni  nakshatra  falling  on Friday, 
Chitra nakshatra on Monday, Uttarashadha on Tuesday, Dhanishtha on Wednesday,  Shatabhisha 
on Thursday, Rohini on Friday, and Revati nakshatra falling on  Saturday.  
   
 
GRAHA  DASHA  
 
Describing  the period  for which  a particular  planet  is supposed  to have  its influence  on the 
native, Lord Vishnu told Shiva -- 'Surya's dasha continues for six years and brings  turbulence, 
turmoil and agony to the concerned perso n. Moon's dasha continues for fifteen years and  is 
considered  very auspicious  as it brings  happiness  and prosperity.  Mangal's  dasha  is considered 
inauspicious and lasts for eight years. It brings sorrow and misfortune. Buddh's dasha  is 
auspicious and lasts  for seventeen years. It brings all kinds of favorable results and is  extremely 
rewarding in every respect. Shani's dasha lasts for ten years and brings all kinds of  inauspicious 
results  to a man.  Brihaspati's  dasha  continues  for nineteen  years  and is extremely  auspicious. 
Rahu's dasha continues for twelve years and is inauspicious. Shukra's dasha lasts for  twenty 
years and is  auspicious.'  
 
Note  -- The period  of years  stated  in the above  mentioned  Graha - dashas  are at variance  from 
those mentioned by Sage Parashar, which is in practice  today.  
   
 
PREDICTIONS BASED ON PHYSICAL  TRAITS  
Dwelling on length about the importance of physical traits and symptoms apparent in  an 
individual, Lord Vishnu told Shiva -' If one sees the following physical traits in a man, h e should 
immediately  understand  that he is seeing  a prospective  King  : Hands  and feet as soft as a lotus 
flower,  pink nails  and no space  left between  the fingers  when  kept straight.  There  is no sign of 
bulging  veins  on his hands  and palms  and they do not sweat  excessively.  On the contrary,  a 
person having rough feet that appears pale, with prominent veins on them indicates that  the 
concerned person would be poor and  miserable.'  
   
 
PREDICTING AGE WITH THE HELP OF FOREHEAD  LINE  
 
Lord  Vishnu  said--'Anybody  having three  parallel  lines  on his forehead  lives  happily  for sixty 
years whereas two parallel lines indicates that he would live till the age of forty years. Only  one 
line on the forehead  indicates  that he would  have  a short  life but if the line stretches  up to both 
the ears then he lives  for a century.  If two parallel  lines  on the forehead  stretches  up to both the 
years then the concerned person lives for seventy years while a triple parallel lines reaching  both 
the years indicates that he would live till t he age of sixty years. A forehead devoid of any line  on 
it means that the concerned person would live for only forty years while a cobweb of  intersecting 
lines  on the forehead  indicates  that the concerned  person  is definite  to die a premature  death.  A 
forehead  with a trident  or an axe mark  on it indicates  that the concerned  person  would  be 
prosperous and live for a  century.  
   
 
PREDICTING AGE BY  PALMISTRY  
 
Lord Vishnu, continuing with his narration told Shiva that the age of a person could be  predicted 
by the lines  found  on his palms -- 'If the life line reaches  the base between  index  and middle 
fingers  then the concerned  person  lives  for a century.  If the life line is long,  clear  and without 
intersections from other lines then the concerned person lives for a hundred  years.  
   
 
PREDICTION BASED ON PHYSICAL TRAITS OF  WOMEN  
 
Lord  Vishnu  said--'A woman  having  a round  face,  curly  hair and lower  portion  of her navel 
slightly  slanted  towards  right,  is extremely  fortunate  not only for herself  but also for her whole 
clan.  Similarly,  a woman  with golden  complexion  and hands  as beautiful  and soft as red lotus 
flower is exceptionally chaste and faithful towards her husband. A woman having dry and  unruly 
hair and also round eyes becomes a  widow.  
 
A woman  whose  face is round like a full moon  and which  radiates  like a rising  sun and whose 
lips are juicy like a 'Bael' fruit (Wood apple), enjoys a happy and contented life. A  woman 
having a cobweb of lines on her palms is sure to lead a torturous and painful life whereas a  palm 
with few lines indicates that she would be poor. If the lines are pink, then they  indicate 
happiness, prosperity and good health whereas blackish lines indicate that she would live a life  of 
slavery.  Any woman  having  either  a 'Chakra',  a hook  or a ear ring mark  on her hand  indicates 
that she would beget worthy sons and rule like a queen. A woman having hair around her  breasts 
as well as a protruding  lower  lip spells  doom  for her husband.  Any woman  having  a festoon 
mark on her palms indicates that she woul d get married in a family superior to her in  status.  
A woman  having  a round  navel  with brown  hair around  it leads  a life of slavery  despite  being 
born in a royal  family.  A woman  whose  little toes as well as big toes of both the legs do not 
touch the ground  while walking spells doom for her husband. In the same manner beautiful  eyes 
indicate good fortune while soft and tender skin indicate a happy married  life. 
   
 
VARIOUS NAMES OF  'SHALIGRAM'  
Describing  how a Shaligram  is named  on the basis  of number  of Chakra present  on it, Lord 
Vishnu  said--'If there  is only one Chakra  on the Shaligram  idol then it is called  'Sudarshan'.  In 
the same  way,  Shaligram  with two Chakras  is known  as 'Lakshmi  Narayan'  while  that having 
three Chakras on it is called 'Achyut'. Shali gram with four Chakra on it is known as  'Chaturbhuj', 
that with five Chakras 'Vasudev'. Similarly, Shaligram with six, seven, eight, ninth, tenth,  eleven 
and twelve Chakras are called 'Pradyumana', 'Sankarshan', 'Purushottam', 'Navavyuha', 
'Dashatmak', 'An iruddha' and Dwi -Dashatmak respectively. Shaligrams with more than  twelve 
Chakras are called  infinite.  
   
 
HOW JEWELS  ORIGINATED  
 
Sutji,  once  narrated  the following  tale to the assembled  sages  which  sheds  light on the origin  of 
jewels and other precious st ones--'During ancient times there lived a mighty demon named  Bala. 
Although  he had defeated  the deities  and driven  them  out from  the heaven,  yet he had assured 
them that he would extend fullest cooperation and support in any yagya performed by deities  in 
future.  All the deities  planned  to perform  a 'Yagya'  in order  to regain  their lost kingdom.  They 
made  all the necessary  preparations  for the Yagya  but were  unable  to find a person  who could 
offer himself as a 'sacrificial being' - a ritual without which any yagya is  incomplete.'  
 
'Seeing  no other  option,  the worried  deities  took refuge  of 'Balasur'  and requested  him to offer 
himself  for sacrifice  so that the yagya  could  be accomplished  without  any hitch.  Balasur  was 
bound  by his promise  so he agreed.  This way, the deities  were  able to accomplish  their yagya. 
But, a strange  event  coincided  with the death  of Balasur,  which  surprised  even  the deities.  The 
virtuous  deed  of offering  himself  as a sacrificial  being  in the yagya  ceremony  had amazingly 
transformed Bala sur's corpse into jewels. Deities tried to carry the 'Jewel -body' through the  aerial 
route  towards  a safer  place,  but it was fragmented  into countless  pieces  due to the impact  of 
ferocious speed of the wind it had to negotiate. These pieces scattered all o ver the places - ocean, 
rivers,  Mountains,  Forests,  etc. In course  of time these  places  got transformed  into countless 
mines  of jewels  and precious  stones  such as Vajra  (diamond),  Muktamani,  Indraneel,  Sphatik, 
Prawal, Pushparag and many  more.  
   
 
IV. PROMINENT  PLACES OF  PILGRIMAGE  
 
Sutji, while giving the names of some prominent places of pilgrimage told the assembled  sages -- 
'The banks  of Ganga  are considered  to be the holiest  among  all the places  of pilgrimage.  The 
holy Ganga,  which  originates  from  the Himala yas in the north,  ultimately  gets merged  with the 
ocean  in the east. During  her entire  course  of flow,  she passes  through  numerous  holy places, 
which  owe their holiness  mainly  to her. Although,  any place  situated  on the banks  of Ganga  is 
considered holy, y et Prayag, Haridwar, Varanasi and Ganga sangam (The place where she  meets  
the ocean) have special significance and there is no other place as holy as each of them. Prayag  is 
believed  to fulfil  both the wishes,  which  a man aspires  for- worldly  enjoyments  as well as 
salvation.  
 
Performing the rituals of pinda dan here not only helps the ancestors to liberate but also  himself. 
Varanasi is the same place where Lord Shiva and Keshav have their respective abodes.  Donating 
at Kurukshetra brings incomparable virtu es and gives both worldly enjoyments as well  as 
salvation. Kedar teerth is capable of liberating even a heinous sinner from all his sins. Few  other 
places  considered  very holy are- Shwetdweepa,  Naimisharanya,  Pushkar,  Ayodhya,  Chitrakut, 
Gomti, Kanchipuri,  Sri Shail, Kam - teerth, Amarkantak, Ujjain, Mathura, Govardhan, etc.  All 
these  places  have  great  religious  significance  and each of them  is capable  of liberating  a man 
from all his  sins. 
   
 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF GAYA  TEERTH  
 
Once, while narrating how Gaya,  a prominent place of pilgrimage in eastern part of India got  its 
name,  Lord  Brahma  told sage Vyasa --'During  ancient  times  there  lived  a mighty  demon  named 
Gaya. He used to torment the deities, who ultimately went to seek the help of Lord Vishnu.  Lord 
Vish nu successfully killed Gayasur after a fierce mace -duel. The place where Gaya died  became 
famous by his name. There is a grand Vishnu temple situated at Gaya where there is  a 
magnificent idol of Lord 'Gadhadhar' (Lord Vishnu holding a mace in his  hand).  
 
Gaya is considered to be the most ideal place of pilgrimage for performing the shraddh rituals.  It 
is believed that a person goes to hell if he dies in the following circumstances - if he dies  without 
his consecrations  being  performed,  or if a wild animal  kills him, or if he meets  an accidental 
death  no matter  what  the reasons  are. But, if 'Shraddh  rituals'  are performed  at 'Gaya'  then the 
soul of such a man gets rid of the tortures of the hell and goes to  heaven.  
 
The importance of performing 'Shraddh ritual s' over there can be gauged by the fact that a  person 
becomes  liberated  from  'pitra  rina' (debts  towards  one's  father)  once  he touches  the sacrosanct 
soil of 'Gaya'.  The reason  being  that Lord  Vishnu  himself  dwells  there  in the form  of 'Pitra 
devata'  and by having  his divine  glimpse  a man is freed  of all his three  debts.  The entire  area 
stretching  from  the foothills  of Vishnu  mountain  to 'Uttar  Manas'  is considered  extremely  holy 
and this is the same  area where  river  Falgu  flows.  Offering  'Pinda  dan' to ancestors  at this place 
helps  them  to attain  salvation.  While  performing  the rituals  of 'Pinda  dan' he should  chant  the 
following  mantra -- 
 
'Esha Pindo Maya Dastratav Haste  Janardanah; 
Parlokam Gate Moksham Kshaymu  Patishthatam.'  
There  are many  other  places  as holy as the banks  of Falgu  and performance  of 'Shraddh  rituals' 
over there give undiminished virtues to the ancestors - Dharma -Prishtha,  Brahmasar, 
Gayashirsha,  Akshay -Teerth,  Dhenukaranya  are few such places  capable  of liberating  twenty 
generations  of a man.  The entire  city of 'Gaya'  is considered  sacrosanct  and performing  the 
rituals of 'Shraddh' or offering Pinda dan to ancestors at any place within 'Gaya' helps the soul  of 
the ancestors to attain to  Brahmaloka.  
   
 
THE RITUALS OF  PINDADAN  
 
Before  setting out for Gaya  to offer  Pinda  dan, a man should  appropriately  perform  'Shraddh 
rituals'  in the village  or town  he lives.  Each  step taken  towards  Gaya  acts as a stepping  stone  to 
the heaven for the ancestors. Getting one's head tonsured or observing fast is prohibited in  some 
places  of pilgrimage  like Badrinath,  Kurukshetra,  Jagannathpuri  and Gaya.  There  is no time 
restriction on the performance of Shraddh rituals at Gaya and they can be performed  anytime.  
 
After reaching Gaya, a man should first of all in voke his ancestors while taking bath in the  holy 
Falgu  and offer  pinda  dan to them.  He should  then visit the temple  of Lord  Gadadhar  (Vishnu) 
and worship  the deity.  The next day, he should  once  again  perform  the Shraddh  rituals  at 
Dharmaranya and Matangwap i, two sacrosanct places having great religious significance. On  the 
third day, he should perform the rituals of 'Tarpan' on the banks of 'Brahmasada teerth' and  then 
go to 'Koop -teerth' and 'Yoop -teerth' to repeat the performance of Shraddh  rituals.  
 
He should then feed the Brahmins at 'Goprachar teerth', an act considered to help ancestors  attain 
salvation. On the fourth day he should take a holy dip in river Falgu and once again  perform 
'Shraddh  rituals'  at a place  called  'Gayashirsh'.  There  are many  more holy places  in the vicinity 
where  he is required  to perform  Shraddh  rituals' - Vyasa,  Dehimukh,  Panchagni,  Surya - teerth, 
Som-teerth and Kartikeya -teerth are few of them. Finally, on the fifth day, he should take a  holy 
dip in 'Gada -lolak' teerth and offe r 'Pinda -dan' under the Banyan tree called 'Akshay vat' - an act 
believed to liberate all his predecessors as well as coming generations from the bondage of  Earth. 
After  that Brahmins  are fed. Feeding  one Brahmin  at Gaya  brings  the same  virtues  what  one 
would get by feeding one crore Brahmins  elsewhere.'  
   
 
TALE OF KING  VISHAL - 
 
Lord  Brahma  then narrated  a tale glorifying  the significance  of performing  'Shraddh  rituals'  at 
Gaya -- 'O Vyasa! Once upon a time there lived a trader who was sonless. One day, whil e he was 
on his pilgrimage, he met a restless ghost, who requested him to perform the rituals of Pinda  dan 
at Gaya so that not only he became liberated from the pains and tortures of being a spirit but  also 
he (trader) went to heaven. The trader went to Ga ya accompanied by his younger brother, as  per 
the request  of the Ghost  and not only performed  the rituals  of 'Pinda -dan' for the ghost  but also 
for his own  ancestors.  
 
As a result  not only the ghost  but all his ancestors  became  liberated.  On account  of his virtuous 
deeds,  the trader  was blessed  with a son. He enjoyed  a long life full of joy and contentment. 
After his death he was reborn as Vishal, in the princely state of Vishala. After growing up he  got 
married but even after a long time he did not beget a  son and this made him very sad. One day  he 
asked  the royal  priests  about  the reason  he did not beget  a son. All the priests  advised  him to 
offer Pinda dan at Gaya as they felt that by doing so the king would definitely get blessed with  a 
son and they were  not wrong, as Vishal indeed was blessed with a son after he had offered  Pinda 
dan at  Gaya.'  
One day while Vishal was having a walk in the royal garden he was amazed to see three  entities 
descending  down  from  the sky. After  all three  of them  had landed  on the ground,  Vishal  had a 
close  look at them.  One of them  was fair while  the second  one's  complexion  was reddish.  The 
third and the most ferocious among them was of dark complexion. For a moment Vishal  was 
dumbstruck  by this mysterious  sight  but it did not take him long to gather  his composure.  He 
asked them as to who they were and was stunned by the answers he  got. 
 
Actually, these three entities were none other than the souls of his Father, Grand Father  and 
Great  Grand  Father,  all of whom  had died long ago. They  had come  to thank  Vishal,  who by 
performing  the rituals  of Shraddh  had helped  them  in getting  liberated  from  all their sins. The 
entity  appearing  fair, who in fact was Vishal's  father  said-- 'Thank  you for helping  me attain  to 
Indra  loka.  If it were not for you, I would  have  still been  languishing  in hell. The entity  with 
reddish complexion is your Grand Father, who had committed grave sins while he was alive  and 
as the consequences he went to the most ferocious hell named Avichi after his death. Ev en he  has 
been  liberated  because  of you. The third  entity  among  us and having  dark complexion  is your 
Great  Grand  Father.  He had committed  heinous  of sins while  he was alive  but even  he has 
become  liberated  because  of you. We have  come  to express  our gratitude and to thank  you for 
having liberated us from our miserable conditions. All three of us are now departing for  heaven.'  
 
Having  said this all three  of them  disappeared  in a moment.  Vishal  was extremely  satisfied  that 
he had been successful in fulfillin g one of the major obligations towards his ancestors  (pitra -rina) 
by helping  them  attain  to heaven.  He enjoyed  a long life and after his death  he too went  to 
heaven.  
   
 
PRAJAPATI RUCHI'S  DISENCHANTMENT  
Once,  Sutji  recounted  the following  tale to the assem bled sages,  which  had been  originally  told 
by sage Markandeya  to Kraunchki  long ago-- 'Once,  Sage  Ruchi  became  so disenchanted  with 
the world  that he decided  to remain  a bachelor,  a decision  which  made  his 'Pitras'(ancestors) 
extremely  worried.  They  tried to change  his mind  by citing  numerous  benefits  of householder's 
life and the yeomen service he does to the  society.  
 
They  said-- 'O Ruchi!  The decision  you have  taken  is most  unfortunate.  Perhaps  you are not 
aware  of the importance  a 'Grihasta'  holds  in the society.  But for his cooperation,  not a single 
religious activity can take place. It's your misconception that a 'Grihasta' can not attain  salvation. 
On the contrary,  he has numerous  opportunities  in his life to attain  salvation.  Different  rituals 
and consecrations  enable  him to achieve  this important  goal of a man's  life.' Pitras'  advises  had 
great impact on Prajapati Ruchi and he agreed to get  married.'  
 
Thereafter a search for an ideal match began but even after best of his efforts he did not get  any. 
Prajapati Ruchi then decided to please Lord Brahma by his austere penance. He commenced  his 
penance,  which  continued  for a very long period.  Finally,  Lord  Brahma  appeared  and advised 
him to please  his 'Pitras'.  Acting  on the advice  of Lord  Brahma,  Prajapat i Ruchi  eulogized  his 
ancestors and performed the rituals of 'Tarpan' to pacify their souls. All his 'Pitras' appeared  and 
blessed  him. PRAJAPATI RUCHI MARRIES  MANINI  
The blessings given by 'Pitras' fructified instantaneously as a beautiful 'Apsara'  manif ested 
herself from the river flowing nearby and said --'O great sage! I am Pramlocha. I would  consider 
it as my good  fortune  if you give your consent  to marry  my daughter - Manini.  Pushkar - son of 
Varun is her father. In course of time a son named 'Rauchya'  will be born to  you.'  
 
This was the day Prajapati  Ruchi  was eagerly  waiting  for. He decided  to get married  then and 
there  so he invited  all the prominent  sages  and the marriage  ceremony  was solemnized  in their 
presence.  In course  of time,  a son named  'Rauchya'  was born to them.  He was a great  sage after 
whom a Manvantar was  named.  
   
 
V. DESCRIPTION OF VARIOUS  CONSECRATIONS  
 
While describing the significance of various consecrations, Lord Vishnu told Shiva that  the 
union  of man's  sperm  and woman's  ovum  resul ts into the birth  of a child.  This union  along  with 
the whole  process  of foetus  getting  transformed  into a baby  is a lengthy  affair  during  which  it 
imbibes numerous impurities. Consecrations purify a man from all these impurities. Lord  Vishnu 
said --'The m ankind has been categorized into four prominent castes - Brahmin,  Kshatriya, 
Vaishya and Shudra. The former three castes are also known as 'Dwijas' (Twice born.  The 
solemnization of a consecration named Yagyopavit is believed to be their second birth.)  because 
only they are entitled to get consecrated into this particular ceremony. Right from his birth till  he 
takes his last breath, a 'Dwija' has to undergo various  consecrations.'  
 
Giving  the names  of some  prominent  consecration  ceremonies  that a Dwija  has to go through, 
Lord  Vishnu  said--'Garbhadhan  Sanskar  is performed  at the time of conception.  The scriptures 
have clearly stated about the best time for a woman to conceive - twelve days after  her 
menstruation  has started,  beginning  from  the fifth day as the first four days are not considered 
auspicious for this purpose. 'Punsavan sanskar' is performed in the third month after  conception 
while 'Seemantonayan sanskar' is performed in the sixth or eighth month after conception.  After 
the birth of a child the con secration named 'Jat karma' is performed while 'Nam karan sanskar'  is 
performed on the eleventh day after his birth whereby the new born baby is given a  name. 
'Nishkraman sanskar' is performed in the fourth month and 'Annaprashan sanskar' in the  sixth 
mont h. The consecration named 'Chudamani sanskar' can be performed either in the first, third  or 
fifth year of the  child.'  
   
 
UPANAYAN  SANSKAR  
 
Dwelling on length about the appropriate way of performing 'Upanayan sanskar' (Sacred  thread 
ceremony)  rituals,  Lord Vishnu  said--'A Brahmin  child  should  get consecrated  with the sacred 
thread in his eighth year while a Kshatriya child's consecration should be performed when he  has 
attained  the age of eleven.  'Upanayan  sanskar'  of a Vaishya  child  should  be performed  in his 
twelfth  year.'  
 
A dwija,  whose  'Upanayan  sanskar'  has been  performed,  must  face southwards  while  relieving 
himself in the night whereas during daytime he should face northward. Subsequently, he   should 
purify himself by properly washing his urinary o rgan with mud (soap) and water. He should  also 
wash his hands and feet. The purification is believed to be incomplete until and unless the  rituals 
of 'Achman' (ritualistic rinsing of the mouth) have been performed. Next morning, after having  a 
bath,  he should do 'Pranayama'  and chant  the sacred  Gayatri  mantra  facing  east. In the evening 
he should  chant  Gayatri  mantra  facing  south.  After  this the ritual  of 'Bhikshatan'  is performed 
whereby  he seeks  alms  and donates  everything  that he gets to his Guru  as a mark of respect  to 
him. 
 
This particular  ritual  is symbolic  and emphasizes  the absolute  necessity  of subduing  one's  ego 
before  acquiring  knowledge  from  his Guru.  A celibate  is supposed  to wear  nothing  but a Deer 
skin and a waist  band  made  of long reeds  on his person  with a sacred  thread  hanging  across  his 
shoulder and carry a stick in his hand. The celibate whose Upanayan sanskar has been  performed 
should  stay at his Guru's  hermitage  till he completes  his education.  It is also his duty to collect 
food grains  from  the neighbourhood  to meet  the food requirement  of all the people  living  in the 
hermitage. A Brahmin celibate should chant 'Bhavati bhiksham dehi' while seeking alms  whereas 
a Kshatriya celibate should chant the same mantra with a slight modification '  Bhiksham  bhavati 
dehi'. Similarly, a Vaishya celibate should chant 'Bhiksham dehi bhavati' while seeking  alms.'  
   
 
KESHANT  SANSKAR  
 
After  finishing  his education  the celibate  should  shave  his beards  and moustaches  for the first 
time. Strict guidelines ha ve been laid down for each caste with respect to this  particular 
consecration.  A Brahmin  should  get consecrated  with this ritual  in his sixteenth  year while  a 
Kshatriya  should  get it performed  in his twenty -second  year.  Similarly,  a Vaishya  should  get 
consecrated  with this ritual  in his twenty -fourth  year.  The above  mentioned  age limits  are also 
the maximum  before  which  respective  castes  are supposed  to get consecrated  with the sacred 
thread ceremony failing which he becomes a religious  outcaste.  
   
 
GRIHAS TA ASHRAM  
 
His education  being  complete  now it is the time for him to enter  the life of a householder.  But, 
before  leaving  the hermitage  he should  pay 'Dakshina'  as a mark  of gratitude  to his Guru  for all 
the knowledge he has imparted to him. With the perm ission of his Guru, he should then marry  a 
girl who is beautiful, younger to him and belonging to different 'Gotra'. Although the best  option 
for him is to marry  a woman  belonging  to his own caste,  but he is allowed  to marry  outside  his 
caste,  provided  the woman  hails  from  a caste  inferior  to him but under  no circumstances  he 
should marry a woman belonging to superior  caste.  
   
 
COPULATION PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN  DAYS  
An ideal wife is one who obeys the commands of her husband without any inhibition.  According  
to the scriptures  the best time for a married  couple  to copulate  is after the woman  has had her 
menstruation, especially till sixteen days after her periods have commenced are considered  best 
for this purpose. But, there are also certain days on which mak ing sexual contacts is  prohibited - 
the first four days after her periods have started, Ashtami, Chaturdashi, Amavasya and  Purnima 
are few such days.  If the above  given  rules  are followed  then a couple  can beget  worthy  sons 
possessing  good  qualities.  Consid ering  the fact that a woman  has sexual  urge eight  times  more 
than a man, scriptures have also advised a man not to overlook the sexual urge of his wife and  to 
satisfy her without bothering about the prohibited  days.  
   
 
PURIFICATION OF DIFFERENT  ARTICLES  
 
Describing the methods of purifying different articles, Lord Vishnu reflected on the  instructions 
which  sage Yagyavalkya  had once  given  to other  sages  in this regard -'Substances  like gold, 
silver,  conch,  vegetables,  rope,  leather  articles,  etc. become  pure once  they are washed  with 
water.  In the same  way,  utensils  made  of wood  or animal's  horn become  pure after they have 
been  chiseled.  Utensils  used in yagya  become  pure after they have  been  rubbed  with mud and 
then washed with water. Washing woolen and silk en clothes with tepid water or cow -urine  make 
them  pure.  
 
Land  is purified  if it is coated  with cow-dung.  Copper  vessels,  articles  made  of lead and Tin 
vessels  become  pure if cleaned  with a solution  of alkali,  acid and then washed  with water.  Iron 
and bron ze vessels become pure if cleaned with ash and water. The followings are believed to  be 
pure- sun-light, fire, cow, horse, earth, air, dew -drops, food -grains up for sale in the market,  etc. 
A man should  perform  Achaman  in the following  circumstances - after his bath,  after drinking 
water, after sneezing, after waking up from sleep, after having food, after having a walk on  dusty 
path, after changing clothes,  etc. 
   
 
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF SHRADDH  RITUALS  
 
Describing the proper way of performing Shraddh ritual s, sage Yagyavalkya told the  assembled 
sages --'A performer of Shraddh rituals should invite able Brahmins and offer them seats  of 
Kusha grass. First of all an invocation is made to 'Vishvedeva' by chanting a mantra in his  praise, 
an action  which  is follow ed by scattering  grains  of barley  in the vessels  kept in front  of the 
Deity's idol. Subsequently, some water and a small quantity of barley is taken in a small  vessel, 
which is then handed over to the Brahmins along with other articles such as ghee lamp,  garland, 
incense,  etc. There  are specific  mantras  for this particular  ritual.  After  that he should  offer  seats 
of Kusha grass to all his ancestors one by one beginning from the left hand side and  subsequently 
moving on to the right hand side. All the ancest ors are then invoked with specific  mantras.  
 
The scriptures  allow  the use of sesame  seeds  in place  of barley  if latter  is unavailable  due to 
some reason. These sesame seeds should be kept in a 'Ardhya patra' and placed to the left side  of 
each 'Pitras' (an cestors) in an inverted position. While performing 'havan' he should  make 
offerings  of 'ghee'  and other  articles  in the 'havan  kunda'.  Finally,  Brahmins  are fed after which 
the performer of Shraddh rituals offers Pindadan in the name of his ancestors. Afte r that he  helps 
all the Brahmins perform 'Achaman' and gives donations to them. The idol of Vishvedeva  is 
immersed  in a nearby  river  or pond  and the inverted  pots are kept back  in the normal  position. 
Finally, all the Brahmins are seen off with respect. Sh raddh rituals performed in the  above 
mentioned way immensely satisfy the ancestors and help them attain to  heaven.  
   
 
VI. 'KARMA' AND ITS CONSEQUENCE - KARMA  VIPAK  
Continuing  with his discourses,  sage Yagvalkya  told the assembled  sages  that an enlightened 
soul is aware  of the fact that the mortal  world  being  impermanent  in nature  has its beginning  as 
well as its end. He is also aware  that a man reaps  the fruits  of his evil deeds  in the form  of 
'Adhidaivik' (heavenly wrath), 'Adhyatmik' (obstacles in spiritual d evelopment)  and 
'Adhibhautik' (worldly problems like diseases, poverty, etc.) That is why he endeavours to  follow 
the path of virtuosity so that he can attain salvation, the ultimate objective of man's  life. 
 
Anybody  engaged  in sinful  deeds  is definite  to go to hell whereas  virtuous  deeds  help a man to 
attain  to heaven.  After  tasting  the fruits  of his actions  he once  again  has to take birth  to realize 
the unfulfilled  wishes  of his previous  birth.  This cycle  of transmigration  is an endless  process, 
leading t o countless births and deaths of a man. He experiences unbearable pains in his  mother's 
wombs lying in an inverted position for nine  months.  
 
Once  again  he has to go through  the same  dreadful  experiences  of youth,  old age, diseases  and 
death.  A sinner,  after tasting  the fruits  of his actions  in the heaven  or hell, depending  on his 
virtuous  or sinful  deeds  takes  rebirth  on the basis  of the gravity  of sins committed.  Killing  a 
Brahmin  is believed  to be the most  heinous  of sin and the person  who has committed  such a sin 
after having suffered the tortures of hell takes rebirth as a donkey or a  dog. 
 
In the same way a person who has stolen gold takes rebirth as lowly creatures such as worms  or 
insects.  A drunkard  takes  rebirth  as a frog and a person  developing  illicit relationship  with his 
teacher's wife takes rebirth as grass or hay. One who shows disrespect to his parents is reborn  as 
a tortoise whereas anybody who wishes ill of his friends is reborn as a  donkey.  
   
 
ATONING FOR  SINS  
 
While describing various me ans by which a sinner can atone for his sins, sage Yagyavalkya  said- 
' A man is certain to meet downfall and degradation in the following three conditions - if he goes 
against  the instructions  given  in the scriptures,  indulges  in prohibited  activities  and runs after 
sensual pleasures. Atoning for one's sin is the best means of getting liberated from his sin as  well 
as guilt.  A sinner  who does not atone  for his sin goes through  unbearable  tortures  and pains  in 
hells more horrible than in 'Maharaurav' (name of  a hell).  
 
Very severe punishment has been recommended for a person, who has breached the modesty of  a 
woman  especially  if she happens  to be his friend's  wife,  teacher's  wife,  his own daughter  or 
sister -in-law, etc. Scriptures are of the opinion that such a sinner should be killed  without 
showing any mercy. If the woman is a willing partner in this ghastly crime then even she  should 
be meted out the same  punishment.  
 
A person  who has killed  a Brahmin  should  atone  for his sin by seeking  alms  for twelve  years  
carrying a skull as his begging bowl. He should sustain himself on whatever he receives as  alms. 
Protecting a cow's life also helps a man from getting liberated from the sin of 'Brahma -hatya'.  A 
drunkard should atone for his sin by consuming any of the fo llowing - boiling liquor, ghee,  cow- 
milk or cow-urine.  A person  accused  of stealing  gold can become  liberated  from  his sin by 
donating gold equivalent to his own weight. A person who has killed a cow can become  liberated  
from his sin by consuming 'Panchgav ya' ( a mixture of cow -milk, cow -dung, cow -urine,  ghee 
and curd) and leading the rest of his life in the servitude of  cows.  
   
 
VII. DIFFERENT KIND OF  AUSTERITIES  
Describing the various types of austerities, Lord Vishnu named a few of  them -- 
 
Yama (Restra ining Passion) - This particular austerity comprises of ten virtues - Celibacy, 
Forgiveness, Meditation, Truthfulness, Honesty, Non -violence, Not stealing, Gentleness and  Self 
control.  
 
Niyama (Daily Routine) - This austerity stresses the importance of purity : both of the body  as 
well as of the mind. It comprises of the following activities: bathing daily,  contemplation, 
observing fast, performing oblations, self study, abstinence, penance, avoiding anger,  being 
respectful towards teacher and  purity.  
 
Mahasant apan Vrata - This particular austerity comprises of specific rituals related with the  usage 
of 'Panchagavya' (a mixture of cow milk, curd, ghee, cow urine and cow dung). On the first  day 
of the austerity a devotee should have only milk, on the second day cu rd, on the third day  'ghee', 
on the fourth day 'gomutra' (cow urine), on the fifth day 'gomaya' (cow dung), on the sixth day  he 
should  live only on 'kushodak'  (drinking  water  from  a vessel  in which  'kusha'  grass  have  been 
kept) and on the last day of the a usterity he should observe complete  fast. 
 
Parna Krichchha Vrata - Separate solutions of 'Palash' (Butea frondosa),  'Gular'  (Ficus 
glomerata),  'Kamal'  ( lotus)  and 'Bael'  tree (wood  apple)  are prepared  after boiling  the leaves  of 
respective  vegetation  ment ioned  above.  On the first day of the austerity  a devotee  should  have 
only 'Palash'  solution  while  on the second  day he should  have  'Gular'  solution.  On the third  day 
he should  have  'Kamal'  solution  while  on the fourth  day he should  live only on 'Bael'  solution. 
On the fifth day of the austerity  he should  live only on 'Kusha'  grass  solution  and nothing  else. 
This is the manner in which the austerity of 'Parnakrichchha vrata' is  observed.  
 
Tapta Krichchha Vrata - A person observing this austerity should begin by having hot milk on  the 
first day followed  by tepid  ghee  and lukewarm  water  on the second  and third  day respectively. 
He should observe a complete fast on the fourth  day. 
 
Pad Krichchha  Vrata  - This particular  austerity  lasts for four days.  On the first day a devotee 
should  observe  'Ekabhakta  vrata'  (having  food only once  a day in the noon).  On the second  day 
he should  observe  'Nakta'  vrata  (having  food only once  a day in the night).  On the third  day he 
should  break  his fast by having  whatever  is availabl e with him because  anything  that has been 
provided by others is strictly prohibited. He should observe a total fast on the fourth day. When  a 
devotee observes these cycles of austerity for three times then it is called 'Prajapatya  krichchhra 
vrata'.  
 
Ati K richchha Vrata - Rituals of this austerity is more or less similar to that of  Prajapatya 
krichchhra  vrata  with a slight  difference - here fast is broken  with a handful  of cooked  food. 
When this particular ritual is observed for four days then it is called A tikrichchha  vrata.  
Krichchha Atikrichha Vrata - Observing the rituals of Atikrichchha vrata for twenty -one days 
living only on milk and water is called Krichchhakrichha  vrata.  
 
 
 Parak Vrata - Observing complete fast for twelve continuous days is called Para k vrata.  
 
Chandrayan Vrata - It's an important austerity lasting for a month which commences on First  day 
of the bright half of a month by observing fast for the whole day and breaking it in the night  with 
one morsel  of food.  On the next day, i.e. 'dwitiya ' one morsel  of food is increased  which  means 
that instead  of one morsel  of food now two morsels  are taken.  This way one morsel  of food is 
increased  on each of the following  days till the fourteenth  day (chaturdashi)  when  the fast is 
broken by having fourt een morsels of food. A total fast is observed on 'Amavasya' (dark  moon). 
On the next day i.e. first day of the dark half of the month one morsel is decreased which  means 
that the devotee  should  break  his fast with thirteen  morsels  of food.  This way one morsel is 
decreased on each successive day till 'chaturdashi' when a devotee breaks his fast by having  only 
one morsel of food. This is the way, how a Chandrayan vrata should be  observed.  
 
Anang Trayodashi Vrata - This austerity is related with the worship of  Lord Shiva  and 
commences on the thirteenth day of the bright half of the Hindu month Margashirsh and lasts  for 
a year. It concludes exactly after a year when 'Rati' and 'Anang' are worshipped with  appropriate 
rituals.  Ten thousand  offerings  are made  in the sacrificial  fire. Brahmins  are fed and donations 
made to them. One who observes this austerity is blessed with health, wealth and good  fortune.  
 
Akhand Dwadashi Vrata - This austerity is related with the worship of Lord Vishnu.  It 
commences on the twelf th day of the bright half of the Hindu month Margashirsh and lasts for  a 
year consisting  of three  phases.  One important  characteristic  of this austerity  is that after four 
months,  which  is the first phase  of the austerity,  five vessels  filled  with food-grains are donated 
to Brahmins.  In the second  phase  of the austerity  consisting  of four months  and commencing 
from the Hindu month Chaitra, pots filled with parched grams are donated to  Brahmins. 
Similarly,  in the third  and final phase  of the austerity  pots filled with ghee  are donated  to 
Brahmins.  
 
Shiva Ratri Vrata - This austerity is related with the worship of Lord Shiva and a fast is  observed 
on the fourteenth day of the dark half of the Hindu month Falgun. A devotee should observe  fast 
in the night and wo rship Lord Shiva by chanting 'Om Namah Shivay'. He should perform  'havan' 
with black sesame seeds and worship Lord Shiva at midnight, in the third and the fourth  'prahar' 
(one prahar equals three hour) with appropriate rituals. One who observes fast on thi s day gets  all 
his wishes  fulfilled  and attains  salvation  as well.  A devotee  who observes  Shiva  Ratri  fast for 
twelve  successive  years  acquires  knowledge,  wealth,  success  and happiness.  Such  a man also 
attains to Shiva loka after his  death.  
   
 
VIRTUES OF OBS ERVING FAST ON SHIVA  RATRI 
NIGHT  
During ancient times there lived a hunter named Sundarsen in the province of Arbuda. One  day, 
he went deep into the forest in search of his prey but unfortunately he found none. He   wandered  
all over the place  but in vain. When  evening  came,  he climbed  up a wood  apple  (Bael)  tree to 
protect himself from the wild animals. Sundarsen was worried that his family  would  have 
nothing to eat that night. Engrossed in his contemplative mood, he kept on plucking leaves  from 
the 'Bael' tree and throwing  them  down.  There  was a Shivalinga  just under  the tree and the 
leaves, which Sundarsen threw, fell down on  it. 
 
Next morning while Sundarsen was climbing down the tree, his arrow fell down. While  picking 
up his arrow, he touched the Shi valinga. Sundarsen was unaware of the fact that it was  Shivaratri 
night  and he had worshiped  Lord  Shiva  with appropriate  rituals  albeit  inadvertently -he had 
offered  Bilva  patra  to Lord  Shiva  and had touched  the Shivalinga.  He attained  to Shiva  loka on 
account of the virtues attained by his inadvertent worship of Lord  Shiva.  
  THE POWER OF  CHASTITY  
Once, sage Vyasa went to Brahmaloka to get his doubts cleared on certain spiritual matters  from 
Lord Brahma. While dwelling on a wide range of religious topics suc h as importance  of 
austerities  and various  incarnations  Lord  Vishnu  took to protect  righteousness,  Lord  Brahma 
narrated a tale of a Brahmin woman who possessed divine powers on account of her  chastity.  
 
Lord Brahma said --'During ancient times there lived a Brahmin named Kaushik  in 
Pratishthanpur Nagar. He was inflicted with leprosy but still his wife was very chaste and  faithful 
towards  him. His wife used to be on her toes attending  to all his demands  and looking  after all 
his requirements.  But still, he used to scold  and abuse  his wife at the first given  opportunity 
without any rhyme or reason. However, his wife did not mind his behaviour understanding  quite 
well the frustrations of a man suffering from dreaded disease like  leprosy.'  
 
One day, something h appened which made Kaushik extremely angry and in a fit of rage he  made 
an impossible demand thinking that his wife would never comply by it giving him an  opportunity 
to curse  her to the satisfaction  of his heart.  Shouting  angrily  at his wife,  Kaushik  said- Age has 
started showing effect on you. You don't look beautiful as before. You have also  started 
neglecting me. Take me to a beautiful prostitute so that I can satisfy my sexual  urge.  
 
Kaushik's wife was deeply hurt by his rude and unfair remarks but she  remained cool and  calm. 
Being  a chaste  and faithful  wife she had no option  but to obey  her husband's  command.  So, she 
left for a prostitute's house carrying Kaushik on her  shoulders.  
 
The prostitute's  house  was far and it became  dark while  they were  still on the way.  Because  of 
darkness, Kaushik's wife could not see sage Mandavya, who in spite of his innocence was  given 
a severe  punishment  by the king- he had been  made  to sit on a pointed  cone  which  after having 
penetrated  through  his body  had pierced  even  his skull.  But, being  a great  sage,  Mandavya  was 
engrossed in his meditation even in such a painful physical condition. Unfortunately,  Kaushik's 
feet, which were hanging down the shoulders of his wife, touched Mandavya's body.  Mandavya's 
meditation  was disturbed  and he came  out from  his meditative  level.  As a result  he became 
conscious of his unbearable physical pain and cursed that whoever had disturbed his  meditation 
would not live to see the next  day.' 
Kaushik  died the next day but his wife,  who had full confidence  in her power  of chastity,  knew 
that her husband  would  be alive  once  again.  She cursed  angrily  -- 'Mandavya  has a 
misconception  about  his power.  He thinks  that only he can control  the natural  phenomena  but 
perhaps he does not know what feats a  chaste woman is capable of performing. Its my command 
to the Sun not to rise from tomorrow  onwards.'  
And indeed, the Sun stopped rising from the next morning leading to catastrophic  fallout. 
Everything went haywire in the world, which made the deities ex tremely worried. They came  to 
me (Lord Brahma) with a request to reveal why Sun had stopped rising. I told them that it was  all 
due to the curse  of a chaste  woman  and then I narrated  the whole  story.  I revealed  to them  that 
nobody except Sati Anusuya was c apable of bringing back order in the world. I advised them  to 
seek the help of Sati Anusuya  who was famous  for her exceptional  chastity.  So, all the deities 
went  to Sati Anusuya  and requested  her to make  the Sun rise so that everything  became  orderly 
in the world  once  again.  Sati Anusuya  agreed  to lend her help in bringing  back  normalcy  in the 
world.  She, by the virtue  of her chastity  not only made  the Sun rise daily  but also made  dead 
Kaushik alive once again. Such is the power commanded by a woman practic ing the austerity  of 
chastity.  There  are numerous  examples  of such women  famous  for their chastity  and Sita was 
one of  them.  VIII. THE TALE OF  RAMAYANA  
 
Lord Brahma then went on to describe the famous tale of Ramayana the mere listening to  which 
absolves  a man from all his sins. He began by giving the details of Sri Ram's lineage and  said--'I 
(Lord  Brahma)  manifested  from  the Lotus  originating  from  the navel  of Lord  Vishnu.  Sage 
Marich manifested from me while Kashyap was Marich's son. Surya manifested fr om Kashyap, 
Vaivaswat -Manu from Surya and Ikshavaku was born to Vaivaswat -Manu. The great  King 
Raghu was also the descendant of Ikshavaku. Raghu's son was Aja, whose son was  Dasharath.  
 
Dasharath  had three  queens -Kaushalya,  Kaikeyi  and Sumitra.  Kaushalya  gave birth  to Sri Ram 
while Kaikeyi was the mother of Bharata. Sumitra had two sons -Lakshman and  Shatrughan.  
 
Sri Ram  had great  devotion  towards  his parents.  Sage  Vishwamitra,  who was tormented  by the 
demons, took Sri Ram and Lakshman along with him so that  he could do his penance  peacefully. 
He assured  Dashrath  that he would  make  both his sons proficient  in all the scriptures  as well as 
in the usage of various weapons. With great reluctance, Dasharath allowed Sri Ram  and 
Lakshman to go along with  Vishwamitr a. 
 
Once  in the forest  Sri Ram  assured  his Guru  to do his penance  without  bothering  about  the 
demons. Vishwamitra commenced his penance and Sri Ram killed all the demons trying  to 
disturb him. The names of few demons killed by Sri Ram were Tadaka, Subahu,  etc. 
 
Janaka, the father of Sita had organized a grand 'Swayamvar' ceremony to which he had  invited 
all the prominent kings of that time. He had also sent invitation to Vishwamitra. Vishwamitra  set 
out for Janakapur accompanied by Sri Ram and  Lakshman.  
Janaka  had a huge  bow gifted  to him by Lord  Shiva  and which  he worshipped  daily  with 
appropriate ritual. Once during the process of cleaning the area where Shiva's bow was kept,  Sita 
lifted  the bow and kept it a distance.  Later  on she forgot  to keep  it back  at the original  place. 
When Janaka came to worship the bow he was surprised to find it to be kept at a different  place. 
He made  an inquiry  and Sita confessed  that she had kept it while  cleaning  the place  of worship. 
Janaka just could not believe that his t ender looking daughter possessed such strength and  power. 
No wonder  he decided  to give Sita's  hand  in marriage  to such a man who could  break  Shiva's 
bow. So, he made a declaration that anybody capable of breaking Shiva's bow could have Sita  as 
his wife.  
There were many mighty warriors present at the 'Swayamvar' ceremony but none had  the 
strength  to even  lift the bow what  to say about  breaking  it. Finally,  as the destiny  would  have 
liked  it, Sri Ram  broke  the bow into three  pieces  and thus married  Sita. Lakshman  married 
Urmila - another  daughter  of Dasharath  while  Bharata  and Shatrughan  married  Mandavi  and 
Keertimayi respectively, both daughters of King  Kushadhwaja.  
 
Later  on, when  Dasharath  decided  to crown  Sri Ram  as the King  of Ayodhya,  Kaikeyi  played  a 
spoilsport  and demanded  her son-Bharata  to be made  the King  of Ayodhya  and Sri Ram  to be 
sent into exile  for fourteen  years.  Actually,  Kaikeyi  had taken  undue  advantage  of Dasharath's 
helpless condition to serve her own interest. Once, Dasharath was busy fi ghting a battle  oblivious 
of the fact that one of the wheels  of the chariot  was about  to eject  from  its axle as the nail 
supporting it had fallen off. Kaikeyi, who was also accompanying him, saved his life by 
preventing  the wheel  from  falling  off and thus maintaining  the balance  of the chariot.  When 
Dasharath learnt how Kaikeyi had saved his life he promised to grant her two boons. At that  time 
Kaikeyi did not ask for any thing and merely said that she would demand at the appropriate  time. 
So, when  the time for Ram's  coronation  came  she thought  it was the best opportunity  for her to 
remind Dasharath about the two boons he had promised to grant  her.  
Dasharath,  bound  by his deep  love for Sri Ram  on the one hand  and by his vow on the other, 
agreed  to Kaikeyi's  demand  with a heavy  heart.  Sri Ram  without  any hesitation  followed  his 
father's order and left for the forest. How could have Sita and Lakshman lived without him?  So, 
they too accompanied  him to the forest.  In course  of his journey,  Sri Ram  passed  by many  holy 
places  and finally  after reaching  Chitrakoot  he made  a 'Parna  kuti' (hermitage  made  of leaves) 
and started living  there.  
 
The shock  caused  by Sri Ram's  separation  proved  to be fatal for Dasharath,  who died with an 
unfulfilled  desire  of having  a glimp se of his dearest  son. Bharata,  who at that time was at his 
maternal uncle's place, returned to Ayodhya after hearing the news of his father's demise  and 
performed his last rites. He then went to Chitrakoot and tried his level best to convince Sri  Ram 
into returning  back  to Ayodhya.  But, Sri Ram  did not agree,  as it was against  his principle  to 
disobey  the commands  of his father.  Sri Ram  gave  his pair of wooden  sandals  to Bharata  as a 
token of love and requested him to return to Ayodhya. Bharata returned to  Ayodhya and kept  Sri 
Ram's sandals on the throne. He then stationed himself at Nandigram - a city situated at  the 
outskirts of Ayodhya and started ruling from there on behalf of his elder brother. He had vowed 
not to return to Ayodhya till the completion o f Sri Ram's period of  exile.  
From Chitrakoot, Sri Ram reached Dandakaranya accompanied by Sita and Lakshman  and 
started  living  in a hermitage  made  of leaves.  There  they also met prominent  sages  like Atri and 
Agastya.  Once  an ogress  named  'Surpanakha'  (Rav an's sister)  attacked  Sri Ram  but Lakshman 
retaliated by severing both her ears as well as her nose. Surpanakha, badly injured and  bleeding 
profusely, went to Khardushan and narrated her woeful tale. Khardushan attacked Sri Ram with  a 
huge army consisting of fourteen thousand soldiers but lost all his men in the  battle.  
 
The revengeful  Ravan  went  to the hermitage  disguised  as a hermit  and abducted  Sita while  Sri 
Ram  was away  in pursuit  of Marich -the golden  deer.  Actually,  Marich  was a demon,  who had 
disguis ed himself  as a golden  deer on the instruction  of Ravan  so that Sita could  be abducted 
successfully. Ravan knew quite well that it was impossible for him to abduct Sita in the  presence 
of Sri Ram. So, he hatched a plan according to which Marich was to disg uise himself as a  golden 
deer and enchant Sita. Ravan was sure that Sita after being enchanted by the beauty of the  golden 
deer would  ask her husband  to get it at any cost. Everything  happened  as per the plan of Ravan 
and he was successful in abducting  Sita. 
 
When Sri Ram did not find Sita in the hermitage he became worried and started searching for  her 
frantically. On the way he met old Jatayu, who had got injured while trying to resist Ravan  from 
taking  away  Sita. Jatayu  informed  him that Ravan  had taken  Sita towards  south.  Jatayu  was so 
badly injured that he died soon after giving Sita's information to Sri Ram. Sri Ram performed  his 
last rites and continued  with his search.  He proceeded  towards  south  as per the instructions  of 
Jatayu  and reached  'Rishyam ook' mountain  where  he met Sugriva,  whom  he befriended.  He 
killed Bali, who harboured enemity against his brother - Sugriva. He then made Sugriva the  King 
of 'Kishkindha' and himself went to live at 'Rishyamook'  mountain.  
 
Sugriva  sent monkeys  in all direct ions to find out Sita's  whereabouts.  Hanuman  went  towards 
south and with the help of Sampati managed to find out the exact location where Ravan had  kept 
Sita. Hanuman  took a giant  leap and the next moment  he found  himself  on the other  side of the 
ocean. He  went to 'Ashok Vatika' where Ravan had kept Sita in captivity. He presented the  ring 
to her, which Sri Ram had given him. Sita, in turn gave her 'Chudamani' (ornament)  and 
requested  him to give it to Sri Ram.  Jumping  from  one branch  to another,  hungry  Hanuman  ate 
all the fruits and in the process destroyed the beautiful garden. When Ravan came to know  about 
the destruction caused in the beautiful garden of 'Ashok Vatika', he sent many demons to  capture Hanuman. But, all of them were killed including Akshay  Kumar, Ravan's son.  Ultimately, 
Hanuman was made captive by Meghanad and produced before Ravan, who ordered his tail to  be 
set ablaze  as a punishment.  Hanuman,  with his tail ablaze,  jumped  from  one palace  to another 
and burnt  the golden  city of Lanka  within no time.  He then returned  to his master  Sri Ram  and 
described everything in  detail.  
 
Finally, Sri Ram attacked Lanka with a huge army comprising of mighty warriors like  Hanuman, 
Sugriva,  Angad  and many  others.  A fierce  battle  took place  in which  all the demons  including 
Ravan were killed. The victorious Sri Ram returned to Ayodhya along with his consort Sita.  The 
residents  of Ayodhya  danced  in joy at the return  of their prodigious  son. Sri Ram  ruled  over 
Ayodhya for eleven thousand years. Finally he asce nded to the heaven taking along all  the 
people  of Ayodhya  with him but before  doing  that he appointed  Lav and Kush -his sons,  as his 
successors.  IX. SHRI KRISHNA  
Making a revelation to Vyasa that the Almighty God manifests himself whenever the  civilization 
is endangered  by the dominance  of sinners,  Lord  Brahma  said-- 'In Dwapar  yuga,  Lord  Vishnu 
incarnated  as Sri Krishna  to protect  Dharma  from  being  subjugated  by 'Adharma',  which  had 
become  all pervasive  at that time.  He was born to Vasudev  and Devaki.  Both  his parents  had 
been  kept under  captivity  by Kansa,  who was aware  of the prophesy  that he would  be killed  by 
Devaki's  eighth  son. In due course  of time Devaki  gave  birth  to seven  sons all of whom  were 
mercilessly  killed  by Kansa  one by one. In order  to prote ct the life of Sri Krishna - the eighth 
child born to Devaki, Vasudev exchanged him with the baby girl born to Yashoda and  Nand. 
Vasudev had no problem in moving out of the prison as Krishna by his divine power induced  all 
the guards to  sleep.  
 
Sri Krishna , being an incarnation of Lord Vishnu performed great feats right from his  childhood. 
Once,  Kansa  sent an ogress  named  Putna,  who tried to kill Sri Krishna  by breast -feeding  him. 
But, Krishna sucked her breasts with such ferocity that Putna met an instant death. In due  course 
of time Sri Krishna  killed  many  more  ferocious  demons  like Shakatasur,  Kaliya  Nag, 
Dhenukasur  and mesmerized  the residents  of Gokul  by his divine  bravery.  He also performed 
many other divine feats like lifting Govardhan mountain and pe rforming Ras -Lila  with  the 
Gopis. Seeing all his plans of killing Sri Krishna go in vain, Kansa sent him a message 
challenging for a duel - fought with his court -wrestlers named 'Mushtik' and 'Chanur'. Sri  Krishna 
killed both the dreaded demons without muc h difficulty. Ultimately, Sri Krishna climbed up  the 
throne sitting on which Ravan had been watching the wrestling bout and pulled him down by  his 
hair. He then punched Kansa on his chest so hard that he died an instantaneous  death.  
 
Having accomplished hi s most important mission of killing the demon king -Kansa and  liberating 
the earth  from  his tyranny,  Sri Krishna  went  on to complete  his education  under  the tutelage  of 
Sage  Sandipani.  During  ancient  times  it was customary  for a disciple  to offer  Dakshina  to his 
teacher, as a mark of respect after his education was complete. Sri Krishna following  this 
tradition  gave  an invaluable  Dakshina  to his Guru  by bringing  all his dead  sons alive  to earth 
from  'Yamloka'.  
 
Sri Krishna  was subsequently  crowned  as the king of Mathura  but on account  of the relentless 
attack  by Jarasandha  he had to abandon  his dear city and shift his base to Dwarka.  He had eight 
queens  among  whom  Rukmini  and Satyabhama  were  prominent.  Later  on he rescued  sixteen 
thousand and one hundred wome n from the captivity of Narakasur and married all of them.  From 
Rukmini he had a son named Pradyumna, who killed Shambarasur. Aniruddha was  Pradyumna's 
son and he married  Usha - daughter  of Banasur.  Banasur  was a great  devotee  of Lord  Shiva  and 
was blessed with one thousand  hands.  
 
Lord Shiva came to his rescue at the time when he was battling against the might of Sri  Krishna. 
A fierce  battle  was fought  between  both the deities,  which  remained  inconclusive  even  after a 
long time.  Lord  Shiva  then requested  Sri Krishna  to spare  Banasur's  life to which  he agreed 
albeit partially. Sri Krishna severed all the hands of Banasur barring two. Finally,  after 
accomplishing  his mission  of liberating  the earth  from  the darkness  of sin Sri Krishna  left for 
heavenly  abode.  X. THE TALE OF  MAHABHARATA  
Giving  the reasons  that lead to the great  battle  of Mahabharata,  Lord  Brahma  told sage Vyasa 
that Sri Krishna  had planned  this great  battle  and executed  it to perfection  to relieve  the earth 
from the burden of tyrants. While giving  the names of lineal ascendants of Kauravas  and 
Pandavas,  he said--'I (Lord  Brahma)  manifested  from  the lotus  which  itself  had its origin  in the 
navel of Vishnu. Atri manifested from me while Chandra from Atri. Buddh was born to  Chandra 
while  he himself  was the father  of Pururava.  Ayu was Pururava's  son while  he himself  was the 
son of  Yayati.  
 
The names  of few famous  descendants  of Yayati  were  Bharata,  Kuru  and Shantanu.  Shantanu 
had two wives - Ganga  and Satyavati.  The former  was the mother  of Bhishma,  the indomitable 
warrior,  who had vowed  to remain  a bachelor  throughout  his life. The latter  i.e. Satyavati  gave 
birth to two sons - Chitrangad and Vichitraveerya. A Gandharva killed Chitrangad  while 
Vichitraveerya died issue -less despite having two wives - Ambik a and Ambalika (both  daughters 
of the king of Kashi).  In order  to expand  their clan both Ambika  and Ambalika  begot  one son 
each from  sage Vyasa.  Ambika  gave  birth  to Dhritrashtra  while  Ambalika  to Pandu.  The same 
Vyasa also had a son from a maid servant wh o became famous as Vidur and who was famous  for 
his statesmanship and  tactfulness.  
 
Dhritrashtra  married  Gandhari  and begot  one hundred  sons from  her among  whom  Duryodhan 
was most notorious. These one hundred sons of Dhritrashtra became famous as Kauravas . Pandu 
had two wives  Kunti  and Madri  from  whom  he begot  five sons-Yudhisthira,  Bhima,  Arjun, 
Nakul  and Sahdev,  who all grew  up to be very powerful  and mighty.  All five of them  became 
famous as Pandavas. Pandu, their father had died while they were still y oung and Madri,  unable 
to bear the sorrow  had given  up her life by jumping  into the burning  pyre of her dead  husband. 
So, the Pandavas were brought up under the guardianship of  Kunti.  
 
Kauravas and Pandavas were bitter rivals right from their childhood. Du ryodhan never missed  a 
chance  to torment  the Pandavas - his cousins.  Both  Kauravas  and Pandavas  were  brought  up 
under  the tutelage  of Kripacharya  and Dronacharya,  both prominent  scholars  of their times. 
Once, Duryodhan tried to kill Bhima by poisoning him b ut fortunately Bhima not only came  out 
unscathed  but also with renewed  strength  and vigour.  Duryodhan  tried his luck for the second 
time to eliminate his enemies by setting ablaze the house of wax in which Pandavas were  living 
but once  again  they came  out unharmed.  Pandavas  then went  to 'Ekchakra  Nagar'  and took 
refuge  in the house  of a Brahmin  family.  A demon  named  'Baka'  used to torment  the people  of 
Ekchakra  Nagar.  Bhima  killed  that demon  and the people  were  relieved  at the news  of their 
tormentor's  death. Thereafter  Pandavas  went  to attend  the Swayamvar  ceremony  of Draupadi. 
Arjun won Draupadi as his wife by piercing the eye of the fish hanged above his head by  looking 
at its image in the water -pot kept  below.  
 
At the insistence  of Dronacharya  and Bhishm a, Yudhisthira  reluctantly  agreed  to share  half of 
his Kingdom with the Pandavas. Thus Pandavas started living at Indraprashth, the capital of  their 
newly acquired  Kingdom.  Arjuna married Subhadra, his second wife and the sister of Sri Krishna. He pleased  Agni Dev by 
his austere penance and received divine weapons like - a divine chariot, Gandiv  (bow), 
imperishable arrows and an impenetrable shield. After being armed with these divine weapons  he 
successfully defeated many powerful monarchies and gave the wh ole acquired wealth  to 
Yudhisthira, his elder  brother.  
 
Dhrithrashtra invited Yudhisthira for a game of 'Dyuta' (gamble) but Duryodhan defeated him  by 
employing unfair and deceitful tactics with the active connivance of Shakuni - his cunning 
maternal  uncle.  Yudhisthira  lost everything  in the gamble - his whole  wealth,  his kingdom  and 
even Draupadi. Pandavas had to go into exile for twelve years with an additional year  of 
'Agyatwas'  (they  were  not supposed  to be recognized  during  this period)  as per the terms  and 
conditions laid down for the  game.  
 
After completing their total period of exile, Pandavas reached Virat Nagar to spend their year  of 
'Agyatwas',  which  posed  more  dangers  and challenges  because  if they were  recognized  during 
this period it would have m eant another twelve years of exile for  them.  
 
Having successfully completed their period of exile, Pandavas demanded back their  Kingdom 
but Duryodhan  was not even  willing  to part away  with five villages.  Thus  Pandavas  were  left 
with no option but to fight  for their legitimate rights. Both the rival armies boasted of mighty  and 
brave warriors on their  sides.  
 
Duryodhan  appointed  Bhishma  as the chief  commander  of his army  whereas  Shikhandi  was 
leading Pandava's army. The first ten days of the battle saw a f ierce fight between both the  rival 
armies  during  which  period  many  warriors  from  each side achieved  martyrdom.  Finally,  while 
Bhishma  lay down  injured,  his whole  body  pierced  with Arjuna's  arrows,  but still alive  because 
he had received  a boon  of 'Iccha  Mrityu' (death  by his choice)  prominent  warriors  from  both 
sides stood around him. It was only after the Sun came north of equinox (Uttarayan),  the 
auspicious  time Bhishma  had chosen  to leave  his mortal  body  that he died after preaching  the 
Pandavas on wide range of  subjects.  
 
After  Bhishma's  death  Dronacharya  led the Kaurava's  army.  This was the most  crucial  phase  of 
the battle.  Dronacharya  had become  so demoralized  after his son's  death,  that he had just no 
motivation left in him to fight the battle. Findin g an opportune moment, Dhrishtadyumna  severed 
his head and Kauravas thus lost their most able and experienced  commander.  
 
Duryodhan appointed Karna as the next commander of Kaurava's army. The most decisive  phase 
of the battle  began  and after a fierce  battle of two days Arjuna  managed  to kill his brave  rival. 
Subsequently, Yudhisthira killed  Shalya.  
 
After loosing all his mighty warriors, Duryodhana, in a fit of rage challenged Bhima for a duel  of 
mace.  Bhima  killed  him after a fierce  fight.  The revengeful  Ashwatthama,  son of Dronacharya, 
attacked  the Pandava's  camp  at night,  much  against  the norms  of battle  and killed  all the five 
sons of Draupadi  and thousand  of other  Pandava  soldiers.  Arjuna  avenged  the death  of his sons 
by defeating Ashwatthama and extra cting the diamond set in his  forehead.  
After  the battle  ended,  Yudhisthira  performed  the rituals  of Shraddh  in the name  of all the dead 
warriors  and ascended  the throne.  He ruled  in a just manner  just according  to the instructions 
given  by Bhishma.  After  Sri Krishna  left this mortal  world,  Yudhisthira  appointed  Parikshit  as 
his successor and left for Himalaya accompanied by his brothers as well as  Draupadi.  
 XI. THE ETERNAL TRUTH  
Lord Brahma, while shedding light on various aspects of religion told sage Vyasa that a  man 
should look at his sorrows (shoka) with a sense of aloofness and detachment, considering it as  a 
passing phase. He also revealed to Vyasa that the 'fire of sorrow' consumed everything that  came 
into its fold and nothing  remained  untouched  by it. A sorrowful  man becomes  bereft  of all his 
possessions -knowledge, religion, physical strength, patience, happiness and all such  qualities.  
 
Lord  Brahma  also told him that virtuous  deeds  never  went  without  being  rewarded,  as all good 
things enjoyed by a man  in his life are nothing but the result of his virtuous past 'Karmas'. On  the 
contrary sinful deeds committed by a man makes his present as well as his future  births 
miserable. Further, glorifying the virtues of some other good deeds, Lord Brahma  said-' 
Protecting  the life of a person,  whose  life is endangered  and who has sought  one's  refuge  is the 
greatest  virtue  and no other  deed  can be compared  with it. One who sheds  his life to protect  his 
religion attains to  heaven.  
 
A contented  man enjoys  even  his adversities  and remains  unperturbed  by them.  A man should 
never  miss a chance  to get benefited  by the company  of enlightened  souls  because  it gives  him 
an opportunity to understand religion in a better way. Donating food begets incomparable  virtues 
and no ot her virtuous deed stands anywhere near  it.' 
 
Lord Brahma concluded by describing Sanatan Dharma in a nutshell and said -' Anybody 
observing the following austerities should be considered an ardent follower of 'Sanatan  Dharma' - 
truth, penance, self -control, purity, forgiveness, compassion, knowledge and  donation.  
   
 
THE SUPREME  YOGA  
Once, Sage Shaunak asked Sutji about the reasons behind man's sorrow. Sutji told him that  man's 
ego and his attachments to this mortal world were the two most important causes for h is sorrow 
and until he gets rid of them he will continue to suffer. Sutji said -' The 'tree of ignorance'  sprouts 
from  the seed of 'egotism'  and it receives  its nutrition  from  sensual  pleasures.  Only  those  who 
possess the 'axe of knowledge' are successful i n felling this 'tree of ignorance' and experience  the 
ecstasy  of Divine  bliss.  Once  a man has experienced  this divine  bliss he not only becomes  free 
from all kinds of sorrow but is also freed from the cycles of birth, death and rebirth. This  divine 
link which a man establishes  with the Almighty  is called  'Mahayoga'  (the supreme  Yoga).  But, 
those  unfortunate  people  who have  not experienced  this divine  bliss continue  to get trapped  by 
the worldly illusions leading to their countless births and  deaths.'  
Sutji  then went  on to describe  the means  by which  a man can have  a pure heart  and said-' 
Austerities like meditation, worship, fasts, oblations, charity, etc., certainly helps a  man  in 
getting rid of all kinds of  impurities.'  
   
 
DEVOTION -THE PATH LEADING TO  ALMI GHTY  
Glorifying  devotion  as the simplest  means  to reach  God,  Sutji  told Shaunak  that there  was 
nothing  else that pleased  God more  than the unflinching  devotion  of his devotee  in him. Sutji 
said-- 'A devotee  who chants  the holy name  of God acquires  imperish able virtues  and attains 
salvation  even  if he were  a lowly  sinner.  One who has surrendered  himself  to the will of God is 
absolved  of all his sins. Even  'Yamaraj' - The lord of death  has strictly  instructed  his escorts  to 
spare  those  who are devotees  of Lord  Vishnu.  Lord  Vishnu  himself  has declared  that anybody 
having total devotion in him should be considered as the most virtuous soul even if he  had 
committed the most heinous of  sins.'  
 
Further hailing the glory of chanting Lord Vishnu's name Sutji said -' The mere chanting of  Lord 
Vishnu's name in 'Kali yuga' brings the same virtue what the combined virtues of meditating  on 
him during  'Satya  yuga',  chanting  his sacred  mantras  during  'Treta  yuga'  and worshipping  him 
during  'Dwapar  yuga'  brought.  A devotee  who has nothing  but the sacred  name  of Lord  Vishnu 
on his lips is certain to attain to Vishnuloka after becoming free from the bondage of this  world. 
Chanting  the divine  name  of Vishnu  even  in dreams  is believed  to absolve  a man of all his sins 
then what to s ay about people who consciously chant his holy name while they are  awake.'  
 
Thus Sutji told Sage Shaunak that anybody could attain salvation by simply having  total 
devotion in Lord Vishnu as it was the most simplest path leading to the  Almighty.  
   
 
XII. THE  DIVINE  STROTRAS  
 
NRISINHA STOTRA  
Telling about the origin of this stotra, Sutji said --'Lord Shiva had created this stotra praising  the 
glory  of Lord  Nrisinha  and invoking  him to protect  the world  from  the wrath  of Matrikas.  The 
stotra goes as follows  -- 
 
Namastestu Jagannath Narsinha  Vapurdhar; 
Daiteshwar Endra Sanharinakha Bhukti  Virajit. 
Nakh Mandal Sambhinna Hempingal  Vigrah; 
Namostu Padmanabhay Shobahanay  Jagadguro. 
Kalp Antambho Danighosh Suryakoti  Samprabha; 
Sahastra Yam Santras Sahastrendra  Parakram . 
Sahastra Dhandasfeet Sahastra  Charanatmaka; 
Sahastra Chandra Pratim Sahastransu  Harikram. 
Sahastra Rudra Tejaska Sahastra Brahma  Sanstut; 
Sahastra Rudra Sanjat Sahastra Aksha  Nirikshana. 
Sahastra Janma Mathana Sahastra Bandh  Mochan; 
Sahastra Vayu Vegasa  Sahastra Anga  Kripakar.  
   
KULAMRIT  STOTRA  
Sage  Narada  once  asked  Lord  Shiva  about  the means  by which  a man could  become  free from 
the delusions of the world. Lord Shiva revealed to him the contents of 'Kulamrit  stotra', 
eulogizing  the majesty  of Lord  Vishnu . By chanting  this stotra,  Narada  successfully  attained  to 
that supreme status, which even the most enlightened souls can only dream of. One  who 
eulogizes  Lord  Vishnu  by chanting  this stotra,  becomes  liberated  from  all the bondage  of the 
world. The stotra goes as follows  -- 
 
Yastu Vishwamana Dyanta Majamatmani  Sansthitam; 
Sarvagya Machalam Vishnum Sada Dhyayet Sa  Muchyet. 
Devam Garbho Chitam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen  Vimuchyet; 
Ashariram Vidhataram Sarvagyan  Manoratim.  
Achalam Sarvagam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen  Vimu chyet; 
Nirvikalpam Nirabhasam Nishprapancham  Niramayam. 
Vasudevam Gurum Vishnum Sada Dhyayen  Vimuchyet; 
Sarvatkam Cha Vai Yavadatma Chaitanya  Rupakam.  
Shubham Ekaksharam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen  Vimuchyet; 
Vamyatitam Trikalagyam Vishvesham  Loksakshinam.  
Sarva Smadyutam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen  Vimuchyet; 
Brahmadi Deva Gandharvai Munibhih Siddha  Charanaih. 
Yogibhih Sevitam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen  Vimuchyet;  
Sansar Bandhanan Mukti Michhamleko Dhya  Sheshatah. 
Stutvaivam Varadam Vishnum Sada Dhyayen  Vimuchyet; 
Sansar Ban dhanat Kopi Mukti Michchhan  Samahitah.  
Anant Matyayam Devam Vishnum Vishva  Pratishthitim; 
Vishveshwar Masaram Vishnum Sada Dhyayan  Vimuchyet.  
   
MRITYU ASHTAK STOTRA  
Describing  the origin  of this stotra,  Sutji  said-- 'Lord  Vishnu  himself  had taught  this power ful 
stotra to Sage Markandeya. The daily chanting of this powerful mantra had enabled  Markandeya 
to conquer death. One who daily chants this stotra thrice a day enjoys a long life and never dies  a 
premature death. The stotra goes as follows  -- 
 
Damodaram Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh  Karishyati; 
Shankh Chakra Dharam Devam Vyakta Rupin  Matyayam. 
Adhokshajam Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh  Karishyati; 
Varaham Vamanam Vishnum Narsiham  Janardanam.  
Madhavam Cha Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh  Karishyati; 
Purusham Pushkar Kshet rabijam Punyam  Jagatpatim.  
Loknatham Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh  Karishyati; 
Sahastra Shirasam Devam Vyakta Tyaktam  Sanatanam. 
Mahayogam Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh  Karishyati; 
Bhutatmanam Mahatmanam Yagyayoni  Mayojinam.  
Vishvarupam Prapannosmi Kinno Mrityuh  Karishyati; 
Ityudi Ritmarkandyam Stotram Tasya  Mahatmanah.  
Iti Tena Jito Mrityu Markande Yen  Dhimta; 
Prasanne Pundarikakshe Nrisinhe Nasti  Durlabham.  XIII. SALVATION THROUGH  YOGA  
Sutji  told Sage  Shaunak  that the ultimate  aim of a man's  life was to attain  salvati on. A man can 
not attain  salvation  until and unless  he has seen through  the trappings  of the worldly  illusions. 
Sutji said --'Practice of Yoga helps a man to live in this world with a sense of detachment and  to 
successfully avoid the allurements of this mor tal world. Yoga comprises of six  organs:  
 
Pranayamaa (Breathing exercises), Japa (chanting), Pratyahara (restraining sense  organs), 
Dharana (resolution), Dhyana (meditation), and Samadhi (deep  meditation).  
 
Not running  after sensual  pleasures  by having  self control  helps  a man in diminishing  his sins 
and diminishment of sins pleases the deities who give blessings. Blessings of deities help a  man 
to attain salvation. Pranayama, an important part of Yoga is of two types -'Garbha' and  'Agarbha'. 
Pranayama, done  with simultaneous chanting of a mantra is called 'Garbha' whereas in  'Agarbha' 
Pranayama mantras are not  chanted.  
 
It is natural  for a man to get attracted  by worldly  pleasures  and checking  this tendency  of the 
mind  is called  'Pratyahara'.  It is not easy to control  the mind  and concentrate  on anything  for a 
long time but 'Dharana'  helps  a man to do that. When  a man has successfully  controlled  his 
sensual desires, then it becomes very easy for him to concentrate his mind. A concentrated  mind 
finds  it easy to meditate.  When  he has mastered  meditation  it is not much  difficult  for him to 
enter  into the deep  state of meditation  i.e. 'Samadhi'.  In the state of 'Samadhi',  all sense  of 
dualism  cease  to exist  as one establishes  divine  link with the Almighty,  which  helps  him in 
experiencing indescribable divine  bliss.  
   
 
SELF  REALIZATION  
Once,  on being  asked  by Sage  Narada  about  the means  that helped  a man in attaining  self 
realization, Lord Vishnu told him that only those privileged few who have understood  the 
imperma nent nature  of this world  and have  successfully  controlled  their sensual  desires  can 
attain self realization. All the mysteries of this Universe are unraveled to a man of self  realization 
and he attains  salvation.  Lord  Vishnu  said-' It should  be the prime  objective  of a man to make 
incessant  efforts  so that he can experience  this divine  knowledge  of self realization -the real 
knowledge, for every other kind of knowledge is superficial and of least  significance.'  
 
Lord Vishnu went on to describe how self real ization could be  attained -- 
'Yadasarve Vimuchyante Kama Yeshya Hridi  Sthitah;  
Tadamrit Twa Mapnopati Jivanneva Na  Sanshayah.  
 
Meaning -- When there is no desire left in the heart then a man is certain to experience the  divine 
taste of this nectar (self real ization) in his life time -- and there is no doubt about  it. 
Unraveling  the mystery  of Universe  to Sage  Narada,  Lord  Vishnu  said--'Brahman  is the cause 
behind  this universe  and one who has understood  this fact can be rightly  called  a man of self 
realizatio n. A man being  under  the influence  of his sensual  perceptions  falsely  believes  this 
world  to be real and is unable  to understand  the real cause  behind  the existence  of this world, 
which  is not the case with a man of self realization.  Instead  of searching  'without'  a man should 
seek 'within'  because  within  him exists  the Universe  just like our sense  organs  perceive  them 
externally. The whole mystery of Universe is unraveled to a man who makes incessant efforts  to 
undertake this inner journey for if his effor ts are made with a pure heart and a firm  determination 
then he is sure to reach  his goal of self realization  one day or the other.  The soul (Atma)  is 
Brahman  but this fact becomes  apparent  only to those  privileged  few, who have  attained  self 
realization.  Self realization  illuminates  the soul in the same  way just as a lightning  illuminates 
the dark sky at  night.'  
 
Lord  Vishnu  went  on to describe  himself  in the following  words --'I am Pure and beyond  the 
limits  of human  intelligence.  I am beyond  the confinemen t of three  basic  qualities  (Satva  guna, 
Rajas guna and Tamas guna). Only he can experience Me who possesses an enlightened  soul 
because I manifest Myself in the heart of every individual as a divine effulgence in order to  drive 
away the darkness which engu lfs it.' 
   
 
BRAHMA -GITA  
Anybody who studies the sacred texts of 'Brahma -Gita' is certain to attain salvation for  it 
brilliantly propounds the theory of divinity of man by proclaiming that in each individual  dwells 
Brahman -the supreme Almighty. Eulogizing th e glory of 'Brahma Gita' Lord Vishnu  said-- 
'Brahma -Gita declares that in each individual dwells Brahman and one who has understood  this 
fact becomes free from the bondage of the world i.e. attains salvation. Nobody can deny the  fact 
that God exists  becaus e the Almighty  manifests  himself  all around  us in various  forms  both 
perceptible and imperceptible. All the five elements (space, air, water, fire and earth) are  nothing 
but the manifestations of Almighty  God.'  
 
'Unfortunately, most of the people are unawa re of the presence of divinity in them - the existence 
of Brahman in each of them. The reason for this is not much difficult to comprehend because  this 
fact is so subtle  that only enlightened  souls  can experience  it. HE lies dormant  and cannot  be 
experience d until and unless  He is awakened  by means  of austerities  and penance.  Brahman  is 
ever present  in a man and does not abandon  him in any of the three  states  of his consciousness - 
while he is awake, while he is dreaming or even while he is  asleep.  
 
Despite  being present  in every  individual  he still remains  unaffected  by his deeds  because  by 
nature He is eternally pure. One more reason why man is unable to feel the presence of  Brahman 
in himself  is his own ego, with which  he falsely  develops  deep  association.  So, a person  who is 
desirous of realizing God must first subdue his ego so that Brahman manifests himself in all  his 
glory.  Without  subduing  his 'ego' a man can never  realize  God because  the sense  of dualism  is 
the greatest impediment in the path of God re alization and 'egotism' only strengthen this sense  of 
dualism.'  
'Once man has successfully subdued his ego, the dawning of God realization becomes  imminent 
because Brahman now has no problem in manifesting himself in the changed scenario.  Brahman 
who is absolute  truth,  eternally  pure and the supreme  Almighty.  He is the eternal  bliss dwelling 
in each individual - the realization  which  made  the Vedas  to proclaim  'Tatvam  Asi'(Thou  is me) 
and who is beyond the confinement of time and  space.'  
 
Ultimately, Lord V ishnu revealed to Sage Narada that Brahman whose glory he had praised  was 
none other than  himself.  
   
 
XIV. GARUDA  QUERIES  
Sutji  once  reached  the forest  of 'Naimisharanya'  in course  of his journey.  Naimisharanya  was a 
holy place where sages and hermits went to do penance. After reaching there Sutji met  many 
prominent  sages  who were  pleased  at his arrival.  They  took it as a God sent opportunity  to get 
their doubts cleared on the mystery called death and what exactly happened after a man  died.  
 
Sage  Shaunak,  one of those  sages,  asked  Sutji --'O Revered  Sage!  We were  just awaiting  your 
arrival. It seems God has listened to our prayer. We are confused by so many diverse  and 
contradictory  opinions  expressed  on the mystery  of 'death'  and what  happens  after death.  Some 
people are of the belief that a man takes rebirth soon after his death whereas there are some  who 
believe  that a man after his death  first goes to 'Yamloka'  to taste the fruits  of his 'Karmas'  and 
only then he takes  rebirth.  We request  you to clear  our doubts  and enlighten  us on the mystery 
called  death.'  
 
Sutji  recounted  the tale of Garuda,  who had once  posed  the same  query  to Lord  Krishna.  While 
narrating the tale, Sutji said -- 'Garuda -son of Vinta, once decided to get a first hand experience  of 
all the three 'Lokas'  (worlds).  After  visiting  all the three  worlds  he returned  to 'Vaikuntha  loka' 
and narrated his experiences to Lord  Krishna.  
 
Garuda said -- 'After visiting all the three 'Lokas' I found the Earth (Prithvi) little overcrowded  as 
compared  to other  'Lokas'.  I also found  that it provided  better  opportunities  to a man both for 
materialistic enjoyments as well as his spiritual advancement. So, I have come to the  conclusion 
that 'Prithviloka'  was the best of all the 'Lokas'  in every  respect.  But, all round prevalence  of 
sorrow and misery in 'Prithvi loka' made me  sad. 
 
I was really  perplexed  to see people  performing  complex  rituals  after the death  of their relative. 
All these  rituals  appeared  so absurd  to me. I was really  amazed  to see people  laying  down  their 
dead  relatives  on the ground.  I could  also not understand  why a dead  body  is laid on the bed of 
'kusha'  grass  and sesame  seeds.  I witnessed  so many  rituals  that surprised  me, for instance  I 
could  not understand  the reason  why donations  are made  after a man dies. I am puzzled  by the 
mystery called death or, what becomes of him after he  dies. 
 
The sight  of sons lifting  the dead  body  of their father  on their shoulders  is still fresh  in my 
memory. I could not understand the reason why 'ghee' (clarified but ter) is applied on a dead  body 
or why the relatives of the deceased chant 'Yama sukta' facing north. I was also surprised to  see 
the son of the deceased being debarred from having meal along with his other relatives. O  Lord!  
Please reveal to me the signi ficance of making 'pinda dan' or, the significance of 'tarpan'  rituals? 
Please tell me the proper method of offering 'pinda dan' and invoking ancestors? I find it hard  to 
believe that all the deeds virtuous or evil committed by a man follows him after his  death.'  
 
This way Garuda flooded Lord Krishna with a barrage of questions and sought clarifications  on 
them.  
   
 
SALVATION THROUGH  RITUALS  
Lord  Krishna  replied --"I am so delighted  that you have  asked  such important  questions  for the 
benefit of mankind. I am r evealing to you the secrets, which were hitherto unknown even to  the 
deities  and yogis.  O Garuda!  A man should  try to beget  a son with the help of means  as 
mentioned in the scriptures because there is no salvation for a person bereft of  son."  
 
Lord Krishn a then went on to describe the proper rituals which are performed after the death of  a 
man and said-"First  of all, the area should  be purified  by coating  it with a layer  of cow-dung. 
This purified  area is called  'mandal'  and it is graced  by the presence  of the 'Trinity' -- Brahma, 
Shiva  and Myself.  Sesame  seeds  are then sprinkled  on the purified  area and kusha  grass  is 
spread. A person whose death is imminent is then laid down on the bed of kusha  grass. 
Scriptures  say that a person  who does not leave  his mortal body  in the above  mentioned  way, 
wanders  hither  and thither  in the form  of a restless  spirit.  No amount  of rituals  can put such a 
soul to rest. O Garuda! Sesame seed has manifested from my sweat and hence is extremely  pure. 
All kind of evil forces  like, ghosts,  spirits,  demons,  etc. keep  away  from  the place  where  it is 
used.  
 
Similarly,  Kusha  grass  has manifested  from  my body  hair and is graced  by the presence  of 
'Trinity' -- Brahma, Shiva and Vishnu. Deities are satisfied if kusha grass is offered to t hem while 
ancestors  are satisfied  by the offerings  of sesame  seeds.  Scriptures  say that if dying  man is laid 
down  on the bed of kusha  grass  spread  on the land purified  by cow-dung,  he becomes  absolved 
of all his sins. There is a great significance of donat ing salt after the death of a person. Salt  owes 
its origin  to Me and donating  it helps  ancestors  in attaining  heaven.  Donating  salt also helps  in 
reducing  the pain and sufferings  of a dying  man and this is why it is donated  along  with other 
articles  after a death  of a person.  The relatives  of the deceased  should  chant  the sacred  'Yama 
sukta'  facing  north  because  it helps  him to attain  liberation."  Lord  Krishna  then explained  to 
Garuda  the appropriate  way of carrying  the corpse  to the cremation  ground --"The  dead  body 
should  be carried  to the cremation  ground  by the sons an other  relatives  of the deceased.  In the 
cremation  ground  the dead  body  should  be kept in such a way that it's head  should  be either 
towards east or north. The pyre should be made either of sandal or 'palash'  wood."  
 
Describing  the experiences  of the soul when  it leaves  the body,  Lord  Krishna  said--"The  soul 
leaves the mortal body with great reluctance because the attachment with the mortal world  exists 
even after his death. Yamdoots, descend  down to earth to take the soul of the dying man to  Yama 
loka.  Those  who have  committed  grave  sins are tied with ropes  and taken  to Yama  loka with 
great  humiliation  but virtuous  souls  are taken  with honour  and due respect.  Yamraj - the lord of 
death  receive s the virtuous  soul with all the honour  and respect  and metes  out punishment  to 
those who had committed sins during their  lives.  
In his dark complexion  and with a buffalo  as his mount  and with a noose  and iron stick  in his 
hands, Yamraj appears terrifying . On the other hand, the sight of lifeless body appears  disgusting 
and people  try to dispose  it off as quickly  as possible  because  it is worthless  without  a soul.  So, 
one must try to make the best use of this mortal body by indulging in good deeds before t he day 
of his final journey arrives otherwise he would be left with nothing but regrets at the time of  his 
death.  
   
 
DEATH AND  AFTER  
Continuing with his narration, Lord Krishna said --"O Garuda! Death comes at the  predetermined 
time, which remains fixed and u naltered under all circumstances. A man's sense organs  become 
weak and his body feeble, which gets inflicted with numerous diseases in his old age. At the  time 
of his death, man experiences unbearable pain and he begins to loose his consciousness. 
Yamdoots  arrive  and begin  to retrieve  the soul from  the body  and this aggravates  the pain. 
Ultimately, the soul, which is not more than the size of a thumb, reluctantly comes out from  the 
body as the attachment with the world exists even after his death. But, a vi rtuous person does  not 
go through  all these  painful  experiences  at the time of his death.  The soul has to take birth  in 
different  species  as well as go through  cycles  of countless  births,  deaths  and rebirths  in order  to 
taste the fruits of his  Karmas.  
 
Describing the significance of 'Pinda dan' rituals, Lord Vishnu told Garuda that they  are 
performed  so that manes  are satiated.  He also revealed  to him that six pinda  dans are offered  to 
the manes  while  performing  the rituals  of last rites-- "The  first 'pind a-dan' is made  at the place 
where person has breathed his last while the second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth 'Pinda dans'  are 
made  at the main  entrance  of the house,  the nearest  cross -roads,  the cremation  ground,  on the 
pyre itself and at the time of co llecting last remains (Asthi)  respectively.  
 
After  reaching  the cremation  ground  the dead  body  should  be laid down  with its head  towards 
south.  The mortal  body  then should  be consigned  to flames  and after some  time sesame  seeds 
and ghee should be poured in to the burning pyre so that it continues to burn  without  any 
problem.  For the next ten days the relatives  coming  from  the same  gotra  of the deceased  should 
observe  a period  of 'Ashaucha' - a period  during  which  he observes  strict  austerities  and avoids 
social contacts.  The son of the deceased  is prohibited  from  having  food along  with his relatives 
simply because he is believed to be impure during this  period."  
 
This way, being  satisfied  by Lord Krishna's  answers,  Garuda  thanked  him for clearing  whatever  doubts he 
had in his mind. Lord Krishna blessed  him. 
 
 
 