Jnana Vahini

Stream of Spiritual Wisdom 
1. Remove ignorance by incisive inquiry
Just as thick fog is dispelled by the rays of the Sun, ignorance melts away before the powerful rays of knowl -
edge  (Sanskrit saying). Knowledge is acquired by uninterrupted inquiry. One should constantly be engaged 
in the inquiry of the nature of Brahman —the reality of the I, the transformations that occur to the individual at 
birth and at death, and other such matters. Just as you remove the husk that covers up the rice, so too you have to 
remove the ignorance that adheres to the mind, by frequent application of incisive Atmic  inquiry. It is only when 
full knowledge is won that one can get liberated, or, in other words, attain moksha . After attaining the above-
mentioned Atmic  knowledge, one has to follow the path of Brahman and act according to the new wisdom.
All doubts that afflict the mind have to be solved by consulting those who know or the true teachers one has 
the chance to meet. Until one gets firmly fixed in the path that the spiritual teacher ( guru ) or sacred text ( sastra ) 
has shown, one has to steadfastly obey their rules and directions. One has to be in their company or be associated 
with them in one way or other. Because one can progress very fast if one keeps close to a wise person who has 
realised the truth, one must, with unrestricted renunciation and sincere earnestness, follow the instructions of the 
teacher and of the holy scriptures. This is the real penance ( tapas ); this spiritual exercise leads on to the highest 
stage.
2. Cognize the shining inner Atma as oneself
When ignorance and its concomitant delusion disappear, the Atma  in everyone shines in Its own splendour. 
All that we see is as a mirage, the superimposition of something over the Real and the mistaking of that 
for this. Things have a beginning and an end; they evolve and involve; there is evolution as well as involution. 
When all is subsumed by involution (dissolution of the world, pralaya ), only the causal substance ( mula-prakriti ) 
endures. Only the unmanifested cause survives the universal dissolution.
When gold is melted in the crucible, it shines with a strange yellow glory. Where did that light emanate from? 
From the gold or the fire? What happened was only the removal of the dross by the fire; the effulgence belonged 
to the gold itself; it is its very nature. The fire is only an instrument for the removal of the dross. Nothing has been 
added to the gold by the fire in the crucible!
If fire could give the splendour, then why doesn’t a stick or blade or pebble placed in the fire become as shin -
ing as gold? One has to conclude that the splendour came not through fire but out of its own inner nature.
The inner presiding Atma  (Pratyagatma ) is separate from the five sheaths of the individual (the pancha-
kosas ). It shines with its own splendour; it is the witness of the activities and consequences of the three qualities 
(gunas ); it is immovable; it is holy and pure; it is eternal; it is indivisible; it is self-manifested, it is peace; it has 
no end; it is wisdom itself. Such an Atma  has to be cognised as Oneself.10
Jnana Vahini  3. To realise the Atma, overcome four obstacles
To realise this Atma , this embodiment of spiritual wisdom ( jnana-swarupa ), four obstacles have to be over -
come: sleep ( laya), waywardness ( vikshepa ), inertia ( kshaya ), and the enjoyment of bliss ( rasa-aswadana ). 
Let’s analyze them one by one.
Sleep  (laya). When the mind withdraws from the external world, it enters into deep sleep ( sushupti ), because of 
the overpowering influence of the objective world ( samsara ). The spiritual aspirant should arrest this tendency 
and attempt to fix the mind on the inquiry into the nature of the true Self ( Atma-vichara ). The aspirant must keep 
watch over the mind in order to keep awake and must discover the circumstances that induce the drowsiness and 
remove them in time. The aspirant must start the process of meditation ( dhyana ) again and again.
Of course, the usual producer of drowsiness and sleep during meditation is indigestion. Overfeeding, exhaus -
tion through too much moving about, want of sufficient sleep at night —these also cause sleepiness and drowsi -
ness. So on those days when you wake up after a sleepless night, it is advisable to sleep a little at noon, although 
generally all those who engage in meditation should avoid sleep during the daytime.
Don’t eat until you feel proper hunger. Practise the art of moderate eating. When you feel three-fourths full, 
stop eating; that is to say, stop even when you feel you can take a little more. In this way, the stomach can be 
educated to behave properly.
Over-exercise is also not good. Even walking can be overdone. You can walk until you conquer drowsiness, 
but remember that you cannot plunge into meditation immediately after you have warded off sleep.
Waywardness  (vikshepa ). The mind seeks to run after external objects, so constant effort is needed to turn it 
inward, away from the attractions of sensory impressions. This has to be done through the rigorous exercise of 
the intellect, of inquiry. Discriminate and get the conviction driven into you that these sensory impressions are 
evanescent, temporary, transformable, liable to decay, and, therefore, unreal ( mithya ) and not truth ( sathya ). 
Convince yourself that what is sought after as pleasurable and avoided as painful are only the fleeting products 
of sensory contacts. Train yourself in this way to avoid the distractions of the external world and dive deep into 
meditation.
A sparrow pursued by a hawk flies in despair for shelter into a house, but it is anxious to fly again into the 
outer world, right? So also, the mind is anxious to go again into the outer world, from the Atma , where it takes 
refuge. Waywardness is this mental attitude, this urge to run back into the world from one’s shelter. Only the re -
moval of waywardness will help the concentration of the mind in meditation ( dhyana ).
Inertia  (kshaya ). The mind is drawn with immense force by all the unconscious and subconscious impulses and 
instincts of passion and attachment toward the external world and its multitudinous attractions. Therefore, it expe -
riences untold misery and might even get lost in its depths. This stage is called “decline of faculties due to inertia”.
The state of inertia into which one is driven by despair cannot be called perfect equanimity ( samadhi ). One 
might even indulge in daydreaming in order to escape from present misery or start building castles in the air. All 
this is due to attachment, to the temptations of the outer world.
There is another type of attachment, the attachment to the inner world, the planning within oneself of vari -
ous schemes to better oneself in the future as compared to the past. Both these form part of what is called decline 
(kshaya ). The basis for both is the attraction of the outer world. Attachment brings about desire, and desire leads 11
Jnana Vahini  to planning.
Enjoyment of bliss  (rasa-aswadana ). When inertia and waywardness are overcome, one attains the bliss of the 
highest subject-object contact ( sa-vikalpa-ananda ). This stage is called the enjoyment of bliss.
Even this is not the Supreme Bliss, which one does not attain or acquire but simply becomes aware of, so to 
say. The sweetness ( rasa) of the differentiating superconscious state is a temptation that one has to avoid, for it 
is only second best. It is enough joy to act as a handicap. The joy is as great as that of people who just deposited 
a huge load they had carried for a long time, or that of greedy people who just killed a serpent guarding a vast 
treasure they wanted to grab. Is the mind content with merely killing the serpent guarding the treasure? No. This 
is only the preliminary step of overcoming waywardness. True bliss is not experienced until the treasure is actu -
ally possessed. Likewise, one must not stop with mere subject-object type of superconscious state ( sa-vikalpa-
samadhi ). From such a limited state, one must reach the highest superconscious state ( nir-vikalpa-samadhi ), 
where there is no mind or any ideation.
4. Eliminate egotism and desire and gain liberation by conquest of the mind
When the Sun rises, darkness, as well as the troubles arising from it, disappear. Similarly, for those who have 
realised the Atma , there is no more bondage and no more sorrow that arises from bondage. Delusion comes 
only to those who forget their bearings, and egotism is the greatest factor in making people forget their very basic 
truth. Once egotism enters people, they slip from the ideal and precipitate themselves from the top of the stairs, in 
quick falls from step to step, down to the very bottom floor.
Egotism breeds schisms, hatreds, and attachments. Through attachments and affection, and even envy and 
hatred, one plunges into activity and gets immersed in the world. This leads to embodiment in the physical frame 
and further egotism. In order to become free from the twin pulls of pleasure and pain, one must rid oneself of the 
body-consciousness and keep clear of self-centred actions. This again involves the absence of attachment and 
hatred. Desire is enemy number one of liberation ( moksha ). Desire binds one to the wheel of birth and death; it 
brings about endless worry and tribulations.
Through inquiry on these lines, knowledge is rendered clearer and brighter and liberation is achieved. Mok-
sha is only another word for independence —for not depending on any outside thing or person.
If nicely controlled and trained, the mind can lead one on to moksha . It must be saturated with the thought of 
God; that will help the inquiry into the nature of Reality. The consciousness of the ego itself will fade away when 
the mind is free from pulls and when it is rendered pure. Not to be affected in any way by the world —that is the 
path to self-realisation; self-realisation cannot be obtained in Heaven ( Swarga ) or on Mount Kailas.
The flame of desire cannot be put out without the conquest of the mind. The mind cannot be overcome with -
out stamping out the flames of desire. The mind is the seed; desire, the tree. Only knowledge of self-realisation 
(Atma-jnana ) can uproot that tree. So, these three are interdependent: mind, desire, and knowledge of Atma .12
Jnana Vahini  5. Brahman is perceived when all traces of “intention” disappear
The one who is liberated while alive (the jivan-muktha ) is established firmly in the knowledge of the Atma . 
That one achieved it by dwelling on the false-true nature ( mithya ) of the world and contemplating its failings 
and faults. By this means, that one developed insight into the nature of pleasure and pain and an equanimity in 
both. That one knows that wealth, worldly joy, and pleasure are all worthless and even poisonous. That one takes 
praise, blame, and even blows with a calm assurance and is unaffected by both honour and dishonour.
Of course, those who are liberated while alive reached that stage only after long years of systematic disci -
pline and unflagging zeal when distress and doubt assailed them. Defeat only made them more rigorous in self-
examination and more earnest about following the prescribed discipline. They have no trace of the “will to live”; 
they are ever ready to drop into the lap of death.
The direct perception of Brahman ( a-paroksha-brahma-jnana ) is the name given to the stage in which the 
aspirant is free from all doubt regarding improbability or impossibility and is certain that the two entities, the 
individual Self or spirit ( jiva) and Brahman, were one, are one, and will ever be one. When this state is attained, 
aspirants will no longer suffer confusion. They won’t mistake one thing for another or superimpose one thing on 
another. They won’t mistake the rope for the snake; they will know that all along there was only one thing, the 
rope.
Also, they won’t suffer from superimposing the boundaries of individuality on the Universal ( abhasa-ava -
rana ). That is, they won’t declare —as they were wont to do previously— that the effulgence of Brahman is not 
in them. In the heart and centre of every individual ( jivi) exists the Supreme Atma  (Paramatma ), minuter than the 
minutest molecule, huger than the hugest conceivable object, smaller than the smallest, greater than the greatest. 
Therefore, spiritually wise people ( jnanis ) who have had a vision of the Atma  in them will never suffer sorrow. 
The Atma  is there, in all living things, in the ant as well as the elephant. The whole world is enveloped and sus -
tained by this subtle Atma .
Spiritual aspirants ( sadhakas ) have to direct their attention away from the external world and become in-
sighted; they have to turn their vision toward the Atma . They must analyse the processes of the mind and discover 
for themselves the origin of all the modifications and agitations of the mind. By this means, every trace of “inten -
tion” and “will” has to disappear. Afterward, the only idea that will get fixed in the mind will be the idea of Brah -
man. The only feeling that will occupy the mind will be the feeling of bliss, which arises out of its establishment 
in the stage of being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ).
Such spiritually wise people ( jnanis ) will be unaffected by joy or grief, for they will be fully immersed in 
the ocean of Atmic  bliss ( Atma-ananda ), above and beyond the reach of worldly things. The constant contempla -
tion of the Atma  and its glory is what is connoted by the phrases “practice of Brahman ( Brahma-abhyasa )” and 
“cultivation of spiritual wisdom ( jnana-abhyasa )”.
6. Train the mind to dwell ever on God
The mind is influenced by the passion for objective pleasure and the delusion of ignorance with which it pur -
sues —with amazing quickness— the fleeting objects of the world. So, again and again it has to be led on 
toward higher ideals. Of course, this is difficult at first, but with persistent training, the mind can be tamed; then it 13
Jnana Vahini  will get fixed in the perpetual enjoyment of the Om (pranava ). The mind can be trained by following the methods 
of quiet persuasion, promise of attractive inducements, practice of withdrawing the senses from the outer world, 
endurance of pain and travail, cultivation of sincerity and constancy, and acquisition of mental equipoise ( sama , 
dama , uparathi , thithiksha , sraddha , and sama-dhana ).
The mind can be turned toward Brahman and the constant contemplation of Brahman by the study of the 
Upanishads , the adoption of regular prayer, sharing with others the ecstasy of devotional singing ( bhajan ), and 
adherence to truth. Very often, with the progress of meditation ( dhyana ), new desires and resolutions arise in the 
mind. But one need not despair. The mind can be broken provided one takes up the task in right earnest and fol -
lows a regular routine of training. The final result of this training is unlimited, unmodified bliss-consciousness 
(nir-vikalpa-samadhi ).
This bliss-consciousness gives full knowledge of Brahman, which in turn results in liberation from birth and 
death ( moksha ). The mind must be attuned to the contemplation of Brahman; one must strive to tread the path of 
Brahman and live in Brahman, with Brahman.
7. Instincts and impulses must be put down
Knowledge of the Atma  (Atma-jnana ) can be won only by the triple path of (1) giving up impulses ( vasanas ), 
(2) uprooting the mind, and (3) analysing experience in order to grasp the reality. Without these three, the 
knowledge of the Atma  will not dawn.
The instincts and impulses prod the mind on toward the sensory world and bind the individual to joy and 
misery. So, the impulses must be put down. This can be achieved by means of discrimination, meditation on the 
Atma , inquiry, control of the senses, control of desires, renunciation ( viveka , Atma-chinthana , vicharana , sama , 
dama , vairagya ), and other such disciplines.
The mind is a bundle of impressions ( vasanas ). Verily, the mind is creation ( jagath ) itself; it is all the world 
for the individual. While in deep sleep, the mind doesn’t function, so creation is practically non-existent for the 
individual. Creation is born (or “enters into the consciousness”) and dies (or “disappears from the consciousness”) 
according to the cognitive powers of the mind. Therefore, when the mind is destroyed, the world is also destroyed 
and one is free, one is liberated, one attains moksha .
Whoever succeeds in controlling the consciousness ( chittha ) can have a vision of the Atma . Consciousness is 
the grown-up tree, while the seed is the “ego”, the feeling of “I”. When the seed “I” is cast aside, all the activities 
of the consciousness also vanish automatically.
The spiritual aspirant who is earnest for these results has to be ever vigilant. At any moment, the senses might 
regain their lost mastery and enslave the individual. The aspirant might lose much of the ground already gained. 
That is why spiritual aspirants are warned away from attachments to the world.
Be ever and always immersed in the search for truth. Don’t waste time in the multiplication and satisfaction 
of wants and desires. One source of pleasure craves another source as a corollary. Thus, the mind seeks again and 
again to acquire the objects it has given up. So don’t yield to the vagaries of the mind. Turn back, even forcibly, 
from sensory attachment. Why, even prayer can’t be done according to the mind’s vagaries. One has to stick to the 
same place and time! The Atma  itself will sustain such spiritual aspirants and give them strength and steadiness.14
Jnana Vahini  8. The one who really knows God becomes God
The one who has subdued the mind will be the same in good times and bad. Grief and joy are but aberrations 
of the mind. It is only when the mind is associated with the senses and the body that it is affected and agitated 
and modified. When one takes in an intoxicant, one isn’t aware of pain, right? How does this happen? The mind 
is then detached from the body, so it isn’t bothered by physical pain or discomfort. Similarly, spiritually wise 
people ( jnanis ) have immersed their minds in the Atma ; they can establish mental peace and quiet by disciplining 
the mind.
Spiritually wise people get full bliss from their own Atma ; they don’t seek it anywhere outside themselves. 
In fact, they will have no desire or plan to find joy in anything external. They are satisfied with the inner joy they 
get. The greatness of spiritually wise people is beyond description, even beyond your imagination! The sacred 
texts ( sruthis ) proclaim,
The one who has known Brahman  becomes Brahman  Itself; the one who has attained 
the Brahman  Principle has become the Highest.
Brahmavith Brahmaiva bhavathi, Brahmavith param aapnothi.
All bubbles are but the same water; so also, all the multiplicity of name and form, all this created world, are 
but the same Brahman. This is the fixed conviction of the spiritually wise ( jnani ), nay, their genuine experience. 
As all rivers flow into the sea and get lost, so also all desires get lost in the effulgent consciousness of the realised 
soul. That is what is termed direct vision of the Atma  (Atma-sakshathkara ).
The Atma  has no death, right? It isn’t born, and it is unaffected by the six-fold process of change. It is  birth -
less ( a-ja), without old age ( a-jara ), without death ( a-mara ), and without decline and extinction ( a-vinasa ). These 
processes are for the evanescent body; they are the six-fold processes of change. They mean being born, existing, 
growing, getting old, declining, and lastly dying. The Atma  has no such modification. It is stable, unshakeable, 
fixed, the witness of all change in space and time. It is unaffected by transformations, like the waterdrop on the 
lotus leaf.
Liberation from the tentacles of the mind can be obtained by the acquisition of the knowledge of the Abso -
lute ( Brahma-jnana ). This type of liberation is the genuine selfrule ( swarajya ). This is genuine moksha . Whoever 
grasps the reality behind all this passing show will be untroubled by instinct or impulse or any other urge; they 
will be the master of the real wisdom.
The robber who has robbed us of the precious gem of Atma  is no other than the mind, so the gem can be 
regained by catching, threatening, and punished the robber. The possessor of that gem is immediately honoured 
by being installed as Brahman.
9. The four types of spiritually wise people
The spiritual aspirant must seek people who have attained this spiritual knowledge and learn their experi -
ence from them, honour them for it, and share their joy with them. Indeed, spiritual aspirants who do so are 
blessed, for they are on the road to self-rule ( swarajya ). This is the mystery of Brahman, the understanding that 
there is no other. This is knowledge of the Self ( Atma-jnana ).
There are four types of spiritually wise people ( jnanis ): 15
Jnana Vahini  (1) Knowers of Brahman ( Brahmavid ),
(2) Master knowers of Brahman ( Brahmavidvara ),
(3) Most excellent knowers of Brahman  ( Brahma-vidvariya ), and
(4) Supreme knowers of Brahman ( Brahma-vidvarishta ).
These types are differentiated according to the development of the pure ( sathwic ) quality in the spiritually 
wise person. The first has reached the fourth stage called master of the path ( pathya-pathi ). The second has at -
tained the fifth, the indifferent, detached ( a-samsakthi ) stage. The third has gained the sixth stage, the lack of 
awareness of material objects ( padartha-bhavana ). The fourth is in the seventh grade, the “beyond” stage ( thuri -
ya), the stage of perpetual samadhi .
Supreme knowers of Brahman ( Brahma-vidvarishta ) are “liberated”, although they are in the body. They 
have to be forcibly persuaded to eat and drink. They won’t engage in any work relating to the world. They will be 
unconscious of the body and its demands.
The other three will be aware of the body in varying intensities, and they will engage in worldly work to 
the extent appropriate to their spiritual status. Those three have to acquire destruction of the mind ( manas ). This 
itself is of two grades: the destruction of the agitations, including their shapes and forms ( swarupa-naasa ), and 
the destruction of only the agitations ( arupa-naasa ).
While on this point, readers might be troubled by a doubt. They might ask, who are these who have con -
quered and wiped out the mind? The answer is: Those who have neither attachment nor hatred, pride nor jealousy 
nor greed. Those who are free from bondage of the senses. Those who have won the battle against the mind are 
really the heroes. That is the test. Such heroic people will be free from all agitations.
10. The effects of the three qualities
One who has achieved the destruction of agitations and their shapes and forms ( swarupa-naasa ) would have 
eliminated the two qualities ( gunas ) of sloth ( thamas ) and activity ( rajas ), and will shine with the splendour 
of pure serenity ( sathwa ). Through the influence of that pure quality, such people will radiate love and beneficence 
and mercy wherever they move. (In the already liberated individual ( Brahma-vidvarishta ), even this serene qual -
ity (sathwa-guna ) is absent.)
The serene quality will have as its unmistakable concomitant characteristics: splendour, wisdom, bliss, peace, 
brotherliness, sense of sameness, self-confidence, holiness, purity, and similar qualities. He who is saturated in 
only that can witness the image of the Atma  within. It is when the pure ( sathwa ) quality is mixed with the slothful 
(thamasic ) and active ( rajasic ) qualities that it is rendered impure and becomes the cause of ignorance and illu -
sion. This is the reason for the bondage of humanity.
The active ( rajasic ) quality produces the illusion of something nonexistent being existent! It broadens and 
deepens the contact of the senses with the external world. It creates affection and attachment, so, by means of the 
dual pulls of happiness and sorrow (the one to gain and the other to avoid), it plunges people deeper and deeper 
into activity. These activities breed the evil of passion, fury, greed, conceit, hatred, pride, meanness, and trickery.
And the slothful ( thamasic ) quality? Well, it blinds the vision and lowers the intellect, multiplying sloth, 16
Jnana Vahini  sleep, and dullness and leading one on the wrong path, away from the goal. It will make even the seen the “un -
seen”! One will fail to benefit even from one’s actual experience if immersed in sloth ( thamas ). Sloth will mislead 
even big scholars, for scholarship does not necessarily confer moral stamina. Caught in the tentacles of sloth, the 
pundits cannot arrive at correct conclusions.
Even the wise, if they are bound down by sloth, will be affected by many doubts and misgivings and be 
drawn toward sensory pleasures, to the detriment of the wisdom they have gained. They will begin to identify 
themselves with their property, their wives and children, and such other worldly temporals. They will even con -
fuse untruth with truth and truth with untruth! Note what a great trickster this slothful quality is!
11. Illusion hides the individual’s true blissful nature
This power of super-imposition that illusion ( maya ) has hides from individuals ( jivis) the Universal that they 
are, the being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ) that is their nature. All this creation ( jagath ), with its mani -
foldness, is born out of the ascription of multiplicity where there is only One. When all this evolution is subsumed 
by the process of involution ( pralaya ), the three qualities ( gunas ) are in perfect equilibrium or balance. This is the 
stage called balance of the qualities ( guna-saamya-avastha ).
Then, through the will of the Super-Will ( Iswara ), the balance is disturbed and activity starts, leading to 
consequences that breed further activities. In other words, the world originates and develops and unfolds. This is 
the stage called unbalanced ( vaishamya ). Thus, from the subtle inner unconscious and subconscious to the gross 
outer physical body, everything is due to illusion ( maya ), or the power of superimposition of the particular over 
the Universal. That is why these are referred to as non- Atma . They are like the mirage, which superimposes water 
over desert sand. They can be destroyed only by the vision of Brahman or Atma .
12. Use the “Who am I” inquiry to cease the agitations
The affection one gets toward one’s relations, the satisfaction one gets when one secures the things craved for, 
the happiness one gets when one utilises such things —all these are bondages that the consciousness imposes 
on itself. Even sleep and dreams are such “agitations” and have to be overcome before the Atma  can be well vi -
sualised and realised. In sleep, the element of ignorance persists. The “I” and “Mine” feelings produce an endless 
series of activities and agitations in the various levels of consciousness. But, just as a single soldier in a vantage 
position can successfully tackle hundreds of enemy personnel who come in single file through a narrow gap, one 
can tackle each agitation as and when it emerges in the consciousness and overwhelm it. The courage to do this 
can be obtained through training derived by practice.
All agitations will cease the moment one enters on the inquiry, “Who am I?” This was the spiritual discipline  
that Ramana Maharshi achieved and taught to his disciples. This is also the easiest of all the disciplines. 
First, there must be the yearning to procure one’s own welfare (the subhecha ). This will lead to the study of 
books about Brahman and its principles, the search for the company of the good, the withdrawal from sensory 
pleasures, and the thirst for liberation.
Even the divine maxim,
I am Brahman  (Aham Brahmasmi )17
Jnana Vahini  has a trace of ignorance sticking to it, the aham  being considered as separate but identical.
This aham  is so persistent that it will disappear only through ceaseless meditation on the implications of
You are That ( Thath twam asi )
and the all-inclusive Atma  or Brahman. This is the enquiry ( vicharana ) stage or basic step in yoga  (bhumika ); 
the stage subsequent to the desire to procure one’s own welfare ( subhecha ) stage. By these means, the mind can 
be fixed very soon on the contemplation of Brahman. Each stage is a step in the ladder for the progressive rise 
of the mind from the concrete to the subtle and the subtle to the non-existent. This is the last stage, the “state of 
diminished body consciousness ( thanumanasi )” stage.
The three stages referred to above and the disciplines they involve will destroy all desires and cravings and 
illumine knowledge of the reality. The mind is rendered fully holy and saturated with truth. This is called the 
stage of no-attachment or no-contact ( a-samsakthi ). That is to say, all contact with the exterior world or even with 
one’s own past is wiped out. No attention is paid to the internal and the external; the spiritual aspirant reaches the 
state of non-cognition of objects ( abhava-pratheethi ), as it is called. Such a person has no awareness of objects 
(padartha-bhavana ) of their own; that is to say, no object can create any sensation in this consciousness. The 
perfect realised soul ( jnani ) is ever immersed in the bliss of the Atma , with no awareness of the seer, the seen, and 
the sight, the triple thread. This is the fourth stage, the “beyond” stage ( thuriya ).
Some are wakeful-dreamy ( jaagrath swapna ); they build castles in the air, planning with the known and 
unknown, the seen and unseen. Others are extra-wakeful; through many births, their “I” and “mine” have become 
too deep-rooted. All these are only agitations of the mind ( vrittis ). Wisdom can dawn only when these are de -
stroyed. Until then, however, no matter how much one may know of names and forms, one can’t grasp the reality. 
The ceasing of all consciousness or agitation is the sign of the person who really knows the reality.
13. Remember constantly that You are not the body!
Look at the clouds that wander across the sky; note that they have no intimate lasting relationship with the sky, 
which they hide but for a few minutes.
Such is the relationship between your body and You, that is to say, You who are of the nature of Supreme Self 
(Paramatma ). The body is only a temporary, passing phase, hiding and clouding the truth.
How can the body’s behaviour —wakefulness, dream, and sleep— affect the Eternal Supreme Self ( Para -
matma ) in any way?
What of your shadow? Isn’t it something separate from you? Does its length or clarity or career affect you in 
any way? Understand that the relationship between the body and your Self is the same. If you take this bundle of 
flesh and bone as yourself, consider what happens to it and how long you can call it “mine”. Pondering over this 
problem is the beginning of spiritual wisdom ( jnana ).
This physical frame, built out of earth, fire, water, wind, and ether, breaks up into its components, as all built-
up things do! Only ignorance will take it as real; only the uneducated will attach value to it as permanent and 
eternal. Did this body exist before birth? Does it persist after death? No. It appears and disappears, with an interval 
of existence! Therefore, it has no absolute value; it is to be treated only as the cloud or the shadow.18
Jnana Vahini  As a matter of fact, this physical world is like the mango tree raised by the magician’s wand; it is the product 
of the trickster known as mind. The clay takes the form of pot and pan and plate, and after an interval, it becomes 
clay once again, shapeless clay. Similarly, all this is the formless existence-knowledge-bliss ( satchidananda ); the 
formless ( nir-aakaara ) appearing with form ( aakaara ) for some time, on account of the delusion and ignorance 
of the mind. Some things are useful, some are not, all because of this name and form.
All forms are He; all are He. You too are He, above and beyond the past, present, and future. You are not this 
body, which is tied up with time and which is caught in the toils of was, is, and will. Be ever fixed in this attitude. 
Dwell constantly in the thought that you are of the nature of the Universal Absolute Brahman ( Parabrahman ); 
then, you will grow into a realised soul ( jnani ).
14. Develop non-attachment: Be in the world but not of it
The mind that is in bondage craves for objects, for the company of men, and it prefers this location or that. 
Attachment is bondage; non-attachment is liberation ( moksha , mukthi ). To crave is to be imprisoned, to die. 
To withdraw the mind from all attachment is to be free, to live forever.
For people, it is the mind that either causes bondage or grants liberation.
Mana eva manushyaanaam kaaranam bandha mokshayoh .
The mind runs after an object and gets attached; the senses are alerted; an action results; the mind is rendered 
happy or unhappy; feeling ensues; fear enters; anger grows; affection develops. Thus, the bonds are tightened.
Fear, anger, and affection are the closest comrades of attachment, the comrades dearest to its heart! All four 
are inseparable companions, moving always together. That is why even Patanjali was forced to assert, “Attach -
ment runs after happiness.” And what grants happiness? The fulfilment of desire, right? Desire leads to hatred of 
those who thwart it, fondness for those who feed it, and the inevitable wheel of opposites of likes and dislikes. 
There is no escape from this for the ignorant.
Impure gold is melted in the crucible and emerges shining and bright. The mind rendered impure by passion 
(rajas ) and ignorance ( thamas ), by anger and conceit, by the impressions of a thousand attachments and desires 
—this mind can be made bright and resplendent by putting it into the crucible of inquiry and heating it on the coals 
of discrimination. That brightness is the light of realisation, of the knowledge that You are the Atma .
Like the dust storm that covers everything with dust, desires, attachments, thirsts, and cravings all blacken 
the mind. They have to be kept away so that the splendour of the Self might merge in the splendour of the Supreme 
Omniself (the Paramatma ).
Whatever the crisis, however deep the misery, don’t allow your grip over the mind to get loose. Tighten it 
further, fixing your eyes on the higher values. Don’t allow the mind to stray away from the holy tabernacle of the 
heart. Make it bow before the Atma  within.
Thus, one can proceed from merging with the differentiated ( sa-vikalpa-samadhi ) to merging with the un -
differentiated ( nir-vikalpa-samadhi ). Delusion must disappear without even a trace; then only can one merge 
with the Undifferentiated. There is no duality there; it is Brahman and Brahman alone. All bonds of ignorance 
(a-vidya ), desire ( kama ), etc., fall away, and one is genuinely, fully free.19
Jnana Vahini  15. Self-realization is the ultimate goal of life
The snake shoves off its coil and has nothing more to do with it. Develop that attitude of non-attachment. Es -
cape from the body delusion. The weak can never grasp this fact. By constant meditation on the Atma  and its 
glory, one can come out of the tangles of the world and worldly affairs. The earnest spiritual aspirant ( sadhaka ) 
must divert all their attention and effort from the sensory world and fix them on the eternal Brahman.
Humanity did not arise merely to wallow in casual joy and fleeting happiness. It is insane to believe so. Iden -
tifying oneself with the “I” and getting attached to “mine” —that is the root cause of sorrow and ignorance. Where 
there is no egotism, there will be no cognisance of the external world. When the external world is not cognised, 
the ego can’t exist. Therefore, wise ones will dis-identify themselves from the world and behave ever as the agent 
of the Lord, being in it but not of it.
Once, in the midst of conversation, Vasishta spoke to Rama; “Listen, Rama, the valiant! The individual with 
ego ( jiva) is a bull reclining in the shade (delusion, moha ) of a vastly spreading tree in the forest (the objective 
world ( samsara ). It is bound by the rope of desire, so it is infected by the fleas and insects of unrest and worry 
and disease. It rolls in the mire of wrong, while struggling in the dark night of ignorance to slake the thirst of the 
senses. Then, some good people who are wise untie it and take it out of the dark recesses of the forest. Through 
discrimination ( viveka ) and inquiry ( vichara ), they achieve the highest intellect ( vijnana ), and through this intel -
lect they are able to grasp the truth, to realise the Atma , to know the Atma . That is the ultimate goal of all life, the 
stage that is beyond the past, present, and future.”
But one point has to be clearly noted and always remembered: merely giving up external activities connected 
with the satisfaction of sensory desires is not enough; the internal cravings have to be uprooted. The word thrishna  
covers both of these: the internal promptings and the external proceedings. When all promptings cease, it is called 
free of desire ( muktha-thrishna ). Knowledge of the Atma  and faith in the Atma  —only these can destroy the ir -
relevant thirsts.
The spiritually wise person ( jnani ) who declares, “I am Brahman”, utters this truth from the sincerity of the 
experience. When the gross and subtle are transcended, when the mind ( manas ), the intellect ( buddhi ), and the life 
force ( prana ) are sublimated, that is to say, when the Self is no longer bound by feelings, thoughts, impulses, and 
instincts, only existence ( Sat) remains, pure and unalloyed Absolute Brahman ( Parabrahman ).
Hence, the spiritually wise person feels one with the Omnipresent, the Omnipotent. But the uneducated, the 
uninitiated, the people who have not taught themselves the first steps of spiritual discipline —they feel that they 
are one with their physical frame.
16. Being-Awareness-Bliss describes the experience of Brahman
The expression being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ) indicates the Eternal, without form ( nir-aakaara ). 
What form can we posit of the All-pervasive, the All-inclusive? “ Para ”, or “ Param ”, means super, beyond, 
above, more glorious than all. Parabrahman  indicates the One beyond and behind everything, grander than any -
thing in the three worlds. It is non-dual, unique, eternal, and infinite. “Two” means difference, dissension, inevi -
table discord. Since Brahman is all-pervasive, It is one and only one. It is indivisible and indestructible.
Realising this fact is the highest wisdom ( jnana ).20
Jnana Vahini  The word Brahman is derived from the root Brih, meaning to expand, to increase, to enlarge, etc. Brihath  
means big, enlarged, gross, high, etc. Purusha  has its root pri, meaning to fill, to complete. Pur means a town 
“full” of inhabitants, that is to say, the body, in a figurative manner of speaking. He who completes or is immanent 
in or who fills it is the Purusha .
The word Atma  has Aap as its root, meaning to acquire, to earn, to conquer, to overcome etc. He who knows 
the Atma  can earn all knowledge, has acquired everything, has earned the knowledge of everything because the 
Atma  is omnipresent. He is then fixed in Being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ), i.e. in the embodiment of Brah -
man. Being is the essence of peace ( santhi ), and awareness is the essence of spiritual wisdom ( jnana ); together 
with bliss, they form the embodiment ( swarupa ) of Brahman.
The Taithiriya Upanishad  has declared,
Through bliss ( ananda ), all this is born;
Through bliss, all this is living;
In bliss alone, all this is merged;
In bliss, all this rests.
The category “ Atma  within ( antar-atma )” has the same attributes as the category Brahman: It is bliss-born, 
bliss-full, and bliss-merged. The more the knowledge ( jnana ), the more the awareness of bliss ( ananda ). The 
spiritually wise person ( jnani ) has joy as the right hand, helpful in all emergencies and always willing and able to 
come to their rescue.
Bhuma means “limitless”. The Chandogya Upanishad  declares that bliss ( ananda ) inheres only in the limit -
less, the Eternal, the Brahman. Another word used by the spiritually wise to describe their experience of Brahman 
is “the One whose nature is splendour, glory, or effulgence, who is Illumination itself ( jyothi-swarupa )”. Ten mil -
lion suns cannot equal the splendour of the Supreme Self ( Paramatma ). The word santhi-swarupa  indicates that 
It is peace ( santhi ) Itself. In sacred texts ( sruthi ) like Ayam Atma Santho , it is proclaimed that the Supreme Self is 
Supreme Peace ( Prasanthi ) Itself.
This is why the Supreme Self ( Paramatma ) is characterised as eternally pure, eternally intelligent, eternally 
liberated, eternally illumined, eternally content, eternally conscious, etc. It is wisdom Itself, so it is the embodi -
ment of all teaching. It is not attached to anything, so it is ever free. At the very moment that the Brahman is tasted, 
all hunger ceases and all desires come to an end, so It grants content.
The highest intellect ( vijnana ) is the name given to the actual experience of the Brahman; it is a special type 
of wisdom ( jnana ), unlike the common fund of information obtained from the study of books. The net result of 
the study of any branch of learning, the fruit of all that study, is also sometimes referred to as highest intellect. 
The unique wisdom of the Brahman is known by a variety of names, like experiential wisdom ( jnana ), insightful 
wisdom ( vijnana ), intuitive wisdom ( prajnana ), consciousness ( chit), and pure consciousness ( chaithanya ).
The opposite of pure consciousness is the unconscious or inert ( jada). The knowledge of Self-realisation 
(Atma-jnana ) makes everything conscious, active. Brahman is eternally conscious ( nithya chaithanya ).21
Jnana Vahini  17. Atma is immanent nonchanging Unity beyond time and space
Realised souls ( jnanis ) will feel that the Atma  immanent in everyone is their own Atma . They will be happy 
that they are themselves all this; they will see no distinction between one person and the next, for they can 
experience only unity, not diversity. The physical differences of colour, caste, and creed, which adhere only to the 
body, are marks of only the external body.
The Atma  has no parts (is nish-kala ); It is without blemish ( nir-mala ), unaffected by desire, anger, greed, 
affection, pride, and envy; It is without activity ( nish-kriya ); It is creation ( prakriti ), which undergoes all these 
modifications, or at least gives the impression that it is so modified. The Supreme Spirit ( Purusha ) is but the eter -
nal Witness, the Ever Modification-less.
Of what can you say, “This is truth?” Only of that which persists in the past, present, and future, which has 
neither beginning nor end, which neither changes nor moves, which has uniform form, a unified experience-
giving property. Well, consider the body, the senses, the mind, the life-force, and all such. They move and change; 
they begin and end; they are inert ( jada). They have three qualities ( gunas ): sloth ( thamas ), activity ( rajas ), and 
purity ( sathwa ). They are without basic reality. They cause the delusion of reality. They have only relative value; 
they have no absolute value. They shine only out of borrowed light.
Absolute truth is beyond the reach of time and space; it is indivisible ( a-parichchinna ). It does not begin; 
it is always and ever existent. It is the basis, the fundamental, the self-revealing. Knowing It, experiencing It, is 
experiential wisdom ( jnana ). It cannot be marked out as such and such and explained by some characteristics 
(it is a-nir-desya ). How can something that is above and beyond the intellect and the mind be described through 
mere words?
It is also termed “invisible to the eye ( a-drisya )”, the eye being the optical apparatus that undergoes change 
and that is very limited in its capacity. Brahman can never be grasped by anything elemental or physical. Through 
Brahman, the eye is able to see, so how can the eye perceive Brahman itself? The mind is bound by the limitations 
of time, space, and causation. How can the Supreme Self ( Paramatma ), who is superior to these and unaffected 
by them, be limited by them?
The terms a-mala , nir-mala , and vi-mala  applied to the Supreme Self connote the same meaning: a-mala  
implies absence of impurity; nir-mala , without impurity; and vi-mala , having all impurity destroyed. So too, the 
terms a-chinthya  (incapable of being conceived) and a-vyavaahaarya  (without any activity) applied to Brahman 
for activity or work imply the existence of another or others, whereas It is unique and unaware of any move to -
ward or away from another.
Know that creation ( jagath ) is the form ( swarupa ) of the secondary one ( Virat-purusha ), who arose from 
Brahma, the form imposed by illusion ( maya ) on the super-soul. Brahman is that which has become or appears 
to have become all this, the Inner Motive Force ( Antar-yamin ). In the without-quality ( nir-guna ) aspect, it is the 
primal cause, the cosmic womb ( Hiranyagarbha ), of which creation is the manifestation. Grasping this secret of 
the universe and its origin and existence —that is experiential spiritual wisdom ( jnana ).22
Jnana Vahini  18. Highest spiritual wisdom is Brahman
Many people argue that spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) is one of the attributes of Brahman, that it is of the nature 
of Brahman, a characteristic of Brahman, etc. But such opinions arise only in the absence of actual experi -
ence, of actual attainment of spiritual wisdom. Arguments and discussions multiply when there is no first-hand 
experience, for the realisation of reality is individual, based on revelation to oneself.
I declare that experiential knowledge ( jnana ) is Brahman, not a mere characteristic or attribute or qual -
ity of Brahman. The Vedas  and spiritual texts ( sastras ) announce that Brahman is Truth ( sathyam ), Knowledge 
(Jnanam ), and Bliss ( Anandam ), not that Brahman has these and other attributes. When Brahman is known, the 
knower, the known, and the knowledge all become one.
Indeed, Brahman cannot be described as such and such; that is why it is referred to as just “It is”, or “Being 
(Sat)”. Spiritual wisdom is also just Being, no more no less. The sacred revelations ( sruthis ) use the word Vijnana-
ghana  to indicate Brahman, right? That word means: the sum and substance of the highest Knowledge ( vijnana ), 
knowledge with a capital K. Only those who are unaware of the sacred revelations will assert that spiritual wis -
dom and Brahman are distinct. Spiritual wisdom is Brahman; distinction is impossible. It is a sign of ignorance 
to posit a difference.
All knowledge that is limited by the three qualities ( gunas ) is ignorance ( a-jnana ), not the spiritual wisdom 
of the transcendental, which is above and beyond the ignorant ( thamasic ), passionate ( rajasic ), and even the 
serene ( sathwic ) motives, impulses, and qualities. How can such limited knowledge be spiritual wisdom? Knowl -
edge of the transcendental has to be transcendental too, in an equal measure and to the same degree.
It might be said that Brahman has form, while spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) is formless, but both are formless in 
the real sense of the word. The apparent form of Brahman is the result of ignorance ( a-vidya ); form is attributed 
to Brahman only to serve the needs of the embodied soul during the period of the embodiment. The Absolute is 
reduced to the level of the conditioned, because the soul is also conditioned in the body. Not to know that this hu -
man interlude is but the conditioned state of the Atma  is to be reduced to the dullness of the beast.
19. Take up the chief path to acquire spiritual wisdom: devotion
“Spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) is the panacea for all ills, troubles, and travails.” This is how the Vedas  describe it. 
There are many paths to acquire this wisdom, and the chief among them is the path of devotion ( bhakthi ), 
which was adopted by Vasishta, Narada, Vyasa, Jayadeva, Gauranga, and other great people. As the oil is to the 
flame in the lamp, so is devotion to the flame of spiritual wisdom. The heavenly tree of joy of wisdom thrives on 
the refreshing waters of devotion. Understand this well.
It is for this reason that Krishna, who is the personification of divine love ( prema ) and who is saturated with 
the quality of mercy, declared in the Gita,
I am known by means of devotion.
Bhakthyaa-maam abhijaanaathi .
Why was this declaration made? Because there are no hurdles in the path of devotion. Young and old, high 
and low, man and woman —all are entitled to tread it. Who among people are in urgent need of medical treatment? 
Those who are badly ill, right? So too, those who are groping in ignorance ( a-jnana ) are first entitled to the teach -23
Jnana Vahini  ing and the training leading to the acquisition of spiritual wisdom. Why feed those who have no hunger? Why 
drug those who are not sick? Brahman or spiritual wisdom is the drug for the de-realisation of the falsely realised, 
the removal of the fog of misunderstanding ( a-jnana ). It will sweep away the dirt that hides the truth.
20. Everyone can win spiritual wisdom, regardless of status, class, or sex
Everyone, whatever the status, class, or sex, can win spiritual wisdom. If women aren’t entitled to it, why is it 
mentioned that Siva taught Vedanta  to Parvathi? How did the great yogi Kapilamaharshi teach the sankhya  
system to his mother, Devahuthi? How did Yajnavalkya, the great sage ( rishi), impart the essential principles of 
Vedantic  philosophy to his wife, Maitreyi, as mentioned in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad ? The Upanishad  can-
not be false. The scriptures that mention these facts speak only the truth.
There is no doubt that sage Mathanga is a great ascetic. Doesn’t the Ramayana  declare that he taught the 
woman Sabari the secret of the sacred doctrine of Brahman? Is that statement false? Coming to this age itself, who 
does not know that the scholarly wife of Sureswaracharya contended with Sankaracharya himself in philosophic 
discussion of Brahman?
So the chief qualification for the path leading to spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) is only spiritual discipline, the 
spiritual exercises ( tapas ) in which one is engaged, not the irrelevant consideration of caste, creed, or sex. Leaving 
all other matters aside, one should concentrate on spiritual discipline.
The Lord is accessible and available to all. He is all mercy. No one except the Lord has the authority to de -
clare anyone unfit for the discipline of spiritual wisdom. If you reflect a little deeper, you will realise that the Lord 
would not deny anyone the chance to reach Him. How can the flame deny refuge to sparks of the same fire? How 
can the sea deny refuge to drops of that sea? The Lord also will not refuse or reject.
A father with four sons cannot state that one of them has no right to a share in his property. It wouldn’t be 
just or proper. Then what should be said of the Lord, who is devoid of the slightest tinge of partiality or prejudice 
and who is full of mercy? To attribute favouritism to Him is to commit sacrilege.
Referring to this question of who is or isn’t entitled to knowledge of Brahman ( Brahma-vidya ), Krishna said 
in the Gita,
I have no favourite. Nor do I dislike anyone. Whatever might be the caste, whether 
the person be man or woman, whoever worships Me with faith and devotion will 
reach Me. Nothing can stand in their way. I too will manifest in the hearts of such.
Is the Gita mistaken? No, it speaks profound truth.
21. Wisdom consists of the feeling of oneness without distinctions
There is another wrong belief current today. It is said that in order to be entitled to the practice of spiritual exer -
cise for the realisation of Brahman —like prayerful repetition of the name ( japa) and meditation ( dhyana )— 
one must adhere strictly to certain modes of daily conduct laid down in tradition and thus attain purity. I do not 
agree. As an analogy, should a bedridden person have to take a course on medicine before being allowed to take 
medicines? To require a person to be pure and good and to follow certain codes of conduct before treading the 
path of God is to say that someone must be free from disease in order to deserve medical treatment! How absurd.24
Jnana Vahini  Purity, goodness, etc., are all consequences of the journey toward God; they can’t be insisted upon as essen -
tial for starting upon the path. The taking in of the drug will gradually induce health and cheer; health and cheer 
should not be insisted upon before the drug is even prescribed or supplied! This obvious fact is ignored by many; 
that is a serious malady indeed!
All those suffering from the malady of ignorance ( a-jnana ) must read and ponder over the books dealing 
with the treatment of that disease, namely, the experiences of the great elders in the field of spiritual endeavour. 
Only then can they understand the real state of things.
One other secret of success has to be kept in mind. Every course of medical treatment involves some regula -
tion and restriction of diet, movements, habits, and conduct. These should not be neglected or taken lightly. In 
fact, if the doctor’s advice on these matters is not strictly followed, even the costliest or latest or most efficacious 
medicine will be ineffective.
Consider the people who underwent the treatment —drugs, restrictions, limitations and all— and success -
fully emerged from the sickroom hale and happy! They are of all castes and ages and of both sexes. Vasishta was 
born of a public woman; Narada’s mother was a washerwoman; Valmiki belonged to the hunter caste; Viswamitra 
was a warrior ( kshatriya ); Mathanga was a member of the depressed classes. The inference is that what is impor -
tant enough is constant meditation on the Lord, not the labels of caste or creed. Wisdom ( jnana ) is the attainment 
of the feeling of Oneness, the realisation that there is nothing high or low. That is the true divine Principle, the 
Brahman.
A sugar doll has head, neck, arms, and limbs, but each part is as sweet as the other. From head to foot, it is 
one uniform sweetness; there cannot be two types of sweetness. That is why it is said to be not dual ( dwaitha ) but 
non-dual ( a-dwaitha ). Those who emanate from the Lord’s face and those who emanate from His feet are both His 
children. The realisation of this truth is the sign of wisdom ( jnana ).
Some trees, like the jack tree, bear fruit from the root up to the topmost branch! Does the fruit near the 
ground differ from the fruit on the tallest branch? No, they are all the same? Or do they taste differently, like dis -
tinct fruits? Of course, among the fruits some may be tender, some unripe, some a little ripe, and some fully ripe, 
and they may differ in taste, too, as is only natural. But never can you find bitterness in the bottom and sweetness 
in the top or sourness in the middle. Tender, green, and ripe are three stages, or three characteristics.
22. Caste depends more on qualities than on birth
So too, the four castes are four characteristics ( gunas ). According to their nature and their activities, the four 
castes have been ordained. Like the fruits on the same tree, some tender, some green, and some ripe, men 
are classified into four groups according to their stage of development, which is judged from their actions and 
character.
Those in whose thoughts and behaviour the pure quality ( sathwa-guna ) predominates are grouped as brah -
mins , who are progressing along the path toward Brahman. Those in whom the active quality ( rajoguna ) is domi -
nant are referred to as protectors or warriers ( kshatriyas ). Thus, the scriptures ( sastras ) have spoken of ingrained 
qualities as the basis of caste, not otherwise. Why? The Gita itself proclaims that the four castes have been estab -
lished by the Lord, taking into consideration (1) the dominance of any of the three qualities ( gunas ) and (2) the 
practice of actions ( karmas ) like repetition of the name ( japa), meditation ( dhyana ), and other disciplinary duties!25
Jnana Vahini  Alhough born as a labourer ( sudra ), a person does attain brahmin -hood through the struggle toward Brah -
man and spiritual exercise. Although born as a brahmin , if that ideal and the effort to attain it is not found, one 
becomes a labourer.
Good conduct ( anushtana ) and strict discipline ( nishta ) are the criteria, the deciding factors.
The inner Atmic  principle is the same in all. It knows no caste or class or conflict.
23. Accept the rigours of spiritual discipline and follow the path of devotion
To realise that the Self is beyond all these lesser categories, devotion ( bhakthi ) is the first requisite. Devotion 
merges in wisdom ( jnana ) and becomes identified with it. Devotion ripens into wisdom, so don’t speak of 
them as different. At one stage it is called devotion, at a later stage, wisdom. Once it is cane, later it is sugar.
Through devotion, the individual soul ( jiva) is transformed into Siva —or rather, it knows it is Siva and the 
soul-idea disappears. To posit oneself as a soul is ignorance ( a-jnana ); to know oneself as Siva is spiritual wisdom.
A white cloth that has become dirty is dipped in water, soaked in soap, warmed, and beaten on a slab in or -
der to restore its colour and condition. So too, to remove the dirt of ignorance that has attached itself to the pure 
being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ) Atma , the water of unblemished conduct and behaviour, the soap of Brah -
man, reflection on the warming of repetition of the name and meditation, and the slab of renunciation —all three 
necessary. Only then can the fundamental Brahman-hood of the Atma  shine forth.
It doesn’t help if the soap is good but the water is dirty. All that soap and all that bother of heating and beating 
are sheer waste, for the cloth continues as dirty as ever. This explains why many aspirants fail. Though they have 
meditated on Brahman for many years and studied about it for long, their modes of behaviour and conduct are all 
wrong. The fault lies in the water, not in the soap! The daily habits, acts, and activities are mean and low, and the 
meditation ( dhyana ) on Brahman is all a waste.
In their ignorance, people hesitate to accept the rigors of spiritual discipline, considering them as so many 
fetters to free living. They decry the divine command and denounce divine grace. That command is not under -
stood and appreciated; it is disobeyed and even fought against. But the wise one who plants wheat will be blessed 
by a harvest of wheat; the fool who plants tare weeps because wheat does not grow. For everyone in the world, 
whether we believe it or not, two plus two make four; the result does not depend on your likes and dislikes. The 
fact that in every being there is the Supreme is a similar inescapable reality. God will not give up if denied or enter 
if invited. God is there, as the being’s very Being. This is the truth, and if you want to know it and experience it, 
develop the vision of the spiritually wise ( jnani ); without that vision, you can never see it. Just as the telescope 
alone enables you to see things that are far away, so the “wisdomscope ( jnana-drishti )” is essential to see Brah -
man immanent in every being.
Just as the child refuses to believe in things beyond its circle of vision, the weakling, who is afraid of the 
travail of winning that intelligence ( drishti ) refuses to believe in the all-pervasive, all-inclusive Brahman!26
Jnana Vahini  24. Serve selflessly, without attachment to the fruits thereof
A set of people with curious ideas have cropped up recently, and they strut about with great pride, for they have 
no yearning for God, even no use for God; they engage in service ( seva), and they are satisfied with service! 
But the essence of service is selflessness and abnegation of the fruit thereof, and these service people have no right 
to look down upon the godly and the spiritual aspirants as inferior. For that is but reaching for the fruit while ne -
glecting the tree! Selfless service is the final fruit of the Godward discipline. That is the attitude of renunciation of 
the fruit of action ( who reall ). How can the fruit be gained without the long and laborious nurture of the tree? The 
very foundation of renunciation of the fruit is love ( prema ) toward all beings, love that seeks no reward. Without 
spiritual experience of this higher love, selfless service is impossible.
At present, the world is full of people who clamour for good profit for themselves but are unwilling to give 
good value for the things they receive. They want God, but they are engaged in the cultivation of some other crop! 
They don’t seek God and strive for God day and night; on the other hand, they have installed the god of wealth in 
their hearts and spend all their time and energy worshipping it and praying for its favour.
How pure is the heart full of devotion ( bhakthi ) to God and love ( prema ) toward all things! Selfless service 
is possible only by such; the rest only prattle about it and pretend to be impelled by it. Only those who are well 
established in the faith that all are children of God, that He is the inner motive force of every being, can include 
themselves in that class of social servants.
Those who say they have no use for God or devotion have egotism as the core of personality and exhibition 
as its outer rind. However much is written and read, that egotism will not wither away. Ego consciousness leads 
to self-aggrandizement, and when self holds sway over the heart, no deed worthy to be styled service can emanate 
from them. It is sheer selfish greed that makes one label the deed as service.
Ignorance will not vanish until this discrimination dawns:
This world is only God and nothing else.
Everything, every being, is but His manifestation,
Bearing withal a new name and a new form.
Love this truth, and believe in it. Then you have the right to speak of service ( seva), devotion ( bhakthi ), and 
righteousness ( dharma ) as well as the authority to preach these three paths. Knowledge of the reality will show 
you that service, devotion, and righteousness are all one and indivisible. Without that knowledge, selfless service, 
etc., become mere exercises in hypocrisy.
Every act done with the consciousness of the body is bound to be egotistic; selfless service can never be ac -
complished while immersed in the body-consciousness. But consciousness of God ( Deva ) instead of body ( deha ) 
will bring forth the splendour of love ( prema ). With that as inspiration and guide, one can achieve much good 
without even knowing or proclaiming selfless in outlook. For such a person, it is all God’s will, His play ( leela ), 
His work.27
Jnana Vahini  25. The paths of devotion, wisdom, and non-attachment are inseparable
Light is wisdom. Without light, all is darkness. If you haven’t secured the lamp of wisdom ( jnana ) to illumine 
your path, you stumble along in the gloom, with fear as your companion. There is no falsehood greater than 
fear, no ignorance mightier than that. Decide therefore to travel in the daylight of spiritual wisdom and be worthy 
of this human birth. Through your success, you can even make the lives of others worthwhile.
Non-attachment ( vairagya ) depends upon spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) as well as devotion ( bhakthi ). Deprive 
non-attachment of that basis, and you will find it crumbling fast. Why, this is the prime cause for the want of spiri -
tual progress at present. All these three have to be emphasised in spiritual discipline; they are not to be separated 
and striven for individually.
Devotion includes spiritual wisdom. Non-attachment isolated from devotion and wisdom, wisdom isolated 
from devotion and non-attachment, and devotion isolated from non-attachment and wisdom —each is ineffective. 
The best that each isolated path is capable of is to give some training in purity. Therefore, never develop conceit 
and declare that you are a devotee or spiritually wise or non-attached. Spiritual aspirants ( sadhakas ) must dip in 
the triumvirate ( triveni ) of devotion-wisdom-nonattachment. There is no other way to salvation.
26. See life as a manifestation of the three qualities
Before everything, be pure and holy. There are plenty of spiritual aspirants, but few of them are pure in heart. 
For example, observe this fact: Many people religiously read the Gita over and over again, many expatiate 
on its meaning for hours and hours, but people who practise the essence of the Gita are rare. Instead, people are 
now like gramophone records, reproducing someone else’s song, incapable of singing themselves, ignorant of the 
joy of song. They are not spiritual aspirants at all. Their spiritual discipline doesn’t deserve the name.
Life must be seen as only the manifestation of the three qualities ( gunas ), as a play of temperaments pulling 
the strings of the dolls. This awareness must saturate every thought, word, and deed. That is the wisdom ( jnana ) 
you need. All else is ignorance ( a-jnana ).
27. Be spiritually wise: without ego, without desires, with equal love for all
The spiritually wise ( jnanis ) will have no trace of hatred in them. They will love all beings; they won’t be con -
taminated by the ego; they will act as they speak. The ignorant ( a-jnanis ) will identify themselves with the 
gross body, senses, and mind, things that are but tools and instruments. The eternal pure Atma  is behind the mind, 
so this mistake of the ignorant plunges them into trouble, loss, and misery.
All the names and forms that fill up this universe and constitute its nature are but creations of mind. There -
fore, in order to perceive the truth, the mind has to be controlled and its wayward fancies calmed. The ever-flicker -
ing waves of the lake have to be stilled so that you can see the floor clearly, right? So too, the waves of ignorance 
that ruffle the mind have to be stilled.
Keep the mind away from low desires that run after fleeting pleasures. Turn your thoughts away from them 
and direct the thoughts toward permanent bliss, which is derivable from the knowledge of the immanent divinity. 
Keep before the mind’s eye the faults and failures of sensory pleasures and worldly happiness. Thus, you will be 
helped to grow in discrimination and non-attachment and to make spiritual progress.28
Jnana Vahini  Just as gold melted in a crucible gets rid of dross and shines in its pristine glory, so too, one has to be melted 
in the crucible of yoga  by the fire of detachment ( vairagya ). Being possessed of this spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) is 
the sign of samadhi , as explained by some.
For those capable of self-control along these lines, the native power will gradually assert itself, and the Real -
ity that is now misunderstood will be rid of that fog. Patiently cultivate the habit of meditating on your Atma -hood 
and see the particular as the universal. Through samadhi , progress is guaranteed and liberation is won.
The springs of egotism, etc., arise from ignorance of the basic truth. When knowledge of the Atma  arises, 
ignorance, with its brood of worry and misery, will vanish. The mark of the spiritually wise ( jnani ) is the absence 
of egotism, the extinction of desire, the feeling of equal love for all, without any distinction. These are the funda -
mentals of knowledge of Self-realisation ( Atma-jnana ).
28. The Lord’s eyes, ears, hands, and feet are everywhere
You can see without eyes, hear without ears, speak without the tongue, smell without the nose, touch without 
the body, and walk without legs. Yes, and experience without even the mind. For you are the pure essence 
itself; you are the Supreme Self.
You have no understanding of this truth, so you are drowned in ignorance. You feel that you are only the 
senses, so you experience misery. The five senses are bound up with the mind; the mind separately activates the 
senses and is affected by their reactions. People read through the mind-associated eye, so they fail. But the spiri -
tually wise ( jnanis ) have the divine eye ( divya-chakshu ), for they have divine vision. And they can see and hear 
without the aid of the senses.
As said in the Gita, the Lord’s feet are everywhere, the Lord’s hands are everywhere. His eyes, His ears are 
everywhere. So He sees all, He does all. Devoid of senses, He makes all senses function. To grasp this mystery, 
the path of spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) has to be trodden. This path is very helpful. When people develop into full 
wise persons ( jnanis ), they themselves becomes It, It merges in them, and both become indistinguishable. Then, 
they realise that they are the inscrutable, the indefinable Brahman, not limited by the illusory superimposition of 
name and form.
When fire burns, its light can be discerned from a distance, but those who are far can’t hope to feel its 
warmth. So too, it is easy to describe the splendour of knowledge ( jnana ) for people who are far from acquiring 
it, but only those who have actually neared it and felt it and are immersed in it can experience the warmth, the joy, 
the melting away of the illusion.
For this, continuous concentrated spiritual exercises ( tapas ) and continuous meditation on God are needed. 
The pure Essence can be known by the spiritual discipline of devotion ( bhakthi ), and in fact the goal of devotion 
is indeed spiritual wisdom.
29. The world is the Lord’s three-act play
When an author writes a play, the entire play will already be in their mind before setting pen to paper. Act 
after act, scene after scene, with no picture of the entire drama in their mind, the author will never entertain 
the idea of writing it at all, right? But take the case of the audience. They grasp the story only after the drama is 29
Jnana Vahini  fully over; it unfolds itself scene by scene. Once they have understood the theme, they too can confidently de -
scribe to others the purport of the play.
Similarly, for the Lord, this drama of time in three acts —the past, present, and future— is clear as crystal. 
In the twinkling of an eye, He grasps all three. For He is omniscient, and it is His plan that is being worked out, 
His drama that is being enacted on the stage of creation. Both the actors and the spectators are lost in confusion, 
unable to surmise its meaning and its development. For how can one scene or one act reveal its meaning? The 
entire play has to be gone through for the story to reveal itself.
Without a clear understanding of the play in which people are acting their roles, they hug the mistake that 
they are souls ( jivis) or spiritual aspirants ( sadhakas ) and waste away their lives, beaten by waves of joy and sor -
row.
When the mystery is cleared and the play is discovered as mere play, the conviction dawns that you are He 
and He is you. Therefore, try to know the truth behind life, search for the fundamental, and bravely pursue the 
underlying reality. Seekers of wisdom ( jnana ) must always be conscious of this.
The Lord is in every heart, in the subtle as well as the gross forms. So the spiritually wise ( jnani ), who has 
had a vision of the Atma  presiding over the inner stage, will never be affected by sorrow; it can never hold sway 
over the spiritually wise. The Atma  is in the ant and the elephant, in the atom and the atmosphere. Everything is 
saturated with Brahman.
30. Make God your constant focus
Seekers must divert their attention inward from the exterior world; they must discover the origins of the agita -
tions of the mind. This process will diminish and destroy the activities of the mind, which make them doubt, 
discuss, and decide. From that stage onward, the exhilaration of being Brahman oneself will be constant. This will 
stabilise the being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ) that arises from the experience.
The spiritually wise ( jnanis ) can never be affected by joy or sorrow, however big; they will be immersed in 
the ocean of Atmic  bliss ( Atma-ananda ), blissfully unaware of the world around, far above and beyond its coils.
This is the discipline called the practice of Brahman  ( Brahma-abhyasa ), that is to say, the ever-present exer -
cise of remembering the basic Brahman of the universe, praying to the formful aspect of that Brahman, speaking 
of His glory, being in His company, and living always in His presence. That is why the Panchadasi  says,
Thoughts dedicated to Him alone, speech devoted to Him alone, conversation centred 
on Him alone —this one-pointed existence is referred to by the wise as the discipline 
of spiritual wisdom.
Thath chinthanam, thath kathanam, anyonyam thath prabodhanam, ethath eka param thwam 
cha, jnana- bhyaasam vidur budhaah.
 This is the lesson taught in the Gita by Krishna:
They fix the mind on Me, they survive only because they breathe me, they inform 
each other about Me, they talk only of Me —they are happy and content with these 
only.30
Jnana Vahini  Math chintthaa madhgatha pranaa bodhayanthah parasparam, kathayanthascha maam 
nithyam thushyanthi cha ramanthi cha.
This ceaseless thought of the Lord is also referred to as reflection on Brahman ( Brahma-chinthana ) or culti -
vation of spiritual wisdom ( jnana-abhyasa ) or the Atma  (Atma-abhyasa ).
31. Calm the mind by steady, continuous discipline
The mind pursues only exterior objects either because of the pull of the senses or because of the delusion 
caused by superimposing the characteristics of permanence, etc., on the external world. So the mind has to 
be brought back to travel to the correct goal again and again.
At first the job is hard. Still, by proper training, all the agitations can be calmed by the prayerful repetition of 
Om. The training consists of controlling the mind by good counsel, superior attractions, withdrawal from sensory 
objects, ability to bear the ups and downs of fortune, steadfastness or faith, and poise or equanimity ( sama , dama , 
uparathi , thithiksha , sraddha , and sama-dhana ).
If, at first, the recalcitrant mind is shown the sweetness of devotional singing ( bhajan ), the efficacy of prayer, 
and the calming effects of meditation, then it can be slowly turned toward meditation of Brahman. It must also be 
led on by the cultivation of good habits, good company, and good deeds. Meditation will, as it proceeds further 
and further, give rise to greater and greater keenness. Thus, the mind has to be caged in the cave of the heart. The 
final result of this discipline is no less than undisturbed, undif ferentiated equanimity ( nir-vikalpa-samadhi ).
This samadhi  is, really speaking, knowledge of Brahman itself, the wisdom ( jnana ) that grants release, or 
moksha . The discipline for this consists of three exercises: the giving up of craving, the elimination of mind, and 
the understanding of the Reality. These three have to be cultivated uniformly and with equal ardour. Otherwise, 
success cannot be ensured; no one of them is enough. The instincts and impulses ( vasanas ) are too strong to yield 
easily; they make the senses active and greedy and bind the person tighter and tighter. So that the mind won’t 
achieve mastery, attention has to be paid to the sublimation and subjugation of the senses and the promptings be -
hind them, to the development of self-abnegation, and the relentless pursuit of reason and discrimination. When 
the mind is won, the dawn of wisdom ( jnana ) is heralded.
The aspirant ( sadhaka ) has to be ever-vigilant, for the senses might recoil any moment, especially when 
the yogi mixes with the world and worldly. The basic truth must be kept constantly before the mind’s eye. Wants 
shouldn’t be multiplied. Time shouldn’t be frittered away, no, not even a minute. The craving for one pleasant 
thing will give rise to another craving for a still more pleasant thing. Cut at the very root of desire itself and be -
come master of yourself. The renouncing of desire will take you fast to the pinnacle of spiritual wisdom.
Liberated people ( jnanis ) will be unaffected by joy or sorrow, for how can events produce reactions in them 
who have wiped out their minds? It is the mind that makes one “feel”; when one has taken a drug that deadens the 
consciousness, one feels no pain or even joy, for the body is then separated from the mind. So too, when it dawns, 
spiritual wisdom separates the mind and keeps it aloof from all contact.
By special discipline, the turbulence of the mind can be calmed. As a result of this, it becomes possible to 
taste the bliss of the Atma , free from its pulls. The mind attracts people outward and offers only external objective 
joy, but wise ones know these joys to be fleeting. The Atma  is enough for them to fulfil all their desires for hap -31
Jnana Vahini  piness, complete and permanent. So, they will have no need for the external world.
32. Worship the great souls who have won wisdom
Liberated people ( jnanis ) will also acquire some special powers through their beneficent resolutions, their 
beneficent promptings and purposes. Through these, they can attain whatever they wish. The greatness of the 
status of liberated people is indeed indescribable, beyond your imagination. It is of the same nature as the splen -
dour and magnificence of the Lord Himself. Why, they become the Brahman that they have always been. That is 
why it is declared, 
The one who has known Brahman  becomes Brahman ;
hat one attains Brahman -hood.
Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavathi,
Brahmavid aapnothi param .
The fact that this world is unreal and that Brahman alone is real must become patent; then, all impulses are 
destroyed and ignorance is demolished. The gem of spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) has been stolen by the mind, so re -
gain the gem by catching the mind. The gem entitles you to the status and dignity of Brahman, which you assume 
immediately. 
The great souls who have won this knowledge of self-realisation ( Atma-jnana ) deserve worship. They are 
holy, for they have attained Brahman —which is the right of everyone in the world, however great or whatever 
the spiritual discipline ( tapas ). That is the kingdom they seek, the honour for which they aspire. This is the great 
mystery, the mystery elucidated in the Vedas , Upanishads , and spiritual texts ( sastras ). The solving of this mys -
tery makes life worthwhile; it is the key to liberation. 
Truth and untruth must be cut apart by means of the sharp sword of spiritual wisdom ( jnana ). It keeps the 
world afar and brings the residence of the Lord within reach. That residence is eternal bliss ( nithya-ananda ), the 
highest bliss ( param-ananda ), the bliss of Brahman Itself ( Brahma-ananda ).
33. Illusion makes Brahman appear as soul, God, and world
Worldly illusion ( maya ), by means of its power of (1) hiding the real nature and (2) imposing the unreal over 
the real, makes the one-and-only Brahman appear as the soul ( jiva), God ( Iswara ), and the world ( jagath ) 
—three entities where there is only one! The faculty of illusion is latent, but when it becomes patent, it takes the 
form of the mind. It is then that the seedling of the huge tree (that is, this world) starts sprouting, putting forth the 
leaves of mental impulses ( vasanas ) and mental conclusions ( sankalpas ). So, all this objective world is but the 
play of the mind. 
The individual soul and the Supreme Being are caught up in this proliferation, and they are inseparably inter -
twined in the world, so they are also creations of mental processes, like the things appearing in the dream-world. 
Imagine the individual soul, the Supreme Being, and the world as having been painted; the pictorial world 
has both the soul and the Supreme Being incorporated in it, and all three appear as different entities, although they 
are created by the same paint. So also, the same mental process creates the appearance of the soul and the Supreme 
Being as pervading and immanent, in the background of the world. 32
Jnana Vahini  It is illusion ( maya ) that produces the illusion of soul, Supreme Being, and world; this is declared by the oral 
texts ( sruthis ). Didn’t the Vasishta-smrithi  make clear that mental processes are responsible for the magic dance of 
He and I, this and That, and mine and His? The expression “I am God–This ( Soham-idam )” found in that text indi -
cates the soul ( jiva), the Supreme Being ( Iswara ), and the world ( jagath ). “Sah” means He, the Unmanifested, the 
Super-soul, the Power beyond and above, the Supreme Being ( Iswara ). “Aham ” means “I”, the entity enveloped 
by the consciousness of doer, etc. “ Idam ” means this objective world, the perceivable sense-world. So, it is clear 
that these three are only the products of mental processes and have no absolute value;  their value is only relative. 
In the waking stage and during dreaming, these three appear as real, but during deep sleep or while uncon -
scious (as during a fainting fit), the mind is not working, so the three don’t exist! This fact is within the experience 
of all. Therefore, it is easy now for you to realise that all three will disappear for good when, through spiritual 
wisdom ( jnana ), the mental processes are destroyed. Then one gets release from bondage to all these three, and 
one knows the one and only entity. In fact, one gets established in knowledge of nondualism ( a-dwaitha  jnana ). 
Only spiritual knowledge won by the analysis of the mental processes can end illusion. Illusion flourishes on 
ignorance and absence of discrimination. So, spiritual education ( vidya ) spells the doom of illusion. 
34. Destroy illusion by inquiry into the nature of Atma
Fevers originate because of your actions; they flourish on wrong methods of life and diet; they grow with the 
growth of such wrong conduct. The idea of the snake, which is an illusion ( maya ), flourishes on the ignorance 
of the real nature of the rope; it grows and becomes deeper the more one forgets the rope, which is the base. The 
ignorance that prevents and postpones inquiry into the nature of the Atma  makes illusion flourish; illusion fostered 
by this attitude becomes as thick as darkness. When the flame of spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) illumines, the dark -
ness is dispelled, along with the illusion of the individual soul ( jiva), the Supreme Being ( Iswara ), and the world 
(jagath ). 
Inquiry ( vichara ) makes the snake disappear; thereafter, only the rope remains. So too, illusion and the blos -
soming of that illusion through the mind as the soul, world, etc., will all disappear as soon as inquiry is done about 
the reality of appearance. One knows that there is nothing other than Brahman. Brahman alone subsists. 
To the question, “how can one thing appear as two”, the reply may be given that, prior to inquiry, Brahman 
appears as the world ( jagath ), although its real nature hasn’t undergone any change at all, just as the pot was un -
derstood as pot before inquiry revealed that it is basically only clay. Crown, earring, and necklace all appear as 
different until inquiry reveals that they are all basically, fundamentally, gold. So also, the one Brahman is apparent 
in many forms and under various names and thus gives the impression of multiplicity. Brahman alone is, was, and 
will be. The conviction that this world is but a superimposition is the real spiritual knowledge ( vidya ), which is 
the end of all ignorance.
 The hare’s horn is non-existent; it is a description of something superimposed. Only knowledge of the reality 
will destroy the idea forever; then, the false idea will melt away. Only the ignorant will stick to illusion ( maya ) 
as truth; the wise will at best designate it as “indescribable” or “beyond explanation”, for it is difficult to explain 
how illusion originated. We know only that it is there, to delude. The wise refer to it as “the hare’s horn”. Thus, it 
is spoken of in three different ways, according to the point of view of each. 
When unthinking children are frightened by calling out, “Watch out! a ghost is lurking there!”, they believe 33
Jnana Vahini  it to be true and get terribly frightened. So too, unthinking, ignorant people get convinced of the reality of the 
objects around them through the influence of the illusion ( maya ). However, those endowed with discrimination 
(viveka ) distinguish between the true Brahman and the false world ( jagath ); others, unable to do so or to find out 
the real nature of illusion, simply dismiss it as “beyond description ( a-nir-vachaneeya )”.
35. Attaining enlightenment destroys ignorance as well as enlightenment!
The wise ( jnanis ), who have clearly grasped the truth, characterise it as the mother, whose corpse is cremated 
by the son! It is the experience of illusion ( maya ) that gives rise to “the revealing wisdom ( jnana )”. The child 
spiritual knowledge ( vidya ) kills the mother as soon as it is born. The child was delivered for the very purpose of 
matricide, and its first task is naturally the cremation of the dead mother . 
When tree rubs against tree in the forest, fire starts and the fire burns both. So too, the knowledge ( vidya ) that 
arose from illusion ( maya ) destroys the very source of that knowledge. Ignorance ( a-vidya ) is reduced to ashes 
by knowledge. 
Like the expression “hare’s horn”, which is but a name for a non-existent thing, illusion ( maya ) is non-
existent, and one has only to know that to dismiss it from the consciousness. So say the spiritually wise ( jnanis ). 
Nor is this all. You label anything nonexistent as ignorance ( a-vidya ) or illusion. Whatever becomes mean -
ingless, valueless, untrue, baseless, and existenceless when knowledge grows, that you can take to be illusion’s 
manifestation. 
Another interesting point is this: It may be argued that since illusion produces spiritual enlightenment ( vidya ), 
illusion is right and proper and deserving of respect, but the enlightenment that arises out of it is also not perma -
nent. As soon as ignorance is destroyed through enlightenment, the enlightenment also ends. The trees and the fire 
are both destroyed when the fire finishes its work. 
The nut of the kataka tree that is placed in water to remove the dirt in it is itself wasted away in the process. 
So, spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) is the gaining of this end, the attainment of complete vacuity, equilibrium, peace. 
36. Direct experience is obtained by continous reflection on truth
The knowledge derived from the mere hearing of Vedanta  cannot be termed direct knowledge. Since the error 
of taking one thing as another is not removed by actual experience in such a learning process, how can it be 
treated as direct or authentic? No, it cannot be; it is indirect only. 
Of course, by hearing about the essential nature ( swarupa ) of the Brahman, which is only Being-awareness-
bliss ( satchidananda ), one may be able to picture it or imagine it. However, one has to actually “see” the Brah -
man, who is the witness of the five sheaths of the individual —the food sheath ( anna-maya ), the sheath of vital 
airs ( prana-maya ), the mental sheath ( manomaya ), the sheath of the intellect ( vijnana-maya ), and the sheath of 
supreme bliss ( ananda-maya ).
You may know from the scriptures ( sastras ) that Vishnu has four arms, with the conch ( sankha ), disk 
(chakra ), mace ( gada ), and lotus ( padma ) in each of them. You may even picture Him as such in meditation. Yet, 
unless you have actually “seen” Him by your own vision, the knowledge gained by the study of iconography can 
never be honoured by the adjective direct  (pratyaksha ). 34
Jnana Vahini  Since Vishnu’s form is considered different and outside when understood through the study of the scriptures 
(sastras ), what you get is really indirect inference, not direct experience. Though a person is ignorant of the fact 
that the Brahman is His own self (not different or outside), why can’t he realise Himself as Brahman as soon as 
he hears the exposition of a maxim like “You are That ( Thath twam asi )”, which reveals that basic Truth? But he 
doesn’t.
You may doubt whether the knowledge obtained from scriptures ( sastras ) about things different from you, 
like Heaven, etc., has any value, but you shouldn’t declare so! For the same scriptures have said, by means of 
divine pronouncements, that you are the Brahman Itself, that You are fundamentally Brahman and nothing else. 
They also warn you that direct experience is not obtained by merely hearing these divine pronouncements!  
The progress of aspirants is of this nature: They reason out with faith and care what they have heard until 
they understand the characteristics of the Atma  in an indirect way. Then, to bring that knowledge into the field of 
actual experience, they take up the process of reflection ( manana ), i.e. revolving it in the mind ( manas ).
37. Atma is the Universal Cause and Seer
The Atma  is present everywhere and is in everything. It is unaffected. It is omnipresent, like ether ( akasa ). It 
is even beyond the ether —It is the ether in the universal consciousness ( chit), so It is referred to as “beyond 
(param )”. It is described in the oral texts ( sruthis ) as “This Supreme Lord is unattached ( asangohyayam puru -
shah )”. 
The Atma  is unaffected and untouched by anything; it is beyond everything and devoid of agitation or activ -
ity. Don’t doubt whether it is unlimited or not. It is beyond the three limitations of space, time, and causation. 
You can’t state that the Atma  is in only one place and not in another. It is not limited by space. You can’t state that 
it exists at one time and not at another. It is not limited by time. Atma  is everything; there is nothing that is not 
Atma . Atma  is All, so it has no limitation of name or form like material objects (vasthus) have. Atma  is full and 
free. Knowing this is the highest truth, the fullest knowledge ( jnana ).
A doubt may be raised here: If the Atma  is immanent in everything, like the ether, isn’t it a transformation 
(vikara ), a change? No. Existing, emanating, growing, changing, declining, dying —these are the six transforma -
tions. But the Atma  is the universal, eternal witness, cognising ether and the other elements, so it has no modifica -
tions at all. It is changeless ( nir-vikara ). 
Saying that the Atma  is changeless means that some other things have modification ( vikara ). So, the question 
may be asked how the word nondualism ( a-dwaitha ) can be used. Now, some things have modification and some 
don’t. But when there is nothing besides Atma , it is wrong to speak of a two-fold entity —it is not two, it is one! 
There is no doubt possible of this; it cannot arise. How can it be said that there is nothing outside the Atma ? For 
this reason: the Atma  is the cause of all this, and there can be no distinction between cause and effect. The cause 
cannot be without the effect, and the effect cannot be without the cause. 
Some might be suffering under the doubt: How can the Atma  be the Universal Cause? The Atma  is the Uni -
versal Cause because it is the Universal See-er. The see-er is the cause of all the delusion of this world. The see-er 
creates silver in the mother of pearl, as well as the varied scenes of the dream world. So too, for the multiplicity 
of things experienced during the waking stage, the Atma , who is the see-er, is the instrument, right?35
Jnana Vahini  38. Attachment and affection are the result of delusion
The world is a play of illusion ( maya ). Because of this play, the world seems to be subject to evolution of 
names and forms and involution of the same until the whole is melted in dissolution of the world ( pralaya ). 
The illusion disappears with the illumination of spiritual knowledge ( jnana ), just as light dispels the delusion of 
the snake with which the rope was covered! Then, the knowledge that the Atma  is all fills and fulfils; one is Atma  
through and through! The sacred texts ( sruthis ) also declare this. 
The Atma  is always content and blissful. To you, one thing appears more attractive than another, so this sen -
sual attachment and affection are the results of delusion and greed. It is like a dog that gnaws a bone; when blood 
oozes out of its tongue and gets mixed with the bone, it relishes the bone the more for that additional taste. When 
it gets another bone, it drops the first one and runs after the second. Thus, the Atma  superimposes its inherent bliss 
upon the external, evanescent object and envelops that object with a certain attractiveness. 
Objects are taken to be pleasure-giving, but they are not really so; they only add to the grief. This affection 
toward things seen through the deluded eye is ever-changing, and it is limited, not unlimited. 
39. The nature of Atma is Being-Awareness-Bliss
The attachment to the Atma  won’t undergo any modifications. Even when the senses and body fall, the Atma  
will remain and infuse bliss. It is unlimited and indestructible. Everyone has attachment to the Self, or Atma . 
It is of the nature of the highest bliss ( param-ananda ). For this reason, it is also described as of the nature of 
being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ). 
Are these three the characteristics or qualities of the Atma ? Or are they its essence, its nature? A doubt of this 
type may arise. Redness, heat, and splendour are the nature of fire, not its attributes. In the same way, Atma  has 
being, awareness, and bliss as its very nature. Fire ( agni) is one, and Atma  is also one, though both may appear 
as different. Liquidity, coldness, and taste are of the very nature of water; yet, water everywhere is the same, with 
no diversity. 
Atma  is one; it subsumes all, and by knowing It, all is known. The Atma  is the witness of the five sheaths 
(kosas ) of the individual: the food, vital-air, mental, body, and bliss sheaths ( anna-maya , prana-maya , manomaya , 
vijnana-maya , and ananda-maya  kosas ).
How can Atma  be all-knowing, it may be asked? Atma  is consciousness ( chit), and all else is inert ( jada). 
Atma  alone can know, and nothing else is capable of knowing. And Atma  knows that all else is Atma . Can the pot 
know the ether ( akasa ) inside it? Although it does not know, the ether is there all the same. But the Atma  in people 
knows even the inert in the presence of the senses. Thus, the body, the house, the field, the village, the country are 
all “known”. So too, the unseen items like heaven are “understood”.
Though the multiplicity of body, country, etc. is non-existent, they appear so because they are formed by the 
tendencies of the mind; they simply appear on the screen as different and varied. In the dream, though one expe -
riences a multiplicity, one knows that they are unreal creations of one’s own mind; this is clear to the witness of 
the dream. Similarly, the experience of the waking stage is at most a mental picture. People also talk of heaven, 
though they have no experience of it.36
Jnana Vahini  40. The realisation of  “I am Brahman”
The investigation of the truth and unity behind all this is the duty of the wise ( jnanis ), their real characteristic.
Some people declare that they have had realisation! How can that be taken as true? Consider the state -
ment “I am Brahman ( Aham Brahmasmi )”. The soul ( jivi) that is the “I” is a mutable entity ( vikari ), so how can it 
possibly grasp this statement? A destitute cannot realise that he is a monarch; so too, mutable entities like people 
can’t grasp the immutable Brahman or posit that they are Brahman. 
Who is this soul that calls itself “I”? Reflecting on this problem, one will see that the “I” is the immutable 
Ever-witness, the Atma , which, forgetful of its real nature, considers itself affected by change through sheer igno -
rance. When one deliberately spends thought on one’s identity, one will know that “I am not a changeable ( vikari ); 
I am the witness of the ego, the ego that suffers continuous modification.” From this step, one will proceed to 
identify the Immutable See-er or Witness ( sakshi ) with oneself. After this stage, there is no difficulty in realising 
“I am Brahman ( Aham Brahmasmi )”.
How can it be said that the witness realises “I am Brahman”? Who is it really that realises it? Is it the witness, 
or soul, who calls itself “I” and undergoes modification? If we say that the witness understands, the difficulty is 
that it is the witness of the “I”, and it has no egotism or “I am ( Aham )” idea. If it is said that it is the “I am”, then 
how can it be the witness also? If it is the “I am”, it will have to be subject to modifications. Then the witness 
also becomes changeable ( vikari )! It can have no idea like, “I am Brahman”, so it can never understand “I have 
become Brahman.” Therefore there is no meaning in saying that the witness realises “I am Brahman”.
Then who is it that so realises this Truth? It becomes necessary to say that it is the soul ( jivi), the “I” that does 
so. Note that the practice of meditation on identity with Brahman is done by the ignorant ( a-jnanis ) to obtain lib -
eration from the shackles of that illusion. The witness has no ignorance ( a-jnana ), so it has no spiritual knowledge 
(jnana ) and no need to get rid of it! Only the ignorant need to take steps to remove it. Qualities like ignorance or 
knowledge attach themselves only to the soul, not to the witness. This is proven by actual experience, because the 
witness that is the apparent basis for knowledge and ignorance is devoid of both, while the soul is actively bound 
up with these two. 
Some may doubt how this distinction came to be. “Does the witness ( sakshi ) know the soul ( jivi), the “I”, 
which changes and gets modified and agitated? And again, “who is this witness? We are not aware of it”, they 
may assert. By undergoing the sorrows of ignorance ( a-jnana ) and seeking solace in the study of Vedanta , one 
infers that there must be a witness who is unaffected by the passing clouds. Later, the witness ( sakshi ) or Atma , 
which one knew by reasoning, is realised in actual experience when the superimposition of illusion of the world 
is removed by spiritual exercise. 
The experience of spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) is available only for the soul ( jivi), for it alone has ignorance ( a-
jnana ). So, it is the soul, not the witness, that knows “I am Brahman ( Aham Brahmasmi )”. After the dawn of that 
knowledge, “I-ness” will disappear, for one becomes Brahman.
Now, who is it that saw? What is it that was seen? What is the sight? In the statement “I saw”, all these are 
latent right? But thereafter, to say “I saw” is meaningless; it is not correct. To say “I have known” is also wrong; 
by merely seeing the immutable once, the mutable soul cannot be transformed into the witness ( sakshi )! Seeing 
the king once, can a beggar be transformed into a monarch? So too, the soul who has once seen the witness cannot 37
Jnana Vahini  immediately become the witness. The mutable soul cannot realise “I am Brahman ( Aham Brahmasmi )” without 
first getting transfused into the witness.
If it is said that the soul, who has no idea of its basic substratum, can by reasoning realise that it is Brahman, 
how then can it “declare” so in so many words? When one has become king, the kingship is recognised by others 
and not declared by the king himself, right? —that is a sign of foolishness or want of intelligence.
Caught up in the coils of change, it is very hard —well nigh impossible— to realise that one is just the wit -
ness of all this passing show. So, the soul ( jivi) must first try to practise the attitude of a witness, so that it can 
succeed in knowing its essential Brahman nature. Getting a glimpse of the king inside the fort does not help the 
beggar to acquire wealth or power; so too, the soul not only must know the witness but must become the witness 
—who is more ethereal than the sky, beyond the three-fold category of knower, known, and knowledge, eternal, 
pure, conscious, free, and blissful. Till then, the soul continues as soul and cannot become Brahman. 
As a matter of fact, as long as “I” persists, the state of witness ( sakshi ) is unattainable. The witness is the 
inner core of everything, the “immanent”, the embodiment of being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ). There is 
nothing beyond it or outside it. To say that such fullness is “I” is meaningless. It is also wrong to call it a vision 
or a direct experience of the Lord ( sakshathkara ).
41. The sacred revelations allow a restricted identity of soul and Brahman
The sacred revelations ( sruthis ) also did not consider the soul ( jiva) and Brahman as of the same nature. The 
more important identity, according to the sacred texts, is of the ether ( akasa ) within one pot and the ether in 
another pot. The ether in the pot is the same as the ether in the pan; the ether in the pan is the ether that has filled 
everything everywhere. The ether in the pot is the ever-full immanent ether. That is the primary general principle  
(mukhyasamanaadhi-karanya). The wind in one place is the wind in all places; the sunlight in one place is the 
sunlight everywhere; the God in one image is the God in all images. This type of identity has to be grasped. 
So too, the witness in one body is the same as the witness in all. 
The sacred revelations don’t declare that the soul ( jivi) is Brahman, as the statement “I am Brahman ( Aham 
Brahmasmi )” would indicate. Instead, they do allow a limited, restricted identity. That is to say, the I-ness of the 
soul has to be eliminated by reasoning; then, Brahman remains as balance, and knowledge of “I am Brahman” 
dawns; this is the restricted process of identity.  Continuing as a soul, one cannot grasp the Brahman essence. 
The beggar has to forget his body to recognise that he is the king; so also, people have to bypass the human body, 
which is the base for their I-personality, to realise their nature, which is divine. 
The human personality has to be discarded by inner devotion and discipline and the acquisition of the divine. 
Then, knowledge dawns that one is divine. Limitations of the individualised Self ( jivi) has to be overcome before 
Brahmahood dawns.
Of course, one can get a glimpse of the Brahmahood during deep sleep, when one is free from all mental 
agitations ( vikalpas ). The dream-body ( taijasa ) during the dream stage becomes the creation ( viswa ) in the deep 
sleep stage and ponders, “Did I travel all this time over various lands and undergo multitudes of experiences? 
Wasn’t all this a fantasy? I was never involved in all this; I was happily sleeping, unaffected by everything.” Just 
as someone recovering from intoxication or freed from illness, or as a beggar coming by a fortune and forgetting 38
Jnana Vahini  their indigence, people realise their divinity and enjoy divine bliss.
Experiencing identity with the Lord, the individualized Self  ( jivi) declares, “I am Brahman. Where has all 
the changing world fled? How deluded I was to be caught in the tangle of soul and world ( jagath )! Past, pres -
ent, and future don’t really exist at all. I am the embodiment of being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda -swarupa ), 
devoid of the three types of distinction.” He is immersed in the bliss of Brahman. This is the fruition of spiritual 
wisdom ( jnana ).
42. Realise your true Self by destroying all limitations
The soul can realise itself only by the destruction of all limitations. The mind is the greatest of these. The mind 
undergoes two stages while being destroyed: destruction of form ( rupa-laya ) and destruction of the formless 
aspect of the mind ( a-rupa-laya ). The agitations of the mind stuff are the forms ( rupas ). Then comes the stage 
of equilibrium where there is the positive bliss ( ananda ) of being sat and awareness ( chit), where also the form -
less mind disappears. The annihilation of the mind is of two kinds, namely, the mind pattern and the mind itself. 
The former applies to sages liberated while still alive; the latter to the liberated when deceased ( videha-mukthas ). 
Now, only the destruction of form ( rupa-laya ) is possible. This makes the person enjoy the bliss derived from the 
experience of identity with Brahman.
So, the mind is a limitation of the individual soul ( jivi). It has to be conquered; the body-consciousness must 
disappear; steady faith has to be cultivated in wisdom ( jnana ). Delusion will then fade away. All “I-feeling” will 
go, and every moment, the spring of being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ) will well up in the individual. That is 
the real direct experience of the Lord ( sakshathkara ). The great masters also emphasise this discipline and dwell 
on this bliss. This, verily, is the truth.
43. Four qualifications for inquiry into the Atma
To entitle one to inquiry into the Atma , one must be endowed with the four qualifications. Scholarship in all 
the Vedas  and scriptures ( sastra ), asceticism, mastery of ritual, dedication to repetition of the name of God 
(japa), charity, pilgrimage —nothing will help in granting that authority. The sacred revelations ( sruthis ) say, 
So equanimity, self-control, withdrawal of the senses, and steadfastness only these 
confer that title, not caste, colour, or social status.
Shaantho dhaanthah uparathih thithikshah …
Be one a pundit versed in all the holy scriptures, a wise person ( vidwan ), or an illiterate, child, youth, or old 
person, a celibate, householder, forest dweller, or renunciate ( brahmachari , grihastha , vanaprastha , or sanyasin ), 
a brahmin , soldier, merchant, or labourer ( kshatriya , vaisya , sudra ), or even an outcaste, man or woman —the 
Vedas  declare that
Everyone is qualified, provided they are equipped with the four qualifications 
(sadhana-chathushtaya ).
Mere reading of the scriptures ( sastras ) does not entitle one. Instead, the attainment of the four qualifications 
mentioned therein is essential.
The doubt might then arise: How can a person who has not read the scriptures attain the four qualifications? 39
Jnana Vahini  My reply is, how does the person who reads scriptures attain them? “Because one knows the scriptures, one acts 
in a spirit of dedication to the Lord, gets mental purification thereby, and acquires renunciation ( vairagya ) and 
other qualifications in increasing measure.”
But then one asks: How can these be cultivated by one who doesn’t know the scriptures. Well, why can’t they 
be cultivated? By the accumulated fruit of the educative influences and good deeds in past births, it is possible to 
get qualified for inquiry into the nature of Atma  (Atma-vichara ) in this birth, without scriptural study.
44. Mastery of the scriptures is not enough
Now the following question might arise. While efforts in previous births are rewarded by endowment with 
the four qualifications, how can study of the scriptures ( sastras ) here and now not help! Some persons are 
also handicapped by the evil effects of past karma , and they don’t get fruit from scriptural study. But as far as 
character and bent of mind are concerned, the lucky ones who have engaged in good deeds in past births are at an 
advantage. The student whose study is handicapped by past mental impressions ( samskaras ) is as unlucky as the 
aspirant who has failed to develop a spiritual bent of mind by activities in past births.
Well! Even when one has mastered the scriptures, if one hasn’t taken up spiritual exercises ( sadhana ), one 
cannot grasp the Atmic  basis of existence. Of course, one who has understood the scriptures has greater chances 
of entering upon a course of spiritual exercises and practising them more steadfastly. The merit acquired in past 
births appears now as a keen thirst for liberation, as a sincere endeavour to approach a guru , as a determined 
struggle to succeed in spiritual exercises, and it comes to fruition with the realisation of the Atma . Success comes 
to those who have faith ( sraddha ) more than anything else. Without faith, the prompting to translate what has been 
read in the scriptures will be absent and scholarship will hang as a burden on the brain.
Since renunciation ( vairagya ), etc. are the qualifications for realising Atma , scholars and the rest are equally 
entitled to it. Isn’t it only through spiritual exercises ( sadhana ) that the Atma  can be known? Then why bother with 
the mastery of all the scriptures ( sastras )? Well, to know the Self, scriptures are not indispensable; having known 
it, they are unnecessary. But all that is inferred from scriptures is only indirect experiences; direct perception is 
impossible by any means other than spiritual exercises. Direct understanding alone is spiritual wisdom ( jnana ).
45. See the Atma by unraveling the five sheaths of the body
What exactly is inquiry into the nature of the Atma  (Atma-vichara )? Not the study of the attributes of Atma , 
as given in books, but the analysis of the nature of the “I”, laying bare the enveloping five sheaths ( pancha-
kosas ), through concentrated discrimination that is directed inward. It is not inquiry ( vichara ) of the external 
world or the outer objective world, or the academic scholarship directed toward the interpretation of texts. It is the 
analytical penetration of the secret of the Atma , achieved by the keen edge of intellect.
Is it then impossible to realise the Atma  through study of the scriptures ( sastras )? The answer is: yes, it is 
impossible. The Atma  is of the nature of being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ). It transcends the gross, subtle, 
and causal bodies ( sthula , sukshma , and karana  sariras ); It is the witness of the waking, dream, and deep sleep 
stages. How could a mastery of the meanings of these words give direct vision of Atma ?
How, then, is the Atma  to be seen? By unraveling the five sheaths that cover up the personality, by negating 40
Jnana Vahini  each of them, experiencing “not this”, and passing beneath and beyond to the substratum of the Atma , the Brah -
man, which all the while appeared varied and manifold.
Anything misplaced in the home must be searched for in the home itself —it can’t be found by a search in 
the woods. The Brahman hidden by the five sheaths must be searched for in the five-sheathed body, not in the 
woods of scriptural lore.
Though Brahman cannot be discovered in the scriptures ( sastras ), the scriptures do tell you of the five 
sheaths ( pancha-kosas ) and of their identification marks and characteristics, so, by exercise of the intellect, it is 
possible to reach down to the Atmic  truth.
46. Approach the preceptor for help in grasping the Atma
Then one might ask, how can one not versed in the scriptures master the process of this analysis and consum -
mation? One can learn it from a guru , or an elder spiritual aspirant ( sadhaka ), right?
But one fact has to be emphasised again. The Atma  principle is beyond the reach of even the most profound 
pundit who has learned the scriptures ( sastras ); it can be understood only by direct experience. That is why it 
was said of old that even that pundit has to approach a guru , a person who has already had the vision. Without 
guidance from such a teacher, Atma  cannot be grasped. Even Narada had Sanatkumara as guru , Janaka had Suka, 
and other saints had other gurus . Maitreyi (the consort of Yajnavalkya), the unlearned Leela, and Chudala are 
examples to show that, without prolonged study of the scriptures, also women in the past learned the knowledge 
of the Atma  (Atma-vidya ) from the guru  and attained success.
47. The grace of the Lord makes everything else superfluous
Of course, when one has the grace of the Lord, the guru  often becomes superfluous, for the Lord makes every -
thing known. Whatever else a person may not have, however deficient they may be in the usually accepted 
qualifications, if they are blessed with the grace of the Lord, they can certainly have a vision of the Atma .41
Jnana Vahini  Glossary
This  glossary contains many Sanskrit words, people, places, and literature that Sathya Sai Baba uses in His 
discourses, especially discourses appearing in this volume. The glossary attempts to provide comprehensive 
meanings and detailed explanations of the more important Sanskrit words, for the benefit of lay readers who are 
interested in Hindu religion and philosophy.
In an electronic version of this volume (e.g. an e-book for the Ipad, Kindle, or Nook), you can click on most 
names, places, people, and Sanskrit words within the text in order to immediately access the word in this glos -
sary. Your device will also have an arrow or other link to press to get back to the text. When compound words are 
hupehnated, individual words are given.
aakaara . Form.
abhasa-avarana . Superimposing the boundaries of individuality on the Universal.
abhava-pratheethi . Non-cognition of objects.
acharya . Spiritual teacher, preceptor..
a-chinthya . Incapable of being conceived.
a-drisya . Invisible to the eye.
a-dwaitha . Nondualism, monism, the doctrine that everything is God, the philosophy of absolute oneness of 
God, soul, and universe.
agni. Fire element.
aham . The knower, the “I”.
aham Brahmasmi . I am Brahman , or I am divine.
a-ja. Birthless.
a-jara . Decline, diminution.
a-jnana . Ignorance, stupidity.
a-jnani . Ignorant person.
akasa . Sky, Space, ether, the subtlest form of matter.
a-mala . Absence of impurity.
a-mara . Without death.
ananda . Divine bliss. The Self is unalloyed, eternal bliss. Pleasures are but its faint and impermanent shadows.
ananda-maya kosa . The sheath of bliss, the innermost sheath of the body.
a-nir-desya . Incapable of description.
a-nir-vachaneeya . Beyond description.
anna-maya kosa . Food sheath, the material or gross outer layer of man.
antar-atma . The Atma  within; the inner Self.
antar-yamin . Inner ruler or Being that guides all creatures.
anushtana . Spiritual or good disciplined conduct.42
Jnana Vahini  a-parichchinna . Indivisible. Without parts.
a-paroksha-brahma-jnana . Direct perception, knowledge of Brahman.
Arjuna . Krishna’s disciple, in the Bhagavad Gita ; third of five Pandava brothers. See Mahabharatha .
a-rupa-laya . Dissolution of the formless.
a-rupa-naasa . Destruction of the formless or mental agitations.
a-samsakthi . Indifferent, non-attachment.
Atharva-veda . The fourth Veda . Atharva  means “fourth”. 
Atma . The real Self, one’s divinity, God, the substance of everything, the unseen basis, the spark of God within. 
The Atma  is unchanging and immortal; It does not die.
Atma-abhyasa . Practice of remembrance of the Atma .
Atma-ananda . Atmic  bliss, bliss of Self-realization.
Atma-chinthana . Contemplation on Atma .
Atma-jnana . Knowledge of Self-realization; awareness of Atma .
Atma-sakshathkara . Direct vision of the Atma ; Self-realisation.
Atma-vichara . Inquiry into the Atma .
Atma-vidya . Knowledge of supreme reality or Atma .
Atmic . Of or relating to the Atma .
Aum . Om; Designation of the Universal Brahman ; sacred, primordial sound of the universe.
Avatar . Incarnation of God. Whenever there is a decline of dharma , God comes down to the world assuming 
bodily form to protect the good, punish the wicked and re-establish dharma . An Avatar  is born and lives free 
and is ever conscious of His mission. By His precept and example, He opens up new paths in spirituality, 
shedding His grace on all.
a-vidya . Ignorance.
a-vinaasi . Without decline and extinction.
a-vyavaahaarya . Without worldly action.
Bhagavad Gita . Literally, Song of God. Portion of the Mahabharatha  that is a dialogue between Arjuna, one of 
the Pandava brothers, and Krishna. See Mahabharatha .
Bhagavan . Divinity; term of reverential address; Sathya Sai Baba is called Bhagavan  by his devotees.
Bhagiratha . King of Solar Dynasty, son of Amsuman. Gave up his kingdom for enlightenment, but eventually 
returned as king.
bhajan . Congregational chant group worship by devotees with devotional music in which repetition of holy 
names predominates.
bhaktha . Devotee of the Lord.
bhakthi . Devotion to God.
bhuma . Vast, limitless, the eternal, the changeless.
bhumika . Basic step of yoga .
Brahma . The Creator, the First of the Hindu Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and Siva 43
Jnana Vahini  (the Destroyer).
Brahma-abhyasa . Practice of remembering Brahman.
Brama-ananda . Bliss of realising Brahman.
brahma-chari . Student, celibate, first stage of life of a brahmin ; one who dwells in God consciousness.
Brahma-chinthana . Ceaseless thought of Brahman.
Brahma-dhyana . Meditation on Brahman.
Brahma-jnana . Knowledge of Brahman.
Brahman  or Brahmam . Impersonal Supreme Being, primal source and ultimate goal of all beings. Thus, It is 
identical to the Atma .
Brahma Sutras . Spiritual text of Vedantic  teachings in short maxims, attributed to Vyasa.
Brahma-vid . Knower of Brahman.
Brahma-vidvara . Master knower of Brahman.
Brahma-vidvariya . Excellent knower of Brahman.
Brahma-vidvarishta . Supreme knower of Brahman.
Brahma-vidya . Spiritual attainment, knowledge of Brahman.
brahmin . First of four castes of social order, the priestly or teacher caste; a person belonging to this caste.
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad . The Upanishad  that sets forth teachings maintained by Yajnavalkya regarding 
Brahman.
brihath . Big, enlarged, gross, high.
buddhi . Intellect, intelligence, faculty of discrimination.
caste . The four castes of social order are: brahmin  (priestly or teacher), kshatriya  (warrior, protector), vaisya  
(trader, merchant, agriculturist), and sudra  (worker, helper).
chaithanya . Consciousness, intelligence, spirit.
Chaithanya . Fifteenth century Vaishnava mendicant reformer; taught the path of love and devotion to the Ava-
tar of Sri Krishna.
chakra . Disk; wheel; a weapon used by Krishna.
Chandogya Upanishad . One of the ten important Upanishads ; a great collection of theological-philosophical-
allegorical utterances. Includes glorification of Om, Gayatri , and Brahman.
chit. Consciousness, knowledge, awareness.
chittha . Mind stuff, memory, subconscious mind.
Chudala . Saintly wife of King Sikhidwaja. When he renounced his kingdom, she gave him instruction in Atmic  
knowledge and brought him back to the throne.
dama . Control of the outer senses.
deha . Body.
deva . Deity, celestial being, god.
Devahuthi . Daughter of Swayambhuva Manu, wife of Kardhama Prajapathi; and mother of sage Kapila.
dhana . Wealth, possessions, superior attractions.44
Jnana Vahini  dharma . Right action, truth in action, righteousness, morality, virtue, duty, the dictates of God, code of conduct. 
Dharma  defies a simple translation into English.
dhyana . Meditation.
divya-chakshu . Divine eye.
drishti . Vision, seeing, intelligence.
dwaitha . Dualism, the doctrine that the individual and the Supreme Soul are two different principles or entities.
Dwapara-yuga . Third in the cycle of four ages. See yuga .
gada . Mace.
Ganga . The 1560-mile-long Ganges river; starts in the Himalayas and flows generally east into the Bay of Ben -
gal; the most sacred river of India.
Gauranga . Name for Chaithanya, a great saint.
Gayatri mantra . A very sacred Vedic  prayer for self-enlightenment; it is repeated piously at dawn, noon, and 
twilight devotions.
Gita. Literally, song. Short for Bhagavad Gita .
grihastha . Householder, one of the four stages of life.
guna . Quality, characteristic. The qualities of sathwa , rajas , and thamas  (serenity, passion, ignorance) are gen -
eral universal characteristics of all kinds of mental tendencies and actions/ thoughts, which are prompted by 
specific kinds and mixtures of these three qualities. For example, sathwic  food is health-giving, strength-giv -
ing and delightful; rajasic  food is spicy, sour, or salty and brings on diseases; and thamasic  food is impure, 
old, stale, tasteless, or rotten. See thamas , rajas , sathwa .
guna-saamya-avastha . State of perfect balance of qualities.
guru . Preceptor, teacher, guide to spiritual liberation.
Hanuman . Son of the Wind God and a great “devotee servant’’ of Rama. He was part man, part monkey.
Hiranyagarbha . Cosmic divine mind; cosmic womb; golden egg first created by Brahman from which all cre -
ation issued.
idam . This.
Iswara . Lord, God, Supreme Being; another name for Siva. 
jaagrath . Waking state.
jaagrath-swapna . Wakeful-dreamy.
jada. Inert matter.
jagath . Cosmos, world of change, creation.
Janaka . A self-realized king; Sita’s father and Rama’s father-in-law. His ancestor was Nimi, a great emperor.
japa. Soft prayer or repetition of the name of God.
Jayadeva . Sanskrit poet; wrote the Gita Govinda , which describes the early life of Krishna.
jiva. Individual or soul, in a state of non-realisation of its identity with Brahman. It is unaware of its own nature 
and is subjected to sensations of pain and pleasure, birth and death, etc.
jivan-muktha . One who is liberated in this life.
jivi. Individual or soul.45
Jnana Vahini  jnana . Sacred knowledge; knowledge of the spirit, pursued as a means to Self-realisation. It is direct experience 
of God, as the Soul of the souls. Jnana  makes a man omniscient, free, fearless, and immortal
jnana-abhyasa . Cultivation of spiritual wisdom.
jnana-drishti . Wisdom eye.
jnana-swarupa . The embodiment of spiritual wisdom.
jnani . Wise man, realized soul.
jyothi-swarupa . Illumination itself.
Kailas . Siva’s mountain abode; Bhagiratha performed penance here to bring down the river Ganga.
Kali-yuga . Fourth in a cycle of four ages; the evil age; the one we are now in. See yuga .
kama . Desire, lust, worldly fulfillment; one of four goals of humans.
Kapila , Kapilamaharshi . Ancient sage-philosopher; prime exponent of one of the six systems of philosophy 
known as sankhya , which emphasizes duality of spirit and nature.
karana . Causal or cause.
karma . Action, deed, work, religious rite, the totality of innate tendencies formed as a consequence of acts done 
in previous lives. Every karma  produces a lasting impression on the mind of the doer, apart from affecting 
others. Repetition of a particular karma  produces a tendency ( vasanas ) in the mind. Karma  is of three kinds: 
(i) praarabdha , which is being exhausted in the present life: (ii) aagami , which is being accumulated in 
the present life, and (iii) samchitha , which is being accumulated or stored to be experienced in future lives. 
Akarma  is action that is done without any intention to gain the consequences; vikarma  is action that is inten -
tionally done.
kataka . Tree whose nut purifies water.
Kauravas . Family that fought Pandavas. See Mahabharatha .
kosa . Sheath.
Krishna . The Avatar  of Vishnu in the Dwapara yuga  (era), prior to the present Kali yuga  (era).
kritha-yuga . First age of man, Golden age of truth. See yuga .
kshatriya . Soldier, protector, warrior; see caste .
kshaya . Decline, loss, inertia; go to destruction.
laya. Merging, dissolution, absorption, sleep.
leela . Divine sport or play.
Leela . Woman who attained heaven through her devotion.
Madhwacharya . 13th cent. exponent of dualist philosophy; lived in the South Indian court of Vijayanagar; 
author of Vedantic  works; founder of a sect of Vaishnavas ; refuted monism of Sankaracharya.
Mahabharatha . Ancient epic in poetic form, by sage Vyasa; describes conflict between the Pandava brothers 
and their cousins, the 100 Kaurava brothers. It contains the Bhagavad Gita , the metaphysical teaching of 
Krishna to Arjuna.
mahavakya . Great aphorism.
Maitreyi . Female consort of Yajnavalkya; one of the greatest sage-philosophers in the Upanishads . Maitreyi 
was known for her wisdom. See Brihadaranyaka Upanishad .46
Jnana Vahini  manana . Reflection, meditation, understanding.
manas . Mind, the inner organ, which has four aspects: (i) mind ( manas ), which deliberates, desires, and feels; 
(ii) intellect ( buddhi ), which understands, reasons, and decides; (iii) the  ‘I’ sense, and (iv) memory ( chitha ). 
The mind, with all its desires and their broods, conceals the Divinity within man. Purification of the mind is 
essential for realisation of the Self.
manomaya-kosa . Mental sheath of the body.
Mathanga . A great sage; it is he who cursed Vali.
maya . Delusion. The mysterious, creative, and delusive power of Brahman through which God projects the 
appearance of the Universe. Maya  is the material cause and Brahman is the efficient cause of the Universe. 
Brahman and maya  are inextricably associated with each other like fire and its power to heat. Maya  deludes 
the individual souls in egoism, making them forget their true spiritual nature.
mithya . Mixture of truth and falsehood; neither true nor untrue, but something in between. The world is not 
untrue ( asat) but mithya .
moha . Delusion caused by false identification, infatuation.
moksha . Liberation from all kinds of bondage, especially the one to the cycle of birth and death. It is a state of 
absolute freedom, peace, and bliss, attained through Self-realisation. This is the supreme goal of human en -
deavour, the other three being, righteousness ( dharma ), wealth and power ( artha ), and sense-pleasure ( kama ).
muktha . Free, liberated.
muktha-thrishna . Yearning for liberation.
mukthi . Liberation; final release or emancipation from the cycle of birth and death. See moksha .
mula-prakriti . Causal substance; basic nature.
Narada . Sage-bard; traveled the world chanting Narayana . Famous for creating disputes, resulting in solutions 
for the spiritual advancement or victory of the virtuous. Expert in law and author of texts on dharma .
Narayana . The Primal Person, the Lord, Vishnu.
nir-aakaara . The state of formlessness.
nir-dheshya . To be described.
nir-guna . Without qualities, attributeless.
nir-mala . Without blemish, pure.
nir-vikalpa . Undifferentiated, without ideation.
nir-vikalpa-samadhi . Undifferentiated deep communion, transcendental absorption.
nir-vikara . Changless, without transformation.
nish-kala . Having no parts.
nish-kama-karma . Renunciation of the fruit of action.
nish-kriya . Without activity.
nishta . State, condition, steadiness, regulated behaviour, excellence.
nithya . Eternal, permanent
nithya-ananda . Eternal bliss.
Om. Designation of the Universal Brahman ; sacred, primordial sound of the Universe.47
Jnana Vahini  padartha-bhavana . Non-cognition of material objects.
padma . Lotus.
Panchadasi . Work on Vedanta , by Madhwacharya.
pancha-kosas . Five sheaths of the individual: food, air, mind, intellect, bliss.
Pandavas . Sons of Pandu; family of 5 brothers that fought the Kauravas: Dharmaraja , Bhima, Arjuna , Nakula, 
and Sahadeva. See Mahabharatha .
Para-brahman . Universal Absolute Brahman.
param . Beyond.
Param-ananda . Highest bliss, union with Brahman.
Param-atma . Supreme Self, Supreme Atma .
Parvathi . Siva’s consort. Also known as Gauri (fair complexioned) and by other names.
Patanjali . Author of the Yoga Sutras , which form the foundation of the yoga  system of Indian philosophy.
pathya-pathi . Master of the path.
Prajapathi . Creator of this world; God presiding over creation. Also called Manu, Surya’s son.
prajnana . Highest wisdom.
prakriti . Nature, the Divine Power of Becoming. Also known as maya , avidya , and sakthi ; the world of matter 
and mind as opposed to the spirit. Prakriti  has three dispositions or gunas  (sathwa , rajas , and thamas ), which 
go into the make-up of all living and non-living beings in the Universe, in varying proportions leading to the 
appearance of infinite multiplicity in form, nature, and behaviour .
pralaya . Dissolution of the world.
prana . Life-breath, life force, vital energy, the five vital airs of the body. English doesn’t seem to have names 
for these vital airs, so we list them with their Sanskrit names: prana  (located in lungs), apana  (flatus, which 
moves downward through the rectum), vyana  (diffused throughout the whole body), samana  (navel; essential 
to digestion), and udana  (rises through throat to head).
prana-maya kosa . The second, subtle sheath of man, consisting of the vital airs and the nervous system.
Pranava . Om; the sacred seed-sound and symbol of Brahman. “The most exalted syllable in Vedas ”. It is used 
in meditation on God. It is uttered first before a Vedic  mantra  is chanted.
prasanthi . Supreme peace, equanimity.
pratyagatma . The inner ‘I’.
pratyaksha . Direct knowledge, perceptible, before one’s eyes.
prema . Ecstatic love of God; divine love of the most intense kind.
pundit . Learned scholar, wise man.
purusha . Perfect person,  supreme lord, soul.
Purusha . Primeval male, Supreme Spirit.
rajas . Passion, activity, restlessness, aggressiveness. Associated with colour red. See guna .
rajasic . Adjective form of rajas , passionate, emotional.
rajoguna . Quality of active nature, passion, restlessness, aggressiveness. Associated with colour red. See guna .48
Jnana Vahini  Rama . Avatar of the Thretha yuga  (era). Hero of the Ramayana ; killed the wicked Ravana to rescue his wife 
Sita, who had been kidnapped. “ Rama ” means “he who pleases”.
Ramana Maharshi . Indian sage, 1879–1950, who taught the path of Self-inquiry.
Ramayana . This sacred epic, composed by Sage Valmiki , deals with the incarnation of Vishnu as Sri Rama , 
who strove all his life to reestablish the reign of dharma  in the world. The Ramayana  has played an important 
role in influencing and shaping the Hindu ethos over the centuries.
rasa. Taste, sweetness, essence of enjoyment.
rasa-aswadana . Enjoyment of bliss.
Ravana . Lord of demons and king of Lanka, who abducted Sita (Rama ’s wife).
Rig-veda . First Veda  composed by the sages, consisting of 1028 hymns. Oldest religious text in world
rishi . Sage, wise man.
rupa . Form, figure, appearance.
rupa-laya . Dissolution of form.
Sabari . A woman ascetic living in the hermitage of her teacher, Sage Mathanga; Rama gave her salvation.
sadguru . True teacher to be followed.
sadhaka . Spiritual aspirant. 
sadhana . Spiritual discipline or exercise; self effort.
sakshat-kara . Divine spiritual experience or vision; direct exerience of the Lord.
sakshi . Witness.
sakthi . Great universal power, divine energy, strength.
sama . Control of the senses, peace, equanimity, tranquility. Also, quiet persuasion, good counsel.
sama-dhana . Mind control by equanimity.
samadhi . Literally, total absorption. The state of super consciousness resulting in union with or absorption in 
the ultimate reality, the Atma ; perfect equanimity. The state that transcends the body, mind, and intellect. In 
that state of consciousness, the objective world and the ego vanish and Reality is perceived or communed 
with, in utter peace and bliss. When people realise in this state their oneness with God, it is called nirvikalpa 
samadhi .
Sama-veda . Collection of certain verses of the Rig-veda  arranged for liturgical purposes.
samsara . Worldly life; life of the individual soul through repeated births and deaths. Liberation means getting 
freed from this cycle.
samskara . Inborn desire, mental impression of acts done in former state of existence. Purificatory ceremony or 
sacrament. 
Sanatkumara . One of four sons of Brahma.
sankalpa . Will, resolve.
Sankara . Also Sankaracharya . Celebrated philosopher, preceptor of non-dualistic Vedanta . Defeated all reli -
gious opponents in debates throughout India.
sankha . Conch.
sankhya . One of six leading systems of spiritual Vedic philosophy, attributed to sage Kapila. Its chief object is 49
Jnana Vahini  the emancipation of the soul from the bonds of worldly existence.
santham . Equanimity, serenity, tranquility.
santhi . Peace, equanimity, serenity, tranquility.
santhi-swarupa . Embodiment of peace.
sanyasin . Renunciant, mendicant.
Saraswathi . Goddess of learning and eloquence, a daughter of Brahma. Also, an underground river, originating 
in the upper Indus river basin and joining the Ganga and Yamuna rivers at Prayag or Allahabad
sarira . Body.
sastra . Holy scripture; sacred text; that which commands, orders, directs with authority.
sat. Existence, being, good, real.
sat-chit-ananda . Existence-knowledge-bliss, or being-awareness-bliss
sathwa . Purity, calmness, serenity, joy, strength, goodness. Associated with colour white. See guna.
sathwa-guna . Quality of purity, calmness, serenity, joy, goodness, strength. Associated with colour white. See 
guna .
sathwic . Adjective form of sathwa ; serene, pure, good, balanced.
sathya . Truth.
sa-vikalpa . With differentiated ideation, thoughts of difference.
sa-vikalpa-ananda . Bliss of the highest subject-object contact. 
sa-vikalpa-samadhi . Subject-object type of superconscious state.
seva. Selfless service; service to others while trying to serve the God within them.
sevak . One who engages in service; server; worshipper.
shadbhaava . Six-fold.
Sita. Wife of Rama; brought up by King Janaka  who found her in a box in the earth. Also, a tributary of the 
Ganga, flowing westward.
Siva. Destroyer in the trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and Siva. The embodiment of 
spiritual wisdom and God of Gods, Mahadeva.
soham . I am God.
sraddha . Faith.
sruthi . Sacred revelations orally transmitted by brahmins  from generation to generation, differing from tradi -
tional law codes ( smrithi ). Divinely sourced scripture; Veda ; divine words known by revelation; that which 
was heard or listened to.
sthula . Gross, material, superficial.
subhecha . Yearning for one’s spiritual welfare; the first stage of higher knowledge ( jnana bhumika ).
sudra . Labourer, the fourth caste of workers. See Caste .
Sugriva . Monkey-king, brother of Vali; with his army of monkeys headed by Hanuman, assisted Rama in de -
feating Ravana.
Suka . Divine son of author of the Mahabharatha , Vyasa. Visited King Janaka, who instructed him in the path to 50
Jnana Vahini  liberation. Also, a messenger of Ravana was named Suka.
sukshma . Subtle.
Sureswaracharya . One of the foremost disciples of Sankaracharya.
sushupti . Deep sleep state.
swapna . Dream state.
swa-rajya . Self-rule.
swarga . Heaven.
swa-rupa . Form, essential nature, true nature of Being, embodiment.
swa-rupa-naasa . Destruction of the agitations, including their shapes and forms.
taijas . Splendid, luminous (from tejas ).
taijasa . Entity associated with dream state composed of mind, intellect, five vital airs, five senses of perception, 
and the five elements; the experiencer of the dream or subconscious state, “light” of the subconscious.
Taithiriya Upanishad . One of the ten most important Upanishads ; it is the philosophical portion of the Black 
Yajur-veda ; the other part is called the White Yajur-veda .
tapas . Concentrated spiritual exercises to attain God, penance, severe austerities.
thamas . Dullness, ignorance, delusion, inactivity, passivity, inertia, sloth. Associated with colour black. See 
guna .
thamasic . Adjective form of thamas , dull, ignorant, passive.
thamoguna . Quality of dullness, ignorance, delusion, inactivity, inertia, sloth. Associated with colour black. See 
guna .
thanumanasi . State of attenuated body consciousness.
Thath . That, the Godhead.
Thath twam asi . You are That. One of four great statements expressing the non-difference of individual soul 
with Brahman, the supreme absolute Self, in Vedantic  philosophy.
thithiksha . Fortitude, forbearance.
Thretha-yuga . The second in the cycle of four eras. See yuga.
thrishna . Thirst, desire, and associated activity to fulfill desire.
thuriya . “Beyond” stage in samadhi ; fourth stage beyond waking, dream, and deep sleep. Superconscious state.
triveni . triumvirate (three things).
Triveni . Confluence of the three rivers Ganga, Yamuna, and the subterranean Saraswathi at Prayag. (Allahabad).
Upanishadic . Relating to the Upanishads .
Upanishads . The very sacred portions of the Vedas  that deal with God, humanity, and universe, their nature and 
interrelationships. Spiritual knowledge ( jnana ) is their content, so they form the Jnana-kanda  of the Vedas. 
Principle message is nondualism: unity of Brahman and Atma .
uparathi . Control of mind by withdrawal from senses.
vairagya . Detachment, renunciation.
Vaishnavite . A person belonging to Vaishnavism , one of the major branches of Hinduism. It focuses on worhip -
ing Vishnu and his ten incarnations.51
Jnana Vahini  vaishamya . Unbalanced.
vaisya . Business person, trader, merchant. See Caste .
Vali. A great monkey-king; brother and enemy of Sugriva.
Valmiki . The saint-poet who wrote the Ramayana .
vanaprastha . Forest-dweller, hermit; third of the four stages of life.
vasana . Inclination, impression of anything remaining in the subconscious mind from past action.
Vasishta . One of the greatest sages ( rishis ) of ancient times; priest of the solar race of kings; revealer of several 
Vedic  hymns. Had sacred, wishfulfilling cow called Nandini.
Vasishta-smrithi . Law book written by Vasishta.
vasthu . Thing, object.
Vedanta . The doctrine of either pure non-dualism, i.e. the identity of Brahman and the Atma , or conditioned 
non-dualism; the end or bottom line of the Vedas , which declares this doctrine.
Vedantic . Of or pertaining to Vedanta .
Vedas . The oldest and the holiest of the Hindu scriptures, the primary source of authority in Hindu religion and 
philosophy. They are four in number: the Rig-Veda , Sama-Veda , Yajur-Veda , and Atharva-Veda .
Vedic . Of your relating to the Vedas .
vichara . Inquiry, analysis and reflection of the nature of the Self or truth.
vicharana . Enquiry, analysis.
videha . Deceased, free from body.
videha-muktha . One liberated when deceased.
vidwan . Wise person.
vidya . Spiritual education, spiritual knowledge, learning, that which illumines, that which gives light, supreme 
teaching.
vi-jnana . Highest wisdom; discriminating faculty of the intellect; spiritual wisdom beyond the material plane.
vi-jnana-ghana . Sum and substance of spiritual wisdom.
vi-jnana-maya kosa . Body sheath of intellect, intuition.
vi-kalpa . Negativity, indecisiveness.
vi-kara . Modification, adaptation, change
vikari . A mutable entity.
vi-karma . Wrong action.
vi-kshepa . Waywardness; distracted or diffused mind that obstructs concentration.
vilasa . Play, manifestation; diversionary activity.
vimala . Having all impurity destroyed.
vinasa . Destruction, extinction.
Virat-purusha . First incarnation of Brahma; Cosmic Divinity; Lord in His form as the physical manifested 
cosmos.
Vishnu . The Preserver in the trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu, and Siva (the Destroyer).52
Jnana Vahini  Viswamitra . Sage; known for his efforts to equal Vasishta. Born as warrior Kausika, who, by the power of the 
Gayatri , transformed himself spiritually. Early counselor of the young Rama.
viswa . Totality, whole creation; also a name of the individual soul in the waking state.
viveka . Discrimination. 
vrittis . Agitations of the mind, consciousness.
Vyasa . Compiler of the Vedas  and author of the Mahabharatha , Mahabhagavatham , and Brahma Sutras .
Yajnavalkya . Great Upanishadic  personage. Priest and guru of King Janaka. Taught the monistic doctrine ( a-
dwaitha ) of the identity of Atma  and Brahman in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad .
Yajur-veda . Second Veda , consisting of a collection of sacred texts in prose relating to sacrifices.
Yamuna . Holy river rising in the Himalaya mountains at an elevation of 10,849 feet and flowing for 860 miles 
before joining the Ganga.
yoga . (a) Union of individual self or Atma  with the Supreme Being or Universal Self; act of yoking. (b) Spiri -
tual discipline or exercise aimed at control of the senses. (c) Science of divine communion. (d) self control. 
No single definition of yoga  suffices. Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras  define yoga  as a series of eight spiritual steps 
leading to union with God.
yogi. One who practices yoga .
yuga . Era or age. There is a cycle of four yugas: Kritha , Thretha , Dwapara , and Kali. The present age is the 
Kali yuga .53
Jnana Vahini  