There are few subjects relating to spiritual development so
critically important and yet so incompletely understood as Yoga.
Although the interest in Yoga that started in the West during the
1960’s has abated to some degree, the teaching of the various
forms of the discipline has become well-established. In many
cases, those who practise Yoga as it is generally taught in the West
do so primarily as a means to improve health, reduce stress or
maintain physical fitness.
The other aspect of Yoga given much attention is the control
over the physical body that can be gained by long practice of its
physical disciplines. Sensational accounts of yogis who can
perform amazing feats of bodily control, such as suspension of
breathing for extended periods of time, conscious control of the
heartbeat and the ability to increase body heat in freezing
temperatures get wide publicity. There are stories of yogis who can
fly, live to an advanced age or perform amazing psychic feats.
Although these stories are, for the most part, never properly
verified, the general impression exists, both in the East and West,
that Yoga can bestow magical or occult powers on those who learn
its deepest secrets.
But, as Gopi Krishna points out, there is much more to Yoga
than its benefits to health, control over the body and potential for
developing paranormal abilities. The significance of Yoga, and the
purpose for which the discipline as a whole was really designed,
lies in its potential for enabling the practitioner to actually
experience expanded states of consciousness and
(i)

INTRODUCTION

(ii)

to verify the existence of levels of creation other than the one we
perceive with our material senses. The other benefits are minor
when compared with the real goal.
Part of the reason for this lack of understanding is that in the
West, Yoga is rarely presented in its complete form. Aspects of the
disciplines which are critical to achieve real success, i.e., a
balanced lifestyle, self-discipline and control of the senses, are not
always emphasized, or if emphasized, they are not followed.
Because the primary goal of Yoga is understood in such a limited
way, few people who take up the discipline are willing to make the
effort essential to real success and the potential for attaining highly
enhanced states of perception remains largely untapped.
Another important aspect of Yoga is that if Kundalini, which
Gopi Krishna claims is at the heart of the discipline, is the energy
responsible for spiritual experience and mystical states of
consciousness, then two logical conclusions can be drawn: 1) all
religious experience owes its origin to this source and 2) the
systematized discipline of Yoga corroborates the basic beliefs of
religion which heretofore could only be accepted on faith. They are
verifiable by personal experience. So, Yoga can provide a method
that alleviates the discord and rivalry that exists between the
adherents of the major faiths and also a foundation for the
development of a more broadly-based scientific method that could
reduce the long-standing conflict between science and religion.
Another reason for the need to properly study and understand
Yoga is the occurrence of what is currently known as ‘Spiritual
Emergence.’ This term is generally used to describe a set of
physical and psychological symptoms which are experienced for
varying periods of time and, if handled in a proper way, can result
in enhanced levels of awareness, creativity and mental well-being.
But some of the symptoms experienced in these cases resemble
common forms of psychosis, and treatments done on this basis can
be detrimental both to the process and to the mental and physical
health of the individual.
For those who approach these processes with an open mind and
who attempt to help the people who experience them there can be
no doubt about the reality of the suffering that many of them
endure, often unnecessarily. But until the physiological basis for
this condition is actually determined and understood, it will not be
possible to make substantial progress either in helping the people
suffering from severe problems related to these processes or in
making Spiritual Emergence a valid and accepted branch of
medical study.

(iii)

INTRODUCTION

It was Gopi Krishna’s belief that the only way to establish the
reality of spiritual experience on a firm scientific basis is to
conduct research into the biological factors that are responsible for
it. The discipline of Yoga, with its systematized and highly
developed methods for enhancing the processes that lead to higher
levels of consciousness, is the natural centre around which this
research can proceed.
Although not a Yoga teacher by profession, Gopi Krishna’s more
than 45 years of experience with the effects of a fully awakened
Kundalini and the thorough research of the subject done during his
lifetime gave him the insight and knowledge necessary for the
understanding of this vast subject. The meticulous study of his own
condition and the information that he gathered can be of invaluable
help in undertaking a project of this kind.
If his theories about the nature of spiritual experience are verified
by the research that he recommended, it will bring about a
revolution in our understanding of the human condition and of the
goal towards which the human race is currently evolving.
Michael Bradford

1
The Aim of Yoga

The great interest evinced in Yoga and other occult doctrines by
a large number of people, both in the East and in the West, is a
clear indication of a growing thirst in men to know more about
themselves, their birth and death, the real nature of the conscious
principle animating them, and about the mystery surrounding the
universe. There is nothing new in the expression of this impulse. It
has been present in various forms from the day man began to lead
the life of a rational being, from the day he began to use stone
implements, of the crudest type, and to live a family and social life
of the most primitive kind. That the thirst has always been present
in one form or another is corroborated by the earliest relics of
primitive men found in different parts of the earth. Undoubtedly
there is a difference in the intensity of its expression and the form
of its manifestation, but that the thirst has not abated is clear
beyond the least shadow of doubt.
There appears to be a misconception in the minds of some people
that Yoga offers an easy and convenient method for gaining access
to the occult. This notion is especially prevalent in the West, and
the idea persists that there are secret practices which can work
wonders in leading men to the realm of the spirit. Such a
conception is not peculiar to this era alone, but, in various
1

2

THE SECRET OF YOGA

forms, has been present from the remote past, ever since primitive
man began to experiment with different methods to gain psychic
powers, to invoke spirits and ghosts, to practice the art of magical
healing, or to trade in sorcery and witchcraft. The men who practiced or professed these arts were always a source of wonder and
attraction to novices desirous of attaining similar powers. The idea
underlying this belief, which persists to this day, suggests that there
are latent possibilities in the human mind which, when developed
through appropriate methods, can place at the command of an
adept unseen, intelligent forces of nature which enable him to
perform extraordinary feats utterly beyond the capacity of normal
men. How far this concept is based on reality and how far it is a
myth is the aim of this work to expound.
Properly speaking, Yoga is an adjunct to religion and has always
been treated as such in India, the country of its birth. The word
Yoga is derived from the Sanskrit root yuj, which means to yoke or
join. As such, Yoga signifies the union of the individual soul with
universal Consciousness or, in the language of the Upanishads,
with the uncreated, all-pervading Brahman. In other words, the
spiritual practices, classified under the general name Yoga,
constitute different methods for the attainment of spiritual
objectives, for verifying the doctrines formulated by prophets and
sages, and for experiencing the Transcendent. Yoga is not
something different or divorced from religion. It is the experimental part of it, offering ways and means to the properly qualified
aspirants, prepared to undergo the discipline and to follow the
methods suggested, to prove for themselves the validity of
religious doctrines and the results attained by those who
successfully pursued the path prescribed.
Yoga, as the empirical part of religion, is especially valuable in
this age of reason as the growing intellect of the race demands
some proof for the existence of the Transcendent Reality within the
universe. Unless and until this proof is forthcoming, even in a
subjective form, it will be increasingly difficult to reconcile the
intellect with the existing dogmas of religion and agnosticism

THE AIM OF YOGA

3

will continue to take a heavy toll from the ranks of scholars and
men of science. From earliest times Yoga has provided the answer
to the agnostic and the atheist in India. To the question, Can you
prove the existence of a reality within the world of phenomena? the
answer has been Yes. How? The answer, practice Yoga and see for
yourself. It should not be supposed that India has not had its share
of highly intelligent and vociferous skeptics and atheists. They
existed even before the birth of Buddha in the sixth century before
Christ, and under various guises have continued to spread their
subversive doctrines to this day. Nevertheless, it is true that in spite
of their opposition, Yoga continued to thrive and to be the chief
instrument of realization for almost all the innumerable and,
sometimes, mutually contending creeds and sects in India, thereby
providing strong evidence of its vitality as well as its efficacy and
popularity even under difficult conditions.
The validity of Yoga in its various forms as a tested method for
gaining spiritual experience has never been doubted. On the other
hand, the doctrine has remained surrounded by a halo that has
continued undiminished to this day. Such a halo and such
veneration, as Yoga now commands even in India, could never
have been possible if from time to time its roots had not been
watered by men of outstanding genius who brilliantly proved for
themselves and others the possibility of the supreme achievement
claimed for it. Because there exists a galaxy of extraordinary
spiritual luminaries behind it, Yoga has been able to survive the
onslaught of centuries and continues to this day to excite the
curiosity and command the admiration of legions who accept it.
There is ample evidence to show that the various methods used in
Yoga were in vogue in India even in the Vedic age, long before the
birth of Patanjali, the renowned author of Yoga-Sutras. To this
great savant of the past, however, goes the credit for gathering the
scattered threads of this hoary cult and formulating it, for the first
time, into a methodological system of scientific experimentation
and philosophy.
Divested of the superstition and myth that surround all reli-

4

THE SECRET OF YOGA

gions, Yoga contains absolutely nothing that can be abhorrent to
any faith or creed. On the other hand, it uses most of the methods
advocated by the founders of great religions, mystics, and sages as
a means to God-consciousness and to render the body a fit vehicle
for spiritual illumination. Despite popular belief to the contrary,
Yoga has never been considered to be a shortcut to self-realization.
Although some writers on Yoga, even in the past, have claimed
extraordinary efficacy for their particular method, the fact remains
that this ancient system has never been considered as a means of
easy approach to the Divine. On the contrary, all those who
diligently pursued it did so with full realization that they were
taking up a most serious quest and that they would be fortunate
indeed if they attained some measure of success in it in their
lifetime.
How seriously the quest is taken in India is, to some extent,
evidenced by the large number of men who leave their homes and
families to live in seclusion or in the company of masters to follow
this path. Their number runs into millions. Apart from them,
millions of men in different walks of life in India make Yoga an
integral part of their lives, devoting to it all the time and energy
they can spare, and even neglecting their worldly ambitions to
achieve success in this enterprise. The life of most of these men is
one great sacrifice to this holy quest. They have no delusions about
the fact that they have entered upon an arduous undertaking, and
have to submit completely to all the disciplines enjoined. They
know that the prerequisites for an earnest study and practice of this
venerable system are a recognition of this important fact, a
readiness to make the sacrifice; and last, but not the least, to make
it a permanent, integral part of one’s life. The present sundry
misconceptions about Yoga, treating it as a treasure house of easyto-follow secret methods to experience the vision, Reality, or the
psychic powers are entirely unfounded and often end in a painful
harvest of disillusionment and frustration.
Many of the disciplines and practices of Yoga are common to

THE AIM OF YOGA

5

all great religions of mankind or, at least, to their esoteric aspects.
The main difference is that in Yoga they have been brought into a
methodological system divested of other ritual. This gives to Yoga
the semblance of an independent cult. The word yoga is met for the
first time in Vedas in the Katha Upanishad and some description of
it is contained in Svetasvatra, the last of the early Upanishads. It is
more frequently met with in Puranas, the epics and other later
literature, and is sometimes synonymously used for tapa and
dhyana (i.e., religious austerity and meditation). Basically Yoga is
nothing more or less than systematized concentration. Fixity of
attention, whether on a God or a goddess, on a symbol or a
diagram, on the void or any material object, or whether on a
mantra or any particular region of the body, is the main exercise of
every ancient form of Yoga. It is at the same time the invariably
met cornerstone of every religious discipline and occult practice
known to man. Why it is so shall be explained at other places in
this volume.
In one form or another Yoga, mental discipline and physical
exercises combined, has been in vogue in different parts of the
earth from time immemorial, forming a part—sometimes a repellent part—of primitive cults and creeds. Some of the unsavoury
practices continue to this day, incorporated into obscene rituals and
ceremonies of some Yoga cults. In the light of these facts it is a
mistake to treat Yoga as an independent system of exercises
devised exclusively to bestow peace of mind or access to the occult
world on those who practice it. But rather, it should be taken as a
valuable system of tried religious practices, collected and coordinated, designed to form a much-needed adjunct to any religion of
mankind for lending corroboration to the possibility of spiritual
experience.
The modern tendency to divide Yoga into several different
distinct and separate types, such as Karma-Yoga, Jnana-Yoga,
Dhyana-Yoga, Mantra-Yoga, and the like, is based on an incorrect
appraisal of the circumstances that led to the development of this
science and an incorrect knowledge of its history. In the

6

THE SECRET OF YOGA

earliest religious literature of India no such distinction is made. It is
true there must have always existed numerous schools of spiritual
culture to cater to the needs of men of different tastes, different
religious beliefs, different intellectual levels, and at different stages
of moral development; and these schools, as is natural and as
happens even now, must have designated their systems differently
to invest them with importance and to attract disciples. But that
difference extended only to the pattern of methods used and not to
the fundamental concept of Yoga.
In the Bhagavad-Gita the enumeration of several forms of Yoga
is an attempt at synthesis and every form has been praised. This is
also clear from the reference made to the identity of sankhya and
Yoga. In the Gita, from first to last, Yoga is treated as a powerful
means toward emancipation, as an integral and essential part of
man’s religious zeal. The same view is taken in other well-known
religious books of the Hindus. In the course of time the various
methods of Yoga were also incorporated into the sacred books of
Buddhists and penetrated to Tibet, China, Japan, and other places
in the Far East. The diverse forms of Yoga, in vogue in India from
very early times, embrace nearly all the methods adopted by people
in different epochs and of different climes from the crude,
primitive attempts made to gain supernatural power of healing,
exorcism, black magic, prophecy, and the like to the subsequent
supreme endeavour of spiritual illumination. Broadly defined the
term Yoga can be applied to any systematic effort made by man to
effect the assuagement of spiritual thirst by the use of suitable
psychosomatic exercises out of the vast inventory of methods
mentioned in Yoga texts and other religious documents. The main
thing to be kept in mind is that Yoga is not an accidentally
discovered royal road to spiritual experience nor the secret treasure
house of some magically effective methods for gaining uncanny
psychical powers. In its diverse forms it is in reality the
conglomeration of almost all the methods for the attainment of
supernormal states of consciousness devised by the religious zeal
of man. In other words, Yoga, in the real

THE AIM OF YOGA

7

sense of the term and in the light of the purpose for which it is
employed, is to the supersensory or spiritual part of man what
empirical science is to his visible or physical part.
Yoga provides methods for the attestation of spiritual truths, but
the laboratory is the man himself. In this sublime enterprise he has
to experiment upon himself to know the real facts about his own
existence, or about the entity who never reveals his own nature to
him from birth to the last day of his pilgrimage on earth, and keeps
him perpetually mystified about his past and future, a prey to
doubts and misgivings from the day he begins to think coherently
to the end. It never was and never can be a readily available
talisman to bridge the yawning gulf between the seen and the
unseen, between the physical and the superphysical for all and
sundry who undertake it. On the other hand, the mental and
physical constitution of the seeker and the diligence and purity of
purpose with which he devotes himself to the effort are of
paramount importance in determining the measure of success he
achieves. It must be clearly understood that Yoga does not provide,
as is sometimes supposed, a way of escape from the earthly part of
our lives or a back-door entrance to the Divine for the evasion of
religious obligations and spiritual responsibilities—speaking in
universal, not parochial, terms—that devolve on man.
Patanjali, in his Yoga-Sutras, introducing the doctrine for the
first time as a distinct and methodical system of spiritual exercises
and philosophy, defines Yoga as restraint of the fluctuations of
mind-stuff. In other words, it means a condition of mental arrest in
which the superphysical existence of consciousness, beyond the
range of the senses and the mind, becomes perceptible to the
initiate. According to Yoga-Sutras one of the attributes necessary
in the aspirant is Astikta, or belief in God. This belief is not to be
taken in any restricted sense. In order to be qualified as an
“Astikta,” one may believe in an anthropomorphic God or a
multitude of gods or a God without form, or a Transcendent
Reality in the shape of Brahman or Shiva or Divinity in any

8

THE SECRET OF YOGA

conceivable mould, but he must believe in Vedas and in the spiritual destiny of man. The followers of sankhya, which does not
advocate a belief in God, but in the plurality of individual souls
and prakriti, or matter, exploit Yoga for the verification of their
own tenets. Similarly Buddhists use it for establishing the validity
of their own conceptions that human existence is a series of incarnations not of an individual soul, but of a combination of
elements, until after righteous endeavour it terminates in nirvana or
cessation from the cycle of births and deaths.
The monotheists, the dualists, and the pantheists in India look up
to and use Yoga for the demonstration of their particular spiritual
beliefs and dogmas. The Vedantists practice it to prove that the
soul or Atman and Brahman are one and the phenomenal world is
an illusion born of the action of maya, an unfathomable and
inexplicable conditioning factor, which envelops the Atman in a
veil of myth. The Saivites practice their own forms of Yoga to
prove that the universe is the manifestation of shakti, the creative
and active aspect of the Shiva-Shakti combination, the two-in-one
attribute of Para Shiva, the lord of creation, who is both the creator
and the created, by combining the conscious principle and the
conscious creative energy in one. In fact, all sects, creeds, and
faiths in India, and there are many of them, depend on Yoga for the
demonstration of their truths and the verification of their varied
and, sometimes, diametrically opposed beliefs.
It is therefore obvious that Yoga has to be viewed from a broader
angle than is sometimes used at present. Even in recent years the
results attained through the practice of Yoga have been variously
evaluated and described by the religious luminaries of India. The
Vedantists, the Buddhists, the worshipers of Shakti, or Shakts, the
Vaisnavites and all the rest, who claim success in Yoga, describe
their experience in terms of the doctrines and beliefs of their own
creed. This means that the final state of Yoga, namely, the ultimate
condition of mental arrest or Samādhi, is not always the same but
varies with the individual and the faith he owns. From this it
follows clearly that those who wish

THE AIM OF YOGA

9

to take up the practice of Yoga, with a definite understanding that it
would lead to such-and-such a condition, and those who foster this
belief among the people not well versed in the history and the
entire application of the system, are not treading on solid ground.
This misconception not only leads to wrong endeavour, disappointment, and frustration but also to a tremendous waste of human
energy. The only reasonable and safe attitude would be to treat
Yoga as a systematized form of religious striving, needing lifelong
attention and sacrifice, for a successful consummation, as has
always been recognized; but what that consummation would be no
one can be sure from the start. If the exercises and the disciplines
enjoined are followed scrupulously one may expect a measure of
success, provided the body and the mind are already in a certain
state of maturity, but what form that success would take, what
would be the nature of the ecstasy, what mental phenomena would
be witnessed and what shape the vision would take, no one can
predict. It is thus evident that the stereotyped goal of an
unfluctuating and unmodified state of consciousness mentioned by
Patanjali does not hold true for all. In the Yoga-Sutras he
postulates the existence of Iswara, not as the Almighty Creator of
the Universe and the ultimate source and refuge of all that exists,
but as a sort of superior overself that helps earnest seekers to gain
moksa, or liberation, with the practice of Yoga. This concept of the
ultimate is at variance with the Brahman of Vedanta, the Shiva of
Saivite, and Vishnu of the Vaisnavite cults in India. Such a
variation in the concept of the Transcendent Reality, depending on
the pattern of the vision experienced in samadhi, provides an
irrefutable testimony to the fact that the supersensory experience of
even the highest adepts in Yoga in the past has not been identical,
but unmistakably varied even in respect to the fundamental truths.
The main problem, on which no light has been thrown by any
writer, ancient or modern, is: How does the extraordinary condition
of consciousness associated with Yoga and other forms of

10

THE SECRET OF YOGA

spiritual effort come about? How does the practitioner find himself
wafted, in the state of trance or Samādhi to regions of omnipotence, transcending the narrow human limits, or to regions of
deathlessness, glory, and incomparable bliss? Although the ecstasy
of a modern mystic or Yogi denotes a tremendous leap forward
from the self-induced trance of a Shaman, the experience of a state
of power with vastly extended knowledge or of a direct contact
with higher beings or higher states of consciousness, which is
common to both, reveals an undeniable similarity in the basic
characteristics of the two. In dealing with Yoga we are, therefore,
faced by a historical problem, stretching across vast spans of time,
that has its roots in the uncanny performances of the medicine-man
and the witchdoctor in primitive societies and its branches in the
varied experience of Western mystics, the Sufis of the Middle East,
the Taoists of China, the Zen masters of Japan, the Yogis of India
and Tibet in more recent historic times.
On account of the fact that there is a radical difference in the
concept of Yoga, as presented in this volume, with corroboration
from ancient canonical texts and standard books on the subject, and
the generally accepted ideas, current today, it is necessary to make
this distinction clear at the outset in order to avoid confusion.
According to my view all systems of Yoga embody divergent
methods for the metamorphosis of consciousness. The real aim of
Yoga is not to cause an obstruction in the normal flow of thought
by sustained efforts of concentration, but to open new areas of
perception in the brain capable of manifesting a transhuman state
of consciousness. The ideas expressed by some modern writers that
the practice of concentration, carried to the required degree, can
enable the Sadhaka to keep out both the sensory impressions,
coming from outside, and the subconscious impulses, invading the
mind from within, and in this state of freedom to experience the
transcendent, do not at all present a correct picture of the processes
released by Yoga or of the ultimate state to which it leads. There is
no agreement at the present moment between the principles
underlying Yoga and the concepts

THE AIM OF YOGA

11

of modern psychology and, therefore, any attempt to explain one in
terms of the other cannot lead to an understanding of the causes
that generate the supernormal states of consciousness associated
with Yoga.
The aim of Yoga is to accelerate a natural process, already at
work in the human organism: to mould the brain to a higher state
of awareness. Modern psychology has no inkling of this process
and, therefore, does not take it seriously into account in its treatment of the mind and its problems. There is no recognition among
present-day psychologists of the obvious fact that the human brain
is still evolving toward a yet unknown destination. This being the
case, psychology can as yet have no jurisdiction over the province
covered by Yoga. It is for this reason that, in spite of its antiquity
and the overwhelming testimony of hundreds of top-rank intellects
of India, the validity of Yoga as a means to gain transcendent states
of consciousness still remains to be accepted by the scholars of
today, and the whole subject is obscure and controversial. Even in
India there is a great divergence of opinion concerning the efficacy
of the various practices as well as about the ultimate condition
toward which Yoga leads. Thus for Sankara, the exercise of the
intellect to discriminate between the real and the unreal, before the
actual beginning of the various steps of Yoga, is necessary in order
to reach the supreme state; while in the Yoga-Sutras of Patanjali no
such condition is imposed. In Gita, the greatest stress is laid on
passionate love and longing for the Deity whether manifesting
itself in a form or in formlessness; Ramanuja, another famous
exponent of Vedanta, believes in acts of daily worship, devout
meditation (upasana), and self-surrender as the surest way of
reaching Brahman. He says in Sri Bhasya (iii.2.23): “It is only in
the state of perfect endearment, i.e., in meditation bearing the
character of deep devotion, that intuitive knowledge of Brahman is
gained and not in any other state.”
The Vedas lay stress on the performance of daily observances,
austerity and dhyana (meditation), and the earlier Upanishads

12

THE SECRET OF YOGA

on righteous conduct, control of the senses and meditation on
Brahman as the means to liberation. The Upanishads, which show
an advance over the ritualistic practices (karma-kanda) of the
Vedas as a result of social and mental evolution achieved during
the course of centuries intervening between the two, assign a
higher place to intellectual discrimination in the pursuit of , moksa
(liberation) than to religious rites and daily Karma (agnihotra, etc.).
Thus it is said in the Mundaka-Upanishad (iii.l.8):
“It, i.e., the Brahman, is not comprehended through the eye, nor
through speech, nor through the other senses, nor is it attained
through austerity or Karma (daily performance of religious duties).
When one becomes purified in mind with the blessings of a rightly
discriminating intellect then only can one realize that indivisible
Self through meditation.” According to Bhagavad Purana utter
surrender to the Lord paves the way to emancipation. “Those who
dedicate every day,” it says, 10.26.15, “their passion, anger, fear,
love, unity and friendship to Hari, attain Him.” This is confirmed
in Bhagavad-Gita (ix.34) in the words of Sri Krishna addressed to
Arjuna: “Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to Me, make obeisance
to Me, worship Me, thus uniting yourself to Me and entirely
depending on Me you shall come to Me.” Krishna repeats this
promise again more emphatically at the end of the discourse
(xviii.66) thus: “Surrendering all duties (dharmas) come to Me
alone for refuge”; “Grieve not, I shall absolve thee of all sins.”
The greatest emphasis among all the factors conducive to liberation has been laid on detachment, intense devotion, and purity
of mind by most of the spiritual luminaries of India. The possibility
of emancipation for one who has not purified himself is
categorically denied in the Katha Upanishad (1.11.24). “One who
has not desisted from evil conduct, who has not his senses under
control, whose mind is not concentrated and free from anxiety
cannot attain this Self through knowledge.” The preliminary
practices of Yoga are, in actual fact, meant for effecting the muchneeded purification of the bodily organs, the nervous system and

THE AIM OF YOGA

13

the mind. Without this purification the practice of concentration,
dharma and dhyana becomes fruitless. For this reason some of the
renowned Yoga saints in India consider the dry disciplines of Yoga
an impediment rather than an aid to realization as compared to
purity of mind and intense longing for the Supreme. Surdas in his
Brahmragita ridicules the idea of Yoga without bhakti (devotion)
serving as a means for the attainment of God. In his Sursagar he
makes the following observation: “In whose company am I to talk.
He talks of Yoga in which all taste of life is burnt up.”
Kabir, another famous Yoga saint, presents the same idea in
these words: “Without devotion to God the wicked go astray.
Whomever I approach for my deliverance is himself caught in the
net. Yogis say Yoga is best and there is nothing else. Hairy and
shaven Sadhus (ascetics) claim that they have found siddhi
(psychic powers, perfection). The Pandit, the warrior, the poet, the
patron – each alone says he is great. . . . Leave passion to your
right and left and hold on to the feet of Hari (the Lord).” Sankaradeva, the far-famed saint of Assam who flourished in the
fifteenth century, conveys the same idea when he says: “Thou has
muttered spells (mantras), undergone austerities. . . . Yoga and
logic have been mastered by thee, yet clouded is they mind, for
without devotion there can be no salvation. All piety resideth in the
name of Rama; this is the essential message of all holy books.” The
earnest attitude of utter surrender and devotion is beautifully
expressed in the Mahanarayan Upanishad (38.1) in these words:
“May the Supreme accept me. May the Blissful accept me. May the
Supreme alone that is Blissful accept me. 0 Lord, being one among
Thy creatures, I am Thy child. End the dreary dream of the
sorrowful existence that I experience. For that I offer myself as an
oblation unto Thee, 0 Lord, together with the prana [life energy]
Thou hast infused in me.”
The whole spiritual literature of India is pervaded through and
through with the utterances of venerated sages and seers, from the
age of the Upanishads to the present day, proclaiming

14

THE SECRET OF YOGA

purity of mind, detachment from the fret and fever of the world,
extreme devotion to and constant meditation on the Deity as the
most effective means to self-realization. The regimented system of
Yoga, as propounded by Patanjali, beginning with yama and
ending in Samādhi, is not earlier than the beginning of the Christian era, though the practices enumerated must have been in use
from time immemorial. In the Vedas and the Upanishads tapas
(austerity), mitya karma (daily observances), dhyana (meditation),
bhakti (devotion), vairagya (detachment), viveka (discrimination),
brahmearya (continence), upasana (constant, devout and reverent
thought), jnana (intuitive knowledge), and the like are all said to be
the channels through which one can attain knowledge of the
Reality. As Yoga etymologically denotes union or, in other words,
the merger of the embodied individual soul with the all-pervading
Isvara or Brahman, it follows that every practice or method,
whether adopted singly or in combination with others, which tends
to bring about this fusion can be called Yoga. For this reason
Bhagavad Gita, Puranas, and other books mention various forms of
Yoga: Dhyana-Yoga, Karma-Yoga, Jnana-Yoga, Mantra-Yoga,
Laya-Yoga, Bhakti-Yoga, Hatha-Yoga, Surta-SabdaYoga, etc. The
system adumbrated by Patanjali is sometimes called Raja-Yoga in
contradistinction to Mantra-Yoga and Hatha-Yoga of the Tantras.
Several of the methods used in one form of Yoga are more or less
common to other forms also, with more emphasis on this or that
practice than on others.
Since every form of Yoga is designed to lead to moksa (liberation) on attainment of knowledge of the self it follows that cittavrtti nirodhah (restraint of the fluctuations of the mind-stuff) is not
the only way to attain the unitive state but that it can be obtained,
perhaps more easily and with greater fulfillment, through other
paths, such as the path of bhakti (devotion), jnana (intuitive
knowledge), karma (religious observances with selfless action),
and upasana (constant devout thought of the Deity) also. Purity of
mind, detachment, self-discipline, and chastity are the common
ingredients necessary to be acquired on any of these paths. That

THE AIM OF YOGA

15

the goal of all forms of Yoga is the same is asserted by the Gita
(xiii.24 and 25) in these words: “Some by meditation behold the
Self in themselves with the help of pure reason, others by proceeding along the path of knowledge and others, again, by treading
the path of action. Others, however, not knowing this, take to
worship (upasana) by hearing from others, and they, too, who are
thus intent on hearing, transcend death.” From this it is clear that
all forms of Yoga ultimately lead to a state of inner illumination.
This point is further clarified in the Gita (V.5), while discussing the
relative merits of Sankhya and Yoga schools of self-discipline:
“The supreme state which is attained by Sankhya is also reached by
Yoga. He who sees that Sankhya and Yoga are one really sees.”
The implication of the synthesis, attempted in Bhagavad-Gita, is
obvious. To the casual observer it merely signifies that all paths
ultimately lead to God. For the common man the same view is also
expressed in Gita (iv.II): “By whatsoever path men approach Me
even so do I meet them, for all men follow My path from all sides.”
For an earnest seeker, however, who wishes to go to the root of the
matter, this position gives rise to a host of problems which must be
answered if Yoga is to be made acceptable to the modern highly
sophisticated intellect. If constant practice of meditation in a fixed
posture with regulated breathing (pranayama) and eyes fixed on the
tip of the nose or the place between the eyebrows, can lead to the
same supersensory state, after years of hard endeavour, to which
mere repetition of the name of the Lord or the mantra “Om”
without a regular posture or pranayama, or mere singing the
praises of God in a devotional frame of mind, or pure intellectual
deliberation on the Real and the Unreal, or simple performance of
daily work in a spirit of dedication, or any other act of worship can
pave the way, it undeniably signifies that the conventional
techniques of Yoga are not the only means to gain access to higher
states of consciousness or to the occult areas of the mind. On the
other hand, it shows that there are varying states and varying
degrees of responsiveness in

16

THE SECRET OF YOGA

the minds of the seekers. This accounts for the diverse nature of the
methods, some easy and some difficult, that must be adopted,
according to the aptitude and the state of development of each
seeker, in order to lead to a successful conclusion of the endeavour.
The modern books on Yoga, presenting a stereotyped version of
the Yoga-Sutras of Patanjali or of Hatha-Yoga, as propounded in
the ancient manuals on the subject, have been instrumental in
creating a wrong impression, especially in the West, that the
practices enjoined in these systems induce a special psycho-mental
condition, by the elimination of sensory impressions and thought,
in which the spirit, liberated from these fetters, perceives its own
glorious, ever blissful and immortal nature. If it is accepted that a
transcendent state of consciousness can proceed only from the
suppression of the activity of the mind, and by completely shutting
out stimuli coming from the senses, the question immediately
arises as to how, in that case, does the same state of transcendence
supervene in the case of a Bakhta (devotee) or a Karma-Yogi (man
of selfless action), who merely adores the Lord in his heart or
surrenders all his actions to Him? In such cases as well as in that of
the illuminati who possess the condition from birth, the higher state
of consciousness can manifest itself, and has indeed manifested
itself on occasions, without the arduous mental training and rigid
disciplines of regimented Yoga. This is an enigma hard to explain
in the light of the current psychological explanations offered for
the final state of Samadhi attained by Yoga. However difficult it
may be to solve the riddle, the fact remains that in all authoritative
canonical books and other spiritual literature of the Hindus the
equality of opportunity for the attainment of the highest state to all
the aspirants, namely, the orthodox Yogi, the man of dedicated
action, the devotee, the discriminating intellectual and the man of
unwavering faith and piety, has been unreservedly guaranteed.
This possibility is recognized clearly by Patanjali in Sutra I of
the fourth book of his Yoga Sutras wherein he says: “Siddhis
(psychic powers and perfection) proceed from birth or from drugs

THE AIM OF YOGA

17

or from spells (mantras) or from austerity or samadhi.” This
aphorism plainly signifies that the siddhis resulting from concentration and samadhi, gained through the methods advocated by
him, are naturally present in some men at birth or can be attained
by the use of certain drugs or by spells or austerity (tapas). In this
way Patanjali has equated the possession of psychic powers and
mystical faculties, exhibited by some individuals as a natural
endowment at birth, and the trancelike states, caused by certain
drugs or by the casting of spells or by fasting and other forms of
austerity, with the Siddhis proceeding from samadhi and the long,
elaborate course of self-discipline and concentration prescribed by
him. Critically examined this passage is of tremendous
significance. If drugs and spells can bestow the same intuitive state
of knowledge and the same psychic gifts as result from the
extremely arduous discipline of Yoga, leading to cessation of
karma and to liberation, the ultimate goal of all yogic disciplines, it
means that potions and charms can be as effective in cutting
asunder the veil of maya and the fetters of karma as all the virtues
demanded and the difficult efforts required in the practice of Yoga
for many years—self-sacrifice, devotion, and righteousness—all
dedicated to God.
Such an idea would, no doubt, strike those who believe in the
infallibility of divine justice as most revolting. It would equate the
mescaline addict, sunk in sensuality, with the mystic and the saint
whose immaculate life has been one long sacrifice to a holy cause.
Obviously there is a veil of mystery surrounding the entire subject.
This prevents us from probing more deeply into the inner recesses
of the spirit in order to reconcile the striking anomalies which
bewilder those who would like to have a rational explanation for
the varied phenomena attending spiritual unfoldment, in order to
obliterate their doubts. All the issues and anomalies, mentioned
above, will be discussed at their proper places in other chapters of
this volume. It is here sufficient to point them out in order to show
that Yoga, in the proper sense of the term, embraces a wide variety
of methods and practices

18

THE SECRET OF YOGA

prescribed to gain a supernormal state of consciousness that has
been an invariable adornment of the enlightened sages, prophets,
and mystics of the past. Many of them never practiced Yoga in
their life and were born with the faculty already developed in the
womb. Others gained it through frequenting the company of holy
men and hearing the descriptions of the supreme state from their
lips, others by prayer, still others by austerity and selfmortification; some by practicing the disciplines of Yoga for an
incredibly short spell of time and some by sudden insight, a sudden
flash of intuitive knowledge, which, like a streak of lightning,
clears the darkness of the mind (avidya), leaving them amazed and
breathless, blessed with a freshly gained, glorious vision that
penetrated into the nature of things.
By diverse paths and in diverse forms the seers of India, the
Taoists of China, the Buddhist arhats, the Sufis of the Middle East,
the Zen masters in Japan, the Siddhas of Tibet and the mystics of
the West attained through Yoga the fusion of the individual with
universal consciousness, interpreting their experience in diverse
ways. In some cases the fusion might have been momentary, in
others of longer duration, lasting for hours, and in still others
existing permanently. But that the impact of each experience was
most overpowering, is clear beyond a doubt. The complexity of the
phenomenon, its varied nature, and the fact that one, witnessing it
in himself, is completely carried away for the time being by the
overwhelming nature of the experience have always stood in the
way of an intelligent understanding and consistent expression of
the condition. Hardly any one of them could coherently express
what he had apprehended. No one of them was the same after the
experience as he had been before it. No one of them fell below the
stature he attained as a result of it.
The very first contact with the Divine, the very first taste of the
indescribable experience, the very first sight of the Ineffable
changed the lives and metamorphosed the inner being of those who
succeeded in attaining the Transcendent. They then pined day and
night for the same experience and were infinitely more happy in
the inner than in the outer world. It does not materially affect

THE AIM OF YOGA

19

the transformed condition achieved if there are great divergences in
their accounts of the supreme experience. It also does not matter if
there are wide differences in the experience itself. The fact that one
of them was blessed with the vision of an adored Saviour, another
with that of a venerated Prophet, another with the glorious image
of a preconceived God, or another with the vision of a formless but
all-pervading and almighty Conscious Being, does not falsify the
experience, but only accentuates the varied nature of the
phenomenon and the inadequacy of any current explanation offered
for it. What matters is that the basic characteristics of the mystical
trance or samadhi are present in varying forms in the experience:
an overmastering sense of wonder at the extraordinary occurrence,
the unutterably glorious nature of the vision, a powerful feeling of
awe combined with inexpressible happiness, overflow of love, and
entrancement or a state of complete or partial oblivion to the world.
Last, but not the least, there is the vivid consciousness of a higher
existence or of submersion into an ocean of knowledge in which all
that was obscured is now explained.
This is the aim of Yoga: the elevation of the narrow, fear-ridden
and desire-tormented human consciousness to a state of
indescribable beauty, glory, and bliss. This is the aim of all religious striving and spiritual endeavour, this transmutation of the
human mind, culminating in its liberation from the chains of ego,
insatiable desire, and fear of death. But this far-reaching
transformation of personality is never achieved by one’s efforts
alone. The as yet inscrutable laws of heredity must have prepared
the soil for the efforts to bear fruit. Then only can the mortal
become immortal and the earthly divine. Then only does a
fortunate seeker gain access to the indefinable inner world, the
glorious realm of consciousness to which no human sense and no
man-made device can penetrate: a world, infinitely vaster and
infinitely more mysterious and breath-taking, than the material
universe, which can only be approached directly by the knowing
self, without the mediation of the senses and the intrusion of the
intellect, for it is as far removed from the world, apprehended

20

THE SECRET OF YOGA

by the mind, and explored by the intellect as the brilliant light of
the noonday sun is from the dark shadows of the night.
The well-known Christian mystic writing under the name of
Dionysius toward the end of the fifth century has tried to portray
this state in these words: “The super-unknown, the super-luminous
and loftiest height, wherein the simple and absolute and
unchangeable mysteries are cloaked in the superlucent darkness of
hidden mystic silence, which supershines most brightly in the
blackest night, and, in the altogether intangible and unseen, fills the
eyeless understanding with superbeautiful brightness. - . . And
thou, dear friend, in thy intent practice of mystical contemplation,
leave behind both thy senses and thy intellectual operations, and all
things known by sense and intellect, and all things which are not
and which are, and set thyself, as far as may be, to unite thyself in
unknowing with Him, who is above all things and knowledge, for
by being purely free and absolute, out of self and all things, thou
shalt be led up to the ray of the divine darkness, stripped from all
and loosed from all.”
Compare this with the description contained in the Mandukya
Upanishad (i.7): “They consider the fourth, i.e., the Turiya state
(the crowning state of Yoga) to be that which is not conscious of
the internal world, nor conscious of the external world, nor conscious of both the worlds, nor a mass of consciousness, nor simple
consciousness, nor unconsciousness; which is unseen, beyond empirical dealings, beyond the grasp (of the organs of action), uninferable, unthinkable, indescribable; whose valid proof consists in
one single belief in the Self; in which all phenomena cease; and
which is unchanging, auspicious and nondual. That is the Self, and
that is to be known.”
It is obvious that both these quotations refer to the same condition, to the same incommunicable, mystical experience, in which
the overpowered intellect reels back defeated from the arena where
the spirit unfolds itself. The crowning achievement of Yoga and
every true and healthy form of spiritual striving can be the same.
Only the psychological constitution of the individuals causes the
variations.

2
How This Aim Is Achieved

The mystical state is still an incomprehensible phenomenon of
consciousness. The range of its expression is so varied and the area
of its manifestations so extensive that it is difficult at this stage of
our knowledge to assign any well-marked limits to it. In its most
common form the time of its occurrence and the duration of its
operation are unpredictable. The flash of inner illumination may
last only for a few moments, like the dazzling brightness of a
meteor shooting across the sky in the darkness of night, or it may
continue for an hour or several hours or even days at a time. It may
occur once in a lifetime, or a few times in one’s life, or daily, or
every night at different hours. Sri Ramakrishna’s ecstasies lasted
for both short and long durations and, sometimes, entrancement
occurred several times in a day. St. Angela of Foligno had her
highest vision of God three times, and Plotinus, according to his
disciple Porphyry, four times in a period of six years. In the case of
a clergyman quoted by William James, the soul opened into the
infinite . . . with ineffable joy and exultation” only once, while in
the case of Margiad Evans the state of Union was of long duration,
extending even to sleep. Shams-i-Tabriz the mystic poet of Persia,
was perennially in a state of divine intoxication: “In a place even
beyond outer space, in a
21

22

THE SECRET OF YOGA

tract without a trace of shadow, soul and body transcending live in
the soul of my Loved One anew,” he says.
The variation between one kind of experience and another even
in a few sample cases pertaining to different people relating to
different periods, is so great and so unaccountable that it is
extremely difficult to understand that they are allied one another.
The number of those belonging to the regular order of ecstatics is
comparatively limited. There are many people who at one time or
another in their lives experience the beatific vision suddenly, in
unexpected ways or under strange circumstances, and feel
themselves in a new world or under a new order of things. As if
temporarily gifted with a new kind perception, they see their
surroundings transformed into a dreamland, a realm of
inexpressible glory in which, forgetting for a while who they are,
they taste the joy of a liberated existence, unencumbered by the
problems and obsessions of the earth. Or the whole cosmic
panorama may appear so changed, so magnified, so full of grandeur
and sublimity that the mind reels under the impact.
The same experience in a more or less intense form occurs to
many people in dreams or in the state between waking and dreaming. They see themselves as if in heavenly surroundings in a highly
exalted and blissful state, drinking in the beauty and the glory of
the paradise around them, or viewing a celestial object or a godlike
being with a rapture that is unknown to the waking consciousness.”
The majority of people who have any type of mystical experience
on rare occasions in their life are often reluctant to relate these
intimate episodes of their being to others, under the mistaken idea
that the occurrence might savour of the abnormal, or that such an
experience, being extremely rare or peculiar to them alone, might
be ridiculed by those to whom they narrate the incident. There are
other variations also. The rapture, with an instantaneous break
through the normal state of awareness into a superearthly plane of
existence in which one is swallowed by a flood of inexpressible
bliss, might be evoked

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHIEVED

23

by a strain of melody, a beautiful object, the atmosphere of a holy
shrine, or even by the embrace of love. The power of expression
and the sense of evaluation of their own feelings and mental states
vary with different people. Some are prone to depict even trivial
occurrences in a highly embellished and colourful language, while
in the case of others a restricted power of expression stands in the
way of an adequate presentation of remarkable experiences which
can rank with those recorded of well-known mystics and saints.
Viewed from a rational aspect, experiences of a transcendent
nature, occurring in persons who never practised Yoga or any other
form of spiritual discipline, nor were particularly devotional or
even deeply religious in the ordinary sense of the term, present a
riddle which is not explicable on the basis of any of the numerous
solutions proposed for the problem. No one can deny the basic
similarity between the ecstatic states described by Wordsworth,
Tennyson, Charlotte Bronte, C. E. Montague, Plato, Whitman,
Marcel Proust, Nietzsche, and a host of other writers, thinkers, and
those recorded by reputed mystics of the West and renowned yogis
of the East. There must be countless other intelligent men and
women of many countries and cultures who had this experience at
one time or another like a bolt from the blue, during the course of
an ordinary, strictly mundane life, and who had either no
inclination or no literary ability to describe it in words. It appears
unbelievable that lifelong devotion to the Deity and sacrifice of all
the enticements and pleasures of earth, with ceaseless observance
of the rigid disciplines of Yoga, should fail to elicit any reward or,
here also in rare cases, should only be recompensed in almost the
same way as some individuals, among the worldly mass of
mankind, are rewarded without having made any effort whatsoever
to deserve it. But it is a hard, historical reality which, so far, has
not been satisfactorily explained.
The unitive state may range from a single, momentary sense of
oneness with nature with a blissful release from the world-weary
selfhood, felt in a sudden upsurge of a new, unidentified

24

THE SECRET OF YOGA

life from within, to experience, described by the well-known
mystic Jacob Boehme when he “felt” in a flash of lightning that the
gate of his soul was opened and he saw and knew what no books
could “teach,” to the state of perennial ecstasy, described by
Abhinava-Gupta in these words:
O, Bhairava-Natha [Lord Shiva]
Thou Refuge of the friendless, Supreme Being,
Pervading both the sentient and the insentient worlds,
Pure Consciousness, One, Eternal, Infinite . . .
By the potency of Thy Grace the world today
Appears to me to be Thy Person, O Mahestra,
And Thee as my Atman ever more, and so I feel
This whole creation as my very self. . .
The taproot of mystical experience lies in consciousness, and
consciousness in different individuals is not the same. The one
great lesson which this experience brings home to us is that the
very fundamental constituent of personality, namely consciousness,
varies in different people. When we say that a certain man is
intelligent and another dull or that one is more aesthetic or
sensitive than the other, we often invest him with a conscious
personality like our own, but with the difference that he is more or
less intelligent, or more or less sensitive. This is a mistake based on
a fundamentally erroneous way of thinking; for as no two faces and
no two streams of thought are exactly alike, so no two units or
pools of consciousness, representing the personality or the outer
area of manifestation of the soul, are alike in any two persons,
including even identical twins. Each unit of human consciousness
has, as it were, its own volume, its own area, its own depth, its own
power of perception, grasp, and penetration. It has its own
memory, scale of passion and intensity of desire. Each personality
has a distinct stamp, a peculiar pattern clearly embossed on it, to
which it conforms more or less throughout its life. In the genuine
mystical state this everyday personality that has its roots in the
deepest strata of the human mind evaporates for a time, opening its
otherwise strongly enclosed precincts to the influx of a torrent that
floods the now empty enclosure with

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHIEVED

25

a new kind of life, a new pattern of consciousness, and, overflowing the former narrow boundaries, causes mixed feelings of wonderment, exaltation, bliss, awe, and a sense of all-pervasiveness,
infinity, and sovereignty in the now eclipsed original personality, a
thin shadow of which still lurks in the mind. If this shadow did not
survive it would be impossible for the normal consciousness to
have any recollection of the extraordinary experience. One would
come back from it, like a man awakening from dreamless slumber,
without the recollection of any impression received in that state.
Even in nirvikalpa samadhi (contemplation) an attenuated shadow
of the normal self continues to function and brings back the
memory of the stupendous vision seen. Quivering and throbbing,
the overshadowed self, shrunken almost to a pinpoint before the
immeasurable Presence that now encompasses it, has still the
faculty left to make a comparison between itself and the veritable
Universe of Being, unlike anything known to it on the earth,
absolutely beyond description, with which for a breathless interval
and with unutterable rapture it finds itself in complete identity, like
a drop of water merged with the ocean to which it belongs.
The description of the Cosmic Being contained in the eleventh
chapter of the Bhagavad-Gita shows overawed Arjuna (the human
element still left even in the highest form of mystical contemplation) in a state of utter surrender, confronted by the infinite,
indescribable Universe of Life, revealed to him in a divine vision
through the grace of Krishna (the Cosmic Self). If mystical union is
a genuine experience of the human mind, and not merely a delusive
state, there must be a concordance in the essentials of the fully
blossomed state experienced by the visionaries of all religions,
irrespective of the period or the culture to which they belong. The
surest way to cast a doubt on the validity of the phenomenon, and
thereby on the fundamental basis of religion itself, is for the
adherents of one faith to belittle or to question the genuineness of
the experience described by the contemplatives of another religion
or cult. The tendency among some writers on mysticism to
devaluate the supreme experience, depicted in

26

THE SECRET OF YOGA

the Upanishads, of the absorption of Atman into the attributeless
Brahman, in which one is lost to everything that can be
apprehended by the intellect, reveals only a lack of firsthand
knowledge of the crowning state of mystical contemplation. The
view expressed by Dean Inge that the highest state of Indian
mystics is that of inertness, of total self-loss and annihilation
springs from a sectarian concept of the Divinity. To hold that the
Supreme Being conforms to this or that image or can be
experienced in this or that form is to bring Him, who is beyond the
furthest reach of our thought, down to the prosaic level of a puny
human being. The view is self-contradictory, for were the
experience of a nihilistic character, with total loss of the observing
power of the soul, how could the seers bring back a vivid
description of it, even in negative terms—that it is not this . . . ;
not this . . . ; not this . . .—on returning to the normal state?
It is obvious that even among intellectuals there is a
misconception about the real nature of the ecstatic state. For one
who never had the experience it is impossible to imagine the
condition of the contemplative’s mind at the time of the flight of
the soul toward the Ineffable. Were God or the Absolute to be
apprehended as we apprehend the objects of senses or the abstract
ideas present in our mind, it would reduce the whole phenomenon
of mysticism to everyday occurrences of the material world,
perhaps in a more grandiose, more impressive and more exalted
form, but a mundane experience nevertheless. By no stretch of the
imagination can a supersensory knowledge of the Godhead be
likened to knowledge in the ordinary sense of the term. There must
occur the development of a new faculty, the opening of a new
channel of perception or a radical transformation and enhancement
of the normal powers of observation of the soul to enable it to have
even a fleeting glimpse of the Supreme Being. Since God, as He is
conceived in all Semitic religions, is the Maker or Master of the
human soul and according to Vedanta is the Absolute as also the
Atman itself, it follows in either case that in order to apprehend
Him the soul has to transcend the

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHEIVED

27

limitations of the flesh in the former case; or those, imposed on it
by maya, in the latter; and to attain a transhuman state of
knowledge where this infinite Ocean of Being or this boundless
Conscious Substratum of the whole universe can be known.
This means, in other words, that the human soul in order to
apprehend the infinite must cease to be finite itself and must
partake for the time being of superhuman attributes and a superhuman state of cognition to have even a transient or fragmentary
knowledge of Him or That, who is normally beyond the grasp of
his sensory equipment and mind. In this state of transcendence, in
this rapturous union between the Creator, the Master, or the
Substance of the soul and the soul itself, in both the Eastern and
Western senses of the phenomenon, how can the enthralled mystic,
transported to other realms of existence, determine where his light
of knowledge ends and the glory of God begins? Like a grain of
salt dropped into an ocean, his narrow personality melts and
spreads the moment it comes in contact with the shore-less stream
of life, surrendering joyously all its mental possessions, shedding
cheerfully every individual trait that stands between it and the
rapturous, incorporeal oceanic state of Being, happy beyond
measure to be one with the glorious, everlasting All instead of an
isolated mortal tormented by desire, death, and decay. “Thou wert
ever close to me,” says the famous mystical poetess of Kashmir,
Lalladed, “and yet I searched for Thee till the evening shadows
fell. But, lo, when at last I saw Thee in myself, I at once realized
my distinction from the earth, that is, the body and identity with
Thee.” At another place she adds: “Having known Thee, I find that
Thou art all and I nothing.” What Some Western writers treat as
“extinction” or “annihilation” after reading the description of
“union with Brahman” or nirvana is, in actual fact, the effacement
of the dividing line between the individual and the Cosmic
Consciousness. Once transformed into an ocean, who would care
to return to the uncertainty and the torment of a transient bubble?
The mistake is caused by the erroneous supposition that in

28

THE SECRET OF YOGA

these high states of mystical union there is a complete obliteration
of personality. This does not occur, since such an event would rob
the supreme experience of all its happiness and grandeur. The same
misunderstanding can result from the term fana used in Sufi
literature. The word fana connotes extinction. The egobound,
narrow human personality has to efface itself to make room for a
higher state of Being to transcend the limitations, imposed by the
senses, and to be in a position to grasp the hitherto Intangible and
to know the previously Unknowable. When the contact takes place
it has the effect of Divine Intoxication, so beautifully expressed by
the Sufi poets. In this state of sat-chit-ananda (existence,
consciousness, bliss) the enraptured soul breaking the restraining
bonds of the ego loses all idea of the body, the world, and the
objects of the senses in the contemplation of a surpassingly
blissful, intensely alive, and extremely fascinating state of Being,
which human language completely fails to portray. Embodied
human life, magnified a hundredfold in awareness, in intellectual
acumen, and in the intensity of higher emotions would still fall
short of the exaltation and exhilaration experienced in the beatific
state.
This ravishment of the soul is mentioned by St. Macarius of
Egypt in one of his Homilies: “And it comes to pass that, having
been without leisure all the day, in this one hour he gives himself
to prayer, and his inner man is rapt, in prayer, in the immeasurable
depth of the other world, in such sweetness that his mind is far
away, being soft and carried thither, so that at that time oblivion
comes into his mind because it has been filled up and taken captive
by divine and heavenly things, carried to the infinite and
incomprehensible, to things so wonderful that they may not be
expressed by human speech; thus, in that hour he prays and says:
‘Would that my soul had gone forth together with the prayer.’
When once through prayer or meditation or by merely evoking the
image of Divinity the soul enters into communion with the
Ineffable, it is drawn deeper and deeper with irresistible power
until, in the highest stage, one can say with

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHIEVED

29

Shams-i-Tabriz that being now devoid of all distinctions and free
of the chains that bind it to the earth, it becomes so completely
identified with the Over-Self that no distinction becomes possible.
The individual then, torn from the anchor of corporeal selfhood,
oblivious of the world and its problems, plunges into the Infinite,
like a raindrop falling into the sea.”
Mystical experience should not be viewed in isolation for any
group of people, nor from the point of view of any particular faith,
but rather, as a phenomenon of a universal character about the
nature of which we are still in the dark. There is no fundamental
difference between the pattern of the genuine mystical state
experienced three thousand years ago, during the Vedic periods
and that of today. It sounds paradoxical but it is true that, instead of
an advancement in keeping with the improvement in the general
intellectual level of mankind there has been regression in this
direction, and in spite of the fact that the thirst for it continues
unabated, the number of those who in recent times secured the
supreme blessing of a mystical contact with the Divine has
dwindled from that which prevailed during ancient or even
medieval times. If the mystical experience betokens in reality a
face-to-face encounter with Divinity or direct contact with
universal consciousness, can there be anything more interesting
and more important from the point of view of human aspirations
than this for the attention and study of the human mind? That the
quest has not been taken up in a serious way is a clear indication of
the fact that either the phenomenon is not considered genuine by
those competent to judge or for certain reasons no importance is
attached to it.
Whatever the reason, viewed in the light of the facts mentioned
in this volume, mystical experience of the right kind presents a
problem which far exceeds in importance most other problems that
engage the attention and consume the labour of countless
painstaking investigators today. Because of its association with
religion and the fact that the majority of those who earnestly strove
for it in the past did so under the belief that the disciplines

30

THE SECRET OF YOGA

undertaken or the austerities undergone provided the only way to
reach God, or to gain release from the cycle of births and deaths in
a tormenting world, mysticism, regarded as the crowning
achievement of faith, became inextricably mingled with the myths
and superstitions of the various creeds, from which position it has
not been extricated so far. Even where a mystic, or a group of
mystics, raised a cry of revolt against the tenets or dogmas of a
particular religion or creed, there came into existence a new faith
with its own set of rituals and dogmas, which in the course of time
became as rigid and as unprogressive as the ones they had
replaced. Some of them, carried away by the stupendous nature of
their visions, identified themselves completely with what they
thought was God or the Absolute, relegating the world and every
human problem to a position of utter insignificance, unworthy of
attention from one blessed with the supreme happiness of union
with the Divine. This attitude of mind in the case of the
overzealous and the ignorant could not but lead to extremes: to the
negation of the world and its problems; to the neglect of the body
and the needs of the flesh; to excessive self-denial, self-torture, and
self-mortification; to distaste for life; to perversion and distortion
of the intellect; and last, but not the least, to an obsessive
preoccupation with the other world characterized by fantasy and
delusive states of the mind.
It is a fact of history that during the millenniums, beginning
about two thousand years before the birth of Christ, there appeared
from time to time, in different parts of the world, specially gifted
individuals who boldly proclaimed their connection with a
superearthly Fount of Intelligence and, by their extraordinary
utterances and writings, their high ethical standards and their
intellectual attributes, proved their assertions to the satisfaction of
the multitudes who followed them, leaving a mark on history
which is as fresh today as it was in their own time. They present an
enigma which even in this age of high intellectual and scientific
achievement still stands unsolved. They are the founders of Yoga
and every spiritual discipline, common

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHIEVED

31

or esoteric, known to man. Almost all these illustrious personages
had certain common characteristics that will be discussed later in
this volume, and almost all of them had visionary experiences
which guided them in creating unprecedented waves of enthusiasm
among the people of their country and time for the attainment of
spiritual ideals which were explained to them. As will be clarified
later, the only rational explanation to account for this thus far
inexplicable phenomenon lies in the admission that the human
body has a still untapped reservoir of psychic energy and the
human brain a hidden potentiality which, though dormant in the
bulk of the race, somehow became active in these extraordinary
men.
Once this is conceded, a ray of light begins to appear in the
hitherto impenetrable darkness that surrounds mystical phenomena.
The varied nature of the visionary experience, the variation in the
degree of responsiveness in differently constituted individuals, the
existence of the faculty in some from birth, and the need for
employment of diverse methods, according to the psychophysiological condition of each individual, now stand partially
explained. It becomes apparent that in dealing with the so-called
supernatural phenomena and religious genius which have been an
incomprehensible feature of civilization, almost from its very birth,
we are not stepping out into a weird, uncanny world where the
solid earth is left completely behind, nor are we entering into the
domain of a capricious God or any other spiritual entity who
bestows enlightenment on only those selected few, who sing His
praises while mortifying themselves, and who keeps the rest in
utter darkness of the spirit, but that here, as elsewhere in the sphere
of biology, we are confronted by a yet incomprehensible law of
nature and a still undiscovered vital mechanism in the human body
which are at the root of this great mystery. This law and this power
mechanism must have, like other aspects of nature, some definite
aim in view. Considering the fact that all those extraordinary
spiritual men and women who had this power centre active from
birth or who succeeded in stirring it to activity,

32

THE SECRET OF YOGA

possessed almost invariably exceptional powers of mind and spirit,
it becomes clear without a shadow of doubt that the aim of this
mysterious mechanism is the upgrading of human consciousness
toward a summit about which we can only guess at present.
Viewed in the right perspective the mystic bears a message of
tremendous import for all mankind. He is not the passive introvert
or inert visionary sunk in his own delusions and lost to the world,
as some people take him to be, nor is he doomed to be a recluse,
abstaining from all the pleasures of life, as the religious-minded
usually picture him or wish him to be. But he is the still imperfect
forerunner of the man to come, the ancestor of the future progeny,
naturally endowed with a consciousness of the transcendent type,
which the mystic experiences only rarely for brief durations with
unutterable rapture, and finds it impossible to portray. He is the
self-controlled seer, idealized in the Upanishads and the Gita, rapt
in the contemplation of the inner universe of Being, calm and
serene, who has overcome passion and lust, and who performs all
his duties in a spirit of dedication, not only for his own welfare but
also for that of the world. He is the industrious, self-sacrificing
savant, urgently needed in our day, calm and contented, who
probes into the mysteries of nature to find something of advantage
for the well-being of the race, who has solved the problem of his
own being and gained access to the higher strata of life. He
represents, in short, the cream of mankind in the near future, the
leader of thought and the ruler of nations, who experiences the
Transcendent, and, fortified with supernal wisdom, thus acquired,
with coordinated effort brings peace and order in the present illmanaged, lust-ridden, passion-ruled world.
This vision of mystics of the future, resulting in a spiritually
dominated, intellectual age, may appear unreal, exaggerated, or
even fantastic to the rationalists, who see no possibility of such a
drastic change in the nature of man, always under the subjugation
of his instincts. For even those who believe in spiritual un-

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHIEVED

33

foldment and the existence of divine potentialities in man, the
advent of a really great mystic is a rare occurrence, and the idea
that a mystic hierarchy would ever come into being or, even if it
did, would devote itself to the affairs of the world in the same
manner as normal individuals do, may seem too utopian to be true.
But seen dispassionately in the context of history, and in isolation
from the agnostic trends of the day, a contrary view would be even
more unrealistic and more at variance with the actual lessons of the
past. Can there be any denial of the inviolable position that, all
through the past, the greatest revolutions in human thought and
human social orders were effected neither by men in power nor by
those in possession of high intellectual endowments, divorced from
the spiritual, but by those who had a powerful mystical streak in
their composition? Do not the ideas of Yajnavalkya, Moses,
Buddha, the other seers of the Upanishads, the prophets of the Old
Testament, Socrates, Plato, Christ, Muhammad, Shankara, and
others, all of them mystics of the highest order, still dominate the
world? The upheavals caused by Darwin, Marx, Freud, and others
in this age were not greater. The materialistic and mechanical view
of life and mind which their ideas profess, lacks proof and has still
to pass the acid test of time.
The issue has been touched in passing to bring into relief the
decisive role played by mystics in moulding the race and in shaping the course of history. It will be discussed in detail elsewhere to
show that no great gulf intervenes between a top-rank intellectual
and a visionary, and that the irreverent attitude of many presentday intellectuals toward religion, and the idea of hidden spiritual
potentialities in men, originates from a skeptical materialistic
tendency of our time. The main factors that have contributed to the
creation of an atmosphere of doubt, even mistrust, toward religion
and the Beyond are, first, that religion because of the generally
dogmatic attitude of its exponents has not been able to keep pace
with the advance in material science, and, second, because the
leaders of spiritual thought fail to demonstrate

34

THE SECRET OF YOGA

the validity of their ideas and beliefs to the satisfaction of an
unconvinced mind. If five hundred years before the birth of Christ,
Gautama, the Buddha, had the intellectual acumen to find fault
with the Vedas and to reject the metaphysical speculations of the
Upanishads, which have an appeal for the erudite even today, how
much more powerful must be the tendency in the modern
intellectual, well aware of the recent revolutionary discoveries of
science, and, at the same time, knowing the inanities, incredible
beliefs, and irrational dogmas contained sometime in the Scriptures
of all religions and other books of faith, to harbour doubts and
misgivings in regard to the religious doctrine and practices to
which he is asked to conform implicitly, without criticism or
questioning.
Modern man, layman or specialist, is hardly prepared to accept
that, at present, the dubiously regarded mystical state is the most
exalted and most productive condition of the human mind. He still
has to understand that the veneration commanded by men
belonging to this category is not an accident or a creation of the
visionaries themselves in order to gain a position of eminence but
the outcome of a deeply rooted urge in human beings to show
respect to one naturally endowed with a lofty attribute of the
human mind necessary for the evolution of the race. Nor has he any
inkling of the fact that this singular state of heightened perception
can confer on those who attain to it such extraordinary powers of
the spirit and mind as can prove of inestimable value in guiding
mankind through the dangers of an uncontrolled technology and
the hazards of a nuclear armament race. The ecstatic is the man par
excellence, fashioned by nature to serve as a model for the
multitudes, striving for happiness in a world still shrouded in
darkness concerning the ultimate aim of human existence. If it is
accepted that the transcendent consciousness, exhibited by many a
prophet and seer of the past, is but a token of the lofty mental and
spiritual outfit that will be the common heritage of the future man,
the towering heights to which the outstanding personalities of the
future will attain cannot even be imagined at present.

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHIEVED

35

To avoid any ambiguity about the position presented in this
volume, it is necessary to explain that the term mystic, as used
here, includes every category of those men who, in one way or
another, gain access to a transhuman state of consciousness and, by
their own example and precept, furnish irrefutable evidence of
extraordinary spiritual powers and intellectual gifts. The importance of this class of men, which includes all the well-known
prophets, sages, and seers of the past, because of their exceptional
talents, was thoroughly recognized in ancient times. The tragedy is
that, on account of a grave misconception, widely prevalent in our
time, namely, that man can know all that is worth knowing only by
his intellect, people at large are under the impression that in
temporal affairs a visionary is often out of place. The consequences
of this misconception are obvious. Modern man still fails to make
use of the spiritual potential present in him and depends too much
on his intellect even in matters that are beyond its ken. The result is
that, with all the amenities and luxuries provided by science, he
lacks the possession of that peace and repose which are necessary
for a fully satisfying and happy life. The lack of spiritual
fulfillment in turn drives him to the use of undesirable surrogates,
to alcohol, to drugs, to insatiable thirst for wealth and power, to
sexual hyperaesthesia, and to other unsavoury practices and
occupations in order to appease the unassauged natural hunger in
his mind.
With the recognition of the important role performed by the
prophet and the seer in ancient times, numerous methods were
devised by different people to attain the exceptional states of mind
peculiar to them. The thirst for the fulfillment of spiritual
ambitions or the desire for magical powers or psychic gifts provided the incentives for such arduous undertakings. The most
elaborate system of tried practices and disciplines employed for
this purpose in any country is provided by Yoga. Keeping in view
the surpassing nature of the metamorphosis that has to be effected,
and the extraordinary results that flow out of it in the case of
successful initiates, it is no wonder that Yoga was always
surrounded by a halo that has persisted to this day. Only the

36

THE SECRET OF YOGA

general ignorance about the extraordinary nature of the alteration in
the personality of the seeker keeps the modern intellect from
becoming an ardent admirer of the system. At the present moment,
the usual run of people who take to Yoga, apart from the wholly
devoted ascetic class, are those who, in addition to their normal
avocations, practice it as a subsidiary effort either to gain psychic
powers or success in their worldly ambitions or to acquire peace of
mind amid the distracting conflicts of a competitive life. In some
cases the aim is transcendence, or rapport with Divinity. A vast
majority of the seekers of all these categories it can be readily
observed, are of average and sometimes even below average
mental capacity. Many of them lack those attributes of character
and that tenacity of purpose which are essential for success in this
extraordinary enterprise.
The doctrine of kundalini, the principal lever used in every form
of Yoga, holds hidden beneath a large mass of mysterious
formulas, strange practices, and rigid disciplines, inextricably
involved in mythical verbiage, one of the greatest secrets of nature
known to man. As already mentioned the term Yoga, employed in
this volume, refers to all the methods that are known or that will be
known in any part of the world, which are effective in leading
people to supersensory states of consciousness and not merely to
conventional systems of Yoga. In this broad sense Yoga is
pregnant with a promise and a hope that far exceeds the highest
expectations which its most enthusiastic adherents hold present.
Yoga provides the only possible bridge between the visible world
and the unseen, the only ladder to reach the glorious heights of
self-knowledge, the only method to remedy the congenital defects
of the brain or hereditary organic flaws of the body, and the only
way to determine the direction of human evolution and the course
of conduct men must follow to conform to it. The usual benefits
associated with Yoga—peace of mind, transcendence, psychic
gifts, and physical health—comprise but a fraction of the immense
possibilities that it holds. The reason is simple. In his present way
of life, man utilizes only a small

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHIEVED

37

part of the psychic force residing in his body. The whole gamut of
human progress achieved to this day, culminating in the visit to the
moon, has been accomplished with the expenditure of this small
amount of naturally available psychic energy, augmented from
time to time in a few individuals by a trickle from the unused,
hidden reservoir. Known spiritual prodigies and outstanding men
of genius who, were they fashioned in a different way, could have
utilized more of this psychic energy. They constitute the wellsprings from which the first tiny rivulets of original thought, both
material and spiritual, flowed forth to mingle together and become
a gradually widening and swiftly flowing stream with the
subsequent small additions made by diligent men from the grateful
multitudes.
Our aim in extending the sphere of Yoga to include every
healthy and systematic aspect of religious endeavour is to focus
attention on this issue of paramount importance, from both the
physical and the spiritual points of view, that all the phenomena
associated with religion, Yoga and the occult, of every shade and
shape, spring from the possibility existing in the human organism,
to alter the output of psychic energy under certain conditions,
leading to a phenomenal transformation of the inner man. In its
more pronounced forms the transformation may lead to a state of
unimaginable glory, to the ascent of consciousness from the narrow
periphery of a gloomy basement to the breathtaking pinnacle of
universal Consciousness, for the first time made cognizant of its
own unbounded proportions and immortal nature. The first impact
of this stupendous vision on the seers is formidable, and it is no
wonder that, under the stress of the flood of emotion experienced at
the breathtaking spectacle, some of them at once faint away. This
glorious consummation of spiritual effort, though rare, has been
achieved time after time by earnest seekers of all epochs and
countries. The transformation can become a permanent possession
of an individual, resulting in a life of such fulfillment, peace, and
beatitude as one can only associate with the godlike denizens of a
glorious paradise.

38

THE SECRET OF YOGA

The tendency to divide mystical phenomena into several
arbitrary compartments and to extol this compartment or that
according to one’s choice or inclination, springs from the fact that
a high degree of ignorance still prevails about the basic fact
responsible for them. Although, from the human point of view
there is no fundamental difference between Western mysticism,
Sufism, Taoism, or Yoga, there is a general tendency, sometimes
even among the intellectuals, to treat them as separate and distinct
from each other. The main reason responsible for this uncalled-for
discrimination probably lies in the fact that as, in the main,
mystical experience is associated with the various religions and
cults, the common strongly marked tendency that has persisted
unaltered from very ancient times to differentiate among creeds has
naturally been extended to the sphere of mystical phenomena also.
The wonder is that although no distinction is made in the
phenomenon of genius, and all talented men who had this heavenbestowed spark in them, belonging to any country and epoch, are
grouped under one category, irrespective of the faith or of the fact
that they were born in the East or the West, the gifted mystics, who
were equally the recipients of a heaven-granted extraordinary
faculty, and, in the same way, are the common asset of all
mankind, are nevertheless divided into groups and categories or
differentiated according to the faith which they profess.
The subject is too vast to be dealt with here and will be
discussed in detail elsewhere. It is enough to mention that all
human beings, belonging to any racial group or to any part of the
earth have similar psychic and physiological reactions, the same
emotions and passions, identical symptoms in bodily disease and
mental disorder and, above all, the same construction of the various
organs, the nervous system, and the brain. Yet some of the
prevalent ideas, especially among the religious-minded and the
credulous in respect to their approach to the Divine and the
Transcendent, men, belonging to different faiths and different
schools of spiritual discipline, are differentiated and regarded in
dissimilar

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHIEVED

39

ways and are, to say the least, infantile. They would have long
since been labelled as blatantly ridiculous, but for the fact that they
hold a large section of the believers still in their grip. If mystical
experience is rooted in reality and is not merely a dreamlike
condition of the mind, it must have a common basis, run a uniform
course and have a uniform symptomatology and climax for all
men, perhaps with slight modifications due to temperamental and
constitutional differences, as every other psychic manifestation in
human beings. It must be subservient to a law or several laws, and
must constitute an activity for which provision already exists in the
human organism. It can in no case be an arbitrary excursion of the
human mind into unknown regions of consciousness, engineered
by man himself, without any legal sanction from Nature or from
God.
The beatific vision cannot be a vision of God or union with
Brahman, the Absolute, for the simple reason that the mental
equipment of man and the consciousness that filters through it are
too fragile and too dim, not even comparable to the faint glimmer
of a tiny glow-worm in an ocean of darkness, to have the capacity
to apprehend, or to commune with, the Almighty Creator of this
staggering universe. Considering the fact that consciousness
exhibits itself on earth in an innumerable variety of forms, from the
infinitesimal sentience of a cell to the flood of awareness in man,
are we certain that no higher state of consciousness is possible on
our globe and does not exist in any other part of the universe? If we
are not sure of it, how can we then presume that man has attained
the highest summit of knowledge and touched the border from
where the exclusive conscious domain of God begins? It might be
that what mystical experience represents, and what Yoga signifies,
is the acquisition of or contact with a higher plane of
consciousness, toward which mankind is slowly but inexorably
evolving in a manner unknown to the scholars of this age. The
transition from this state to the higher plane of consciousness might
signify an ascent no less striking and no less wonderful than was
the ascent from the anthro-

40

THE SECRET OF YOGA

poid ape to man. All prophets, mystics, and seers as also those
individuals (for instance Wordsworth) who had such experience
without any specific religious discipline, might have had brief,
long, or even permanent contacts with this higher plane of Being,
which would seem as wonderful and as breathtaking as a sudden
ascent to the level of human consciousness, with all its universe of
thought and imagination, might have had for an ape.
This might be the explanation for all the supernatural and
mystical phenomena exhibited, whether as an inborn gift acquired
with some kind of discipline, from the dawn of reason to the
present day. The explanation is not offered in a spirit of arrogance,
nor as an infallible conclusion communicated by a supernatural
source, but in all humility as a humble contribution to knowledge
from one who has undergone the experiences, from the simple to
those of a high order, witnessing many of the phases and
objectively studying his own mental conditions and reactions for
decades before deciding to place the results of his observations
before the world—not for instant acceptance or outright rejection
but for study and investigation. Many difficulties will crop up in
the unqualified acceptance of this view from both religion and
science. The present work does not provide the scope for
discussion of the many implications of this view nor of objections
likely to be raised.
The idea that in the ecstatic state of samadhi, the mystic yogi
does not behold the Creator or the Absolute need not cause a shock
to the religious-minded. In fact, a contrary view would be even
more sacrilegious for the reason that it is nothing short of
presumption on the part of man, with all his frailties and limited
mental equipment, to suppose that he has reached the summit of
evolution and there are now no intermediary stages, of perfection
and intelligence between him and the Almighty Author of the
universe. The mystics and Yoga saints themselves are divided over
this important issue. From our present knowledge of the extent of
the universe and the insignificant position occupied by earth, it is
more difficult to maintain that

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHIEVED

41

in the unitive state the contemplative apprehends, beholds, or
becomes identified with the unimaginably powerful Lord of this
creation, the sole Support of countless suns and planets and the
refuge of countless forms of life throughout the universe, than to
aver that the mystic state, or turiya, represents but another step on
the ladder of evolution, raising man to a higher stratum of
consciousness, with a tremendous enhancement in his powers of
observation and with new channels of perception not exhibited by
normal consciousness. The first transformation effected on his
entry to this stratum is that he may become acutely aware of an allknowing and all-pervasive state of Being, which may project itself
on his perceptive faculty with or without a bodily form, entirely
unlike anything known on earth. Whatever the nature of the vision
or of the transformation witnessed in oneself, the unique,
supernormal nature of the experience is unmistakable. The
visionary now in touch with the stupendous, indescribable world of
consciousness, interprets it as a contact with an almighty,
omniscient Divine Being and may have the realization that the
Being has entered into him or that he is one with It.
In actual fact what he perceives is himself with a highly enhanced supersensory form of awareness, in contact now with the
subtle universe of consciousness that was previously impervious to
his inner vision. The ecstasies and entrancements, the confusions
and contradictions, the varied sensations and surmises, the diverse
nature of the visions and values and the divergent interpretations
placed on the experience by the mystics themselves, that present a
dilemma for scholars, could never be a characteristic of the unitive
state were it, in the real sense, a union between the Almighty and
man. Anomalies, conflicts, and variations occur because the brain
has to adjust itself to the new development. As the power of
adjustment varies with different people and the experience is
affected by their constitution, temperament, thoughts and fancies,
religious and social environments, individual idiosyncrasies and
suggestions of preceptors, it is no wonder that the whole
phenomenon, at the present stage

42

THE SECRET OF YOGA

of our knowledge of it, presents such a host of variations and
incongruities that the bewildered intellect finds it difficult to assign
its origin to the same cause. This does not mean that this
transformation in man does not rise nearer to Divinity or that he
does not develop divine attributes to attain this sublime state. He
certainly rises higher in the scale of evolution, coming in
possession of new talents and powers, with new channels of cognition and a new vision of the universe and his own life, and surely
needs an all-round ethical development as a precondition to the
ascent. But he is still far, far from God or the Absolute and even
the apex of his own evolution. In the most perfect cases he can
become a superman, an arhat, a Buddha, a prophet Saviour, a jivanmukhta (one liberated in life), an adept, or illumined sage.
How does this incredible metamorphosis come about? What
invisible psychic forces, activated by devotion, passionate longing,
austerity, meditation, or other practices, are generated and come to
the rescue of the soul to release it from its prison and raise it to a
state of unparalleled glory and universal being? What carries it to
the uttermost limits of knowledge and existence, so that nothing
greater or more sublime can be known or experienced in human
life? It cannot be, as is commonly supposed, an external agency,
propitiated or invoked by these practices, which comes to the aid of
the devotee to lift him up from darkness into light or from human
to Cosmic Consciousness. What is more probable and more in
accordance with the methods employed by nature, is that there
must be something already provided in the soul-body combination
we call man, still a source of wonder and mystery to the learned,
which is capable of remoulding the whole organism with the help
of a still unidentified Source of Energy hidden in the depths of the
body, which is at the root of the transcendent phenomena exhibited
by men. This something must also be the hidden power behind
Yoga, the vast reservoir of psychic energy, designed by nature for
the evolution of man, which, when channelled in the right
direction, can work miracles

HOW THIS AIM IS ACHIEVED

43

with his body and the brain to infuse him with a new life and a new
consciousness. There is irrefutable evidence to show that this
power mechanism has been known and manipulated in different
ways to gain magical powers or transcendent states of
consciousness from very ancient times, but so far no attempt has
been made to dissociate it from the miraculous and the supernatural
and to bring it within the orbit of a demonstrable natural law
governing the evolution of the human race.

3
Kundalini, Fact and Fiction

The general idea prevailing about Kundalini, in both the East
and the West, is of a mysterious and fabulous power lying dormant
in men, which, when roused to activity, can confer amazing
psychic gifts and transhuman states of consciousness on the
successful initiates. The belief is current in India and elsewhere
that those, in whom the energy vivifies the seventh centre in the
brain, are transmogrified and attain unlimited dominance over the
forces of nature. This belief is fostered by the high claims made in
the ancient literature on Kundalini-Yoga about the infinite
possibilities for the elevation and deification of those who
propitiate this divine power. The ascent of Kundalini from Cakra*
to Cakra is attended, it is said, with progressively increasing
psychic powers until in the seventh centre the mortal becomes one
with supreme Reality, or Lord Shiva, the Creator, Preserver,
Destroyer of the three worlds. The Yogi, it is averred, gains limited
powers of domination over men, fascination for women and
sovereignty over the forces of nature. Thus in Mahanirvana
*Cakra: In Yogic parlance Cakra signifies a centre of psychic force, to be existing on the
cerebro-spinal axis, beginning from Muladhara root-support centre, at the base of the spine. The
number of Cakras, as now generally held, is six through which Kundalini rises on its ascent to
Sahasrara in the crown of the head. In the ancient texts these centres are depicted being circular in
formation.
44

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

45

Tantra (vii. 39,40,41,50) it is said that he who worships the AdyaKali (kundalini) Mistress of the three worlds “Becomes in learning
like Brhaspati (the Guru of the Celestials), in wealth like Kubera
(the god of riches). . . . Men bow with respect at the mere mention
of his name. The eight siddhis (i.e., the power to become
exceedingly large or extremely small or light as a feather, to float
in space, or to become invisible to sight, or to enter the bodies of
others, to be clairvoyant, clairaudient, or to have domination over
all the forces, etc.), he looks upon as mere bits of grass.”
There is no end to the siddhis (supernatural powers) promised in
the ancient writings to those who succeed in awakening kundalini.
Thus in Sat-Cakra-Nirupana (vs. 21) it is said: “By meditating on
this Navel Lotus (Nabhi-Padma) the power to destroy and create
(the world) is acquired. Vani, (the goddess of speech) with all the
wealth of knowledge ever abides in the lotus of his face.” Again in
verse 31: “He who has attained complete knowledge of the Atman
(Brahman) becomes, by constantly concentrating his mind (citta)
on this Lotus, a great sage (Kavi), eloquent and wise, and enjoys
uninterrupted peace of mind. He sees the three periods (past,
present, and future), and becomes the benefactor of all, free from
disease and sorrow, long-lived, and, like Hamsa, the destroyer of
endless dangers.”
The possibility offered by the Tantric Sadhana to gain longevity,
health, and miraculous powers seems to have been exploited to the
full by the ancient exponents of the system to attract the attention
of the multitudes and to gain followers for the cult. The promise of
these extraordinary achievements was not extended to men only
but also to women. Thus it is stated in Hathayoga-Pradipika
(iii.l02): “The woman who (with the practice of Vajroli Mudra),
applying suction with her female genital organ) directs the
reproductive secretion in the upper direction (i.e., draws it into the
head), becomes a Yogini with the power to know the past, present,
and future and to float in air.” I have quoted these passages to show
that what many modern seekers expect from Yoga, in the wildest
flights of their fancy,

46

THE SECRET OF YOGA

is already offered in the old manuals and, according to some of
them, can be had merely for the asking.
It is easy to see that the achievements are highly exaggerated, a
common tendency among ancient authors, and that there is not
only no end to the glowing promises held out but also undisguised
contradictions in the statements. For while some emphasize
lifelong effort and hard discipline to gain the favour of the goddess
to achieve this or that siddhi, others consider mere efficiency in but
one asana or in some single Pranayama or repetition (japa) of a
mantra sufficient to gain the most rewarding supernatural gifts.
The pity is that no attempt has been made to separate the chaff
from the wheat, and in the current literature on the subject only the
old rituals, down to the most obscene ones, the old practices,
formulas, and promises are being interminably repeated without
any effort at clarification to show what deserves credence and what
should be rejected as mere superstition or exaggeration, impossible
of acceptance in this rational age. It can be confidently asserted
that there is a solid core of truth in the assertions of the ancient
authors which has been so exaggerated and embellished that a
doubt is cast over the whole system. What is more important, from
the present-day point of view, is that this solid core has the unique
possibility of providing empirical evidence for its support to the
satisfaction of even the most skeptical of intellects. The aim of this
work is to lay open this possibility by subjecting the ancient as well
as the current ideas and theories about Kundalini-Yoga to a critical
analysis in the light of modern knowledge about the human mind
and body. The attitude adopted in India during the past several
centuries in respect to the ancient treatises on Yoga, has been and
still is one of uncritical acquiescence under the impression that the
authorities are too lofty and the subject too sacrosanct to be
critically examined in this profane age. This supine attitude has
done no good to anyone but, on the contrary, has resulted in
pushing into oblivion one of the greatest discoveries ever made by
man, for the simple reason that the discovery at present is
represented in a manner which is repugnant to commonsense.

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

47

It is unfortunate that there is no book on Kundalini-Yoga,
written by a modern intellectual, well acquainted with the presentday concepts of science, based on his own experience of the divine
power. Most of the writers on the subject either merely copy the
ancient books or try to interpret the writings in the light of their
own spiritual and metaphysical ideas. The nature of the mysterious
force has not been defined or elucidated in a rational way in any
treatise ancient or modern. The general impression about the
awakening among those interested in the subject is, therefore, of a
sudden leap from the visible world of rigid cause and effect to a
transmundane state of existence where everything becomes
possible; a dangerous position in this age of reason, fostered by
writers with a predilection for the supernatural and the uncanny for
whom every word of the ancient manuals has the weight of a
gospel. Except for the nature of nerve energy, which carries out the
multifarious activities of the body in a most amazing manner and
every moment flashes thousands of signals from the various organs
and limbs to the brain and vice versa, modern physiology has
drawn an almost complete picture of the human frame, its organs
and their functions, and no obscure region or crevice has been
omitted, save for some portions of the brain and the spinal cord,
about which knowledge is still extremely meagre. There is
apparently no visible biological device in the body capable of
generating a spiritual energy of the fabulous kind, as is mentioned
in the literature on the subject. The organs at the base of the spine
are the rectum and the sexual parts and their functions are well
known. How can this area, the skeptics may reasonably ask, be the
seat of a magical force which cart effect such a radical change in
the human system as to make it capable of superhuman feats?
The ancient exponents of this Yoga meet this obvious objection
by the argument that kundalini, in the wider sense of the term, is
the Cosmic Life Energy or Prana-Shakti, the source of all the
Phenomena of life in the universe, and that in the microcosm,
represented by man, She (Shakti), in a corresponding form, resides
at the base of the spine in the form of a serpent, coiled three and a

48

THE SECRET OF YOGA

half times, closing with her mouth the lower entrance to the
passage leading to the abode of Shiva or Brahman in the crown of
the head. In average men and women She lies asleep, or in a static
form, i.e., coiled, conditioning the human consciousness that,
forgetful of its own divine, immortal nature, it allows itself to be
caught in the toils of the constantly changing, phenomenal world.
When roused to activity with appropriate methods She, a streak of
lightning, darts through the Susumna, clearing the darkness that
holds the embodied spirit bound to the earth. According to the
concept of the ancient authorities, therefore, kundalini is divine in
nature, the superintelligent creative aspect of Lord Shiva, the
Creator, Sustainer and Destroyer of the world, one with Him in the
unmanifested state; but while He even in the unmanifested state
continues to bide without any change or modification, unaffected
by the emergence and dissolution of the Cosmic hosts, She, as the
Creatrix, manifests Herself both as the objects and the energy that
sustains them. “She is the Omnipotent Kala who is wonderfully
skilful to create,” says Nirupana (vs. 12), “and is subtler than the
subtlest. She receptacle of that continuous stream of ambrosia
which flows from the Eternal Bliss. By Her radiance it is that the
whole of this universe and this Cauldron is illumined.”
In fact for Her devotees She has the same absolute position and
the same unlimited powers as are associated with God, Isvara,
Allah, or Jehovah by the religious-minded. With such a conception
of the divine energy (kundalini) it is no wonder that ancient authors
have been most lavish in their praises and exhausted the power of
their genius in investing her with all the attributes and all the
powers—Omnipresence, Omnipotence, Omniscience—befitting
the Creatrix and the absolute Ruler of the world. The reason for
assigning an almost divine position to Gurus who succeed in
establishing rapport with Her and investing them with all the
virtues and unrestricted supernatural powers, befitting those who
have won the favour of the Almighty Controller of the universe,
thus becomes apparent. It is the same

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

49

old idea, expressed in a different way, that by propitiating the
mighty Unseen Power behind the Cosmos through austerity,
worship, and various other forms of spiritual discipline, one can
attain the lofty position of a direct inner contact with Him, paving
the way to superhuman attributes and supernatural powers, which
is prevalent in almost all the existing great religions of mankind
and which acted as a powerful guiding factor in primitive cults and
religious practices as well. In the microcosmic form the allpowerful Creative Energy (shakti) is symbolized in the form of a
coiled serpent, i.e., in a state of inaction, residing at the base of the
spine in the human body. The aim of Kundalini Yoga is to awaken
the serpent and to force her, stage by stage, to ascend the spinal
canal, known as susumna, until She reaches the seat of Shiva in the
highest centre in the brain. This ascent, it is stated, takes years to
accomplish, though in exceptional cases only a short time,
constantly attended by divine manifestations. At each of the five
lower cakras, or lotuses, the ascending shakti dissolves one of the
five primordial elements of which the visible cosmos is constituted
(namely, earth, water, fire, air and ether) into the basic substance,
which is consciousness, until after dissolving the mind and ego,
which are also the forms of primeval shakti, the liberated spirit
finds itself in ecstatic union with the Eternal Conscious Reality to
which it owes its being.
Many modern writers on the subject have taken the same line
and ascribe the phenomena associated with kundalini to the
existence of a cosmic, astral, etheric, or psychic force without any
biological connection with the human body, much in the same
fashion as has been done in the ancient treatises. They override the
physiological objections to the existence of lotuses on the spinal
cord, or of any structure in the flesh resembling a coiled serpent at
the base of the spine, or of the other objects mentioned in the
ancient books by saying that all these formations on the spinal cord
and brain, to which the ancient Scriptures refer with confidence
have no tangible physical reality, but exist in the astral body or the
subtle sheath of prana, surrounding the

50

THE SECRET OF YOGA

physical frame. In the same manner the term nadis, frequently used
in the treatises on Hatha Yoga, is held to signify channels of
psychic energy or invisible prana that have no identity with the
network of nerves, veins, and arteries distributed over the whole
body. There can be no denial of the fact that the potent pranic
current generated by the body, on the awakening of kundalini, is of
such a marvellous nature, and acts with unerring precision and
superhuman intelligence, that it reaches the province of the Divine;
yet for all practical purposes all its physical and physiological
bearings the foundation power firmly rests on the biological
structure of the human frame. From the purely scientific view,
therefore, some of the basic assumptions of Kundalini-Yoga have
no existence in reality according to the interpretation put on the
word nadis and lotuses by some modern authors. In other works,
however, nadis are translated as arteries.
The cakras to which repeated reference is made by both ancient
and modern writers and which, in fact, by constant use have
become so familiar that the very name cakra has assumed the
significance of kundalini, are held by some authorities to represent
nerve plexuses of the central or autonomous nervous system, and
by others as subtle vortices of prana energy, located at different
places in the brain and the spinal cord, having no corporeal
lineaments visible to the eye. They can be observed they say, only
with internal vision acquired when Kundalini is awakened. These
vortices are said to exist in the form of lotuses with a specific
number of petals in each. The lotus in the lowest or muladhara
cakra has four petals; the next above it, svadisthana, six; the
manipura, or navel plexus, ten; the next above anahata or heart
centre, twelve; the visuddha, or throat plexus sixteen; the ajna
cakra, or the lotus between the eyebrows, two; and the last, the
sahasrara, is said to be a lotus with a thousand petals situated in
the cerebrum.
The total number of petals in the six lotuses from the
muladhara to ajna cakra is fifty, which corresponds to the number
of

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

51

letters in the Sanskrit alphabet. In fact, each petal of every lotus has
a letter on it, which, all combined, form the Sanskrit alphabet or
Verna-mala. In addition to the letters each lotus has a presiding
shakti, or goddess, with a specific shape and colour. The Buddhist
Tantrics recognize only four cakras, or lotuses, beginning at the
umbilical cord and ending in the Usnisa-Kamla (lotus) in the head,
corresponding to sahasrara. The other two correspond to the
anahata and visuddha in the cardiac and laryngeal regions. In some
ancient statues of Buddha the opened Usnisa-Kamala is depicted
by a slight protuberance on the top of the head. The general
impression prevailing at present that there are seven Cakras on the
cerebro-spinal axis is of comparatively recent origin. In the early
Upanishads only one, two, or three centres are mentioned, while in
some texts dealing with kundalini ten, eleven, and even more
cakras are described. The Brhadarnyka-Upanishad (2.1.19 and
4.2.3) mentions only the heart-centre as the seat of origin of the
nadis that carry prana energy to every part of the body. In his
exposition of the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, Vacaspati Misra (i. 36)
makes mention of the lotus of the Heart and Susumna; and
Patanjali himself (iii. 29) refers to nabhi-cakra as a centre for
concentration. The other cakras mentioned in Tantric texts are
Yonisthana, Lalana, Manas, and Soma Cakras. According to ShivaSamhita (ii. 28) besides the six Cakras there are five other centres
with many names. In a comparatively recent Sanskrit work,
Advaita Martanda, no less than twenty cakras are enumerated.
Meditation on any one of the six Cakras, it is said, can lead to the
arousal of Kundalini. Different psychic powers are associated with
each cakra. The lotuses, the letters on their petals, the Bija
Mantras, the presiding Shaktis with their appearance and
accoutrements are clearly mentioned in the ancient texts, and
vividly depicted on the illustrations drawn in ancient times. They
present an intriguing and fascinating study that has largely
contributed to arousing the curiosity of seekers about this form of
Yoga from very ancient times to the present day.
The question that now arises is how far these descriptions of

52

THE SECRET OF YOGA

Cakras, their lotuses, and other accessories correspond to reality
and have a substratum of truth in them. To a scientific mind
acquainted with the anatomy of the human body, the diagrams and
the descriptions would at first sight strike one as the product of a
brain which, to say the least, has lost touch with actuality and lives
in a fantastic realm of dreams. It would dismiss the whole subject
as entirely unscientific and irrational, the fanciful creation of
deluded anchorites or of unscrupulous charlatans to deceive the
credulous. In fact, even in India, the Tantric rites practices have
been and are severely criticized by the followers of Vedic systems
of ritual and worship. In view of this, it is difficult to imagine how
impossible it is for a modern informed mind to reconcile the
descriptions of the ancient masters, relating to the cakras and the
lotuses, with the characteristics of the cerebro-spinal system
contained in modern texts on physiology. It is not, therefore, to be
wondered that the Yoga, dealt with in Tantras labours under a
cloud, and that modern writings on the subject by adhering to
ancient terminology and descriptions, instead of attempting to
present this venerable system within the framework of modern
knowledge, tend to render it more unintelligible and obscure.
In order to establish the existence of the power reservoir of
kundalini on a scientific basis, acceptable to a strictly rational
mind, it is absolutely necessary to explain the existing
discrepancies in the accounts of different authors and to elucidate
and reconcile the apparently fantastic and impossible assertions
about the lotuses and the Cakras in order to clear the cobwebs that
have grown around the subject in the course of the ages. The
ancient, or the present, unrealistic mode of presentation of this
Yoga might result in a progressively diminishing audience for time
to come, and help the writers to maintain the illusion among a
sector of the credulous and uncritical seekers for supernatural. But
it can neither do any real service to this ancient system of religious
discipline nor help to uncover the momentous discovery of the
highest importance that lies concealed under the

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

53

cloak of weird formulations, fantastic creations and mythical
beings. Considering the general ignorance concerning the basic
facts of physiology prevailing during the past, and the superstitious
awe with which the inexplicable phenomena relating to the mind
and body were regarded, even by the intelligent and the learned in
ancient times, it is not surprising that the ancient masters created a
whole host of divinities and strange formations in the body to
account for the bewildering effects caused by kundalini. But now a
rational explanation is unavoidable.
Before taking up the issue of lotuses, described in lavish detail,
let us confine ourselves to the discussion of the presiding shaktis
that pervade the cakras and are meticulously portrayed in the
ancient texts. A mere glance at their names, Dakini, Rakini, Kakini,
Sakini, Lakini and Hakini, is enough to convey to any
discriminating intellect that the appellations are crudely fabricated
and can only deceive the ignorant or the extremely credulous. No
rational man can even for a moment accept the existence of
supernatural beings with such a string of designations that cannot
fail to strike even the least informed as being artificial and
fictitious. Some modern writers have tried to interpret these shaktis
in terms of particular nerves dominating the various plexuses. If
this interpretation is accepted we will have to accept the same
interpretation for the lotuses as well, and also for such other
creations of the ancient masters as appear improbable and fantastic
to the modern mind. The experts who witnessed the phenomenon
in themselves, completely baffled by the strange effects and weird
displays produced by the impact of the newly generated vital
currents at the various nerve junctions on the spinal axis, could not
but attribute the mysterious happenings to the agency of various
supernatural entities whom they designated as shaktis in keeping
with the conception that the human body and the whole Cosmos
were the manifestation of an almighty divine Energy, maha-shakti
or parmeshvari.
The association of the letters in the Sanskrit alphabet with the
petals of the lotuses is another bald fact unacceptable to common-

54

THE SECRET OF YOGA

sense. If the lotuses exist, even on the psychic plane, it is incredible that heaven should have so arranged their petals to
correspond exactly to the number of letters used in the Sanskrit
text. Whether they exist on the astral or the physical realm they
could never be intended by nature to serve the purpose of one
particular language to the exclusion of the others. There is no
reason why the Chinese characters or Egyptian hieroglyphs or the
cuneiform writing of the Sumerians or the script of the ancient
inhabitants of the Indus Valley which are at least as old as Sanskrit,
do not find any place on the lotuses, if they are really part and
parcel of the human body, or even on the astral plane, an etheric or
psychic counterpart of it, and not merely imaginary objects
intended to convey some purpose about which we are in the dark at
present.
The Bija-Mantras are no less inexplicable. The very nature of
the sounds emitted by the mantras, Ham, Vam, Yam, Lam, etc., are
a clear indication of the fact that they are fabricated and are as
imaginary as the presiding shaktis and the letters of the alphabet. It
is evident that when repeated interminably in a state of intense
concentration, with diminished breathing heart action, they can
serve effectively, with their nasal intonation and monotonous
sonority, to induce a state of quiescence preceding the state of
trance. Monotonous sounds have been used from prehistoric times
and are even now employed by hypnotists and teachers of the
occult to induce somnambulistic conditions. In primitive societies,
in all periods of history down to times, monotonous chanting and
weird music have always used to induce abnormal mental
conditions and trancelike states in sensitive persons, susceptible to
occult influences. The recitation of the Bijas or other Mantras,
prescribed by the Guru, causes the same somnolent effect in the
Sadhakas with a largely enhanced effect in combination with the
other mental and physical exercises enjoined. It is easy to see that
the Mantras of the class Aim, Krom, Srim Svaha, or Hrim, Srim,
Krim, Parameshvari (Mahanirvana Tantra vi. 72-74 and 82) or
others used in Tantric Sadhna are definitely of the hypnotic type.

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

55

It is obvious that the lotuses, the presiding Shaktis, the letters of
the alphabet, the Bija-Mantras and other objects, as well as the
diagrammatic formations meticulously described in the ancient
manuals and shown graphically in the illustrations, have no real
existence and are the mental creations of the masters to provide a
physical representation for their teaching as well as to invest it with
a certain amount of mystery, solemnity, and awe—all of them
necessary ingredients of every effective religious practice and
discipline. It has to be remembered that the system of KundaliniYoga is of great antiquity, probably extending to an epoch
antecedent even to the Indus Valley civilization. It is a well-known
fact that up to comparatively recent times even physicians had
fantastic notions about blood, phlegm, menses, and the like, as well
as about the organs and their functions, and maladies were often
attributed to the evil influence of spirits, demons, and other
diabolic supernatural sources. The people often resorted to
exorcism, spells, and charms or other magical cures for even the
most dangerous and virulent diseases which modern rational
methods of treatment are now slowly bringing under control. In
such a milieu of ignorance and superstition, it is no wonder that
fantastic stories were current about the phenomenon of kundalini,
and that its exponents should themselves have weird notions about
the mysterious power. They made use of Hermetic methods and
cabalistic signs, and peopled the whole region, from the base of the
spine to the crown of the head (in which the impact of the force is
felt) with strange objects and supernatural entities to account for
the unusual manifestations. What other reaction could be expected
to a rare and mysterious biological phenomenon which, even in our
age of progress, has not been identified as yet, and, when located,
is very likely to prove a difficult problem for the most learned?
Modern authors have drawn from writings that are centuries old,
dating back to times when the world was still shrouded in the
gloom of ignorance and the people were much more in the grip of
the uncanny and the supernatural. It is a testimony to the rarity of
the phenomenon that, in recent times, no adept of

56

THE SECRET OF YOGA

this form of Yoga has appeared to recast the ancient treatises, in
order to bring them in line with the enormous advances in
psychology, physiology, and other branches of knowledge relevant
to this subject. At the same time great credit is due to the ancient
authors who, in spite of the handicaps under which they were
labouring and the ignorance prevailing in their time, displayed a
considerable knowledge of the nervous system, out of all
proportion to the general level of the information available
acquired no doubt by observing internally the movements of the
luminous currents released by an awakened kundalini.
For a manual suited to the level of knowledge of the present day
it is necessary to clarify the position in respect to these imaginary
descriptions of the ancient authors and to concentrate only on the
scientific implications of the phenomenon. A modern aspirant,
burdened with the conventional details, would not only find
himself on the horns of a dilemma, unable to reconcile the fully
substantiated and thoroughly investigated findings of anatomy with
the strange objects and mysterious beings said to be residing at
different places on the spinal cord, but also see his efforts to
decipher these hieroglyphics turning into a will-o’-the-wisp chase
which can lead him nowhere. For the ancient seers to whom the
enterprise was the main object of life, a long course of instruction
in the mysteries and intricacies of the esoteric system was
necessary to keep them engaged, and to instill a sense of reverence
for the teacher and the subject, making it necessary for the former
to embellish it with mythical divinities and enigmatic figures in
order to sustain the curiosity and interest of their disciples.
This brings us to the basic issue of the reality of the Cakras
themselves. Divested of the imaginary embellishments, what
remains are concentrations of nerves, having a circular formation.
Here we tread on solid ground, verifiable in terms of our pr
knowledge of the human body. For at the places, where the Cakras
are said to be located, there are thick clusters of intersecting nerves
which become at once recognizable when the pow-

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

57

erful stream of nerve energy, generated by kundalini, begins to
circulate in the system. With a little more improvement in the
delicate instruments that are now used to measure the electrical
activity of the brain and the speed of nerve impulses, it might
become possible at no distant date to detect variations in the
quality and potency of nerve currents. When this comes to pass, the
changes wrought in the nervous system by an active kundalini as
well as the passage of the more potent current through the crisscrossing nerve junctions can be easily detected. Even at present
more than sufficient evidence is furnished by the ancient writings,
provided they are sanely interpreted, to show that, although the
whole phenomenon is attributed to the activity of a superhuman
power, the biological reactions that occur as a result of it are, to a
large extent, understood and dealt with in proper ways in keeping
with the level of knowledge of the times.
Some of the present-day exponents, unable to reconcile the
lotuses and their accessories with the findings of modern physiology and caught in the labyrinth of ancient writings, interpret the
term nadis as subtle channels of prana, different from nerves. They
adopt a stand which is contradicted by the fundamental teaching of
the Tantras themselves. All the disciplines of Kundalini-Yoga are
directed towards Bhutta Shuddhi, i.e., for the purification of the
five gross elements in the body. This purification can only be
effected through the instrumentality of the bodily organs controlled
by the nervous system and the brain. In fact, the whole armoury of
Hatha-Yoga practices—Posture, Shatkarma, Concentration or
Pranayama—is aimed to secure control or to improve the functions
of the various organs with the ultimate object of gaining power
over the vital processes of the body in order to force the arousal of
the serpent power. When awakened, the live, pranic force, coursing
through the nerves, effects the purification of the body and the
transformation of the brain to make supersensory experience
possible. When we readily acknowledge what is a matter of daily
observation, that the spirit animating us, in spite of its divine
nature, can act only on and by the

58

THE SECRET OF YOGA

body through the brain, the nervous system and the complex of the
biological organism, how can we then assume that any other
divine agency can act on the same body effectuating radical
changes and transformations, without the agency of the brain, the
nervous system or other vital organs? If nadis are merely
incorporeal channels of prana, through what channel then do the
changes and the manifestations in the body occur? In the light of
these facts it is not only against the spirit of the ancient writings,
but also against the dictates of sense and the highly scientific
nature of this venerable system to invoke superphysical and
unverifiable agencies to account for a phenomenon that can be
explained in strictly rational terms.
In his exposition of the Yoga-Sutras of Patanjali (iii. 32)
Vacaspati-Mishra says that “the words (in the head) imply the
(nadi), called susumna, and that Patanjali means samyama on
that.” The words ‘in the head’ clearly indicate a location tube
susumna, which establishes its corporeal nature. This is confirmed
in Katha-Upanishad (11.3.16) in these words: “The nerves of the
heart are a hundred and one in number. Of them the one (susumna)
passes through the head. Going up through that nerve one achieves
immortality. The others that have different directions become the
cause of death.” Further confirmation comes from BrhadaranyakaUpanishad (iv. 2.3): “And this human form that is in the left eye is
his wife, Viraj (matter). This space that is within the heart is their
place of union. The mass of blood which is in the heart is their
food. What looks like a net within the heart is their covering. The
nerve that rises upward from the heart is their passage for moving;
it is like a hair split into a thousand parts. (Numerous) nerves
(nadis) of this body called Hita, are rooted in the heart. It is
through these that the essence of food passes when it moves. Hence
the subtle body has finer food than the gross body.” It is the nerves
that extract the finer essence from the body which circulates as
psychic and nerve energy in the system.
This biological essence or individual prana is the connecting

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

59

link between the corporeal body and the incorporeal Cosmic
Life energy. Again the same Upanishad states (iv. 3. 20): “In a
man are these nerves (nadis) called Hita, which are as fine as a
hair split into a thousand parts, and full of white, blue, brown,
green and red (serums). . .” There can be no doubt that the
reference is to the bodily nerves. It is no exaggeration to say
that some of the nerve fibrils are as fine as the thousandth part
of a hair. The colours are supposed to be due to the mixture of
wind, bile, and phlegm in varying proportions, according to the
prevalent notions of the time. Pancastavi (vs. 2) likens
kundalini to the fine filament of the maidenhair fern, a very apt
illustration for the slender nerve-fibres covering the human
body. This view is again unequivocally confirmed by HathaYoga-Pradipika (ii. 4) in these words “So long as nadis remain
clotted with impurity the movement of prana does not occur
through the middle passage (susumna) and so long as prana
does not flow through susumna how can success attend the
undertaking? In order to become affected by impurity the nadis
must have a corporeal nature. Pranayama and other practices of
Hatha-Yoga aim to remove this impurity.
Shiva-Samhita (2. 29,30,31,32) gives a graphic description of
the anatomical arrangement of the nerves (nadis) which can
leave no one in doubt about their physical character. In order to
arrive at a correct evaluation of the accounts of the ancient
authors it must be borne in mind that the descriptions cannot be
as detailed and accurate as are contained in a modern manual of
physiology for the reason that the structure of the body was an
unfathomable mystery in their time, and though the pulse-beat
was well known, the riddle of the flow of blood was still
unsolved. Considered in the light of these facts this description
of the nervous system singularly informative. It says: “Other
nadis (besides susumna) rising from muladhara spread to the
tongue, penis, eyes, big toes, the abdomen, armpits, thumbs,
and lower limbs, and terminate there. From these nadis by the
process of ramification and branching there arise 350,000 nadis
existing at their respective places.

60

THE SECRET OF YOGA

All these vital nadis are efficient in carrying prana (from one part
to the other) and by division and multiplication are spread over the
body.” The view expressed by Arthur Avalon and others that nadis
are subtle channels of pranic or vital energy is thus not borne out
by the statements contained in the ancient treatises. Once it is
admitted that the term nadis used by ancient writers refers to
nerves present in our flesh and blood, there should come a change
in the concept of Kundalini-Yoga, the doctrine, coming down from
the unverifiable planes of incorporeality, should touch the solid
surface of earth as a verifiable biological phenomenon. All this
possesses profound significance which will be explained elsewhere
in this volume. Had the system of kundalini been elaborated by any
other people independently, it is possible that they might have
associated their own script with it in some way though not
precisely in the manner, as has been done in India. In order to
clarify this rather cryptic statement it is enough to mention here
that as Revelation and Genius proceed from an awakened
kundalini, and language is the main channel for the expression of
both, the association of the Sanskrit alphabet or, for that matter, of
any other alphabet, with the other symbolic representations of the
mysterious Force is, therefore, a perfectly natural process. Since
this relationship, though well known to the ancient masters, has not
been explicitly brought out in any ancient treatise, not one of the
modern expositors of this Yoga, in spite of deep study am search,
has been able to understand or explain its significance, which is of
a paramount nature. The tendency to cover the science of life with
a mantle of superstitious ritual, mythical personages, mysterious
happenings and miraculous powers, representing an earlier stage in
the development of the human mind, seriously retards instead of
advancing, in this age of widespread knowledge and progress, the
cause of this most important doctrine, which rationally approached
and critically examined, can prove to be a veritable mine of
surprises and new discoveries for both the seekers after God and
the votaries of science.

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

61

It is a matter of common observation that we live in two
worlds, one physical and the other spiritual. The visible universe
and our bodies are made of this physical stuff, but our thoughts
and consciousness are formed to be of an intangible substance
about which, even in this era of phenomenal progress in
knowledge, we as yet know next to nothing. This subtle world of
thoughts, fancies and dreams is as basic a fact of our experience
as the physical universe, and is decidedly nearer and more
intimate to us than the latter. But it is so inextricably linked up
with every cell and fibre of our flesh that it appears to be an
inseparable product of our physical body. It is true that if
consciousness and thought are self-existing substances, and not
merely the products of cellular activity, they should have an
independent existence as well as spheres of activity of their own,
but viewed from our experience this holds true only in the
abstract. For we never perceive consciousness or thought
operative without the vehicle of flesh. It is precisely here that
kundalini plays a decisive role. As if alive to human aspirations
at a certain stage of intellectual development, far-sighted Nature
has planted a divine mechanism in the human body, which by
effecting an alteration in the vital energy, or prana, feeding the
brain, can bring the amazing universe of consciousness within
the range of awareness of an awakened man.
The whole science of kundalini is based on the manipulation
of prana-vayu, the nerve junctions (cakras), and the brain. Vayu
in Sanskrit means air and the word is used with prana to denote
its subtle nature. Prana and vayu are, sometimes,
interchangeably used by the ancient authors to designate nerve
energy or vital breath. Although prana is a self-existent
substance, deathless and all-pervading, yet its manifestation in
the bodies of terrestrial creatures is rigidly regulated by
biological laws. In fact, the whole kingdom is the product of the
activity of prana and the atoms of matter both combined. Prana
is not something radically different from matter, but both are
derivatives from the same basic substance, para-shakti or
Primordial Energy. At the present

62

THE SECRET OF YOGA

stage of our knowledge nothing would be more ridiculous to
suppose that this combination of prana and matter which resulted
in such marvellous organizations of living creatures be so flimsy
and unstable as to yield readily to the human will. The impression
prevailing in the minds of some people that a few minutes’
exercise of concentration can work miracles in changing one’s
existing level of consciousness with the arrest of prana and thought
is, therefore, as correct as it would be suppose that repeated light
hammer-blows dealt to a metal can lead to the release of atomic
energy. An overhauling of the entire human body is necessary to
effect a radical transformation of consciousness from the normal to
the supersensory level. This is the reason why real success in
Yoga is so very rare. The position is that a large proportion of even
those who take to the study and practice of Yoga are, not
infrequently, are themselves ignorant of the Herculean nature of
the enterprise that confronts them, and the marvellous
transformation of consciousness hat can occur by this means.
The ancient writers have made no secret of this formidable task,
impossible of achievement through human effort alone. Only
because nature has provided a contrivance in the body, susceptible
of stimulation by certain methods, does the far-reaching change in
the state of consciousness envisaged by Yoga become possible.
There is another unalterable condition. The nervous system of the
initiate must already have attained a certain degree of
preparedness, through heredity and a right mode of life, before the
manipulation or even the activity of the contrivance can be
effective enough to bear the desired fruit. It is because of the
formidable and unpredictable nature of the enterprise that the
ancients have likened the mysterious kundalini, the key to this
mechanism and power centre, to a coiled serpent lying asleep on
the Manda, a triangular space with its apex downwards located in
the region bordering the lower end of the spinal column. Although
there is some variation in the accounts of different authors about
the location of Kanda, the seat of kundalini, all are agreed

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

63

that the region lies somewhere between the perineum and the
navel. The location of the muladhara and the other cakras is also
meticulously described, though there are slight variations in these
accounts also. These facts also clearly show that kundalini, being
localized in space, must be a physiological contrivance, and,
therefore, the channel or nadis through which it operates must also
have a physical existence. How the whole region associated with
kanda becomes active on the awakening of the serpent powers
radiating energy to all the vital organs and centres, to effect
rejuvenation of the body and elevation of mind will be described in
another place in this volume.
In the light of these facts it would be a mistake to suppose that
because the accounts of nadis do not exactly tally with our present
chart of the nervous system, and because the alleged existence of
the lotuses and other objects at the cakras has no substance in
reality, the allusions made to them in the Tantras and other
manuals on Kundalini-Yoga do not refer to the nerves made of
flesh but to hypothetical channels of life energy interpenetrating
the human body. If such were the case, then instead of suggesting
the arduous and even dangerous practice of pranayama, which
directly affects both the autonomic and the central nervous system,
combined with postures, mudras and bandhas that are unequivocally physical exercises, the ancient masters would have
contented themselves with recommending purely mental exercises
to stimulate channels that had no corporeal reality, and could,
therefore, be approached only through the medium of the mind.
That from prehistoric times complicated, laborious, and painful
psychosomatic methods have been used provides unmistakable
evidence that the mechanism to be stimulated has an objective and
concrete reality. When the mechanism has a corporeal existence
the effects of its stimulation must have the semblance of psychic or
biological activity, like the activity of any other organs in the body.
That it is so will become progressively apparent in the succeeding
chapters in this volume.
It is true that universal prana is a superphysical substance like

64

THE SECRET OF YOGA

mind, but it has a tangible organic medium by which it acts on
living organisms through specific channels of activity, that is, the
cerebro-spinal system. We know very well that the brain is the
instrument for the expression of mind. The only way by which we
can come in contact with the supersensible realm of mind is by
tuning the brain to finer vibrations not perceptible in the ordinary
way. Whatever the method used to achieve the objective—whether
meditation, pranayama, mantra, or prayer—in every case the organ
stimulated or affected is the brain or some specific portions of it
about which we are still in the dark. What effect the training or
tuning has or what changes occur in the nerves or grey and white
matter we do not know, but of this we have no doubt: all our
practices and techniques finally impinge on the brain. The same is
true word for word in the case of excitation of kundalini. Prana
acts on our body through the nerves and the brain. It is, therefore,
necessary in order to reach kundalini to direct our efforts to the
training and tuning of both of them, which is exactly what the
ancient authorities prescribe for the aspirants. For the arousal of
kundalini, and for her subsequent activity, the somatic channel of
the cerebro-spinal system is as necessary as the cultivation and
development of the brain is necessary for the better expression of
thought. Uncritical acceptance of the existing accounts, instead of
elucidating, has made the subject more obscure and complicated
and resulted in lending currency to false and misleading notions
about this mighty power. The extent to which even the learned
have been carried away by the cryptographic descriptions and
cabalistic signs and diagrams is surprising. The common man has
thus imbibed entirely erroneous ideas about this force, treating it as
a supernatural power which, when propitiated or evoked with Yoga
practices, puts an Aladdin’s lamp into the hands of the fortunate
Sadhaka to do with it as he likes.
Viewed apart from this huge and misleading mass of cakras,
lotuses, shaktis, serpents, mantras, and other mythical creations, of
the human mind and interpreted in the light of modern knowl-

KUNDALINI, FACT AND FICTION

65

edge, all that has a semblance of plausibility, and which we can
accept subject to investigation, is the rather startling fact that the
human body in the region close to the base of the spine has a
reservoir of vital energy which, when activized with certain tried
methods, leads to amazing changes in the human level of
cognition, making the brain responsive to higher states of existence
or to other dimensions of consciousness. This is a most
extraordinary experience that has left its mark on history almost
every time it became the destiny of the one who almost invariably
blossomed into a prophet or an illumined sage. And this is not all.
For the expression of a transcendent state of Consciousness a
highly developed body, a superior nervous system and brain are the
prerequisites demanded by nature to effect the transformation. The
promises held out in the ancient texts about health and longevity
are, therefore, to some extent, rooted in fact. Supernormal psychic
gifts, such as prophecy and clairvoyance, as well as the power of
fascination and magnetic appeal, also become available to the
successful initiates within certain limits. This in a nutshell is the
message of the Tantras and all the ancient treatises dealing with
kundalini. In fact, as has been already explained, this is the aim and
object of every form of Yoga, and every religious discipline. For
the ultimate target of every occult or religious practice is to bring
the mind in tune with Cosmic Consciousness or the Infinite
Universe of Life, hidden from the normal mind. Supernormal
psychic gifts, enhanced intellectual calibre, and literary talents
invariably attend the crowning stages of the metamorphoses
brought about.
The region contiguous to the base of the spine is lined with thick
clusters of nerves and also forms a junction of a large number of
arteries and veins. The nerves lining it come from both the central
and the sympathetic nervous systems. This central area of the body
forms the seat of the reproductive system in both men and women.
There can be no denying the fact that life, in its initial stages, is
generated by this region and that from it arises the sexual impulse
which has a most powerful

66

THE SECRET OF YOGA

effect on the brain. It is the seat of mystery and romance, of the yet
unfathomed potentialities of life, of creativity as also of mental
twists and obsessions of which psychology has only now begun to
explore the depths. This part of the human anatomy has been an
object of ceaseless speculation from the remotest epochs. It is often
the first portion of the body to excite the curiosity of the child. It
has been designed by Heaven, for reasons best known to it, to
discharge, besides its normal function of procreation, the still
nobler purpose of evolution, in conjunction with a specific centre
in the brain and a host of nerves, employed to extract the Elixir of
Life from all parts of the body for transmission through a narrow
duct in the spinal cord. This upward flow of the nerve energy,
partly used for reproduction (Urdhava-retas in Sanskrit), forms the
basis of Kundalini-Yoga. In fact, it is the ultimate aim of every
form of Yoga, practiced for the attainment of transcendent states of
consciousness. How the Elixir is transformed into a more powerful
nerve current, which nerves are involved in this operation, what
region of the brain is most affected, and how the transformation of
consciousness takes place, are questions which, to answer, would
need the devoted labour of countless savants in times to come for a
thorough exploration of what is one of the most momentous secrets
of Nature, underlying religion and every form of religious
discipline, including Yoga. If we accept as true even a tithe of what
the
ancient
masters
claim
for
Kundalini-Yoga—
superconsciousness, psychic powers, longevity, radiant health,
genius, and a host of other gifts and talents—this points to a hidden
source of energy and strength in the body, so marvellous, so potent,
and so precious for the peace and happiness of mankind that no
price paid for it and no sacrifice made to acquire the secret would
be too great.

4
Yoga, True and False
According to some authorities on Yoga, one very essential
qualification that should be present in an aspirant is viveka
(discrimination). The person must be able to make up his mind
as to what is of real worth or of a permanent nature and what is
unsubstantial and transitory. How necessary viveka is on the
path of liberation is expressed by Sankaracarya in VivekaCudamani (147) in these words: “This bondage can be
destroyed neither by weapons nor by wind, nor by fire, nor
millions of acts (enjoined by scriptures): by nothing except the
powerful sword of knowledge that comes of discrimination
(viveka), sharpened by the grace of the Lord.” It is easy to see
that as long as the aspirant has not a correct sense of values and
does not possess, in ample measure, the faculty to determine
what is really beneficial for him and what is not, there is no
possibility of his success in a difficult enterprise like Yoga.
Viveka is thus the very foundation stone on which the
subsequent efforts of an earnest seeker come to rest for the
simple reason that he himself has to make the choice of and the
path he would like to pursue to reach it. Study of books and
scriptures or the advice of scholars and teachers can only help
to bring to his mind a whole bag, full of different goals and
different paths designed to reach them, advocated by different
67

68

THE SECRET OF YOGA

authorities, each of them as learned, as pious, and as convincing as
the other. But the choosing has to be done by the seek according to
his own ability and his own power of discrimination irrespective of
what is suggested by others. It is here that the crux of the
endeavour lies, for all the future harvest of his efforts depends on
his choice.
In the search for a career, in the selection of a partner,
embarking on a hazardous worldly enterprise do we not think
deeply and debate within ourselves for days and weeks consulting
our friends and well-wishers, before making the final decision in
the light of what appears to us most appropriate under the
circumstances? What then should be our attitude when we try to
reach God, the Author of Creation, or when to gain entry to higher
planes of consciousness which, as long as we have not found
access to them, are deeper than the bed of an ocean and farther than
the farthest object on earth? If we have a genuine urge for this
quest, should we not then wholeheartedly devote ourselves first to
a deep study of the literature on this subject, especially to a study
of the lives and utterances of those who are reported to have
achieved the goal, to find out what kind of men they were, what
obstacles beset them on the path, and what the reward was for their
efforts, sacrifices and sufferings at the end? This study, combined
with a study of a few scriptures, as for instance the Bible, Quran,
Bhagavad Gita, Dhammapada, or any other Buddhist testament,
will probably be enough to develop sufficient insight in an earnest
seeker to enable him to determine the nature of the goal he should
set before him and what he might expect at the end if his sincere
efforts bear any fruit. If the approach to Yoga is made in this way,
after weighing all the pros and cons, the conceptions about this
science, in the minds of most people in both the East and West will
undergo a radical transformation leading to a more healthy and
sober view about this holy enterprise. It will then cease to have
magical properties with which people invest it, and emerge as an
objective reality with its full share of hazards,

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

69

difficulties, disappointments and distractions, as any other
enterprise undertaken by man.
The rarity of a successful consummation in Yoga is mainly due
to the fact that most of those who embark on it have often no clearcut picture of the desired goal, how they themselves should be
equipped for it, or what they should expect on the way. They
usually accept the versions of the teachers whom they approach for
guidance and who are often themselves unaware of the real goal
and the path. They proceed to sit in the postures and to perform the
other exercises as instructed by such teachers. In this way they
bring down to the level of a mechanical, physical, or mental drill a
system of discipline that is designed, in its true form, to reach
down to the deepest levels of the human mind in order to effect
radical changes in the whole psychological makeup of an
individual. Commenting on the qualifications needed in a seeker
for enlightenment, Updésa-Sāhasri writes: “This is always to be
taught to one who is of tranquil mind, who has subjugated his
senses, who is free from faults (of character), obedient, endowed
with virtues, always submissive (to the teacher), and who is
constantly eager for liberation.”
Discrimination and dispassion are two of the most essential
attributes needed in a Sadhaka, and every Indian scripture has
accorded the highest priority to them. “But he (that master of the
chariot i.e., body),” says the Katha-Upanishad (1.3.7), “does not
attain that goal, who being associated with a nondiscriminating
intellect and an uncontrolled mind, is ever impure. He attains only
worldly existence (involving birth and death).” During the
probationary period, spent by the disciples with their teachers in
India in ancient times, the latter had full occasion to frame their
opinion about the merits of each disciple in the light of the
injunctions contained in the sacred texts. This is clear from several
passages in the Upanishads, as for instance Mundaka-Upanishad
(1.13): “To that pupil who has approached him with due courtesy,
whose mind has become perfectly calm and who has control over
his senses, the wise teacher should truly impart that

70

THE SECRET OF YOGA

knowledge of Brahman by which one realizes the Being,
imperishable and real.”
The Bhagavad-Gita repeatedly draws attention to the mental
qualifications of the aspirants and time after time emphasizes the
fact that without the basic virtues of detachment, self-mastery,
devotion, faith and intellectual discrimination, success in the search
for liberation is not possible. Self-control has to be acquired first
before the actual practice of Yoga is started, “Pledged to the vow
of continence, fearless, keeping himself perfectly calm and with the
mind thoroughly brought under control and fixed on Me” says
Krishna to Arjuna (iv. 14), “the vigilant Yogi should sit absorbed
in Me.” Again in vi. 36, He says: “Yoga is difficult of achievement
for one whose mind is not subdued, but it can be easily attained
with practice by him who with his mind under control ceaselessly
strives for it; such is my belief.” These citations make it abundantly
clear, without the least trace of ambiguity that a finely adjusted
intellect, able to guide the Sadhaka in choosing his goal and his
way of life and conduct is an indispensable prerequisite for the
experience of Yoga. As at present Yoga is more or less an
individual effort, with a great diversity in methods and
innumerable exponents, each loud in the praise of his own method,
the selection of a teacher needs the same fine exercise of the
intellect as in all other matters. If this selection not made with
proper care there is every possibility of a failure even in the case of
one who, after deep study and thought, has made the choice of the
goal and the path which he would like to take.
This brings us to the very heart of the problem we wish to
discuss. Since the time the various kinds of disciplines used in
Yoga were first practiced or prescribed, a great transformation has
occurred in the way of living, mode of thinking and social
environment of people. The basic qualifications demanded for
Yoga need a mode of life and certain attributes of mind, as for
instance renunciation, self-denial and devotion, which are
incompatible with the requirements of the present highly
competitive

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

71

and fast-moving age. The more sophisticated teachers, therefore,
instead of advising their disciples to cultivate these essential
attributes, and to adopt a concordant mode of life, make futile
attempts to adapt the ancient teaching to the present highly
artificial and competitive social order, often with disastrous consequences. The scope of this volume does not permit us to pursue
this issue in detail. It is sufficient to point out here that there is
gradually occurring a growing dissonance between the fundamental
concept and practice of Yoga, as it was taught at the height of its
spiritual practice in India in the past, and as it is now presented to
the world. The impact of this calculated distortion has been
especially harmful in the West for the reason that the seekers,
having often no grounding in the scriptural lore of India, lack the
necessary insight to differentiate between what the revealed texts
prescribe and what the modern exponents try to inculcate.
From very early times there have been three classes of religious
teachers and those dealing with the occult among whom it is
necessary to distinguish in order to avoid waste of effort and disillusionment. One of the classes consists of those deeply versed in
the sacred lore who have made themselves fully conversant with
the details of various esoteric systems and religious disciplines,
even practiced them, and who possess the ability to impress others
with their knowledge and discourse. The second class comprises
those who have diligently practiced the disciplines, possess or
cultivate needed virtues, and who, as a result of long, ceaseless
effort, attain a tranquil state of mind, have visionary experiences
and develop, or are naturally gifted with, psychic powers, such as
mind-reading, clairvoyance, etc., which they exhibit on occasions
to instill respect in their followers. The third class, extremely
limited and rare, consists of those who either as the result of a short
or a long course of discipline, combined with lofty mental traits, an
austere mode of life and exceeding benevolence of disposition, or
as a natural endowment, attain the beatific State through psychic
gifts, flashes of illumination and inspira-

72

THE SECRET OF YOGA

tion, and remain more in rapport with an entrancing inner rather
than outer world. All systems of Yoga are designed to produce the
mental state prevailing in the third category, which, because of the
numerous factors involved and the radical nature of the
transformation to be effected, becomes fruitful only in a few cases
out of thousands who apply themselves to it.
The other two categories work with the light borrowed from the
third, just named, which consists of a genuinely illuminated class
of men. The reason why they sometimes come to the forefront is
because the phenomenon of true spiritual efflorescence is
extremely rare. “Out of thousands of men,” says the Bhagavad Gita
(vii. 6) “hardly one strives for perfection and out of thousands of
such seekers hardly one in reality attains to Me (Krishna as the
Universal Self).” How difficult is the path for which enlightened
teachers of the highest calibre are needed is described by KathaUpanishad (1.3.14) in these words: “Arise, awake, and learn by
approaching the Excellent Ones. The Wise describe the Path to be
as impassable as a razor’s edge, which when sharpened is difficult
to tread on.” Because of the fact that human beings in general, are
at different stages of development, both intellectual and moral, as
they stand on different steps of the ladder of evolution, and have
different tendencies and appetites, they have different ideas about
perfection and the Ultimate as well, and are motivated by different
aims in the quest for spiritual experience. Some seek worldly
success and fulfillment of carnal desires with the aid of the magical
gifts they hope to gain by this means. Others hanker after position
and power and strive for the development of a magnetic
personality, able to command the obedience of sundry people with
the occult influences they will be able to radiate. Yet others are
hungry for psychic gifts and supernormal faculties, clairvoyance,
levitation and the like, and there are others who desire health,
longevity, and a peaceful frame mind under all circumstances.
Few, indeed, there are who have actual knowledge of the real goal
of Yoga and who long for the supreme experience, subordinating
every other consideration and directing every other effort to this
lofty aim.

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

73

Magic has been an ingredient of religion from the earliest times.
In fact, in the “primitive” stages religion is indistinguishable from
magic so much so that some scholars, among them J. G. Frazer,
trace the origin of the former to it. Magic was much in evidence in
India during the Vedic period and echoes of it are found in the
Upanishads also. Thus in Brhadarnyaka a magical remedy is
suggested to an injured husband (6.4.12) in this way: “Now if a
man’s wife has a lover and he wishes to hurt him, he should feed
the fire in an unbaked earthen vessel, spread tips of reed inversely
(to the usual way) and offer these inversely placed tips of reed,
smeared with ghee (clarified butter), in the fire, uttering the following Mantras: ‘Thou has offered in my burning fire thy prana
and apana, I take them away, etc.’ . . . ‘Thou hast offered in my
burning fire thy sons and cattle, I take them away, etc.’ . . . ”
Patanjali has devoted the third book of his Yoga-Sutras to the
enumeration of the supernormal gifts and miraculous powers
attainable through the practice of Yoga. The Tantras and books on
Hatha-Yoga are filled with magical rites, spells, charms and
exercises for the attainment of fabulous powers and supernatural
gifts. These excursions into the realm of magic and the miraculous,
even on the part of great adepts of Yoga, have a profound
relevance to human nature, since a large proportion of humanity
has an innate propensity for the miraculous and the supernatural. In
many cases this propensity is so strong that no amount of argument
or dissuasion, and even no amount of proof to the contrary, can
convince them that the domain of the supernatural is still shrouded
in the darkness of doubt and suspicion, sometimes even trickery
and fraud, and that demonstration of miraculous or magical powers
by a person has seldom, if ever, been beyond dispute. In any case,
it has never brought to him or to those who were benefited any
lasting credit or good.
Accepting human nature as it is, the teachers of the two lower
categories adapt their teaching to suit the predispositions of those
whom they teach. The desire for supernatural adventure and the
acquisition, of miraculous powers, the subconscious longing in the

74

THE SECRET OF YOGA

heart of many people who take to Yoga and other occult practices,
find a response in countless books, published in these days, which
provide them liberally with many varieties of brightly coloured and
highly embellished foods, suited to their tastes. The old Tantric and
Yoga texts of India and Tibet provide the raw material from which
these appetizing dishes are cooked. The outcome has been that
cheap and dangerous methods are taught to the unwary, and Yoga,
brought down from its high pedestal, been made a saleable
commodity which anyone can purchase for a price. Hypnotism,
suggestion, drugs, magic, legerdemain, Mantras and every other
device known to man to excite curiosity for and to stimulate
interest in the miraculous and the occult are all freely used by those
who trade in the supernatural. The discriminating power of a
balanced intellect, considered indispensable by the ancient masters
for the right choice of the teacher and the path adopted, has been
replaced by what is the most powerful incentive in this age: the
possibility of gain. The aspirants seldom suspect that when a Guru
breathes a Mantra into their ear and instructs them in meditation in
a certain way, with the injunction that they should practice it daily
in such-and-such a manner to gain such-and-such results is,
without their knowledge, planting a suggestion deep into their
subconscious and dealing with them in the same way as some
mental healers and psychiatrists deal with the crowds of patients
who throng their clinics or gather round them for treatment. The
seekers after Yoga and the occult who, instead of counting on their
own efforts, guided of course by a preceptor, display a weak
mental attitude of utter dependence on the teacher for their spiritual
regeneration, show evidence of lack of character and an unhealthy
thirst for the Divine. Those who believe that they can attain to
higher states of consciousness in this way, or by adopting any
novel or easy method, deceive themselves and indirectly tend to
cast a shadow of doubt and disrepute on this ancient science.
Hypnotism and suggestion have played a powerful role in all
religious and occult practices from early times. The magic rites

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

75

of the primitives and the occultists of Egypt, Chaldea, Greece, and
other old civilizations made use of them in ample measure. The
disciplines of Yoga contain a strong element of autohypnotism and
suggestion in them. The attainment of a state of transcendent
consciousness, which crowned the labours of most of the famous
mystics, sages, and Yoga saints of the past, is a unique phenomenon, attended by certain well-marked attributes that can be objectively verified. In other cases, where the practitioners of spiritual
disciplines including Yoga, perceive visions, have supernatural
visitations, or believe they have attained a state of mental calm,
without developing the other talents which will be discussed in
another chapter of this volume, and without experiencing a noteworthy change in their whole personality, are not infrequently
experiencing the effects of autosuggestion, or the suggestion of an
instructor that has gone home into the subconscious. Commenting
on this possibility in the cases of conversion in his Varieties of
Religious Experience*, William James writes: “Similar occurrences abound, some with and some without luminous visions, all
with a sense of astonished happiness, and of being wrought on by a
higher control. If, abstracting altogether from the question of their
value for the future spiritual life of the individual, we take them on
the psychological side exclusively, so many peculiarities in them
remind us of what we find outside of conversion that we are
tempted to class them along with other automatisms, and to suspect
that what makes the difference between a sudden and a gradual
convert is not necessarily the presence of divine miracle in the case
of one and of something less divine in that of the other, but rather a
simple psychological peculiarity, the fact, namely, that in the
recipient of the more instantaneous grace we have one of those
subjects who are in possession of a large region in which mental
work can go on subliminally, and from which invasive
experiences, abruptly upsetting the equilibrium of the primary
consciousness, can come.”
It is undeniable that some cases of Yoga end merely in auto*Longmans, Green, New York, 1903.

76

THE SECRET OF YOGA

hypnosis by causing the same condition of the brain as is
deliberately induced by hypnotists in their subjects. Since some
people are much more responsive to the hypnotic influence than
others, follows that the same rule must be true in respect of
autohypnosis also, and that the more susceptible individuals
succeed in inducing the condition in themselves more easily than
others. Regular practice in a secluded place, a steady unmoving
posture that can persist even when the mind passes into a sleeplike
state, rhythmic breathing with soporific resonance proceeding from
the monotonous utterance of specially selected words, fixity of
attention or vacuity of thought create the passive or fatigued
condition of mind, favourable to the hypnotic trance. The idea
already existing or inculcated about the Deity or the
Superconscious state, acting as a suggestion, and using the now
vivid imagination of the self-hypnotized Yoga practitioner, can
create a hallucinatory appearance corresponding to it which has all
the semblance of reality for him in the same way as a picture,
evoked by the suggestion of a hypnotist, has for the moment a real
existence for his subject. The vision is naturally accompanied by a
state of happiness at the fulfillment of an earnest desire, which is
reflected on the countenance of the Yogi.
Many of the secret rites and hidden practices, prescribed by
esoteric systems and occult creeds as well as many exercises of
Yoga, are but effective methods of self-hypnosis in disguise. They
cause the practitioner to fall into a state of mental passivity leading
to trance. The daily repetition of the experience tends to fortify
belief in the reality of the vision and to create an assurance that the
practitioner has found what he had striven for. This assurance has a
powerful effect in creating self-confidence in and in influencing his
followers and disciples. Once the ability to induce hypnosis in
himself has been gained by a Sadhaka, the next step of exhibition
of psychic talents becomes possible soon afterward in a certain
proportion of successful initiates. They may succeed in awakening
extracerebral memories relating to the past or in exhibiting
clairvoyance, prevision or other supernormal gifts.

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

77

As these extrasensory developments do not occur in all successful
cases of self-hypnosis but only in a few, in the manner of hypnotized subjects, it is obvious that the condition supervenes only in
such cases where a tendency already exists in the brain in a
dormant form and only needs some stimulus to stir it and bring it
out.
This class of Yogis and occultists, though much more numerous
than the true Yoga saints and mystics, and existing from prehistoric
times, has made no impact on mankind, though in their own
circumscribed environment men of this category shine brilliantly
for a while. The reason for this is simple. They do not possess the
ever-shining light of genius nor the dynamic power of the soul to
shed a lustre that could survive beyond the narrow span of their
lives. Apart from the fact that they can induce the condition in
themselves, and on that account possess confidence in their own
ability to cause the phenomena, Yogis of this class are in other
respects no better than hypnotized subjects or professional
sensitives and mediums, whose demonstrations are witnessed by
thousands every year. It is a mistake to suppose that they can produce these extraordinary phenomena at will and mould the occult
forces of nature according to their choice. If it were so and they did
possess the power of command over these forces, they could dispel
the doubts of the multitudes with but one conclusive supernatural
demonstration before the skeptics, whose number is alarmingly on
the increase, and with but one bodily flight in the air, while the
cameras are recording and thousands of eyes witnessing the feat,
revive belief in the occult for at least many centuries to come. But
no such demonstration has ever been ventured, nor is likely to be
ventured for a long time to come. It can be readily admitted that
there are hidden powers and occult forces in nature about which
modern scholars are still in the dark. But, as in the case of material
energies, they too must be governed by rigid and uniform laws.
They await the time when man can make lawful use of them with
full understanding of their nature and possibilities. Till that day the
erratic exhibitions, witnessed in mediums

78

THE SECRET OF YOGA

and others, can only be treated as freakish occurrences, which in
the course of time, with study and investigation, may lead to better
understanding of their origin and the purpose they serve.
The material phenomena, attributed to prophets, mystics, Yogis,
though counterfeited to some extent by mediums and sensitives in
their séance chambers during recent times, have never been
conclusively demonstrated. They have never even been uneqivocally proved in the past, because if this had been done it would
have shut, once and for all, the mouths of the skeptics and believers
who at no time in history ceased to cast doubts on the Divine and
the supernatural. To what extent the skeptical attitude was in
evidence in the past is also amply illustrated in the dialogue of the
Buddha in which he explicitly states that the exhibition of
supernatural feats on the part of one on a spiritual path instead of
enhancing his reputation is more likely to result in his classification
as a mountebank and trickster. It is said that when informed by a
disciple that a certain monk had flown up to that of a high pole,
and thence circled the town three times, to win a sandalwood
bowl, which a rich merchant had placed on the top of the pole with
the proclamation that one who could take it there would possess it,
Buddha ordered the bowl to be broken into pieces and distributed.
Leaving aside the psychics and mediums, some of whose
exhibitions, especially of the material kind, lack coherence and
consistency and need further investigation for their verification
eliminating every possibility of fraud and trickery, we have only
two classes of men to deal with. One class is the prophets, Yoga
saints and mystics, and the other class those Yogis and men, who
as a result of autosuggestion or self-hypnosis develop conviction
that they have attained a state of illumination and the visions and
appearances they perceive in trance or semitrance states, are real
manifestations of the Divine and not mere figments of their own
voluntarily excited imaginations. These two classes have been
mentioned to demonstrate the main compart-

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

79

ments into which Yogis and those who strive for God-realization
can be roughly divided.
Dehydration and deprivation of water for some time in a desert,
the rarity of air on a high mountain peak, prolonged starvation or
numbness by exposure to extreme cold can cause hallucinations in
which the victim ceases to experience the agony which torments
him. From this analogy it is safe to infer that prolonged fasting,
extreme austerity, and self-mortification as well as too little sleep,
a state of excessive preoccupation with the supernatural and the
numinous, in utter silence and solitude, cannot but predispose the
mind toward obsessions and delusions that may even take the form
of hallucinatory manifestations. The morbid effects of unnatural
modes of life and repression of natural tendencies are now too well
known to require mention. In the light of this knowledge it should
not be difficult to understand the state of mind of an anchorite,
whose life is a bundle of inhibitions, fastings, self-denials, and
mortifications of the flesh with excessive attention given to the
unseen and the unknowable. Is it then to be wondered that after a
time the mind loses its grip on reality and lives in a world of
fantasies and dreams?
It is a fact well known to hypnotists that, after a subject has been
once subjected to a hypnotic trance, it becomes much easier on
subsequent occasions to induce the sleep by means of a single
gesture, a word of command, a look, or a suggestion. In rare cases,
where the subject is responsive to telepathy, even a mental command from a distance is sometimes sufficient to bring about the
hypnosis. This also holds true in the case of autohypnosis. Once a
Sadhaka succeeds in inducing in himself the hypnotic trance, it
becomes easier for him on subsequent attempts to induce this
alluring state when the ideas present in his mind materialize in selfcaused visions of extraordinary vividness, appearing much more
real and substantial than the most vivid experiences in dreams. No
wonder then that some of them exude an atmosphere of such poise
and calm, and are so confident of the reality of their own visionary
experiences that they often exercise a power-

80

THE SECRET OF YOGA

ful effect on those who sit in their company contrasting their serene
bearing with the agitated minds of other people.
Those of them who gain access to the deeper regions of the
mind and succeed in developing dormant psychic faculties command even greater homage and excite greater wonder among the
people who witness these extraordinary feats. Since most of us are
not yet fully informed about the identity of the factors that work in
a hypnotized subject and a self-hypnotizing Yogi causing the
trance and the psychic phenomena, we fail to recognize the
similarity between the two. Although this form of Yoga has its
benefits it has its disadvantages as well. The initiate, it is true can
voluntarily dive into the depths of his subconscious, but that only
means descending into a dream-state, not as one does in sleep, but
with deliberation plunging into a hallucinatory condition,
transported to a world of being where thoughts take on a visionary
aspect and fancies assume vivid appearances somewhat akin to the
illusory states induced by drugs. At best it can only signify
volitional excursions into the dream territory, often with some
therapeutic results, but nothing more. There is at present general
ignorance about the fact that the practice of Yoga, or that matter of
any form of religious discipline, can lead to two fundamentally
different mental states. One is brought about by autohypnosis,
creating a hallucinatory inner world of visions, with or without
psychic powers. The other is a state of transformed consciousness,
leading to glorious supersensory planes of being attended always
by genius and psychic powers in one form or another characteristic
of all great seers, prophets, mystics, and Yogis of the past.
The following extract from Aldous Huxley’s work, Heaven and
Hell,* can help to illustrate our meaning: “Some people never
consciously discover their antipodes. Others make an occasional
landing. Yet others (but they are few) find it easy to go and come
as they please. For the naturalist of the mind, the collector of
psychological specimens, the primary need is some safe, easy and
* Harper & Row, New York, 1956.

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

81

reliable method of transporting himself and others from the old
world to the new, from the continent of the familiar cows and
horses to the continent of the wallaby and the platypus. . . . Two
such methods exist. Neither of them is perfect; but both are
sufficiently reliable, sufficiently easy and sufficiently safe to justify
their employment by those who know what they are doing. In the
first case, the soul is transported to its far-off destination by the aid
of a chemical—either mescalin or lysergic acid. In the second case,
the vehicle is psychological in nature, and the passage to the
mind’s antipodes is accomplished by hypnosis. The two vehicles
carry the consciousness to the same region; but the drug has the
longer range and takes its passengers further into the terra incognita.” The passages denote a poor concept of the Ineffable or
rather the very antithesis of the true mystical state. What Huxley is
describing are visionary or rather hallucinatory excursions into
below-the-surface levels of the mind while the unitive state is a
flight to regions beyond the farthest reach of submerged states.
How and why hypnosis produces its observed effects Huxley, or
for that matter psychologists, are not able to explain. “All that is
necessary, in this context,” Huxley says, “is to record the fact that
some hypnotic subjects are transported, in the trance state, to a
region in the mind’s antipodes, where they find the equivalent of
marsupials—strange psychological creatures leading an autonomous existence according to the law of their own being.” * About
the physiological effect of mescalin, Huxley offers the explanation
that probably it interferes with the enzyme system that regulates
cerebral functioning and by so doing lowers the efficiency of the
brain as an instrument for focusing the mind on the problems of
life. “This lowering of the biological efficiency of the brain seems
to permit,” he says, “the entry into consciousness of certain classes
of mental events, which are normally excluded, because they
possess no survival value. Similar intrusions of biologically
Useless, but aesthetically and sometimes spiritually valuable, material may occur as the result of illness or fatigue; or they may be
*Ibid.

82

THE SECRET OF YOGA

induced by fasting, or a period of confinement in a place of
darkness and complete silence.” At another place he adds:
“Milarepa in his Himalayan cavern, and the anchorites of the
Thebaid followed essentially the same procedure and got
essentially the same results. A thousand pictures of the
Temptations of St. Anthony bear witness to the effectiveness of
restricted diet and restricted environment. Asceticism, it is evident,
has a double motivation. If men and women torment their bodies, it
is not only because they hope in this way to atone for past sins and
avoid future punishments, it is because they long to visit the mind’s
antipodes and some visionary sightseeing. Empirically and from
the reports of other ascetics, they know that fasting and a restricted
environment will transport them where they long to go,”
These passages reveal an intellectual confusion, common among
some scholars and people in general, about the sublime experience
of the genuine mystical state. This confusion has prevailed from
time immemorial, with the result that the rigid ascetic who starved
himself or employed other methods of self-mortification to induce
a hallucinatory state of mind, by causing alterations in the
physiological balance of the body, has often been mistakenly
bracketed with the true mystic or the illumined sage. In actual fact
the two conditions are poles apart. One denotes a decline and the
other a high degree of enhancement of the mental faculties. This is
a point of paramount importance to be kept in mind in determining
the value of Yoga or any other healthy form of spiritual discipline.
The vision of God or contact with Cosmic Consciousness to be
genuine must signify a step forward and not a recession the mental
condition of the seeker. The reason for some taking hallucinatory
drugs or employing other methods to gain visionary or illusory
experiences springs from a misconception of the value of genuine
mystical phenomena. If the urge to Divinity or have access to
higher planes of being, which has been a powerful influence in the
life of man from earliest times, has as its final aim the fantasmic
states induced by hormone-derangement, starvation, or drugs, it
clearly points to an unwholesome

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

83

impulse at work in the human psyche which, under the guise of
leading man to his Maker, draws him into a world of appearances
and apparitions, only slightly removed from the borderline of
insanity.
Referring to the consciousness produced by intoxicants and
anaesthetics, especially by alcohol, William James says*: “The
sway of alcohol over mankind is unquestionably due to its power
to stimulate the mystical faculties of human nature, usually crushed
to earth by the cold facts and dry criticisms of the sober hour.
Sobriety diminishes, discriminates, and says no; drunkenness
expands, unites and says yes. It is in fact the great exciter of the
Yes function in man. It brings its votary from the chill periphery of
things to the radiant core. It makes him for the moment one with
truth. . . . The drunken Consciousness is one bit of the mystic
Consciousness, and our total opinion of it must find its place in our
opinion of that large whole.” .. . “Nitrous oxide and ether,” he
continues, “especially nitrous oxide, when sufficiently diluted with
water, stimulate the mystical consciousness in an extraordinary
degree. Depth beyond depth of truth seems revealed to the inhaler.
This truth fades out, however, or escapes, at the moment of coming
to, and if any words remain over in which it seemed to clothe itself,
they prove to be the veriest nonsense. Nevertheless, the sense of a
profound meaning having been there persists, and I know more
than one person who is persuaded that in the nitrous oxide trance
we have a genuine metaphysical revelation.”
The confusion is due to the fact that a standard, clearcut picture
of what a true mystic experiences in the highest flights of ecstasy is
not available anywhere. In the first place the condition is
incommunicable and, second, its range of expression is so vast and
there are such enormously varied accounts of it that it is extremely
difficult to locate the boundary at which the spurious forms,
induced by hallucinogens, etc., cease and the genuine oc*Varieties of Religious Experience by William James, Longmans, Green,
New York, 1903.

84

THE SECRET OF YOGA

currences begin. This issue will find clarification in another chapter
of this volume. In India the genuine Yogis with a transformed
consciousness usually met instant recognition throughout the past.
The learned scholar, the miracle-worker, and the one prone to
drugs also had their place among the holy men, but they were in
the lower ranks. The Hindu scriptures are categorical in their
emphasis on a regulated life and a disciplined mind for one
practicing Yoga. The extremes of the type that lead to morbid
states of the mind or to foods and drinks that cause unhealthy reactions in the body have to be eschewed. In fact, some of the caste
restrictions about food arise from the scriptural injunctions that
food, being the builder of prana, must be pure and wholesome.
That the mental condition induced by nitrous oxide is hallucinatory is obvious from the fact, mentioned by William James,
that on emerging from the visionary state the words in which the
truth witnessed in the trance condition clothes itself are found to be
sheer nonsense. The return to normalcy from all the hallucinogens
and intoxicants that cause a temporary inflation of personality is
almost always followed by feelings of depression or lassitude. The
aftereffects of genuine ecstasy are altogether different. The
genuinely esctatic experience is revealed as if a heaven has been
opened. The sublime nature of the vision, surpassing anything
known or even imagined in the normal state, remains indelibly
engraved on the memory, an unending source of inspiration and
wonder which, even in the darkest hours of life, sustains the spirit
with hope and cheer. Sometimes even one fleeting glimpse of the
supreme state continues to shine in the depths of the heart as a
beacon pointing to a glorious existence that does not belong to this
daily world. St. Ignatius Loyola* has described one such
experience that befell him in these words (He refers to himself in
the third person): “As he was going to pay his devotions at the
Church of St. Paul, about a mile out of the town of Manresa, and
was sitting on the banks of the Cardenero, or as
*Spiritual Exercises, translated from the Spanish by Anthony Mottolo, Garden City, New York, 1964.

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

85

some say of the Rubricato, his mind was suddenly filled with a new
and strange illumination, so that in one moment, and without any
sensible image or appearance, certain things pertaining to mysteries
of the Faith, together with other truths of natural science, were
revealed to him, and this so abundantly and so clearly, that he
himself said, that if all the spiritual light which his spirit had
received from God up to the time when he was more than sixty-two
years old, could be collected into one, it seemed to him that all this
knowledge would not equal what was at that moment conveyed to
his soul.”
The true prophets, mystics and Yoga saints constitute a class of
men including in its ranks the founders of all religions, as well
several great systems of metaphysics and philosophy, initiators of
new lines of thought and conduct, adepts in the knowledge of the
occult and originators or reformers of all systems of religious
discipline and Yoga. Not one of them veiled his identity or hid
himself and the Light he came to diffuse in a far-away mountain
retreat, but, on the contrary, boldly fought the evils of his time and
valiantly stood against the tyranny and wrath not only of reprobate
kings and chiefs but also of powerful heads of corrupt religions and
prevailing decadent creeds. These mystics proved an asset to the
country in which they were born.
Misconceptions about this subject in the minds of the common
people in this enlightened age are due to the fact that the modern
world, though immensely rich in physical science, is deplorably
lacking in knowledge of the occult and the sublime. The inherent
tendency in the human mind to associate mystery and wonder with
the Divine, for which there is a rational ground deprived of the
proper nourishment, is driven to feed itself voraciously on a
fictitious other-world, on the hair-raising tales of ghosts and
haunted houses, on incredible stories of hypothetical miracleworking supermen and hierarchic Methuselahs living in inaccessible regions, which has done, and is doing, great harm by
diverting the attention of the true seekers from the understanding of
a mighty law of nature by which man can raise himself to a sub-

86

THE SECRET OF YOGA

lime state in a most rational way as natural and as practical as the
birth and development of a child. This unwholesome diet caused
serious harm in several directions. On the one hand, it aggravates
the mental condition and makes the appetite even more morbid
and, on the other, draws the attention from the genuine ideals and
diverts it toward persons or concepts of the occult and the Divine
that are either fictitious and have no relation to reality or are not at
all fit to form the models worthy of emulation by mankind.
Approached in a sane way the realm of the occult and
supernatural will also be found to be crowded with the fictitious
and the spurious, as in any worldly realm. Those who do so will
find that, barring the experience of those prophets, mystics and
Yoga sages, whose names are household words in the countries to
which they belong, all the rest they have heard about such as the
imaginary adepts and wonder-workers do not possess the seal of
attestation either of those who were a witness to their extraordinary
lives, or of the monuments they left behind to show that they were
men or women of flesh and blood. The utmost they will discover of
the occult, in the objective world, well attested and confirmed, will
be the erratic and unpredictable phenomena produced by sensitives,
mediums, hypnotized subjects, or some self-hypnotizing Yogis, but
beyond that, nothing. If they try to bring before their minds the
image of the most outstanding seer or Yogi they have ever heard
of, out of the known and well-attested cases, they will find that he
is something quite different from what they themselves would wish
to be. They will also find that almost all the illuminati, about whom
they have heard, had lives of suffering, of intense longing for the
Divine, sometimes almost to the point of madness, of utter
simplicity and self-denial, of detachment from the world and
renunciation of its pleasures, of selfless service, often in the face of
colossal odds and insurmountable difficulties, of complete
immersion in the love of the Deity and entire absorption in the
inner universe. They can easily gather from this that success in the
quest, if ever attained, would add

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

87

their names to the same category, and fill their minds with the
same fires of passion, renunciation, love of the Divine, and service
for humanity that characterized the illuminati.
It is well known that in both medieval and ancient times the men
and women, who delved into the occult in order to become
sorcerers, magicians, necromancers, wizards, or witches were
never publicly applauded. They were forced to practice in secret, to
form esoteric circles and brotherhoods, and to perform their weird
rites far from the eyes of common men, in eerie spots and in the
shades of night. Modern man, deceived by the fictitious accounts
he has read, and filled with the glamorous images of hypothetical
Master Yogis, is too often led to believe that a few years practice
with certain secret methods would raise him to the same level, able
to achieve impossible deeds with the power gained over the forces
of nature, to conquer disease, to win domination over men, to know
the deeper secrets of life, and to live in utter peace and bliss under
all circumstances. How many men succeed in achieving these
objectives can be gauged from the fact that in recent years out of
the millions, who undertook the practice of Yoga, not one has
claimed that he has gained even a fraction of the powers claimed
for it or for other forms of esoteric discipline by the overenthusiastic protagonists of these systems. Leaving miraculous
powers aside, how many have plainly or implicitly made the assertion that they, in their person, have attained the transcendent
state of Consciousness claimed for Yoga, and backed their assertions by a frank self-revelation in the same way as has been done
by several well-known Christian mystics, Sufis, and Yoga saints in
the past with a candour and sincerity that has made their works
Immortal? If there is none or only one or two, it clearly points to
the fact that the present way of approach to Yoga holds little
promise of success for the legions who undertake it in these days.
By miraculous powers we mean the type of supernatural talents
which legendary Yogis like Gorajah Nath are said to have exercised, that is, the type of powers mentioned by Patanjali in his
Yoga Sutras under the term siddhis and which are repeated in al-

88

THE SECRET OF YOGA

most all the books on Kundalini- and Hatha-Yoga. This does not
refer to uncontrollable psychic gifts, which hundreds of mediums
possess, but to the power of will developed to an extent where one
can exercise the occult faculties, under all circumstances and in full
view of people in broad day light, and can repeat the same
performance at any time at his choice. The interruption of breathing, of the heart action, or of other functions of the body, including the flow of blood, are merely physical phenomena and do
not fall in the category of occult powers, referred to here. Many of
the present-day concepts about the supernatural and the occult are
purely mythical. But the myth is so prevalent and so concordant
with our wishful thinking that, despite every indication to the
contrary and the fact that hundreds of thousands of disillusioned
seekers bear testimony to the repeatedly proven hollowness of
many of these beliefs, a large number of those interested in the
occult still persist in the quest. They convince themselves that had
such extraordinary achievements not been possible, then countless
men would not have devoted their lives to this pursuit from time
immemorial. Others console themselves with the thought that were
there not a substratum of truth in such episodes all these stories of
supermen could not have found currency or commanded such wide
acceptance.
As has been explained, the Yogi whose image has been
projected on the public mind, especially in the West, by some
modern exponents of the occult, exists nowhere in the world. There
is no Yogi who readily changes from the physical into the astral
body, conveys his instructions by mental projection, heals with a
touch, transmutes base metals into gold, transforms his disciples
into adepts, or performs other similar miracles while leading a
happy unruffled life free from the cares of the world. At least
history makes no mention of any such extraordinary spiritual
prodigy or Yogi who in his own person rose above physical laws,
performed miracles left and right, and lived a life of peace and
happiness to the end. On the other hand, in all saints and mystics of
the world we come across lives of spiritual storm and stress, of a
raging

YOGA, TRUE AND FALSE

89

passion for divine experience, of periods of intense joy interspersed
with spells of extreme despair, of persecutions and martyrdom, of
extreme poverty and want, of ravaging disease and premature
deaths, or rigid austerities and self-mortification, of ridicule and
calumny, of great trials and suffering and other vicissitudes, in
many cases far more severe and trying than are often met with in
ordinary lives.
Time and again the author of the Bhagavad-Gita gives an insight
into the mental condition of the accomplished Yogi. The Herculean
struggle for self-mastery, the extremely recalcitrant nature of the
mind, the moderate, well-balanced life that must be led, the awful
yet blissful nature of the supreme vision, the pitfalls in the path, the
pattern of behaviour to be followed, the mental attributes of the
emancipated, the dangers of employing psychic powers, the
sacrifices and surrenders to be made are all described at length.
There are many people who after years of ceaseless efforts,
sacrifice, and suffering find no change in their state of
consciousness, and in the essential aspects of their personality
continue to be the same as they were before. In their despair they
either blame the teacher or the whole system which they followed
or even question the justice of the divine Being toward whom all
their devotion, sacrifice, and effort were directed. Why there
should be such a reaction is based on the mistaken idea that all our
spiritual endeavour is a means to please or propitiate the Lord and
to seek His grace in order to cross over to the other shore. Is it not
an anomaly that while, in the intellectual sphere, out of millions
who devote their lives to the various sciences and arts and make
colossal sacrifices to win distinction in them, only an extremely
few rise to the stature of a Shakespeare, a Kalidasa, an Omar
Khayyam or a Confucius. The rest reasonably attribute the rise to
exceptional natural talent, based on some still unknown biological
law. In the spiritual realm the seekers after God do not often take
the same reasonable view and, instead of attributing their failure to
a law of nature, assign other causes for it.
The true aim of Yoga is transformation of Consciousness, the

90

THE SECRET OF YOGA

creation of a heaven on earth. What lasting joy can supernormal
talents or command over supernatural forces bring to a man whose
inner being has not risen above the narrow, vacillating periphery of
the human mind. What greater happiness can occult gifts, temporal
power, or earthly riches confer on a man who, in perennial
communion with the Universal Ocean of Life, has realized his own
immortal nature, knows himself as one with the Eternal Fount of
Cosmic Consciousness, in want of nothing and beyond the farthest
reach of the contaminations of the earth: sorrow, decay and death.
The other subsidiary achievements, supernormal gifts and powers
of domination, after which many people strive, are but alluring
pitfalls in the path. The object to be realized is the experience of
the Self, beyond all price, beyond all thought and beyond
everything the earth can offer. This is how Chandogya Upanishad
(iii—l4-2 & 3) has tried to depict this state:—“He, who is
permeating the mind, who has Prana for his body, whose nature is
consciousness . . . who possesses all the agreeable odours and all
the pleasant tastes, who exists pervading all this, who is without
speech (and other senses). . . . This my Atman residing in (the
lotus of) the heart is greater than the earth, greater than the sky,
greater than heaven, greater than all these worlds.”
This idea is re-echoed by Lao Tze in his Tao-Te-Ching (85 and
89): “Of old these came to be in possession of the One; Heaven in
virtue of the One is limpid; Earth in virtue of the One is settled;
Gods in virtue of the One have their potencies; the valley in virtue
of the One is full; the Myriad creatures in virtue of the One are
alive; lords and princes in virtue of the One become leaders in the
empire; it is the One that makes these what they are; . . . The
Myriad creatures in the world are born from something, and
Something from Nothing.” The supreme experience of Yoga or
other forms of religious discipline is unlike any other experience
known to the mind. It is more real and more convincing, whether
undergone in the trance state or in full wakefulness, than any
objective experience undergone by anyone during the whole course
of embodied life.

5
The Discipline of Yoga

As the various methods for the awakening of kundalini,
described in Hatha-Yoga manuals or prescribed in other ancient
texts, are already mentioned in detail in several modern books, it is
not necessary here to enter into a recapitulation of the techniques
already explained in other writings. A few words are, however,
necessary to bring out the fact that all the practices and exercises
described are of a type that one would expect of a system, designed
for the excitation of a psychosomatic mechanism in the body,
intimately connected with the reproductive region at the base of the
spine and the cerebral hemispheres in the head. The ancient writers
on the subject have made no secret of this close relationship
between the two poles of the mechanism, and even the purest and
the most saintly of them have described the interaction of the two
in plain terms without any effort at ambiguity. In assessing the
value of the ancient techniques it is necessary to bear in mind that
they were designed at a time when knowledge of the human body
was extremely meagre and recourse to supernatural agencies and
spiritual forces to account for the more obscure functions of the
organism which are not clearly defined in biological terms was
very common. When once the processes responsible for Spiritual
experience are rightly understood in the context of
91

92

THE SECRET OF YOGA

biology, the development of new techniques and more improved
methods will follow instantly as a matter of course.
Patanjali divides the whole process of Yoga into eight parts, or
limbs. These are yama (restraint), niyama (discipline), asana (posture), prana-yama (control of breathing), pratyahara (control of
senses), dharana (concentration), dhyana (unbroken contemplation), and samadhi (complete absorption). The Hatha-Yoga and
Laya-Yoga have also the same eight divisions. There are minor
differences in respect of the subdivisions of each part. The YogaSutras specify five yamas and five niyamas, and the manuals of
Hatha-Yoga ten of each. Briefly stated the yamas are avoidance of
violence to living creatures, truth, absence of covetousness, forbearance, fortitude, kindness, simplicity, moderation in food, and
purity of body and of mind. The niyamas are austerity, contentment, belief in scriptures, charity, worship, listening to holy texts,
repugnance for wrongful action, adherence to scriptural ordinances,
recitation of sacred formulas, and practice of religious observances.
Broadly speaking the ordinances grouped under the heads of
yama and niyama are the rules of conduct and behaviour to be
observed by every aspirant to spiritual illumination. They are
designed to inculcate the ideals of truth, piety, harmlessness,
charity, self-control, and altruism without which no spiritual
achievement is possible. In the Bhagavad-Gita the qualifications of
one fit for the supreme experience have been repeatedly and
variously defined.
There is no doubt that the most important contribution of religion to the progress of mankind has been morality. From the
earliest times the ideas of forbidden and permissible, of sacred and
profane, of clean and polluted, of pure and impure formed the raw
material from which the subsequent towering edifices of morality
and ethics were built. Both in primitive societies and in later
civilized cultures the evolutionary impulse was at the bottom of the
ethical tendency in the primary crude and subsequent elaborated
forms.

THE DISCIPLINE OF YOGA

93

If it is conceded that man has a spiritual goal to attain, and there
is certainly no conflict of opinion about this point, at least among
the various faiths of mankind, it follows that, in order to make this
idea a reality, the spirit must gain more and more domination over
the flesh and not be dominated by it, since that would be a step in
the opposite direction toward carnality and bondage and not toward
emancipation. This implies that rise in morality denotes a rise in
the power of the spirit. From this the conclusion is obvious that any
discipline or method designed to gain self-realization or Godconsciousness must be oriented to raise the moral stature of the
practitioner to a level where it can offer no hindrance in gaining
self-mastery to the enlightened soul.
For this reason self-denial, control of the senses, detachment
from the world, truth and right conduct form the necessary ingredients of every kind of Yoga and every school of religious
discipline. As it is in the nature of men to go to the extreme, the
scriptural injunctions and the spirit of the commandments have too
often been distorted or highly exaggerated with the result that
excessive forms of self-denial and detachment, instead of a healthy
and judicious moderation, have been and are frequently practiced
to forge even stronger bonds around the soul by causing obsessive
and morbid states of the mind. The vast majority of the seers of the
Upanishads were householders and lived healthy and meritorious
normal lives to a mature age, when they entered the third stage and
retired to the forests to strive for enlightenment. The successful
termination of this effort led later to the fourth stage, or ashrama,
when the now accomplished sage wandered as a homeless ascetic,
welcomed and revered everywhere, to allay the doubts and answer
the questions of those deeply interested in the mighty problems of
life and death. One of the greatest of these sages, Yajnavalkya,
discredits severe austerity and self-mortification as effective means
for Brahman-realization. In the Mundaka Upanishad continence,
truth, and performance of prescribed duties are considered to be
sufficient measures for the attainment of higher consciousness. The
Bhagavad-Gita strongly condemns ex-

94

THE SECRET OF YOGA

cessive penance and self-mortification, preaching moderation, selfless action, devotion, truth, and righteousness as the most appropriate virtues of those who seek enlightenment.
Considering the arduous nature of the psycho-physiological discipline, and the long duration of mental exercises, it is but natural
that certain postures of the body should have been chosen for the
asana stage. Beyond this, asanas have no other significance in
other forms of Yoga and, according to both Patanjali and the Gita,
the Sadhaka himself has to make the choice of the way in which to
seat himself, remaining steady and keeping the head, torso, and
neck erect to avoid flexion of the spinal cord. In the Hatha-Yoga,
however, in order to prepare the body for a sudden infusion of the
life force as the result of a powerful awakening of the serpent
power, asanas are also used to limber one up to a state of
toughness and flexibility necessary for the proper functioning of
the visceral organs. The statement in the Gheranda Samhita that
there are 8,400,000 asanas, of which 1,600 are said to be excellent,
is obviously an exaggeration, a specimen of the manner in which a
simple fact is presented in an entirely incredible manner in some of
the ancient texts, demanding a sane and critical approach on the
part of the seeker. The number of asanas actually described in this
work is only thirty-two. Hatha-Yoga Pradipaka describes fifteen
asanas only.
Shiva Samhita mentions eighty-four postures and this number is
usually accepted even now. There are Sadhus in India who can
perform most of these asanas with alacrity for a small gift. They
are as far away from Yoga as any body-training gymnast or acrobat
is. It is as great a misnomer to call efficiency in the mere performance of a few difficult and striking asanas Yoga as it would be to
designate a dextrous circus performer as a Yogi. The Yogic
asanas, when employed merely for gaining suppleness and health
of the body, are no better than other body-building exercise and
ought to be understood and labelled as such. The assertions made
in Hatha-Yoga treatises that miraculous powers attend the proper
performance of certain asanas are an obvious exaggeration,

THE DISCIPLINE OF YOGA

95

used as an inducement to the seekers for undertaking the disciplines. The two most convenient asanas for any kind of Yoga are
the padmasana and the siddhasana. In the former the right foot is
placed on the left thigh and the left foot on the right thigh, with the
heels pressing against the pudenda, and the hands either placed in a
similar manner, the right hand on the left thigh and vice versa, or
simply each hand on the thigh of the same side. In the other asana
one heel is pressed against the perineum and the other against the
region of the genitals, with the hands on the thighs or one upon the
other, palms upward, on the upper leg.
Every Sadhaka can select a convenient posture for himself out
of the many enumerated in Yoga manuals, but for an earnest
seeker, whose mind is set on samadhi, the posture should be one
which he can maintain for hours without fatigue or cramp, and
which keeps his head and trunk steady and unflexed. A few words
are here necessary to explain the significance of the gruesome
asanas peculiar to some schools of Tantric Yoga, in which the
Sadhaka performs the practice in a cremation ground or seated on a
skull or astride a corpse. The use of human skulls and bones in the
performance of occult practices has been in vogue from very early
times and prevailed in many places in one form or the other. In the
mystery cults of Chaldea, Greece, and Egypt, revolting and fearexciting ceremonies, as for instance the kissing of snakes,
embracing a dead person’s hand, infliction of wounds, and the
shedding of blood, were held to instill a sense of respect and awe
with regard to the mysterious ritual into which the candidate was
initiated. In the light of these practices there is nothing new or
surprising in the mundasana and shavasana of some Tantrics and
the utter indifference to what they eat, not excluding even dung, of
the Aghoris.
T0he six processes of body-cleaning are: (1) Dhauti. This is a
method to clean the mouth, throat, stomach, and intestines by
swallowing a long piece of wet cloth and then drawing it out. The
other accessories to this process are drinking a copious draught of
water and then expelling it through the mouth, con-

96

THE SECRET OF YOGA

traction and expansion of the abdominal and intestinal muscles to
eject wind, self-stimulated vomiting and muscular contractions,
combined with pressure of the breath, to cause increase or decrease
in the peristaltic movement of the entire digestive tract at will. (2)
Vasti. This is a method by which a Yogi, sitting in a stream or pool
up to the navel, can draw up water through the anus by means of
suction applied with the action of breath and the intestinal muscles
combined, and after cleaning the lower portion of the tract, eject it.
(3) Neti. This means thorough cleansing of the nasal passages by
the use of a thread. (4) Lauliki. This is achieved by the movement
of the contracted abdominal muscles from side to side to ensure
regular motion of the bowels and to maintain the suppleness of the
waist. (5) Trataka. This is an exercise at concentration and
strengthening the muscles of the eye by gazing fixedly at some
object without winking. (6) Kapalabhati. This is a method for the
removal of phlegm and mucus by means of breathing exercises or
by drawing up water through the nose and ejecting it through the
mouth and vice versa.
It is obvious that years of practice are required in order to gain
proficiency in these exercises. What purpose could this difficult
and even precarious system of body-cleansing fulfill in the attainment of a higher state of consciousness, is a question that can arise
in the mind of any student of Hatha-Yoga. To take only one instance, the exercise of trataka in the hands of an ignorant Sadhaka
can do great damage to the eyes. Sometimes this practice degenerates into gazing at the sun with disastrous results and loss of eyesight of the unfortunate seekers after Yoga. What unbending
necessity could drive the experts to devise and practice such rough
methods of internal cleanliness, especially of the stomach and the
intestinal tract? As far as we know the only reason offered for these
practices is that they are needed to correct the inequality of the
three humours and to keep the body in a healthy condition. But
why such drastic methods were undertaken when drugs to cause
vomiting and even contrivances to clean the colon were available
in India in ancient times is not clear. There can be only

THE DISCIPLINE OF YOGA

97

two answers to the question: either these practices were undertaken
for their wonder-exciting property, which appears hardly plausible
as more amazing performances, such as sleeping on a bed of nails
or standing on one leg or living atop a tree, were possible with less
labour and the chances of a greater yield, or there is something
inherent in this form of Yoga which makes proficiency in the
methods of body-cleansing a necessary qualification in a candidate
for sublime spirituality, and for this reason years were spent in
gaining mastery over them.
According to the ancient treatises on Hatha-Yoga the Sadhaka
sets before himself the goal of conquering disease and decay, and,
with this aim in view, undertakes the arduous task of kaya sadhana, or the Culture of the Body, to make it invulnerable to death
by gaining control not only over respiration, circulation of blood,
digestion, and elimination with pranayama and shatkarma, but also over the autonomic nervous system and the brain in order to
gain immortal life with a siddha deha or Perfect Body. The idea of
prolonging the life of the body for indefinite periods was also
prevalent among the Taoist sects of China, Tibetan Tantrics, and
alchemists of ancient times. There is no doubt that, when benignly
disposed in a healthy body, the awakening of kundalini can lead to
rejuvenation, prolongation of life, and immunity to disease
commensurate with the possibilities latent in the human
constitution. This might have happened in exceptional cases in the
past. But lack of sufficient data about this mighty mechanism,
designed by nature for injecting a new life into the human body,
not only makes the enterprise directed to activate it highly
dangerous at this stage of our knowledge, but also stands in the
way of deriving all possible benefit from its activity when it is
aroused. Because of the extremely uncertain nature of the
experiment, it has been said about this Yoga that the Sadhaka holds
immortality in one hand and death in the other. The lure of
unfading youth, victory over death, miraculous powers, and the
capacity of enjoyment of the pleasures on earth for cyclic periods
of time has been, perhaps, one of the most

98

THE SECRET OF YOGA

powerful factors in antiquity in attracting neophytes to the arduous
enterprise of Hatha-Yoga. There are countless people even now,
including men of learning, who have an inborn faith that such a
possibility does exist in the occult systems of a religious discipline
such as Yoga, not knowing, sometimes, that this faith springs from
the promises that lie concealed in the natural Fountain of the Elixir
of Life, kundalini.
Because of their stringent nature some of the practices of HathaYoga have been kept secret and never divulged except to the
initiates who, in the eyes of the preceptor, possessed the physical
fitness and the presence of mind necessary to emerge from the
ordeal safe and sound. Even with such rigorous training and strict
body control only very few of the Sadhakas could stand the ordeal
without succumbing to the severity of the trial. From this it is easy
to gauge the magnitude of the risk involved for an ordinary
individual in modern complex society, especially for one who has
no practice in, nor even the possibility of gaining such complete
control over the body as is envisaged in, the difficult shatkarma
exercises. Even fearless anchorites, divested of all worldly
responsibility and trained to perfection, often gave way before the
rigour of the ordeal. The implication of this well-known aspect of
Kundalini-Yoga, which is of paramount importance in
understanding the biological basis of this cult, is often overlooked.
The point that should have excited curiosity is that if there is a risk
in the enterprise (and a whole system of body-control exercises has
been devised to minimize that risk by manipulation of the visceral
organs), it clearly indicates that the practice creates a disturbance in
the body for which a certain state of preparedness and control over
the vital organs is necessary. It is a matter of regret that because of
the cloud of mistrust and suspicion under which this system has
been labouring in the past, it has received less attention from the
learned than it deserved. It is easy to understand that the risk
mentioned and the disturbance guarded against, whether psychical
or physical, could not be due to causes that have no material basis,
because if such

THE DISCIPLINE OF YOGA

99

were the case the necessity for purely physical measures to combat
the danger would not arise.
It is therefore obvious that the danger apprehended and the
disturbances feared must be of a physical nature. The danger is
particularly related to pranayama. In Hatha-Yoga practices,
pranayama is the lever by which the serpent power is awakened.
“Performed in the prescribed manner,” says Hatha-Yoga Pradipika
(2.41), “pranayama purifies the nerve-circuit enabling prana in
good form to pierce (the mouth of) susumna and to enter through
it.” With the entry of prana in the central canal (susumna) the
startling manifestations peculiar to Hatha-Yoga, but possible in
other forms of Yoga also, begin to make their appearance in the
body of the Sadhaka. The arduous types of pranayama,
recommended in the books on Hatha-Yoga, are always attended by
a certain amount of risk. There is not only a possibility of damage
to the lung tissue, caused by overstrain, leading to disease, but
danger to the safety of the nervous system as well. It is for this
reason that special stress is laid in Hatha-Yoga manuals on
beginning the exercises with restraint under the instructions of a
competent Guru along with close adherence to a strict regimen in
food and drink.
In his exposition Vacaspati Misra refers to manu (vi. 72), in
which he says, “By restraints of breath one should burn up defects.” In the Yoga-Sara-Sangraha (second part), it is said on the
authority of Yoga-Vasistha that one who becomes proficient in
performing kumbhaka (the retentive phase of pranayama) without
resorting to the other two, that is the inhalation and the exhalation
phases, can achieve anything he desires in the three worlds. The
importance of pranayama as a means of achieving fixity of
attention is admitted by Patanjali in i. 34 and ii. 53 of his YogaSutras.
In the Hatha-Yoga system, however, combined with the bandhas and mudras, pranayama takes a more drastic and, at the same
time, a more unnatural and precarious form. Its effect on the body
of the Sadhaka, especially one not favoured with a hardy and

100

THE SECRET OF YOGA

robust constitution, being often fraught with danger, particularly in
the initial stages, the practice of shatkarma seems to have
introduced to give a tone to the system and to offset the injurious
effects resulting from the overstrain and the disorganization caused
in the body by the drastic exercise. “Proficiency in shatkarma
before beginning the practice of pranayama,” says Hatha-Yoga
Pradipika, “is necessary for one who has excess of phlegm in him.
But for one who is free from these defects (has a harmonious state
of the humours) shatkarma is not necessary.” Since the standard of
health demanded by a rigorous training of kind is uncommon,
recourse to shatkarma is almost always by those who devote
themselves to Hatha-Yoga. The control over the visceral organs
gained by it can always be used with advantage to combat
disturbances in which the whole body, including the brain and the
digestive system, is involved. Support for this view is again
furnished by the unambiguous statements made in the Tantras that
particular difficulty is experienced when kundalini pierces the three
granthis, or knots, located at the muladhara, anahata, and ajna
cakras, especially the second one, commanding the heart and navel
centres which, it is said, can cause great disorder and even disease.
If we now turn to the science of therapeutics for guidance in this
matter we will find that the need to irrigate the large intestine or to
empty the stomach arises in acute digestive disturbances, and the
washing of the colon is sometimes resorted to in delirious
conditions of the brain, caused by toxaemia arising from a
poisoned condition of the blood. This is exactly why these methods
of purification of the internal organs were practiced the ancient
students of this Yoga, no doubt, after long experience and study of
the symptoms caused by a sudden awakening of the serpent power.
This means that, if the practices group under shatkarma are to be
taken as an indication of the reactions caused in the body by
pranayama or the arousal of kundalini they provide strong
evidence for the assumption that the exercises of Hatha-Yoga can
lead to a sudden change in the organic

THE DISCIPLINE OF YOGA

101

balance of the body of a type that can precipitate serious disturbances (of both a psychological and a physical nature), and it is
necessary to fight with extraordinary presence of mind and control
over the digestive and other organs. With the enormous advances
made in the knowledge of medicine and surgery, most of the
purposes served by these practices can now be achieved by
mechanical devices: stomach pump, enema, etc., but they fail in
one essential aspect, that is, the confidence and the will power
gained by the practitioner in the process of winning mastery over
his body by these methods.
It is known that the most critical period, when the constant
presence and guidance of the Guru is considered indispensable, is
the time of awakening. The Guru continues to supervise the
operation closely till the ajna cakra is reached. After this stage the
Sadhaka watches closely until the ajna cakra is reached. The
Sadhaka then enters the hierarchy of the accomplished ones, and
their relations as preceptor and disciple cease. Sometimes the Guru
even bows to the disciple at this point, in recognition of the
surpassing achievement. This ceremony of bowing to the disciple
at the end of the initiation ceremony of a neophyte, admitted to the
order, is even now performed by some ascetic sects in India in
imitation of the ancient custom. The Guru/disciple relationship
ends at the sixth centre, or the Cakra of Command, as the Yogi is
now guided by intuition and has access to a Fount of Knowledge
higher than that of any mortal Guru. The hazardous nature of the
enterprise and the colossal nature of the task that made the constant
guidance of a preceptor necessary have been often conveyed by the
Yoga adepts of India in cryptic expressions like “diving deep in the
ocean without getting wet” or “making the frog dance before the
serpent” or, as Lalla has said, “submitting to thunder and
lightening” or “being ground to powder in a mill.”
Pranayama is of several kinds. In the Yoga-Sutras of Patanjali
and in the Hatha-Yoga treatises three phases of the process are
recognized. First is puraka, that is, inhalation which is done by

102

THE SECRET OF YOGA

closing either the right or the left nostril with the thumb and
forefinger of one hand applied to the place. Then comes kumbhaka,
or the retentive phase, when the inhaled air is retained inside for a
certain duration of time. This is followed by recaka, or the
exhalation of the breath through the other nostril. This makes one
pranayama. The process is repeated either by inhaling again from
the same nostril from which the breath has been expelled or from
the one through which it was first inhaled. The duration of each
phase is regulated either by repeating mentally the mystic syllable
Om or any other Mantra, or by keeping count of time with the
fingers of the other hand. The three phases are of the same or
different durations. Kumbhaka may be done for a period twice or
four times that of the puraka, and recaka twice or of the same
duration as puraka. One form of pranayama is done by retaining
the breath outside after it is expelled for a certain duration before
another inhalation is done.
About the various methods of pranayama, as prescribed by
different exponents, enough has been said to show that the ultimate
objective is to reduce the rhythm of breathing to such an extent that
it becomes hardly perceptible or, in the words of Vacaspati Misra,
a bit of cotton held before the nostrils should remain unmoved in
the flow of the breath. In the Yoga-Sara-Sangraha (second part) the
place of precedence is allotted to kumbhaka, which can continue
for months and years without puraka and recaka. This is
designated as kevala kumbhaka, and is known as the fourth
pranayama, beyond count, time, and space. Kevala kumbhaka also
finds mention in Yoga-ttatva Upanishad. With the attainment of
proficiency in this pranayama the power to travel in space and
other siddhis, it is said, come into the possession of the Sadhaka.
Clearly, therefore, the aim of the practice is to diminish breathing
to a degree that it appears that one is not breathing at all or, in other
words, is apparently in a perennial kumbhaka, that is, in a state of
suspended breathing. Whether the duration of puraka, kumbhaka
and recaka are uniform or they are made to vary in a certain
proportion, the effort

THE DISCIPLINE OF YOGA

103

of the Sadhaka is to be directed toward increasing the interval by
slow degrees till an extremely reduced rhythm, working effortlessly, is attained.
The following observation of Mircea Eliade in his book, Yoga,
Immortality and Freedom, dwelling on some of the effects caused
by pranayama. is deserving of attention: “The Indian ascetics
recognize four modalities of consciousness (in addition to the
enstatic “state”): diurnal consciousness, consciousness in sleep
with dreams, consciousness in sleep without dreams and ‘Cataleptic consciousness.’ By means of Pranayama, that is by increasingly
prolonging inhalation and exhalation (the goal of the practice being
to allow as long an interval as possible to pass between the two
moments of respiration)—the Yogi can, then, penetrate all the
modalities of consciousness. For the non-initiate there is
discontinuity between these several modalities; thus he passes from
the state of waking to the state of sleep unconsciously. The Yogi
must preserve continuity of consciousness—that is he must
penetrate each of these states with determination and lucidity.”
By the term “cataleptic consciousness,” Eliade refers to turiya,
or the fourth state of consciousness, the other three being the states
of wakefulness, dream, and dreamless sleep. According to the
Indian scriptures, turiya is the state of self-knowledge or
illumination in which the identity of the Atman and Brahman or
Jiva or Iswara is realized. It is the indescribable state of existence
experienced in the highest form of samadhi or the ecstatic “State,”
as Eliade calls it. The confusion seems to arise from the fact that he
distinguishes between samadhi and turiya while, in actual fact,
turiya is the modality of consciousness present in asamprajnata,
nirvikalpa, or nirbija samadhi, and also characterizes the
consciousness of a Jivan-Mukta, or one liberated in life. This is
clear on the authority of Mandukya Upanishad (7) wherein it is
said: “They consider the Fourth (that is turiya) to be that which is
not conscious of the internal world nor conscious of the external
world. . . . That is the Self and that is to be known.” Again (in 12)
it says: “The partless Om is the Fourth

104

THE SECRET OF YOGA

(caturthah, i.e., turiya)—beyond all conventional dealings, the limit
of the negation of the phenomenal world, the auspicious and the
non-dual. Om is thus the Self to be sure. He who knows thus enters
the Self through the Self.” The position has been clarified beyond
doubt by Gaudapada in his Karika (i.l4 and 15). “The earlier two
(visva and taijasa) are endowed with dream and sleep, but prajna
is endowed with dreamless sleep. People of firm conviction do not
see either sleep or dream in turiya. . . . Dream belongs to one who
sees falsely, and sleep to one who does not know Reality. When
the two errors of these two are removed, one attains the state that is
turiya.”
The point here is whether these four modalities of consciousness
are characteristic of the embodied spirit or whether they have an
independent existence of their own. The first three, it is hardly
necessary to argue, have no independent existence, that is, they do
not exist as cosmic planes of wakefulness, dreaming, and
dreamless sleep, but represent different states of human consciousness. They are mutually exclusive, that is, as argued by
Gaudapada, when one is dreaming he cannot be awake and when in
dreamless slumber he can neither dream nor be awake. Similarly
when one is awake he cannot dream, in the real sense of the term,
nor can he be in dreamless slumber. It is, therefore, obvious that
the moment a Yogi enters the dream state with lucidity, that is
consciousness, dreaming must cease forthwith and when one enters
the state of dreamless slumber it too must vanish instantly, for the
simple reason that as darkness and light cannot exist together, in
the same way the oblivion of the dream state and dreamless
slumber cannot coexist with lucidity for any length of time. It
might be contended that the so-called ecstatic “state” (samadhi),
being a transhuman plane of consciousness, can “penetrate” the
other three. In reply to this it is enough to point out that at the very
moment when transhuman consciousness penetrates any modality
of human consciousness it must at once transform and illumine it.
It can neither assume the modality into which it enters nor coexist
with it.

THE DISCIPLINE OF YOGA

105

The point has been discussed at some length to show what grave
misconceptions exist in respect of samadhi and the transcendent
states of consciousness even among eminent scholars both in India
and in other places. From this it is easy to infer the amount of error
in the minds of the common people about these fascinating but still
very little understood mental states. The terminology used by the
ancient writers is sometimes so technical and difficult and the
expositions are so varied that for those who have not had the
experience it is extremely difficult to make even a remote mental
picture of it. The conflicts and contradictions that occur as a result
of this difficulty are, therefore, only natural. The experience of
samadhi is not an artificial or extraneous mental condition, brought
about by the suppression of thought, nor a magical state of
perception that can “penetrate” into the dreamless and dream levels
of the mind while retaining an awareness of the process, so that
one continues to remain conscious that he is dreaming or in
dreamless sleep all through the paradoxical episode. But it denotes
a transformation of the whole personality—dream state, dreamless
slumber, waking and all—a marvellous rise to higher planes of
consciousness, the emergence of an effulgent, sublime inner being
(called divya deha, or divine body, by the ancients) which persists
through all the three states of waking, dreaming, and dreamless
sleep in the same way as the normal personality of an individual
persists through them.
Pratyahara is defined by Patanjali (11. 54) as the withdrawal of
senses from their objects in conformity with the restrictions
imposed by the mind. In his commentary on this Sutra, Vyasa
explains pratyahara in this way: “When there is no conjunction
with their own objects, the organs in imitation of the mind-stuff, as
it is in itself, become, as it were, restricted. When the mind-stuff is
restricted, like the mind-stuff they become restricted; and do not,
like the subjugation of the senses, require any further aid. Just as
when the Queen-bee flies up, the bees fly up after her, and when
she settles down, they settle down after her. So when the mindstuff is restricted, the organs are restricted. Thus

106

THE SECRET OF YOGA

there is the withdrawal of the senses.” Yoga-Sara-Sangraha, the
authority of Narada Purana, defines pratyahara as the withdrawal
of senses from all the objects in which they are engrossed. “The
Yoga practitioner,” it says, “who applies himself to meditation
(dhyana) without first subduing his senses can only be considered
as unintelligent, as the meditation of such a person can never bear
fruit.” Gheranda Samhita (iv. 3. 4. 5) defines hara as the
withdrawal of mind from honour and opprobrium from what is
good to hear and what is not good to hear, what is odorous and
malodorous, from sweet, sour and bitter, from any form of sound,
smell or taste by which the mind is drawn to bring it back under the
control of the Self (Atman). The Bhagavad-Gita (ii. 57. 58)
describes the state of one observing pratyahara in these words:
“Stable is the mind of him who, unattached to everything, meets
good and evil without rejoicing at the one and feeling revulsion at
the other. . . . When a man like a tortoise, which draws in its limbs
from all directions, withdraws his senses from the objects of desire
then he attains to a stable state of mind.”
“The first five limbs of Yoga, from yama to pratyahara,” says
Yoga-Sara-Sangraha, “are for the control of the body, prana the
senses and the other three limbs, dharana, dhyana and samadhi for
the control of citta (consciousness).” Divested of mystical and
magical colouring with which some writers on Yoga try to invest
these practices, dharana is simple concentration on certain
susceptible regions of the body or on some object, with a mental
content relating to some aspect of Divinity, to the supernatural or
the numinous. Dhyana is deeper concentration persisting for a
longer time and samadhi is the absorption of the mercurial mind in
the contemplation of the Self. According to Patanjali (1.2.3.4)
“When the mind-stuff is restricted then the Seer (that is, the Self)
abides in himself. At other times It (the Self) takes the same form
as the fluctuations (of the mind-stuff).” A man deeply engrossed in
study or in painting or in other absorbing occupation is in a state of
concentration. A classi-

THE DISCIPLINE OF YOGA

107

cal example of absorbed concentration, cited in Yoga-Sara-Sangraha, refers to the mental condition of an arrow-maker who is so
engrossed in his work that he fails to see the king passing by.
“Binding the mind-stuff to a place is fixed attention (dharana)”
says Patanjali in the Yoga-Sutras (3.1). Commenting on it, Vyasa
says: “Binding of the mind-stuff, only in so far as it is a fluctuation, to the navel or to the heart lotus or to the light within the head
or to the tip of the nose or to the tip of the tongue or to other places
of the same kind or to an external object—this is fixed attention.”
Dharana, dhyana and samadhi are, in actual fact, the three
successive phases of one single effort directed toward making the
attention one-pointed. When dharana becomes continuous it is
dhyana. Vacaspati Misra in his exposition of Sutra 3.2 of the
Yoga-Sutras, cites a passage from Vishnu Purana in which dhyana
is explained in these words: “An uninterrupted succession of
presented ideas single-in-intent upon His (the Deity’s) form
without desire for anything else, that, O King, is contemplation
(dhyana).” In other words dhyana is the continuous flow of
thought on one single object to the exclusion of all other thoughts.
According to the Sarva-Sarsana-Sangrha, “the continual flow of
thought in one place, resting on the object to be contemplated, and
avoiding all incongruous thought” is dhyana. The same view is
expressed in Isvar-Gita quoted in Yoga-Sara-Sangraha.
Studied from a rational angle, the practice of dharana and
dhyana, as expounded in the Yoga-Sutras and other ancient books
has nothing “mysterious” or “magical” or “mystical” about them.
Dhyana, deep meditation, connotes fixity of attention on one object
and this connotation has come unaltered from the Vedic period in
India. It is, of course, the intensity with which concentration of
mind is practiced and the will and perseverance behind the practice
which are decisive in achieving success in the enterprise. The
various exercises of Yoga including asana, pranayama, and
Pratyahara lend a potency to concentration which is not possible
in other ways. It is the power of ekagarta, or one-point-

108

THE SECRET OF YOGA

edness of thought, which is effective in stimulating the centre of
paranormal consciousness in the brain, commanding susumna
where on the awakening of the kundalini, the Flame of
Superconciousness burns with transporting effect. The important
point to be kept in mind is that dharana and dhyana are not ends in
themselves, but means to an end and that end is the excitation of
the Transcendent centre in the head. It is with the aim of
stimulating this region and susumna that fixity of attention on one
of the susceptible nerve-junctions, as for instance, the navel, or the
heart, or the place between the eyebrows, or the palate, or the
crown of the head is recommended by the ancient writers on Yoga.
In his commentary on Yoga-Sutra 3. 1, Vyasa recommends
concentration on the navel, heart, or light in the head for the same
reason.
Dharana, dhyana and samadhi are the three last steps toward the
attainment of a fuller and richer life. In samadhi the mental flux
becomes entirely restricted and the stream of thought becomes one
with the object contemplated. In every spiritual practice the object
kept before the mind being either the Deity with or without form or
the Self or the Guru or some transporting object, like the lotus, or
any iconographic representation, prescribed for meditation,
complete absorption of mind in the object plainly signifies a
transformation in the interior of the Sadhaka. In other words, it
denotes the development of a new quality in his own consciousness
which, assuming the image of the Deity or the Self or a lotus or a
light, keeps the attention of the Sadhaka from wandering this way
or that, and holds it completely engrossed in contemplation in the
same way that a magnet holds a piece of iron tightly attached to it
by the sheer force of attraction. It is the development of this
alluring quality in his consciousness that keeps the Yogi entranced
for hours without any sign of fatigue and with a beatific expression
on his face. The arrest of thought in samadhi does not occur
because of the restraint exercised by the Yogi, but, primarily,
because the mind is rapt in the contemplation of a fascinating inner
state which

THE DISCIPLINE OF YOGA

109

may intervene either by imperceptible degrees or suddenly during
the practice of dhyana. This is Yoga, the state of rapturous union
between the fluctuating mind-stuff and the ravishing Universe of
Consciousness which now begins to loom large on the mental
horizon of the Sadhaka.
This is the reason why repeated mention is made in all Indian
scriptures and books on Yoga of the incomparable bliss of
samadhi. The ceaselessly repeated expression Sat-Cit-Ananda, the
keyword of Vedanta to signify the Ineffable, meaning ExistenceConsciousness-Bliss, is symbolic of the enrapturing transhuman
state of consciousness experienced in samadhi. “He, the Selfexistent Being is verily of the nature of Bliss,” says the Taittiriyopanishad (ii.7). “Having attained this Bliss one becomes
blessed.” That the aim of samadhi is Cosmic Consciousness is
expressed by Atmopanishad (3) in these words: “Now about the
Parmatman: Verily He is to be worshipped according to the
precepts of the Vedas. And He (reveals himself) to one who,
through the Yoga of Pranayama, Pratyahara and Samadhi or
through reasoning meditates on the Adhyatma. He is like the
banyan seed or like the Syamaka grain: conceived of as being as
subtle as a hundred-thousandth fraction of the point of a hair, and
so forth. He cannot be grasped or perceived. He is not born. He
does not die. He is neither dried up nor burnt, nor shaken, nor
pierced, nor severed. He is beyond all qualities, the Witness,
eternal, pure, of the essence of the indivisible, one only, subtle,
without components, without taint, without egoism, devoid of
sound, touch, taste, sight and smell, devoid of doubt, without
expectation. He is all-pervading, unthinkable, indescribable. He
purifies the unclean and the defiled. He is without action. He has
no Samaskaras. He is the Purusa who is called the Parmatman.”
Bliss (ananda) with an indescribable state of Being is the keynote of the samadhi attained in Raja-Yoga, Laya-Yoga, MantraYoga, Hatha-Yoga, Jnana-Yoga, Bakhti-Yoga, Karma-Yoga, and
also the attribute of the Supreme, conceived by Vedantists, Sai-

110

THE SECRET OF YOGA

vites, Sakts, Tantric Buddhists, Sahajas, Vaisnavites, and the rest.
It is obvious from this that pranayama, dhyana, niskama karma
(desireless action), jnana, bhakti, and kundalini ultimately lead to
the same mental condition. Are not the ecstasy resulting from
concentrated bliss, said to be far more intense than the highest
transport experienced in the climax of the embrace of love, and the
inexpressibly marvellous nature of the Vision sufficient baits to
keep the attention of the Yogi riveted for the time being,
completely immobilized and transfixed by the sheer transport of
the experience? Just as a man, intensely watching an entrancing
drama, becomes at times oblivious of his surroundings and does
not even hear when spoken to and, by identifying himself completely with the play, ceases to pay attention to his body and the
impressions coming from his senses in the same way multiplied a
dozenfold, a Yogi, rapt in samadhi, becomes oblivious to his body,
his senses, and the world to such an extent that even loud noises
and other distracting factors fail to interrupt the state of utter
absorption in which, for the time being, he is immersed. The
difference between dhyana and samadhi, according to the YogaSara-Sangraha, lies in this: violent sensory impression coming
from outside can cause interruption in the state of absorption
attained in the former, but fail to do so in the latter. It is about this
state of ecstatic contemplation, when the mind is completely
identified with the object contemplated, that the Knower, Known,
and the process of Knowing, it is said, become one. In this condition with but a vestige of the ego left, even if he wishes it, the
entranced Yogi cannot withdraw his mind from the state of rapt
contemplation till the ecstasy is over. The only method of recalling
Paramhamsa Rama-Krishna from his ecstatic trances, it is said, was
to pronounce a name of the Lord or some Mantra into his ear.
The difficulty experienced by intellect in understanding the real
nature of samadhi is reflected in this passage from Mircea Eliade’s
Yoga, Immortality and Freedom* “. . . It would be
*Pantheon, New York, 1958.

THE DISCIPLINE OF YOGA

111

wrong to regard this mode of being of the Spirit as a simple
‘trance’ in which consciousness was emptied of all content. Nondifferentiated ecstasies are not ‘absolute emptiness.’ The ‘state’
and the ‘knowledge’ simultaneously expressed by this term refer to
a total absence of objects in consciousness, not to a consciousness
absolutely empty. For, on the contrary, at such a moment
consciousness is saturated with a direct and total intuition of being.
As Madhava says, ‘Nirodha (final arrest of all psychomental
experience) must not be imagined as nonexistence, but rather as the
support of a particular condition of the spirit.’ It is the enstasis of
total emptiness, without sensory content or intellectual structure, an
unconditioned state that is no longer ‘experience’ (for there is no
further relation between consciousness and the world), but
‘revelation.’ Intellect (buddhi), having accomplished its mission,
withdraws, detaching itself from the purusa and returning into
prakrti. The Self remains free, autonomous; it contemplates itself.
‘Human’ consciousness is suppressed; that is, it no longer
functions, its constituent elements being reabsorbed into the
primordial substance. The Yogin attains deliverance; like a dead
man, he has no more relation with life; he is ‘dead in life.’ He is
the ‘Jivan-Mukta,’ the ‘liberated in life.’ He no longer lives in time
and under the domination of time, but in an eternal present, in the
nunc stans by which Boethius defined eternity. . . . ”
The difficulty and the misconceptions arise from the fact that the
state of “trance” or oblivion to the world is considered to be an
unalterable characteristic of samadhi. This, in its turn, naturally
creates the idea that during this condition human consciousness
and human thoughts are completely suppressed and the Self or, in
other words, the Light behind the intellect and mind, now free from
all distractions, contemplates itself. It has been explained that if
ego-consciousness were entirely suppressed the Yogi cannot bring
the least recollection of what is experienced in samadhi when he
returns to his normal condition. Second, what is more explicit, a
perennial samadhi, as in the case of a Jivan-Mukta, can never be
possible. If the elimination of the

112

THE SECRET OF YOGA

human condition and the suppression of the intellect and are an
invariable feature of samadhi, how can a Jivan-Mukta, at all attend
to the needs of the body and survive for any length of time? The
remark of Eliade that “the Yogin attains deliverance; like a dead
man he has no more relations with life: he is ‘dead in life’” is far
from the reality. The highest products of Yoga in India, Abhinava
Gupta, Sankara, Ramanuja, Kabir, Nanak and others, were all men
of action, with exceptional mental gifts and intellectual acumen,
who brought glory to the land by their peerless contribution to the
spiritual thought of mankind. For a correct understanding of Yoga,
therefore, a new orientation is necessary, especially in the West.
Samadhi can occur both with entrancement and oblivion to the
world and also in full wakefulness as a normal feature of a higher
state of consciousness. How this apparently paradoxical situation
comes about will be explained in another work. But even in the
case of the former, as for example in the instance of Ramakrishna,
Chaitanya, and others, as also in some of the Christian mystics one
is never “dead to the world” but actively engaged, more actively,
perhaps, than is the case with normal men, in the moral and
spiritual enlightenment of mankind.

6
Kundalini, the Key to
Cosmic Consciousness
Before attempting to offer an explanation for the indescribable
mystical state let us see how far the usually accepted idea of Grace
can cover the varied manifestations of the phenomenon. In the
utterances of prophets, mystics and saints themselves the factor of
Grace in the achievement is again and again emphasized. The
belief is of great antiquity, almost as old as religious experience
itself, and is repeatedly expressed in the religious literature of the
world. Among the Buddhists the ever-abiding Buddha is
substituted for God. Considering the fact that from the very
beginning the human mind has attributed the existence of all
phenomena, inexplicable to it, to the agency of supernatural entities
or divine beings, it is no wonder that for the still more
incomprehensible mystical experience an added degree of divine
favour has been thought to be a sufficient explanation for it. Until
very recent times intractable diseases were often ascribed to the
maleficent influence of evil stars or spirits, gods or goddesses even
by the civilized populations of Europe and Asia, and exorcism or
propitiation was resorted to, sometimes with adverse effects, to
cure the malady. In India, even after the discovery of vaccination
and with the full knowledge that it provides an effective safeguard
against the disease, many credulous people side by side with the
inoculation, present the customary offering
113

114

THE SECRET OF YOGA

to the goddess Shitalla, the presiding deity of smallpox, to appease
her. Similar practices are common in other lands also, and the
practice of wearing amulets against bad luck and disease still
continues in Europe among a large number of people.
In the light of this tendency of the human mind, ascribing the
vicissitudes of life to the favour or disfavour of God or other divine
beings, which was much more pronounced in the comparatively
darker ages of the past, the factor of divine Grace to account for the
mystical state was the only possible and reasonable explanation to
offer for the extraordinary condition. Thus in the Svetasvatara
Upanishad it is said that Svetasvatara came to realize Brahman
through austerities and the grace of God. Katha-Upanishad goes a
step further when it declares that neither by studying nor by
listening to the scriptures can the Self be realized and that realization can be gained only when the Self desires to manifest itself.
In the Gita the importance of grace is constantly stressed and in the
last chapter Krishna promises liberation to Arjuna if he eschews all
striving and comes to Him alone for refuge. Connected with the
doctrine of Grace is also the stress laid on the imperative need of a
really qualified preceptor or Guru among all the mystical sects of
India, Tantric Buddhists, and Sufis. The homage to be paid to the
teacher who initiates one into the knowledge of Brahman is
emphasized to a high degree in the Tantras. The Guru is compared
to God and even substituted for Him, and it is held that only
through the flash of intuition, passing from the Guru to the
disciple, like the passing of a flame from one lighted candle to
another, can the transcendent state be attained.
Among the religious-minded, even during these days of unprecedented material progress, when satisfactory explanations for
many of the hitherto obscure phenomena of nature have been
furnished by science, an attitude of solicitation and surrender
toward the Almighty Source of all creation at times of extreme
mental stress, grave danger and in serious illness, where the
success of human efforts remains in doubt, is common among both
the scholars and the laity. This healthy instinctive gesture of

KUNDALINI, KEY TO COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

115

the human mind, still enveloped in the mystery of its own existence
and always at the mercy of gigantic natural forces, acts as an
inherent safety device to keep a frustrated sensitive mind from
giving way completely under the strain. To ascribe the mysterious
process of illumination of a seeker when he comes face to face
with the awe-inspiring, indescribable phenomenon within himself,
to the Grace of God or the divine in himself or to the favour of the
Guru, has, therefore, been a natural confirmation to this instinctive
tendency of the human mind. The object of the quest being God or
the Brahman or the Self or some Deity the conclusion was natural
that the encounter could not take place without His or Its
concurrence and favour.
Grace has, therefore, come to hold a very important place
among the seekers after transcendent experience of all shades of
thought, of all religions and creeds, and of all epochs. Until the
whole phenomenon of religious experience is explained to the
satisfaction of the intellect, the idea of Grace will and must continue to hold sway in the present or in a modified form over the
minds of the people. It should, however, be obvious to every keen
observer that the various factors involved in every kind of genuine
mystical experience are so strongly marked and persistent that,
apart from the factor of grace, conformity to some still obscure
biological and psychic laws is indicated as a precondition to the
supreme experience. For instance, we find that purity of conduct, a
high degree of morals, love of God or other Deity, constant thought
of the end in view, and a passionate longing for the experience are
necessary for success in the undertaking. So are self-denial, control
of passions, and a heart aflame with the love of fellow beings.
Grace is in a way a responsive gesture from the Unseen, a sign of
assent from Divinity or a sort of permit from the Almighty Cosmic
Forces to a deserving aspirant to approach the Ineffable, normally
beyond the reach of ordinary mortals. But the very fact that certain
norms of conduct have been prescribed for the guidance of seekers
by every religion and every esoteric creed is a clear indication that
Grace itself is de-

116

THE SECRET OF YOGA

pendent on a number of factors that must attend the efforts of the
seeker.
Conformity to a certain spiritual discipline betokens the need for
preparation and effort, a tuning of the mind and body to the
demands of a higher plane of life. At the present state of our
knowledge what makes Grace an essential ingredient of transcendent experience is the incontrovertible fact that in the first place
the supreme vision is granted only to an infinitely small minority
out of the countless millions who strive for it, some even with a
greater regard for the higher standards of conduct on the path than
those who unexpectedly attain the crown, and, second, because the
highest experience from the remotest past has come naturally to a
few as a heaven-bestowed gift from their very birth. This aspect of
the problem presents an almost irrefutable argument in favour of
the position that Grace is indispensable for salvation, except when
we recollect that in the case of genius, superior mental gifts and
psychic powers as well as the possession of the talent are
determined by birth, and the efforts of but a few in a vast number
of competitors fructify much more rapidly or bear a more abundant
and richer harvest than the others.
If we accept Grace as the sole factor responsible for success in
any spiritual enterprise, we have then to concur with the view of
those who consider success in worldly undertakings as a mark of
divine favour or reward for previous karmas. Birth into an affluent
and well-placed family, providing far greater opportunities for a
life of happiness and prosperity, or a superior physical endowment
at birth, enabling one to shine in athletics and sports and to
outshine other equally hard-working contestants, should also then
be ascribed to the same cause. Marginal escapes in accidents, cure
of patients declared to be past human help, unexpected strokes of
luck, winning in gambles and lotteries and other similar
occurrences which, in absence of a rational explanation, we are
accustomed to ascribe to chance should also then fall into the same
category. When this is conceded then every occur-

KUNDALINI, KEY TO COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

117

rence which we cannot explain will have to be considered as Godordained. In fact this is the usual attitude of mind of the devoutly
religious. That not a leaf can move without command is an idea
common to almost all great religions of the world.
Considered from this aspect, we can say with justice that all that
happens in this universe, from the movement of atoms to the
motions of colossal suns and gigantic sidereal systems, proceeds
from the invisible Power that has brought this mighty creation into
existence. As man is but a helpless spectator of a mighty drama,
covering the whole of space, in which humanity occupies no higher
position than that of a colony of microbes, or a small pebble on the
bed of a vast ocean filled with rocks and boulders from end to end,
always impotent before the mighty cosmic forces that sweep round
him, regardless of his choice, he has only two ways open to explain
the situation, either the whole drama is a monstrous play of lifeless
forces ruled by laws in which his existence is a matter of accident,
or the stupendous performance proceeds from an Almighty
Intelligence, which ordains and rules all its activity. From this
point of view everything that happens in the cosmos, every action
we perform, every breath we draw, every pain we suffer, every joy
we taste, every failure and success we face all come from God.
For such an attitude, there should be no difference in the success
achieved in a worldly project or in a victory gained in the spiritual
realm. Both are equally due to divine favour. But for One who
desires to probe into the nature of things, to satisfy the cravings of
the intellect, the phenomenon of illumination is as much a matter
for investigation as any other phenomenon of nature. In spite of the
fact that the robust constitution of a powerful athlete is determined
to a large extent by his birth, no one can deny the fact that regular
exercise, coupled with a healthy mode of life, develops his arms,
thighs, chest and legs in away that gives a distinctive shape to his
body, a symmetry to his limbs, and an agility to his movements not
found in those who have not undergone the training. He becomes
capable of prodi-

118

THE SECRET OF YOGA

gious feats of strength not possible for ordinary men. We do not
yet understand the whole process as to how the nerves and muscles
coordinate to fashion the muscular body of a strong man, but we
are in no doubt about the fact that proper exercise, nourishing diet,
and a healthy way of life are necessary to bring this about. In the
same way we know that apart from those who are spiritually gifted
from their birth (as for instance in the case of the South Indian
saint, Jnaneshwar, who wrote a commentary on the Gita at the age
of sixteen, ministered to the spiritual needs of countless people,
and left an inspiring collection of poems before passing away at the
age of twenty-one), some sort of mental discipline, some kind of
spiritual exercise, attention to morals, austerity with a passionate
desire for the experience, nobility of action and elevated conduct
have always formed a part of the efforts of those who achieved
success in their spiritual quest. Even in the case of the born mystic
and seer, as if a natural accompaniment to the condition, almost all
these characteristics, it has been found, are usually present from a
very early age in the majority of such people. In the light of these
facts it would be as incorrect to say that success in spiritual
endeavour is purely an act of Grace as it would be to ascribe the
triumph of an athlete merely to his birth, without taking into
account the other factors which contributed to the development
necessary for success.
A study of the lives of medieval saints and mystics, in both the
East and the West, makes it abundantly clear that a certain norm of
conduct and behaviour, certain distinctive mental traits and certain
peculiar modes of thought and action have characterized all of
them, without a single exception; but unfortunately due to the fact
that the biological factors underlying this condition have not been
understood thus far, no attention has been paid to the classification
and study of this outstanding class of men. Had this been done it
would not have been difficult to locate the factors responsible for
the mental condition exhibited by them, and to a lesser degree
possessed by millions and millions

KUNDALINI, KEY TO COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

119

of people with inherent mystical tendencies, living in different
parts of the earth today, irrespective of their religious belief and
faith. It would have been found that, although there is no gainsaying the fact that some still unintelligible factors play a decisive
role in the attainment of the final state of enlightenment, such as
the as yet little understood factors determining the birth of human
beings, there is a basic similarity not only in their temperament and
behaviour but also in the ultimate condition, the vision, and the
ecstasy. This clearly indicates the existence of a new form of
psychic activity in their systems, about which they are in the dark,
like the play of erotic passions at the age of puberty in those
brought up strictly in a cloistered environment which is,
sometimes, the cause of mystification to them.
It is, therefore, obvious that though indispensable until the law
underlying the phenomenon is thoroughly understood, the doctrine
of Grace does not explain all aspects of the problem. If Grace is the
sole arbitrator in man’s search for the Divine how does it happen
that some possess the gift from birth while others gain it only after
years of rigid self-discipline and sacrifice? If we attribute this
difference to the effect of karma it means eliminating Grace, since
in that case karma becomes the decisive factor, and if we attribute
it to the will of God we then impute arbitrariness and partiality to
Him. The explanation offered by some scholars that mystical
experience is a plunge into the subconscious is as correct as it
would be to say that the ecstatic condition is only a realistic state of
daydreaming. It is well known that clever tapping of the
subconscious, attempted by present-day psychologists, does not
often reveal an edifying or elevating spectacle. There is too much
of the crude, the grotesque, and the animal in that. The lower
passions and urges are found parading there in a state of utter
nudity. Even in the case of those who, in the subconscious depths
reached in a state of hypnosis, furnish incontestable proof of
clairvoyance, memory of former births, or precognition, there is no
elevation of personality, no blissful encounter with the Well-spring
of Life, no taste of deathlessness

120

THE SECRET OF YOGA

and no intuitive flashes of eternal truths. It is a probe into the
recesses of mind, no doubt, but of a mind which is the cause of our
bondage and pain, the thin vapoury envelope of our thoughts,
passions, and fancies, the illusive veil of maya that hides the
stupendous, undifferentiated ocean of egoless and deathless
Consciousness, which the seers of the Upanishads called the
Brahman or simply That. It is a historical fact that almost all the
top-rank Yoga adepts in India have been men of outstanding
intellectual attainments and they are all known by the harvest of
their genius, the monumental works they have left behind. Such a
bloom of the higher faculties of mind could never have been
possible by an unnatural way of life combined with practices which
aimed only at the annihilation of thought.
Patanjali himself says that when the suppression of the modifications of the mind-stuff is accomplished, “Then the seer (that is
the Self) abides in himself” (i.3). As for the means to be adopted
for the restriction of these fluctuations, he says (i.12): “This
restriction is by (means of) practice and passionlessness.”
Commenting on it, Vyasa writes: “The so-called river of the mindstuff whose flow is in both directions, flows toward good and flows
toward evil. Now when it is borne onward to isolation (kaivalya),
downward toward discrimination, then it is flowing unto good,
when it is borne onward to the whirlpool of existence, downward
toward nondiscrimination then it is flowing unto evil. In these
cases the stream toward objects is damned by passionlessness and
the stream toward discrimination has its flood-gates opened by
practice in discriminatory knowledge.” For a proper understanding
of the Yoga expounded by Patanjali, and for that matter of any
system of Yoga or religious discipline that makes use of
concentration as a stepping-stone to higher spheres of
consciousness, it is of paramount importance to bear in mind that
the object is not to create a blank or a void by a complete stoppage
of the process of thinking, but to change its direction from the
outer gross world to the inner subtle one. This change of direction
does not imply immersion into reveries and day-

KUNDALINI, KEY TO COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

121

dreaming, but the complete absorption of thought into and its
identification with the well-spring of Consciousness, the Self,
which, shining by Its own light, becomes increasingly conscious of
Itself through practice, until It completely overshadows the world
perceived by the senses. The mind then freed from the domination
of desires and sensory impression remains rapt in the contemplation of the marvellous, extremely fascinating inner world.
How in the light of these facts can it be admitted that samadhi
itself results in the cessation of thought, caused by intense concentration or by a diminished flow of blood to the brain, or by the
stoppage or slowing down of the breath? Had the phenomenon
been confined to the practice of dhyana or Hatha-Yoga only, even
then the solution would provide insurmountable difficulties in the
way of its acceptance by a rational mind. But when we find that the
exercise of intellectual discrimination, selfless action, constant
thought of Divinity, passionate devotion and, above all, merely a
gesture from the Unseen in the form of Grace can bring about the
mystic state, the whole problem assumes a different aspect
altogether. It becomes obvious that all the current explanations
offered for this condition do not, in these circumstances, provide a
satisfactory answer to the riddle. There must be some other factor
underlying and common to all these which exercises a decisive
function in the attainment of the divine objective.
It is a commonly observed fact that the normal human consciousness is able to apply itself only to a limited field of observation at one time, and this law operates in sleep and hypnotic
conditions also. For instance, while reading a paper we can scan
only one word and one line at a given instant and not have all the
words and all the lines of that page before our mind at the same
time. Similarly while trying to imagine the colossal body of the
sun, our largest picture of it can only correspond to the widest
landscape seen, and can never exceed the limits of the mental
horizon present in us; although the sun is millions of times the size
of earth, all we see at one time from horizon to

122

THE SECRET OF YOGA

horizon is but an infinitesimal part of the earth. The experience of
samadhi, as described by Yogis and saints, is a plunge into the
Infinite, a dive into the plumbless depths of an unbounded Conscious Ocean or the vision of an all-pervading Omnipotent Being or
the face-to-face encounter with a personified God, of unlimited
power, in a halo of infinite glory, unlike anything seen on earth.
In all the genuine phenomena of this kind, the effect on the
visionary has been always stunning, and the experience has been
repeated, with variations of course, but always with a powerful
impact on the mind. The question is: How can this occasional
virtual metamorphosis of consciousness be explained in terms of
the solutions suggested? Either the whole subject is delusive and
the vision is only an overpowering hallucination, in which case the
inquiry need not proceed any further, or the phenomenon is the
outcome of an alteration in consciousness, resulting from an
alteration in the functioning of the brain. Arrest of thought can at
the most tend to keep the consciousness unruffled or, in other
words, it can cut off the impressions coming from the senses and
keep the flame of awareness absolutely steady for some time, but it
cannot enlarge the capacity of consciousness to such a degree as to
cause a staggering effect on the individual, wafted to a new plane
of being, to infinity and immortality. Unless there occurs a radical
transformation in the power of cognition of the observer himself,
allowing him to compare his former state with the vision seen, the
mystic state, as described by great Yogis and mystics, is not
possible. The consciousness will continue to have, even in the
condition of stillness of thought, the same limited capacity as is
allowed to it by the brain.
The argument that in the condition of samadhi consciousness is
dissociated from the brain and can, therefore, be realized in all its
majesty and universal character is not valid for the simple reason
that not infrequently both in the mystical state, occurring
spontaneously, and in samadhi, brought about by Yoga, the Deity
is apprehended as a personified Being, as in the case of Vaishnava
saints, Sufis, and Western mystics, which is not possible without

KUNDALINI, KEY TO COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

123

the agency of the brain. Even in the case of nirvi-kalpa samadhi,
which is considered to be the highest state of illumination, the yogi
brings back the memory of the transmundane experience, when he
comes again to his normal state, an impossible achievement unless
the memory is awake all the time, demonstrating conclusively the
continuing activity of the brain. There is no escape from the
position that the rapturous descriptions of the ecstatic vision,
described by those who had the supreme experience, could be
possible only when they could retain a recollection of it in the
normal state, establishing thereby a link between what they
underwent in the trance condition and in their normal
consciousness. This shows that in some way the surface consciousness continues to function in both conditions. If this were not the
case the experience would leave no impression on the mind of the
Yogi, as happens in syncope or deep sleep of which one has no
recollection on awakening.
The view that the ego-consciousness completely ceases to operate at the time of mystical flight is contradicted by the accounts of
the experience left by mystics, Yoga saints, and others, which
clearly indicates that, even in such cases where the body shows all
the outer signs of insensibility, the ecstatic state is still sufficiently
alert to recall a memory of the extraordinary occurrence on
returning to the normal state. “The Soul,” says St. Teresa of
Avila,* “neither sees, hears, nor understands anything while this
state lasts; but this is usually a very short time, and seems to the
soul even shorter than it really is. God visits the soul in a way that
prevents it doubting when it comes to itself that it has been in God
and God in it; and so firmly is it convinced of this truth that,
though years may pass before this state recurs, the soul can never
forget it nor doubt its reality. . . . But you will say, how can the
soul see and comprehend that she is in God and God in her, if
during this union she is not able either to see or understand? I
reply, that she does not see it at the time, but that afterwards she
perceives it clearly: not by a vision, but by a certitude
*The Way of Perfection, Newman Bookshop, Westminster, Maryland, 1948.

124

THE SECRET OF YOGA

which remains in the heart which God alone can give.” Here is an
account of one of his samadhis given by Rama-Krishna
Paramahamsa himself: “One day I found that my mind was soaring
high in samadhi along a luminous path. It soon transcended the
stellar universe and entered the subtler region of ideas. As it
ascended higher and higher, I found on both sides of the way ideal
forms of gods and goddesses. The mind then reached the outer
limits of that region, where a luminous barrier separated the sphere
of relative existence from that of the Absolute. Crossing that
barrier, the mind entered the transcendent realm, where no
corporeal being was visible. Even the gods dared not look into that
sublime realm, and were content to keep their seats far below. But
the next moment I saw seven venerable sages seated there in
samadhi. It occurred to me that these sages must have surpassed
not only men but even the gods in knowledge and holiness, in
renunciation and love. Lost in admiration, I was reflecting on their
greatness, when I saw a portion of that undifferentiated luminous
region condense into the form of a divine child....”
There is no denying the fact that in the case of samadhi brought
about by Hatha-Yoga a deathlike state of the body can ensue as a
result of more or less complete cessation of vital functions, caused
by the almost complete interruption of breathing. The deathlike
trance sometimes occurs naturally, as in the case of born mystics.
But even in these cases the memory is partially active, since if this
were not so, the Hatha-Yoga could not retain the memory of their
visions. It is, therefore, obvious that the brain actively participates
in inducing transcendent conditions of consciousness in a way
which is a mystery at present. In some kinds of Hatha-Yoga
samadhi, the Yogi loses all consciousness and, on returning to the
normal state, has no recollection whatsoever of what he underwent
in the trance. Yogis of this category demonstrate their mastery over
their bodies by allowing themselves to be buried underground for
days and even weeks. The astounding nature of this feat has led
some present-day scholars

KUNDALINI, KEY TO COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

125

to link superconsciousness with a cataleptic condition of the body,
and they expect one with a transhuman state of consciousness to be
able to stop his breathing and suspend his heart action, making the
body inert and cold, that is, corpselike in appearance. This is an
entirely erroneous position which we shall discuss at length
elsewhere. Here it is enough to say that a corpselike condition
supervenes only in some cases of Hatha-Yogis and not in Yogis in
generals and among the former only a few attain to the supreme
state of Transcendent Consciousness.
The fallacy of the notion that the arrest of thought can magically
open the door to the Divine has already been pointed out. No
method employed by man to experience a vision of the Transcendent Reality can ever be successful unless the human consciousness itself is developed to an extent where it can apprehend
supersensory realms. Millions of Sadhus in India practice meditation for as much as twelve hours a day, and sit in the yogic
posture even during the night, supporting their head and arms,
while maintaining their erect position, on a flat piece of wood held
aloft by a rod fastened to its middle, its other end planted firmly on
the ground. They continue the practice for years without ever
attaining samadhi. There is some mysterious element that has
eluded the grasp not only of the adepts of the past but also the
scholars of today, which must be present in all cases of a
successful termination of the Yoga practice. The ancient masters,
fully cognizant of the fact that in this enterprise success crowns the
efforts of hardly one out of thousands of aspirants, attribute the
anomaly to the effect of past karma, an explanation which they
offer for the other inequalities of life also. But even admitting the
operation of the law of karma, we have to accept the possibility
that there must be some lack in the psychosomatic organization of
the bodies of those who fail in this undertaking even after the most
strenuous lifelong efforts to achieve a higher State of
consciousness. Even those who believe implicitly in the law of
karma do not hesitate to ascribe to a mediocre or inferior condition
of the brain or to some defect in the body the failure

126

THE SECRET OF YOGA

of those who never shine intellectually or never acquire a strong
physique, in spite of constant efforts made to achieve distinction in
either. When on the physical plane, with belief in karma, in order
to account for the absence of success in the efforts of the inferior
condition of the brain, or the flaw in the construction of the body,
is fully recognized, why should not failure in a spiritual effort also
be ascribed to its temporal cause, that is to some lack in the mental
and physical constitution of the Sadhaka about which we are in the
dark at present?
In ancient Indian scriptures one of the factors responsible for
success in spiritual endeavours is held to be the predominance of
the sattva element, tending to a harmonized condition of the body
and the mind which clearly points to the dependence of the experience on a certain favourable condition of the organism. Even
among the sattvic aspirants success falls to the share of one out of
hundreds. The ancient masters selected their disciples with the
utmost care, always according preference to the purest and the
most earnest among those who sought guidance from them. But in
spite of this hardly one out of them all achieved the state of
illumination and made not only himself but his Guru also immortal
by his outstanding brilliance. The predominance of the sattva
element, mentioned in the Gita, does not explain the reason for
failures among the Sattvics in whom the percentage of success is
very low. What then are the factors indispensable for genuine
mystical experience? Since none of the solutions offered for
transcendent conditions of consciousness is able to bear close
scrutiny, and at the same time it is impossible to deny the phenomenon in consideration of the overwhelming evidence, it
becomes necessary to place religion and transcendent religious
experience on a solid foundation, beyond the shadow of
uncertainty and doubt that hangs over it today, and to locate the
mysterious factor which is responsible for all their enormously
varied manifestations from prehistoric times to the present day.
Those who fear that a thorough analysis of religion and transcendent truths is not desirable, since scriptural knowledge is

KUNDALINI, KEY TO COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

127

beyond the probe of reason and must always remain above it to
avoid profanation, are inviting the very catastrophe which they
dread. If faith is a mere bubble, liable to burst with only a pinprick,
it would be far better to make the prick sooner and watch the
reaction, rather than that it should continue to exist as a hollow
mass of vapoury thought liable to burst and spread ruin around it at
any time. The custodians of various faiths of mankind are often
loath to allow a free and frank discussion of their tenets and
dogmas because most of them lack the grand experience of the
founder that brought their faith into existence. If they had it even
once, the situation would be quite different and, confident of their
own position, for true mystical experience engenders a faith that no
fault-finding can shake, they would welcome healthy criticism, and
by their very life prove the truth of the basic doctrines of all great
religions, lying barren beneath a crumbling mass of superstition
and a ponderous load of ceremonies, rituals, and practices, the
cobwebs which every prophet, mystic, and seer tried to clear in his
time, only to expose his own message to the same process of
encrustation soon after his departure from the earth, to become
more prolific and tenacious than the one he had swept away.
Those who hold that the founder or founders of their religion,
their mystics and saints, had the supreme vision and performed
their holy tasks of regenerating mankind as a special prerogative of
God, and that they had been sent purposely for the mission
assigned to them, do a great injustice not only to the lofty men
who, acting as messiahs, tried to elevate mankind by their own
example and precept, but also to the Supreme Source of all
Creation by attributing arbitrariness, partiality, and nepotism to a
system of existence bound by law from end to end. The Anthropomorphic conception of a God, dealing out favours left and right,
watching over the actions of his children like a jealous father,
propitiated by acts of remembrance and small offerings and always
on the look out to punish those who offend him or forget to pay
homage in the prescribed way, cannot but cramp man’s

128

THE SECRET OF YOGA

highly developed imagination and constantly rankle his penetrating intellect. We have, therefore, to search for some other explanation than those now offered to account for the inexplicable
phenomena associated with Yoga and mysticism, and for the
appearance from time to time of extraordinary spiritual prodigies,
who tried in diverse ways to popularize noble ideals of love,
brotherhood, and peace on the blood-stained arena of the earth.
There are still some people, though their number is now on the
decrease, who ascribe visionary religious experiences to a
pathological or hysterical condition of the mind. They make no
difference between illuminative states experienced by a contemplative and the delusions of a psychotic. While it must be
admitted that the biological factors which pave the way to spiritual
experience can, in disharmonious states of the body or mind, or
unfavourable heredity, cause pathological affections of various
kinds, it is as fallacious to attribute the phenomenon of spiritual
unfoldment to a morbid state of the mind as it would be to ascribe
the conditions attending pregnancy and childbirth to an unhealthy
state of the body. To stigmatize genuine religious experience as a
kind of mania would mean to ascribe some of the loftiest creations
of the human mind in the sphere of literature, art, philosophy, and
ethics to the erratic efforts of a mad man. If we cannot understand
the phenomenon it is not sensible to resort to solutions that savour
of sterility. A far better course would be to make greater efforts to
solve the riddle and to refrain from explanations until our
knowledge has developed sufficiently to make a fruitful
investigation possible. To ignore a factor that has been responsible
for half the events of history and has proved the greatest incentive
for human progress has been a serious omission on the part of
those competent to make the investigation. Failure to meet the
challenge of a phenomenon so remarkable, so far-reaching and
widespread in its effects, so intriguing and baffling in its nature as
religion has always proved to be, can mean only one of three things
in

KUNDALINI, KEY TO COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

129

the present state of man’s progress. Either there is a sense of defeat
even before the exploration has been started, or an unaccountable
prejudice toward religion and the Divine exists, or the present
evolutionary development of the mind tends more toward the
material and the gross than toward the spiritual and the sublime.
There is a class of scholars who, though themselves intensely
religious and God-fearing, refrain from the inquiry on the plea that
the sacramental and the holy should always remain beyond the
touch of reason, and that the ways of God and the prophets are not
amenable to intellectual investigation. Such an attitude of mind is
not one of submission but of antagonism to the laws of God, for if
He had decreed that reason should not meddle in the affairs of
faith, then religion would have remained confined to the spirit
alone and never encroached upon the province of the flesh. But
since every prophet and every inspired sage tried to regulate the
behaviour of the body so as to make mortal life in harmony with
spiritual laws, this constitutes an invitation, even a command, to
the intellect, which is a part of the body, to aid in making this
harmony not only possible but also fruitful. For a number of
reasons the modern intellect has shown an apathy toward the
investigation of the phenomenon of religion which is completely at
variance with the zeal evinced by it in other directions. The upshot
has been that many infantile beliefs, dogmas, and practices still
continue to obsess the mind of a large proportion of the human
race, which is not only incommensurate with their intellectual
stature, but also positively dangerous for their survival. The fact
that a few intellectuals here and there put forward what appear to
be rational interpretations of the religious idea and belief in
defence of faith, does not serve to change the general atmosphere
of doubt toward the expression of what is one of the fundamental
urges of the human mind.
One other explanation that the Yoga trance or mystical
experience is the outcome of self-hypnosis and suggestion, though

130

THE SECRET OF YOGA

applicable in a number of cases, does not at all help us to understand genuine spiritual illumination. It can explain the ecstasy, the
visions, and the exaltation, but not the permanent, uplifting effect
of the experience on the whole of life. It cannot explain the
certitude gained of immortality, or the magnetic influence exercised, or the, at times, psychic gifts displayed; and, above all, it
cannot explain the dazzling light of genius shed from ancient times
by some of the brightest stars of this constellation. In the literature
of the world is there anything to compare with the sublimity of the
Upanishads, the Bible, the Quran, the dialogues of Buddha, and the
teachings of the Gita? Does any other work contain the same
inimitable arrangement of words, the same depth, persuasive power
and appeal?
If the answer to this is negative does it not mean that besides
their divine mission these religious preceptors also rank among the
greatest geniuses the earth has ever produced for the literary
excellence of their works? The achievement appears all the more
phenomenal when it is remembered that some of these authors
were illiterate, some imperfectly lettered, and only a few of them
having any pretension to scholarship. Besides them there are
hundreds of comparatively lesser known ecstatics who, circumscribed by the environments in which they were born, shed their
brilliance within the periphery of a small locality, but nonetheless,
within their own province and relating to their own language, their
works possess the same excellence as the more widely known
contributions of the world-renowned founders of great religions
and top-rank illumined seers.
We are, therefore, face to face with a mighty problem when we
try to find an explanation for the mental condition of the religious
teachers of the highest order. We have to account for the existence
of not one but four outstanding attributes of front-rank mystic
minds. They are Ecstasy, Moral Elevation, Psychic Powers, and
Genius. This remarkable combination is confined to this class, and
this class alone. Otherwise we find these attributes distributed
singly and in too few cases. The combination of even

KUNDALINI, KEY TO COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

131

two out of them in one individual is extremely rare. The man of
genius may not have moral elevation, ecstatic vision, or psychic
gifts, a medium may not have moral stature, vision, or genius, and
one prone to visionary states may not have the moral armour,
psychic power, or the genius of the true mystic. In judging the
prophet, the mystic, and the real saint we have to take the startling
fact into consideration that he is in possession of all four rare and
lofty attributes, each one of which, even when singly present,
confers distinction on one possessing it. There is no difference
except one of degree between a genuine prophet, mystic,
accomplished Yogi, seer, and sage, and whoever out of them
emerged with all these four gems glittering in his crown.
It is obvious that no explanation offered either now or in the past
provides a satisfactory solution to the riddle. What makes the
phenomenon more inexplicable is the evidence of authentic cases
in which the whole gamut of mystical flight of the soul has been
experienced by some persons who neither underwent any discipline
nor were religious nor even believed in God. For some of them
nature assumed the aspect of divinity, and they experienced all the
emotions—the sense of awe, enlargement of consciousness, the
sense of oneness with creation, overwhelming idea of
deathlessness and unlimited knowledge—which are associated
with mystical experience. It does not matter whether the ecstasy
was repeated frequently or occurred only once or twice, but what is
of utmost importance in judging the phenomenon is the
inescapable fact that, apart from the category of mystics and Yoga
saints, human consciousness shows the capacity of enlargement in
the direction of a supersensory, widely extended state, in some
persons even without any discipline or training, denoting a
potentiality of the human body which the various methods are
designed to develop. This clearly points to the existence of a
psychic or organic activity in man by which this extraordinary
metamorphosis of consciousness is effected.
Commenting on the significance of ecstasy, William James
writes: “Saint Ignatius was a mystic, but his mysticism made him

132

THE SECRET OF YOGA

assuredly one of the most powerfully practical human engines that
ever lived. Saint John of the Cross* writing of the intuitions and
‘touches’ by which God reaches the substance of the soul, tells us
that— ‘They enrich it marvellously. A single one of them may be
sufficient to abolish at a stroke certain imperfections of which the
soul during its whole life had vainly tried to rid itself, and to leave
it adorned with virtues and loaded with supernatural gifts. A single
one of these intoxicating consolations may reward it for all the
labours undergone in its life—even were they numberless. Invested
with an invincible courage, filled with an impassioned desire to
suffer for its God, the soul is then seized with a strange torment—
that of not being allowed to suffer enough.’ ”
Where is this new centre of spiritual energy formed? From
which mysterious source comes the vision, the celestial joy which,
as St. Teresa says, “Penetrates to the very marrow of one’s bones,”
the lucidity that sees to the very foundations of the universe and the
sense of unity that merges one with All? Secular knowledge has no
answer to this question. “To the medical mind,” says William
James, “these ecstasies signify nothing but suggested and imitated
hypnoid states, on an intellectual basis of superstition, and a
corporeal one of degeneration and hysteria. Undoubtedly these
pathological conditions have existed in many and possibly in all
the cases, but that fact tells us nothing about the value for
knowledge of the consciousness which they induce. To pass a
spiritual judgment upon these states, we must not content ourselves
with superficial medical talk, but inquire into their fruits for life.”
But an answer to it is provided in the Tantras, the Upanishads,
Sufi literature, the self-revelations of Christian mystics, and the
esoteric doctrines of almost all religions both ancient and modern.
In fact the whole ponderous superstructure of religion that has been
progressively gathering substance from prehistoric times
*Collected Works, translated by Otilio Rodriguez, Doubleday, New York, 1964.

KUNDALINI, KEY TO COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

133

contains the most effective answer to this question. The impulse to
find the Creator, the search for magical powers to rise beyond the
inexorable laws of the material world, the desire for immortality
and the yearning for an ideal state of existence, which have been an
inherent feature of the human mind, in crude and nebulous forms in
the primitive state, must have a place of origin in the organism of
man which not only produced the initial seed but has continued to
water the growing plant for the past many thousand years in all the
vicissitudes through which mankind has passed.
It is a striking testimony to the anomalous behaviour of the
human mind that an impulse which received the greatest share of
attention from the outstanding intellects during past epochs should,
in this age of reason, be the target of a most irrational prejudice
which refuses to accord even recognition to it, as a basic urge
reaching up from the deepest strata of man’s being. Nothing would,
perhaps, appear more fantastic to a modern intellectual than to hold
that the impulse to reach God or the desire to gain miraculous
powers, immortality, or an ideal state of being does not merely rest
on fancy or wish-fulfillment or any other imaginary cause, but
rather on a solid basis provided for it by nature in mankind. Just as
travel at incredible speeds in interplanetary space represents an
achievement beyond the wildest dreams of the leading thinkers of
the seventeenth or eighteenth centuries, in the same way the
discovery of the marvellous Fount of Spiritual Energy, which is at
the bottom of all these impulses and desires, would place in the
hands of the elite of the coming centuries a veritable mine of new
knowledge and possibilities entirely beyond the imagination of the
thinkers of our time.

7
The Biological Aspect of
Kundalini
In general, when discussing religion and the gospels of the
various faiths, we are apt to confine our attention to the period,
very recent in the annals of man, during which the present wellknown religions of mankind have been in existence, and we often
entirely overlook the epochs prior to that through which man lived
as a rational being, active and alert with crude stone implements to
hunt, arboreal shelters, caves, skin tents or hovels, and with but the
rudiments of savage culture to regulate his family and social
behaviour. He continued to live in this manner, split up into
various ethnic groups, and scattered over different regions of the
earth, at the mercy of the elements, surviving with the greatest
difficulty the awful rigour of the glacial periods that covered a
large part of the earth for long periods of time. Through this period
man was never without a religion, however crude and primitive,
but a religion nevertheless. This religion often took revolting and
fantastic forms and shapes, sometimes demanded horrible
sacrifices and awful austerities, but there was always a religion of
some sort to occupy his mind in all the epochs before the birth of
existing faiths, varying from place to place and age to age.
Computing roughly, the current faiths, and even those of which
some sort of historical record is available, do not extend
134

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

135

to more than five or six thousand years, whereas the primitive
faiths cover a period of more than five or six times this time. It is
true that these faiths were for the most part a jumble of myth,
superstition, magical rites, sorcery, blood sacrifices and weird
rituals in which our cultured minds can see nothing but dark
distortions of the holy and the sacred. Nonetheless these wild and
fantastic outpourings were the uncontrolled and unrefined expression of an inner urge that tried to find some sort of meaning in
human life, and to make a distinction between the physical and the
superphysical parts of man.
Primitive man made a distinction between the visible world and
the unseen, between the corporeal body and the spirit, between the
waking state and dreams, between here and the hereafter, between
the sacred and the profane. He looked at the mysterious forces of
nature with awe and an ever-growing desire to come in contact
with the powers that controlled these forces, or the spirits that
animated them. He ate, drank, frolicked and fought, worked and
slept always under the shadow of mysterious powers that
surrounded him, brought him abundance and dearth, disease and
health, and in other ways ruled his destiny. In one form or another
all the characteristics of the religious impulse, and all the
symptoms of the inexpressible longing for the supernatural and the
supersensible, were present in man in crude and amorphous forms
for many thousands of years before the sages, the saviours, and the
prophets came, one after the other, to refine the crude distorted
beliefs and to humanize the cruel and revolting rites and practices
that had gathered shape in his savage mind through staggering
spans of earlier times.
Crude forms of Yoga must have been in use for thousands of
years, in almost all parts of the earth, before it took shape as a
regular system in India. The problem that now arises is how to
account for an impulse seated so deep in human nature that it has
persisted through many ages, perhaps even from the first glimmer
of reason in man, overpowering his mind to such an extent that it
swayed all his actions and thoughts and kept him

136

THE SECRET OF YOGA

in thrall from birth to the moment of death, and even pursued him
to the hereafter, instilling in him a desire for ceremonial burial and
performance of rituals after his death. It certainly could not be a
passing fancy or a transient reaction, created in his yet
insufficiently developed, ignorant mind, by its first impact with
natural phenomena and the effort to find an explanation for them. It
could also not be the outcome of fear of the elements in a state of
fury, the thunder and lightning, the wind and tide, the rain and
storm, since he was accustomed and reconciled to them from the
very beginning of his career on earth millions of years before. It is
amazing that such lame explanations have been put forward by
eminent scholars to rationalize an impulse that has been one of the
most powerful governing factors of man’s existence from primeval
times.
From the unmistakable evidence before us it is obvious at no
time in his chequered career was man free from the mental fervour
characteristic of the religious urge. On the contrary, with few
exceptions he seems to have been much more in the grip of the
supernatural than the most credulous and the most superstitious of
today. There is no other single factor, apart from the primary urges,
that has maintained such a hold on the mind of primitive man,
diverting his activity into channels that had absolutely no
relationship with the satisfaction of his physical needs. He could
have continued to survive without it, even after the advent of
reason, as he had survived for millions of years before in the
subhuman and animal stages. Viewed from a strictly rational
perspective it can be said that the religious impulse, instead of
aiding the development of reason, enveloped the mind with darkest
clouds of superstition and fear, and continues to do so even now in
the lower strata of underdeveloped societies. But at the same time
there is no denying the fact that, side by side with his reason, this
mysterious impulse of submission to unseen intelligent forces
around him, and a dim sense of the distinction between this world
and the other, between the propitious and unpropitious or the holy
and the

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

137

unholy, spontaneously took shape in his mind. This did not
disappear with the advance of the intellect, as shadows disappear at
the approach of light, but became more rational, keeping the same
hold on the seasoned intellect as it had done thousands of years
before when reason was still in its infancy.
A few words are necessary to weigh the validity of some of the
hypotheses put forward by modern scholars and men of science to
account for the phenomenon of religion. One of these, the doctrine
of the animistic origin of religion, was propounded by E. B.
Taylor, an anthropologist of the nineteenth century, and by Herbert
Spencer, a well-known writer on philosophical subjects. According
to this theory the investiture by the primitive mind of all the objects
and forces of nature with life or animation in the form of soul,
spirit, or other invisible beings provides the basis for the
appearance of the organized religions of later epochs. The idea of
aliveness or animation in nature, it is supposed, originated in the
mind of primitive man from the observation of death scenes, when
the living principle seems to depart from the body; from dreams,
hallucinations, trance conditions, or from what the savage could
only interpret as the animated activity of natural forces. This idea,
it is held, materialized first in ancestor worship and in funeral rites
and ceremonies in the belief that the departed souls or spirits led an
invisible existence of their own.
Apart from the fact that the practice of worshiping the spirits of
the departed has not been universal, the theory of the animistic
origin of religion fails to explain the various amorphous forms of
religious motivation exhibited in the still earlier ideas of primitive
man, as for instance, in totemic practices or in the notions of mana
and taboo. There might have been other variations, too, of which
we have no knowledge. So far as the animistic idea is concerned it
speaks more in favour of the hypothesis that religion is the
expression of a basic impulse of the psyche and from the very
beginning started in the human mind as a distinction between the
body and the spirit, this world and the

138

THE SECRET OF YOGA

other, death and deathlessness, the permissible and unpermissible,
the sacred and profane, as a spontaneous projection of an inner
development that slowly and painfully, but at the same time
inexorably, led evolving mankind to the lofty conceptions that now
permeate the religious literature of the world. From a rational point
of view, therefore, animism ought to be considered as an inevitable
phase in the evolution of the religious impulse, and early mode of
its expression, and not as the wellspring of religion itself.
For the hypothesis of the psychoanalytical school, founded by
Freud, it is enough to say that the Freudian concept is not now fully
accepted by some other psychologists. Another eminent
psychologist, McDougall, believes in the existence of an animating
principle or soul in the human body. The idea of a Father in
heaven, who looks benignly after the created multitudes of
humanity and provides for their needs, might well appear to casual
observation as the projection of a wish for a protective father, but a
deeper study of even such an anthropomorphic concept of God
makes this interpretation untenable for the simple reason that the
very idea of a superearthly Being, having his abode in high heaven,
with divine attributes and able to command all the forces of nature,
not being a fact of experience, must depend for its existence on a
tendency present in the human mind to draw a distinction between
the earthly and the Divine or between this world and the one above
or beyond it, and is evidence of the influence of the deep-rooted
religious feeling in man. Apart from this, if we cast a glance at the
unrefined religious ideas and practices of primitive man we find
that this was more often of a compulsive or exacting, than of a
pleasure yielding or wish-fulfilling nature, a driving pressure
reaching up from the depths of the primitive mind.
For further clarification it is necessary to point out that at
present scholars are practically in the dark as to the nature of
psychic energy, the source of all vital activity in the body, including that of thought and the rapid interplay of nerve im-

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

139

pulses. No one would like to contend the blatantly obvious fact that
thought and consciousness do not fall into the category of material
objects according to the current definitions of matter. Yet
according to Samkhya-Yoga and Saivite schools of philosophy, the
three widely accepted cosmogonic doctrines of Indian thought,
dealing with prakrati, or matter, as an objective reality (in contrast
to Vedanta, which treats it as an illusory appearance), not only
thought but even the intellect and ego are the manifestations of
matter in its ultra-subtle formation.
This classification is based on the introspective study of nervous
impulses and analysis of thought in the highly penetrative supersensual states of consciousness or samadhi. The scientific value of
an exploration carried out in this manner is far greater that that of
the somewhat analogous investigation, carried out by men of
science, on normal men through an analysis of their dreams, on
neurotics and the insane or on hypnotized subjects for the diagnosis
of mental and even physical ailments. The amazing knowledge of
the nervous system and the flow of two kinds of nerve currents,
about which science has no accurate information as yet, has also
been obtained in the same manner. The founders of these
philosophical schools had a very sound basis for their postulates,
for in the superconscious state psychic energy, or prana, whether
or not brought to a state of arrest, becomes clearly perceptible as an
extremely subtle essence in the body, atomic or subatomic in
nature, the connecting link between the material organism and
immaterial life.
The impossibility of interaction between matter and the incorporeal spirit, without an intermediary connecting link, is an old
problem of philosophy. Attempts to meet this difficulty have found
an outlet in the various forms of monism, pantheism, Vedanta, and
the like. Setting aside the philosophical aspect of the subject, all we
wish to emphasize is the fact that the existence of an extremely
attenuated biological substance that acts as fuel to the activity of
thought and the play of the nervous impulses is a sine qua non of
biology itself. The present lack of

140

THE SECRET OF YOGA

knowledge of this vital biological essence, which is as necessary
for the manifestation of life and thought as the fine metal filament
in a glass bulb is necessary for the manifestation of electric light,
invalidates many of the present-day concepts of psychology based
on direct interrelation between the psyche and the physical organism. The moment the existence of this medium is accepted and,
considering the highly sensitive devices that are now coming into
use for the measurement of psychic activity, it should not take long
to locate it. The present tendency to ascribe almost every obscure
phenomenon of the mind, such as neurosis, lunacy, hysteria,
ecstasy, dream and religious experiences exclusively to the
subconscious must cease to obsess the intellect. In that event it
would be saner to infer that the object affected is not the soul, an
immaterial, universal substance, which cannot become diseased by
material contamination. But it is the interconnecting medium or
prana which is the fuel of thought and which when even slightly
disturbed or disorganized creates the disintegrations and distortions
of personality peculiar to affections of the mind
The view of Freud that religions originated in some primitive
situations in which the sons combined to kill their father that they
might possess his wives and concubines, but felt so guilty after the
murder that they refrained from such possession, repented for their
deeds through religious rites. The inaccuracy of this view is
apparent. How could a solitary or even a few incidents of this kind
lead to the establishment of a practice and the development of a
compulsive need throughout the primitive worlds of such an
overwhelming character as to sway the conduct, thought, and
history of mankind to this day. Also how could the thought of
performing posthumous religious rites, as a measure of repentance,
occur to the sons of the murdered father if religion in some form or
at least the idea of survival of the spirit of the departed was not
present in their minds? If the idea was already current at the time it
means that religion had originated before the incident.
Another hypothesis for the origin of religion put forward by

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

141

Wilhelm Schmidt, rests on the assumption that originally there was
worship of one high or supreme God or a few high gods, which
later proliferated into the worship of countless smaller gods, spirits,
ghosts or demons among primitive people. The idea of a High God
can only spring from the natural tendency in the human mind to
seek out the author or cause of every object one confronts. The
primitive mind had to follow this tendency in order to postulate a
Creator or Father for the existence of the world round it, however
crude that conception might have been, and however narrow and
limited the cosmos might have appeared to its still imperfectly
developed conceptual faculty. Thus there can be no dispute about
any hypothesis presented for the existence of an Author or
Progenitor of the world. But when it is accompanied by the idea of
offering worship to this self-created Progenitor, combined with the
concept of His unceasing control over the forces of nature, His
incorporeality, omnipotence and immunity to death, the position
becomes entirely different. It demands a deeper probing into the
human mind, whether primitive or civilized, in order to discover
the cause for all the emotional and intellectual ferment associated
with religion from the very earliest times.
The idea of Durkheim that totemism was the most primitive and
universal form of religion and that as the god of a clan the totemic
principle could be nothing else than the clan itself, personified and
symbolized, means that it was the society that evoked the
experience of the Divine in the mind of primitive man by virtue of
the power it had over him. The society required that, forgetful of
his own interests, he should make himself its servant and submit to
every sort of inconvenience, deprivation and sacrifice without
which social life would be impossible. As the social structure of
the group is expressed in spiritual ways, the individual came to
believe that it was outside or beyond himself. This theory does not
explain how the idea of the totem itself originated. Why should the
primitive mind have imagined that a certain intimate relationship
existed be-

142

THE SECRET OF YOGA

tween himself and some animal or plant, or have regarded it as of
particular significance for tribe and paid reverence to it? The very
fact that an institution of this sort existed in more primitive forms
of human society with the rudiments of worship and solemnity
attached to it provides ample evidence for the existence of a
peculiar impulse in the aboriginal human mind that expressed itself
as an invisible relationship between itself and some animal or
plant, some object or force in nature. The primitive mind invested
it with life and the power to act evilly or benignly toward him, his
whole family or clan demanding a reverential and solemn attitude
or some sacrifice for its propitiation, with a promise of bestowing
strength and power if worshiped with due ceremony. In this way
the very existence of totemism denotes the activity of the religious
impulse in rudimentary form.
Another school of thought traces the origin of religion to magic.
It is, no doubt, a well-observed fact that in one form or another
belief in magic has been widespread among primitive people all
over the earth. This either took the form of spells or charms or rites
performed to influence disembodied spirits, ghosts, demons, and
other invisible forces of nature, for gaining the objectives not
ordinarily possible, such as curing disease, granting favours,
harming an enemy, winning an object of passion, or for other
purposes. As in the case of fetishism, the symbol rested on the
investiture of some natural object, an image, a pebble, a piece of
bone, a feather of a particular bird or any such small thing or article
with the power of warding off evil or granting desires. Another
form of magic is contained in Shamanism, another very widespread
primitive cult in existence even now among the Eskimos of North
America, northern Asia and the primitive peoples of the Pacific and
African regions. The Shamans, in a state of ecstasy or possessed by
a spirit or some psychic power, exhibit curative, clairvoyant, or
magical powers. According to J. G. Frazer, magic is the basic
substance out of which religion has probably developed. Where
magic failed to achieve the aims desired, the primitive mind, he
says, turned to religious practices to attain them.

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

143

Magic is the companion and not the precursor of religion.
Although it does not now form a part of the modes of worship and
the rituals of the major faiths of mankind, it is inherent in their
origins and in the lives or teachings of their founders under the
guise of the “miraculous.” Buddha sternly disallowed the use of
psychic powers, but he admitted their existence, and the possibility
of their development in one who strives for deeper insights. There
is a tradition that he had to demonstrate his own magical powers
when for the first time he returned to his own kingdom after
enlightenment. The miraculous is no more than divinized magic.
The eight siddhis or psychic powers, attributed to Yoga, are merely
developed forms of magical skill. The magical feats of Shamans
are duplicated every day in varied forms by mediums and
sensitives of civilized communities. How many religious-minded
people offer worship to the Deity purely as a mark of reverence
and devotion without any ulterior, temporal or spiritual, objective?
For a large part of mankind are not religious observances and
prayer a propitiatory approach to Divinity for success in worldly
pursuits, freedom from affliction or for the cure of an intractable
disease by special favour or, in other words, by a miraculous
intervention? There has been no time when religion was free of the
magical and the miraculous. Sorcery, witchcraft, necromancy,
crystal-gazing, prophecy, and all the other forms of magic-craft and
divination originate from the same source in which the religious
impulse has its birth.
The unmistakable similarity in the early crude religions, totemic
practices and the mana-taboo concepts of primitive peoples,
separated by insuperable barriers and unconquerable distances,
clearly points to the fact that man’s response to an inner motivation
has been practically the same, marked by divergences due to varied
environments and different mental levels of the tribes. The more
elaborate magical practices, religious ideas, and rituals of the
vanished civilizations of Sumer, Egypt, Chaldea, Babylon, Crete,
and the Indus Valley show another phase in this development. The
teachings of the later prophets, Saviours, and sages, known to
history, demonstrate a further striking advance over

144

THE SECRET OF YOGA

the former. But a close observation clearly shows the existence of
an unmistakable vein of identity running through them. This is a
clear indication of the fact that the development of the idea in man
has proceeded in a visibly uniform manner earliest ages to this day.
From this it follows that those adherents of the existing faiths, who
hold that the last word on the subject is contained in their gospels,
and that man has nothing more to learn about religious truths,
adopt an attitude of resistance to the natural evolutionary growth of
the religious impulse.
There are also other views about religion. Hegel considers
religion to be a permanent and independent activity of the spirit
next in importance to philosophy. According to Kant, religion
consists in regarding all our duties as divine commands. Equating
of morality with religion does not, however, explain the extremely
varied phenomena of the latter. It is true that religion has a close
relationship to morality or to what is permissible or not
permissible, but the two are not identical. Moreover, what we treat
as “divine commands” in the savage cults sometimes assume the
form of horrible human sacrifice, which by no stretch of
imagination can be classed as moral, although the attitude of mind
that led to those sacrifices and other attrocities was undoubtedly
religious. According to the idea of Rudolf Otto, the basis of
religion is a feeling for which he has used the word “numinous”—a
kind of divine respect distinguishable from mere fear or terror. In
its lower form it may be regarded as the feeling excited by the
weird and the uncanny. Included in this numinous feeling is the
sense of mystery which is never absent from true religion.
Whatever the explanation offered, there can be no two opinions
about the fact that this feeling, impulse, or attitude of mind, is not
uniformly distributed among individuals, but radically varies in its
intensity, from total preoccupation with it, utter neglect of the
world, to the seemingly almost complete absence of this feeling.
We see both types of people around us. There are those in whom
religion assumes the form of a ruling passion who do not hesitate
to sacrifice everything to satisfy the over-

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

145

mastering impulse in diverse ways, and those whom the idea of the
supernatural, the religious or the sacramental leaves entirely
unaffected. From the accounts of their lives we are left in no doubt
as to the incontestable position that almost all the great saviours,
prophets, mystics, and seers were men and women with an
overmastering passion for the spiritual and the divine, which often
drove them to such heights of sacrifice and suffering, heroic
actions and courageous deeds, and to such levels of nobility and
benevolence as have few parallels in any other sphere of human
activity. Many of them faced death and martyrdom, torture and
abuse without flinching or even swerving a step from the path they
had chosen for themselves and which, under a direction surpassing
mortal will and choice, they believed was chalked out for them by
an Almighty Divine Power or Being.
For a proper study of the phenomenon of religion the correct
way is not to concentrate only on the gospels, rituals, ceremonies,
and their effectiveness as a means to assuage the spiritual thirst of
the adherents of one particular faith or of all the modern faiths and
creeds, but to focus attention on the mode of expression of the
religious impulse from dim antiquity to the present day. In making
this study, a fruitful method is to carry out an examination of the
mental conditions, behaviour, and utterances of the individuals in
whom the impulse attained its fullest expression.
At present, unfortunately, the world is sharply divided into two
mutually antagonistic strata, one of which, the believers, profess
implicit faith in the beliefs and tenets of their religion and the
other, the nonbelievers, who deny as uncompromisingly the
authenticity and truth of such beliefs. The result is that the whole
issue has become controversial where religion is looked upon more
as a matter of individual choice and opinion or, in plain language,
as a hobby or even a fad, rather than as an indispensable activity of
the mind or an innate urge of the human psyche, The devout are as
responsible for this as the skeptics, for the simple reason that they
surround the founders of their religions or their prophets and sages
with such a background of

146

THE SECRET OF YOGA

miracles and supernatural occurrences, or such an atmosphere of
divinity, that they are elevated to the stature of superhuman beings,
completely removed from the sphere of men of flesh and blood.
This deification of a specially gifted class of mortals, who are as
human as any of us, with the difference that they have an
inordinate passion for the Divine and are prone to mystical states
that permeate their whole life, and in most cases cause them to
renounce all the pleasures of flesh, is causing more damage to
religion and to the colossal possibilities it possesses for the unification and regeneration of mankind than all the other factors of
human experience.
It is easy to see that not one of the explanations offered, either
by men of science or by those of faith, is able to cover all the
innumerable facets of the religious phenomenon. Most of the
attempts made to present a solution, broadly speaking, fall into two
categories. They either display an orchestration of learning which
overawes the less learned into an acceptance of the theory merely
by an exhibition of erudition or attempt an intellectual
investigation on the basis of the data collected, both of them
unsatisfactory methods for approaching the numinous. For a real
understanding of the problems arising from religion it is necessary
that the exponent should have undergone the experience himself. It
is a curious fact that while in the allied branches of knowledge, as
for instance biology, biochemistry and psychology, empirical study
is considered an essential qualification for a writer in these subjects
the equally if not more important and, more widely sought-after
sphere of religion has been left open for the invasion of any
charlatan, dabbler, or impersonator, who wishes to make it a
hunting ground for his amusement or gain.
We have already arrived at the conclusion that, whatever the
explanation offered for the existence of the religious impulse, there
can be no doubt about the fact that in those who attained the higher
peaks of spiritual ascent, and flowered as inspired prophets and
illumined sages, the impulse was invariably strongly marked from
the beginning or developed at some period in life.

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

147

No mere dabbler and no impostor ever rose to the heights of
spiritual glory or ever found a place in the lofty cadre of the
illuminati. The utmost that any exceedingly clever imitator or actor
ever achieved was the unenviable reputation of a thaumaturgist or a
magician. The highest products of spiritual discipline in every part
of the earth enjoy a reputation for sanctity and nobility that has
been seldom reached by any other class of men.
If a study is made of all the top-rank prophets, mystics, sages,
and seers of the earth, whether they were Christians, Muslims,
Hindus, Buddhists, Taoists, or Zoroastrians, it will be found that all
of them, and they number hundreds, were in possession of all
Transcendent attributes in varying proportions. Viewed dispassionately this singular combination of higher mental faculties in
religious geniuses is of profound significance and can point to only
one momentous conclusion which is that the religious impulse,
acting in an inexplicable manner, blossoms ultimately into a
personality which, from our generally accepted standards, is of the
loftiest stature. This means, in other words, that the religious urge,
functioning in a strong, well-marked form, is the harbinger of a
higher state of consciousness, mental efficiency, moral enlightenment, and supernormal psychic gifts.
The following passage, from the Foreword to the Introduction to
Zen Buddhism, written by Jung, helps to illustrate our meaning: “It
could be objected that consciousness in itself has not changed, only
the consciousness of something, just as though one had turned over
the page of a book and now saw a different picture with the same
eyes. I am afraid this is no more than an arbitrary interpretation, for
it does not fit the facts. The fact is that in the texts it is not merely a
different picture or object that is described, but rather an
experience of transformation, often occurring amid the most
violent psychic convulsions. The blotting out of one picture and its
replacement by another is an everyday occurrence which has none
of the attributes of a transformation experience, It is not that
something different is seen, but that one sees differently. It is as
though the spatial act of seeing were

148

THE SECRET OF YOGA

changed by a new dimension. When the Master asks: ‘Do you hear
the murmuring of the brook?’ he obviously means thing quite
different from ordinary ‘hearing.’ Consciousness is something like
perception, and like the latter is subject to conditions and
limitations. You can, for instance, be conscious at various levels,
within a narrower or wider field, more surface or deeper down.
These differences in degree are often differences in kind as well,
since they depend on the development of the personality as a
whole; that is to say, on the nature of the perceiving subject.”
Jung’s own solution of the problem does not explain the reason
for the transformation of consciousness, which he admits. For
every manifestation of the phenomenon of religion he ultimately
turns to the Unconscious, a self-invented magic key which a little
verbal turning and twisting, can be made to fit into any lock. The
transformation of consciousness does not, in the genuine cases,
point to a subconscious content of the mind nor collective
unconscious, from the primeval savage to the modern intellectual,
but to a state of awareness which, transcending limits of time and
space, can exercise the faculties of enhanced knowledge,
clairvoyance, and prophetic vision for which psychology has no
explanation to offer at all. This metamorphosis of consciousness is
not of the nature of a subjective experience only, but coming with
enhanced intellectual efficiency, supernormal psychic gifts, and
moral elevation provides conclusive of the fact that the change has
affected the very roots of being, and shows a difference of the same
kind as is present between a man of mediocre mental ability and an
intellectual prodigy. When we never allow ourselves to remain in
doubt about the fact that there must exist a biological distinction
between the former type of mind and the latter, it is really strange
that we fail to allow the same difference between the common run
human beings and the illuminati.
In the absence of a satisfactory explanation from any modern
source we are driven to look into the ancient volumes relating

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

149

to the subject for a solution of the problem. When we do so we find
that the phenomenon of transformation, transfiguration,
conversion, transmutation, or rebirth is fully recognized by almost
all the religions and occult doctrines of the past. ‘While every faith
and occult creed possesses its own method of physical and mental
training to effectuate this transformation there is no unanimity
among them either about the nature of the transformation effectuated or the factors responsible for it. At the present moment
hardly anyone is prepared to acknowledge that there is a regular
psychosomatic arrangement in the body by which approach to
Divinity and higher planes of consciousness becomes possible. For
the scholar as well as for the common man, religious experience is
a subjective phenomenon, although its effects may give rise to
objective results. In this context the remarks of William James* are
of particular interest: “When, however, a positive intellectual
content is associated with a faith-state, it gets invincibly stamped in
upon belief, and this explains the passionate loyalty of religious
persons everywhere to the minutest details of their so widely
differing creeds. Taking creeds and faith-state together, as forming
‘religions,’ and treating these as purely subjective phenomena,
without regard to the question of their ‘truth’ we are obliged, on
account of their extraordinary influence upon action and endurance, to class them amongst the most important biological
functions of mankind. Their stimulant and anaesthetic effect is so
great that Professor Leuba, in a recent article, goes so far as to say
that so long as men can use their God, they care very little Who he
is, or even whether he is at all. ‘The truth of the matter Can be put,’
says Leuba, ‘in this way: God is not known, he is not understood;
he is used—sometimes as meat-purveyor, sometimes as moral
support, sometimes as friend, sometimes as an object of love. If he
proves himself useful, the religious consciousness asks for no more
than that. Does God really exist? How does he exist? What is he?
Not God, but life, more life, a larger, richer, more satisfying life, is,
in the last analysis, the end of religion.
*Longmans Green, New York, 1903.

150

THE SECRET OF YOGA

The love of life, at any and every level of development, is the
religious impulse. At this purely subjective rating, therefore, religion must be considered vindicated in a certain way from the
attacks of her critics. It would seem that it cannot be a mere
anachronism and survival, but must exert a permanent function,
whether it be with or without intellectual content, and whether it be
true or false.”
It is not God who is used by men but, in actual fact, it is God
who is using mortals for a divine purpose which He alone knows.
Do we know why we lean so heavily on the Supreme Being who is
the cause of our existence? Do we know why we exist at all? If not,
our attitude to the still unfathomed mystery of creation should be
more reverent and more in keeping with our stature as rational
beings. It is the upward pull from Universal Consciousness, or call
it God, exerted through the psychosomatic channel of kundalini,
which is at the bottom of this attitude of reliance on God displayed
by the religious-minded of all denominations. What our minds
habitually reflect must have its source in the invisible Fount from
which all our healthy instincts originate. This is the reason for the
idea often expressed by mystics of all countries that God
reciprocates in a larger measure the love of His devotees and is
always at least as eager to receive the love-sick soul into His arms
as the soul is to reach Him. The very existence of the idea of God
and its close interconnection with the manifold hopes and fears of
the human mind provides in itself a strong testimony in support of
the stand that religion is inseparably connected with the whole
biological and mental structure of man.
The success of surgical operations and medicines in the treatment of diseases depends entirely on the inherent tendency, present
in the living flesh, to fill up and heal the wounds. and to react to
the chemical agents that enter into the stomach or the bloodstream.
If this tendency did not exist it would be dangerous, even fatal, to
perform surgical operations, and medicine would prove of no avail
in the treatment of illness. The same law

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

151

must be operative with varying degrees of effectiveness at the
bottom of all religious and occult practices, which means, in other
words, that unless there exists a possibility in the body to respond
spontaneously to such efforts to create the mental and physiological condition necessary for religious experience no amount of hard
work done to achieve success in the enterprise can ever be
actualized in the smallest degree. The body and mind are so closely
interrelated that a change in one is directly or indirectly reflected in
the other. Therefore, any exercises or practices undertaken for
causing any kind of change in the mind, as for instance inducing
samadhi or attainment of paranormal faculties, cannot but have a
corresponding effect on the body. To deny that the human body is
an indispensable factor in the development of a higher state of
consciousness or for the exhibition of supernormal faculties
amounts to a negation of the objective reality of the phenomena.
Those who believe in religion and the validity of religious
experience must also believe in the capacity of the human body to
exhibit the phenomena either as a characteristic present from birth
or as a hidden potentiality that can be developed with exercise, or
that may spontaneously declare itself at some later period in life—
in all the three cases manifested in a manner for which we have no
rational explanation at present. If for the expression of normal
human consciousness a delicately adjusted intricate biological
apparatus is absolutely necessary, how can this unalterable
condition be dispensed with for the even higher manifestation of
Superconsciousness. We do not think in these terms because we
are accustomed to treating the normal human body and normal
human consciousness as the last achievement of evolution or
created by God, a most erroneous notion stemming from selfconceit. Those who do not believe in religion can dismiss the
whole subject as pure fabrication of superstitious minds, as a
creation of priests or on any other ground. But those who believe
cannot escape the responsibility of finding a rational basis for their
faith. They cannot say that religious experience is a

152

THE SECRET OF YOGA

random or erratic phenomenon, possible only for some people
purely by divine favour or as a peculiarity present in their minds,
without any relation whatsoever to the biological construction of
their bodies, a by-product of the human psyche, active as a matter
of accident, and not as an inherent tendency of every mind.
It is as correct to say that religious striving and occult practices
somehow create a particular condition of the mind in which
mystical experiences become possible without affecting the body,
as it would be to hold that self-mortification helps in causing
visionary states in ascetics as it is pleasing to God. These explanations do not help to solve the riddle but, on the other hand,
make it more complicated and difficult. How can spiritual exercises change the normal behaviour of the mind and make it capable
of exhibiting entirely inexplicable paranormal phenomena, and, at
the same time, why should asceticism be a feature of the religious
impulse, effective to such a degree as to create sometimes an awful
thirst for self-torture and self-denial? It is the height of folly in
such an important issue to explain one enigma in terms of another,
thus creating a vicious circle that can never lead to the heart of the
problem. It is because we are often accustomed to regard the
religion in which we are brought up merely as a legacy of a prophet
or a sage or a line of prophets or sages, rather than as an inherent
thirst of the human mind, dependent for its existence on the
biological makeup of the organism in the same way as other basic
urges exist that we deplorably fail in tracing the origin of all
phenomena connected with religion to their real source, and leap
from one wrong supposition to the other without arriving at the
right solution of the problem.
If we believe in the efficacy of Yoga or other systems of discipline designed to lead to transcendent conditions of consciousness and psychic insights, we will have to accept the existence of a
responsive element in the body which is affected by these exercises in such a way as to lead to the development or emergence of
new faculties and extraordinary mental states in the organism.

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

153

This element can take the form either of a general tendency in
the body, a predisposition present in the cerebro-spinal system or
of a regular mechanism designed by nature to lead the human mind
to higher states of consciousness by its own normal activity or by
stimulation through some kind of mental and physical exercise.
Neither the religious impulse nor the phenomenon of
transcendence to which it leads in rare cases can be purely psychic
in origin, for in that case, apart from the fact that there can be no
uniformity in its manifestation, there would arise no need for
somatic disciplines to develop it. There can be no rational
explanation of religious and supernormal psychic phenomena other
than that there does exist an agency in the mind-body combination
which is at the back of the religious impulses and all the
consequences that flow out from it. There is no other way to
account for the extraordinary happenings of history caused by the
impact of illumined men and women, who time after time changed
the course of the lives and thoughts of millions of men, and even
now continue to exert a tremendous influence in shaping the
history of the modern world.
Yoga or any other system of spiritual discipline can, when
successful, lead to higher states, or, we can even say, to normally
inaccessible levels of consciousness, not by any unnatural methods
causing arrest of thought or respiration, as is sometimes supposed,
but by a hitherto unthought-of transformation of the human brain.
This transformation occurs by means of a mechanism already
present in the body. In the initial stages, or where a permanent
transformation is not possible, there may occur transient interludes
of lucidity or superconsciousness, known as Samadhi, in the case
of Yogis and ecstasy or rapture in the case of mystics. Permanent
transformation results in a Jiwan Mukhta, Cosmic-Conscious Yogi,
or in an illumined sage. In every case the transformation depends
on the awakening of kundalini. Protracted practice of meditation
and pranayama in a determined Sadhaka may lead to the
awakening of the serpent power in a few cases. In other cases
either a comatose condition, resembling

154

THE SECRET OF YOGA

animals in a state of hibernation, with nearly suspended animation and insensibility or self-induced hypnosis, with highly attenuated breathing, numbness of the body and hallucinatory
experiences, may crown the laborious efforts of some of the practitioners out of the thousands who undertake the discipline. The
rest remain barren of any appreciable results. The awakening of the
serpent power by even the most strenuous Hatha-Yoga methods is
a rare occurrence, and rarer still is its ascent to sahasrara and its
permanent abode in this region, when only the transformation of
the brain is accomplished and Cosmic Consciousness attained.
The spinal cord, with the reproductive equipment at one end and
the ventricular cavity in the brain at the other, is the largest
repository of the life force, or prana, in the human body. This life
force is a biochemical substance of a most complex formation,
extremely subtle and volatile, having its roots probably in the
subatomic levels of matter. Belief in the efficacy of Yoga as a
time-honoured method of self-realization ipso facto means belief in
prana, for the whole science of Yoga is built on the possibility of
employing prana as an instrument for effecting a metamorphosis
of the brain and raising it to higher levels of perception. In every
form of Yoga, with a meditative technique or discipline of the
breath, the first object intended to be influenced is prana. The fact
that physiologists have no knowledge of this medium is of no
consequence, for up to very recent times there was no knowledge
of vitamins either. If science has not yet been able to fashion
instruments delicate enough to detect this extremely subtle essence,
it does not mean that it does not exist. Yogis have differed among
themselves about the utility of the various methods employed to
gain transcendent knowledge about the nature of the Ultimate
Reality, but there is no dispute among them about the reality of
prana as the sole agent responsible for success in any enterprise
undertaken to gain higher states of consciousness. From the time of
the Vedas to the present day, a long period of nearly four thousand
years, the existence of prana as a workable instrument of salvation
has been accepted by generation

THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF KUNDALINI

155

after generation of Yogis and occultists of India, and their combined testimony carries a weight that cannot be lightly brushed
aside.
The manner in which the cerebro-spinal system, with the reproductive organs at the lower end, functions as the evolutionary
mechanism is one of the most remarkable instances of the ingenuity and economy of nature. The vast network of nerves
covering the whole body, penetrating to every hair and pore of the
skin, to every cell of the flesh and bones, to every fibre of the
muscles and to the tiniest fragment of every internal and external
organ, in addition to discharging its highly complex normal
function as the communication system of the body, performs also
the supreme task of initiating and carrying into effect the evolutionary impulses that have been instrumental in raising man to his
present intellectual stature, and are even now at work to mould his
brain toward a higher state of cognition or, in other words, to a
transcendent state of consciousness. The method by which this is
effected, like all other devices of nature, is extremely simple when
it is once thoroughly understood. But as long as it is not
understood, like other still hidden secrets of existence, it appears so
baffling and complicated as to be almost beyond comprehension.
The aim of this writing is to draw attention to this amazing but, at
the same time, hitherto entirely unsuspected activity of the nervous
system. What we have recorded is based word for word on
accurately observed personal experience, combined with
unmistakable objective proofs, which shall be mentioned at their
proper place in another volume. This is not all. Our experience is
supported not only by the revelations contained in the vast mass of
ancient literature on kundalini in Tantras, manuals on Hatha-Yoga,
Upanishads, Puranas, Buddhist documents, and other sacred lore of
India, but also by the life stories and utterances of scores of wellknown Yoga saints who flourished at various times during the last
more than one thousand years and are, therefore, recent figures of
history.
Described in terms of modern physiology the activity of the
nervous system, in the evolutionary as well as in the reproductive

156

THE SECRET OF YOGA

sphere, lies in extracting from the mass of tissue surrounding every
nerve fibre an extremely subtle but highly potent essence that may
be well designated as concentrated life force, which, travelling
along the routes described by the innumerable nerve filaments,
ultimately reaches the spinal cord, and the brain, the well-protected
storage plants of this highly complex substance. A fraction of it
spills over into the nerve junctions and plexuses as also into the
nerve clusters lining the various organs. In the case of normal men
and women a fine stream of this vital essence trickles through the
nerves into the reproductive organs, where it vivifies the sex cells
produced by the gonads. It is the existence of this concentrated
nerve essence in the spermatozoon and ovum that bestows fertility
and the power of transmission of hereditary characteristics through
the genes. The essence permeates every atom of the reproductive
cells.
From the upper ending of the spinal cord another fine stream of
this living energy filters into the brain as fuel for the evolutionary
process continuously at work in the organism. Variations in the
size of this stream determine the intellectual and aesthetic
development of an individual. The stream is comparatively large in
the case of men of genius and top-rank intellectuals. The variegated expression of genius depends on the particular region of
the brain which the cranial stream irrigates and develops. In the
accomplished Yogi the nervous system functions in a manner that
almost all the subtle prana, extracted by the nerves, a large part
whereof was formerly expended in procreative activity, now
irradiates the brain, resulting in the transformation of
consciousness. The whole body, including all the vital organs,
participate in this activity of the nervous system in the case of an
adept in whom kundalini makes her permanent abode in the
sahasrara. In the case of those in whom ecstasy is experienced at
intervals with or without entrancement, this extraordinary activity
of the nervous system occurs only for a limited duration at
intervals leading to the emergence of a higher consciousness for
the time being.

8
The Physiology of Yoga
Before proceeding to describe the mode of operation of the
divine Energy, kundalini, and the methods devised from ancient
times to arouse it to activity, it is necessary to enter into a brief discussion about one point. If kundalini is the only natural device in
human beings, implanted by nature to lead to transcendent states of
consciousness, how has it been possible for the followers of other
schools of Yoga and the adherents of other religions to attain the
mystical state without awakening this power, and even without
having the knowledge that such a force exists designed to stimulate
it? Furthermore, if there exists a power centre of this kind at all in
the human frame, how has it escaped the notice of modern
anatomists who have probed into every nook and corner of the
body, and why when special methods are available to activate it, is
the knowledge of the mechanism so rare, even in India, and the
number of successful initiates so extremely small as to be almost
negligible? There is another important point also: since kundalini is
the ultimate source of all the phenomena proceeding from any type
of Yoga or any kind of spiritual discipline, how is it that even
accomplished Yogis, who achieved transcendence by means of
Raja-Yoga, Bakhti-Yoga or Karma-Yoga, or mystics have not been
able to detect and locate

158

THE SECRET OF YOGA

this hidden power centre as Hatha-Yogis and Tantrics have done.
These points are very relevant to the issue and they indirectly
support our hypothesis. We have already arrived at the conclusion
that religion, in order to be an inherent attribute of the human mind,
and not merely an artificial creation of prophets and sages, must
have an independent base in the psychic makeup of man,
necessitating a complementary biological apparatus as well.
The only way by which this psychosomatic contrivance could make
its presence felt is to create an awareness in the surface
consciousness of the purpose it has to accomplish. This awareness
in the initial stages can only take the form of an unaccountable
impulse or desire tending, often erratically, in the direction which it
is designed to take, like the indefinable sexual propensities of
children before they begin to understand the significance of the
urge. We have seen how the impulse started in primitive man with
the ideas of totem, taboo, death and birth ritual, animism,
supernaturalism, and the like, and developed to the point of the
worship of spirits, ghosts, living creatures, or natural objects of
various kinds and thence rose to the adoration of supernatural
entities, celestial beings, gods and goddesses, or one All-pervading
God.
During this process of evolution that took man aeons to
accomplish there must have been born, at one time or another,
peculiarly constituted men and women of the same category, whom
we now consider to be mystics, mediums, and sensitive, possessed
of unaccountable psychic gifts, but in other respects conforming to
the same level of mental development as others. Those of them
who were a little more intelligent and tact than the rest, counting
on the awe and wonder they created, must have occupied
commanding positions as did the prophets of antiquity, and from
that state of authority prescribed, to satisfy the curious crowd,
some methods and ways to attain the same powers as they
themselves possessed. The appearance of these uncommonly gifted
men from the earliest epochs of man’s existence should not be in
the least surprising. On the contrary it can be

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

159

taken to be perfectly in accord with the natural order of things.
Just as there existed variations in the mental level, physical development and the emotional content of the various people, as is
the case even today, there must have also cropped up now and then
some odd individuals possessed of uncanny powers, like the
medicine-man we even now see among the so-called underdeveloped people, still adhering to religious customs and rituals in
vogue thousands of years ago. Their later prototypes still survive in
the form of Shamans, voodooists, witchdoctors, and others among
the existing primitive societies of the earth.
The inexplicable appearance of mediumistic properties in some
persons—telepathy, clairvoyance, divination, and other psychic
gifts—cannot be attributed to mere accident, since the attributes are
so well defined and the phenomenon has occurred so persistently
from earliest time that it would be entirely irrational to ascribe it to
the freakish sport of chance. Eliminating chance, the only other
rational way to account for it is to accept the possibility of such
talent in the psychic endowment of man, about which we are still
in the dark, and which is naturally manifest only in an extremely
small percentage of people even in this age. This logical conclusion
again points to a still obscure activity of the human brain, and the
existence of a special region or a centre of psychic energy that
gives rise to it, in other words, to kundalini. These born psychics,
part and parcel of the human society from the beginning, are in all
probability the instruments designed by nature not only to create
interest in the occult and the supernatural, but also to revive
interest with their amazing performances whenever it threatens to
diminish. It is probably this class of men to which Patanjali refers
in his Yoga-Sutras as possessing siddhis from birth. By acting on
the already present religious impulse in the people of the time, they
must have been responsible for the creation of that burning
enthusiasm and even frenzy that usually marked the religious zeal
of primitive man. In the later epochs this enthusiasm, milder and
more refined, was kindled by the oracle and the seer, the more
evolved proto-

160

THE SECRET OF YOGA

types of the primitive awkward, but still incomprehensible,
psychics, known under the names of medicine-men, witchdoctors
Shamans, and the like. Even in this age of reason they are the
objects of deep interest for countless millions of people in both the
East and the West who are irresistibly drawn to them to assuage
their own thirst for the unseen and the supernatural.
The positions of power commanded by these primitive knowers
of the occult, as well as their own inherent curiosity and interest,
must have acted as a powerful incentive to enterprising individuals,
as they do even now, to learn the secrets of the art in order to reach
the same position as well as to appease their own thirst for
knowledge of supernatural forces with the added motive to harness
them to their own service. This must have led to a search for
methods and practices to induce the same conditions of mind
naturally present in the psychics, and in this search the latter must
have played the role of teachers, not always honest ones, to
maintain their own position and prestige, which ultimately resulted
in the strange practices, orgiastic rituals, hard penances, bloody
sacrifices, and bizarre ways of worship that characterized the
religious observances of primitive man. Their brutal aspect was in
accord with the pattern of his behaviour and the level of his mental
development. It could not be otherwise, since it would have been
entirely unnatural had primitive man been an angel in one respect
and a devil in another.
This accumulated store of rites, practices, and exercises, pruned
and refined from time to time through the ages, altered and
changed by contact with other people and tribes, or revised later by
specially gifted magi, oracles or priests, continued to be in the
possession of mankind in different parts of the world until, with the
further advance of civilization, the practices were again modified
and refined by the prophets, sages, and seers, who began to replace
the magi, the oracle, the Shaman, the medicine-man and the
witchdoctor of primitive peoples. Among the people segregated by
sea, deserts, or other natural barriers, the old methods and practices
continued to survive until recent times.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

161

As all these methods and practices came into existence as a result
of the operation of a naturally active kundalini through the ages,
and as they were improved and revised from time to time by those
in whom the power was naturally awake or was developed in
rudimentary forms, it is in keeping with our concept that even
without any knowledge of kundalini, or any inkling of the practices
of Hatha-Yoga, the adherents of other faiths and the followers of
other schools of Yoga achieved success with these methods in a
limited number of cases. The parent of all systems of religious
discipline and ritual from the very beginning of the religions
impulse has been kundalini alone, and no other agency, human or
divine has evoked this impulse.
As regards the other point it is enough to say that there is no
separate organ in the body that acts as an evolutionary mechanism
for the manifestations associated with kundalini. The function is
performed by the cerebro-spinal system as a whole through the
direct agency of the reproduction mechanism at the base and a still
unidentified, silent centre in the brain, designated by Indian
Savants as Brahma-rendra or the Cavity of Brahma, which
becomes active on the awakening of kundalini, resulting in an
altered activity of the nervous system. This activity can be verified
and measured with proper methods devised for the purpose when
the nature of the alteration is understood. It is sufficient to say that
the location of this extremely sensitive zone, and the extraordinary
sensations to which it gives rise, have been described in precise
terms by some of the great mystics and Yoga saints of India. In
fact, the paramount importance of this region in every kind of
Yoga and every form of meditative technique is universally
recognized among all the schools of religious discipline and
esoteric practice in India, and finds repeated mention not only in
the ancient scriptures and Yoga texts, but in the folklore to such an
extent that the close association of this region with success in any
form of religious effort is almost as well known as other common
concepts of religion.
Like the first whitening of the sky at dawn to herald the ap-

162

THE SECRET OF YOGA

proach of the sun, the first sign of success in any form of religious
striving comes from this region. It is the place of conjunction of
the canal coming from the spinal cord and the ventricles of the
brain. This cavity and those adjoining it are filled with the cerebrospinal fluid, said to be a derivative from the blood and fairly akin
to plasma. The whole vast structure of Kundalini.. Yoga revolves
round this cavity and the spinal canal. For those unacquainted with
human anatomy it is only possible to indicate the approximate
location of the area on the basis of an inner perception of the region
or the sensations experienced there. This, to the best of our
knowledge, has also been the means of observation of the ancient
masters of this Yoga, which accounts for the variation found in the
number of the nadis and the cakras, and also in their location. It is
for this reason that accurate observation and study by experts is
necessary in order to place the subject on the footing of an exact
science. The effects produced by an awakened kundalini are so
multilateral from the very beginning to the final stage that once a
thorough investigation is started a host of possibilities will come
into view, one after the other, by which the biological nature of the
phenomenon, from radical changes in the behaviour of genital
organs to alterations in the activity of the nervous system and the
brain can be indisputably established. There is no method so
adequate to demonstrate the objective reality of religious
phenomena as an investigation carried out on kundalini.
The view expressed by Arthur Avalon in his fine book, The
Serpent Power that the ascent of kundalini is always attended by a
coldness of the body is applicable only to a very limited number of
cases and is not a general characteristic of the awakening. He says:
“Kundalini when aroused is felt as intense heat. As Kundalini
ascends, the lower limbs become as inert and cold as a corpse; so
also does every part of the body when She has passed through and
leaves it. This is due to the fact that She as the Power which
supports the body as an organic whole is leaving Her centre. On
the contrary, the upper part of the head becomes

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

163

‘lustrous,’ by which is not meant any external lustre (Prabha), but
brightness, warmth and animation. When the Yoga is complete the
Yogi sits rigid in the posture selected, and the only trace of warmth
to be found in the whole body is at the crown of the head, where
the Shakti is united with Shiva. Those, therefore, who are sceptical
can easily verify some of the facts should they be fortunate enough
to find a successful Yogi who will let them see him at work. They
may observe his ecstasy and the coldness of the body, which is not
present in the case of what is called the Dhyana-Yogi, or a Yogi
operating by meditating only, and not rousing Kundalini. This cold
is an external and easily perceptible sign.”
A normal awakening does not arouse intense heat. There is only
a pleasant sensation of warmth, beginning from the muladhara and
spreading to the whole of the body, in the first stages of the
Awakening. It is universally accepted by the ancient writers that
“heat” resides in the umblical centre to carry out the function of
digestion. It is, therefore, in accord with this idea to say that
kundalini burns in the navel. There is also nothing unusual in the
expression that the awakening of the serpent power in the umbilical
region is revealed by the sensation of a great fire. In fact the ascent
of kundalini is like the pouring of liquid flame into the various
cakras and finally into the cranium. It may also resemble the
brilliant lustre shed by a prolonged flash of lightning, accompanied
by noises like thunder. But whether compared to a blazing fire, or
flame, or lightning, the idea of intense or burning heat is not
included in the expressions for that would introduce an ominous
feature into the phenomenon. The repeated mention of the moon in
the sahasrara and her cool, refreshing lustre, made in the ancient
works on Kundalini-Yoga, provides ample evidence for our
position.
There is no doubt that moderate heat, causing the body to sweat,
is caused by pranayama, but it is of the same type as is generated
by any violent exercise. The word tapas used from the Vedic times
connotes religious fervour associated with devout

164

THE SECRET OF YOGA

worship, self-discipline, and penance, and not to any so-called
“mystical heat.” Siddhis and divine manifestations proceed from
tapas, as mentioned often in the scriptures. For this reason the only
sense in which tapas can be understood is intense spiritual effort
and austerity and not in the sense of heat, mystical or otherwise. It
is often the tendency to find hidden or cryptic meanings in plain
words and expressions used by the old authors which cause
confusion in the understanding of the phenomena associated with
religion and the occult. The expressions “mystic psychic fire-force”
and “the Secret Psychic-Heat is born” used in the subjoined
passage from the book, Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines by
W. Y. Evans-Wentz, do not refer to any burning heat, as is also
clear from the other passages in the book, but rather to the simple
phenomenon of the Awakening, which is here attributed to the
transmutation of the seminal fluid. This is explained by EvansWentz himself when he says: “Bodhisattvic mind is an honorific
term for the male generative fluid or ‘moon-fluid.’ In the present
context it is symbolical of the transmuted sex-vitality, whereby the
psychic-heat is produced as are all occult psychophysical powers.”
It is in this sense that the aforementioned passage, quoted below, is
to be understood:
“This is the Tibetan letter-symbol for the personal pronoun ‘I’
written, , transliterated as HAM and pronounced as HUM. It is
white in correspondence with the sexual fluid, which its
visualization sets into psychic activity. The brain psychic-centre is
conceived as the place whence sexual functions are directed; and,
therefore, the HAM is to be visualized as in the chakra called the
Sahasrara-Padma, or Thousand-Petalled Lotus. The HAM
symbolizes the masculine aspect of the mystic psychic fire-force;
and, as a result of its union with that of the feminine aspect,
symbolized by the short A, the Secret Psychic-Heat is born.
The Goddess Kundalini is roused from her age-long slumber to
ascend to her Lord in the pericarp of the Thousand-Petalled
Lotus. She first ascends, like a flame, to the Manipura-Chakra,
of which the navel is the hub; and the lower half of the body

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

165

is filled with the mystic fire. Thence she continues her ascent; and
in union with her Lord, the Divine One, the whole body is filled,
even to the tips of the fingers and toes, with the Secret
Psychic-Heat.”
The glowing radiance in the head and the light circulating
through the nerves gives to the Sadhaka the vivid impression of an
inner conflagration, not attended by heat, or of an internal
effulgence which fills his whole mental horizon and seems to
surround him in and out like a vast circle of flame. Gunjari-pada,
quoted by Eliade, also says: “Neither scorching heat nor smoke is
found.” In the light of this fact it is easy to understand why the
ancient savants, in the internal phenomenology, refer to it as the
play of fire and compare it to intensely bright objects or heavenly
orbs. There is, however, no doubt that in all cases of a healthy
Awakening the digestive power is highly augmented. The ancient
authors refer to it as increase in the digestive heat: “(with
proficiency gained in Pranayama) The digestive-fire (Jathar-Agni)
of the Sadhaka is highly increased” “All his limbs become
graceful,” says Shiv-Samhita (3. 34), “and he partakes of
delectable, wholesome foods with great enjoyment. Overflowing
with strength and energy his heart is always brimful of joy. (All)
these qualities necessarily manifest themselves in the body of the
Yogi.” Burning heat is created in the body when the prana energy,
released by kundalini, instead of rising through susumna, its
natural channel, streams partly or wholly through pingala or the
solar nadi on the right side of the spinal cord. It is by arousing the
serpent power through the solar nerve that the extraordinary feats
of staying naked under ice for prolonged periods or drying wet
sheets of linen, wrapped round one’s bare body, in Arctic cold can
become possible.
The phenomenon of kundalini is fraught with so many possibilities that volumes will be required for a detailed treatment of
all of them. For our purpose here it is enough to state that the
awakening can occur through ida or pingala, instead of through
susumna, or partly through one of the former and su-

166

THE SECRET OF YOGA

sumna. Where this occurs spontaneously in a forceful manner
gravest danger threatens the life and sanity of the unfortunate
man or woman. This, so far little understood, morbid awakening
of kundalini is the root cause of several forms of insanity about
which psychiatrists are still groping in the dark. In those in
whom the cerebro-spinal system has attained the required degree
of maturity the powerful psychic energy set free by kundalini invariably makes its abode in the head, raising the consciousness
to transcendent planes. Any attempt made by such practitioners
to divert the divine energy to this or that nerve channel or this or
that cakra is fraught with grave danger. In the case of less
developed Sadhakas, the force can be raised through ida or
pingala for the performance of a few amazing feats at the cost of
the performer’s own spiritual welfare and happiness. As kundalini is the base of all Yoga practices, the extreme need for
caution on the part of those who take to these practices haphazardly, without thoroughly informing themselves about the
subject, cannot be overemphasized.
Coming now to our point: the spinal cord, which plays a
most, important role in the attainment of higher states of
consciousness, is a longish white cylinder, oval in cross-section,
with an inner grey and outer white matter. Unlike it, the
cerebellum and the cerebral hemispheres of the brain have an
internal bulk of white and an outer thin layer of grey matter on
their surfaces. The cord is encased by the vertebrae, which form
a strong bony covering around it. The vertebral column in man
consists of thirty-three vertebrae, which fit into one another
giving flexibility to the backbone. The direction to sit erect
during the course of meditation in Yoga practices is designed to
avoid curvature of the cord and the central duct, in which new
processes occur and new forces are generated as a result of the
pressure exerted on the brain and the nerves by fixity of
attention and pranayama. In human beings the spinal cord does
not extend the whole length of the spinal column, but ends at
about the second lumber vertebra, that is, the second vertebra
below the thoracic region. In animals with tails (cow, horse,
etc.), the spinal cord extends

I

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

167

virtually the whole length of the vertebral column. The spinal canal
in man does not, therefore, extend to the base of the spine but ends
at a point higher up. At the terminus of the spinal cord a cluster of
nerves descends below, resembling a horse’s tail in appearances to
which the name cauda equina has been given.
Thirty-one pairs of spinal nerves arise from the spinal cord, each
pair arising in one spinal segment. These segments are not
distinguishable internally. Each spinal nerve arises from the cord in
two bundles: the dorsal and ventral roots. It is held that the dorsal
roots contain afferent, or sensory, nerve fibres, and the ventral
roots efferent, or motor, fibres. Along either side of the spinal cord
is a chain of ganglia, called the sympathetic chain. These ganglia
are connected to another chain of ganglia in front of the vertebral
column, which gives rise to the sympathetic plexuses, known as
prevertebral ganglia. The third set of sympathetic ganglia situated
in the organs is called terminal ganglia. These three sets of ganglia
are interconnected among themselves and also with the spinal
nerves. Alongside the sympathetic plexuses there is another system
of nerves known as the parasympathetic system. Both the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic nerves constitute the
autonomic nervous system. The most important of the
parasympathetic nerves is the vagus, or wandering, nerve, arising
from the brain, and passing on the left and right of the spinal
column. Most of the visceral organs receive a double innervation,
that is both the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems send
their nerves to them. In general the fibres from each of these two
systems have antagonistic actions on the various organs, which
they innervate.
The sympathetic impulses accelerate the heart action and the
parasympathetic slow it down. The motility and secretion of the
digestive tract are increased by impulses from the parasympathetic
nerves, and reduced by sympathetic ones. The same is true of other
organs. This augmentative and inhibitory or excitatory and
depressive action of the autonomic nervous system has been
indicated by the ancient exponents of Hatha-Yoga by the terms hot
and cold. Thus pingala, or the solar nadi, on the right side

168

THE SECRET OF YOGA

of the spinal cord, which rising from the muladhara cakra after
criss-crossing with the ida at the sites of the various cakra is
said to be hot, and ida, the lunar nadi, on the left side of spinal
canal, which rising from the same place and criss-crossing in the
same manner, is said to be cold. The two nadis are designated as
sun and moon to signify their hot and cold effects. The
descriptions of the ancient masters about anatomical and physiological details need not to be taken too literally for the reason
first, that their knowledge was drawn from subjective experience
and not from actual anatomical study and, second, because it
was the tendency of the times to clothe physiological knowledge
and for that matter knowledge of other natural sciences in
metaphoric language, since empirical methods of observation
were still in an incipient stage. This holds true not only of Yoga
but also sciences like therapeutics, astronomy, and chemistry, as
is obvious from the treatises on these subjects written at that
time.
Our task will become easier if for a moment we divest
ourselves of the illusion that the ancient writers on the subject
were infallible, and deal with Yoga, occult literature, and
mystical experience in the same manner, as the first empiricists
dealt with vast store of amorphous theoretical material, dating
from ancient times. Alchemy, astronomy, geography, medicine,
biology and other natural sciences that came to them as a legacy
from the past were treated in this way. A reluctance to study
empirically religious phenomena can only tend to discredit
religion in the eyes of those with a scientific bent of mind, and
to create doubt and antagonism against a basic reality and a
basic hunger of the human mind. If religious truths are not
demonstrable and must always be accepted on faith it means
perpetuation of existing conflicts between the men of faith and
the men of science, between religion and religion, creed and
creed, and a perpetuation of doubts and uncertainties. But if they
are demonstrable in order to be lasting, that demonstration
should be as possible now as at any time in the future.
Instead of entering into hair-splitting discussions, the wiser

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

169

course at the present stage of our knowledge is to concentrate on
the essentials and to find a way out of the labyrinth by treating only
those facts that possess some probability and are not difficult to fit
into the modern concepts of anatomy and psychology. In order to
conform to this mode of presentation it would be necessary to
avoid many of the time-honoured technical terms and expressions
employed by writers on this form of Yoga, reducing it to the
position of a sectarian cult, and to clothe it in a language more
suited to the rationalistic tendencies of our age and in keeping with
the universal nature of the subject itself. Unless we take the
untenable position that for the expression of higher states of
consciousness the human body and the brain need not come into
the picture at all, and that superconsciousness can be achieved by a
sudden plunge into the Unknown, it becomes necessary to leave no
possibility unexplored in order to find some sort of agreement
between the assertions of the ancient authors, writing under great
handicaps on account of the general ignorance about the human
body, and the modern highly developed knowledge of physiology.
In this enterprise the most difficult task is to establish the first
slender connecting link, after which with present-day methods of
research it would not be difficult to locate the whole chain
responsible for the phenomenon.
Resuming our description of the nadis we can safely identify
susumna with the spinal cord and its central canal, and ida and
Pingala with the sympathetic and parasympathetic chains on the
left and right of it. Pingala, it is said, rises from the right testicle
and ida from the left one. This point needs clarification, since the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic systems innervate the
Visceral organs and are also distributed in other parts of the body.
The preganglion neurons of the sympathetic chain rise from the
thoracic and lumber segments of the spinal cord, and those of the
parasympathetic from the brain and the sacral sections of the cord.
In the light of this fact the scrotum or the testicles cannot be treated
as the place of origin of these two nadis. The actual position is that
the whole area from the perineum to the navel

170

THE SECRET OF YOGA

is thickly supplied with nerves from the central as well as the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. A large
proportion of these nerves line the reproductive organs of both
men and women. These chains of nerves are also joined by
other nerves distributed over the right and left thigh, leg and
foot. In an extended state of consciousness the nerve current
moving through the chain of nerves designated as pingala
distinctly appears to be hot and that moving through the ida
cold. The perception of these two currents by introversion is
one of the first developments that occurs on the awakening of
kundalini.
The first centre, or muladhara cakra, which plays a decisive
part in the awakening, can be safely identified with the nerve
junction between the anus and the root of the male organ. This
is the most sensitive and the most important part in all the
operations conducted by kundalini on awakening. We have
purposely refrained from identifying the nadis and the cakras
with this or that nerve or plexus, and will leave this task to the
efforts of more competent investigators, who possess a
thorough knowledge of the nervous system and the brain. The
information we are recording is based on experience and inner
observation. Thus it is impossible to be precise as to the exact
nerve among the thousands or the exact spot which is involved
in the operation. The specification of the nerves and their
locations referred to here are tentative and should, therefore, be
considered as mere approximations, subject to verification and
study by other observers. This will avoid controversies and
conflicts of the type that have occurred in the past. For the aim
of this work is not to establish a new creed or to denigrate the
existing ones, but to find a common basis and a common
formula for them all. An error would be gratefully rectified, for
it is by gradual expansion of his knowledge and correction of
his mistakes that man has arrived at his present height.
In brief, it is a divine mechanism, which, with the
awakening of the serpent power, springs to action to effect the
liberation of the soul. The exponents of kundalini believe that
the human

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

171

body as a microcosm of the universe can duplicate the process of
creation, maintenance, and dissolution of the Cosmos. They hold
that so long as She lies coiled up above the muladhara cakra,
closing the aperture to Brahman-rendra, the embodied soul remains awake to the world, but when, with proper efforts, She is
aroused and drawn upward to unite with Her spouse, Lord Shiva,
in the sahasrara, the Yogi, now asleep in relation to the sensory
world, awakens to the realization of his own divine nature. Her
upward movement to the Sahasrara is, therefore, called layakarma, or the process of dissolution, and Her descent back to
muladhara is Srsti-karma, or the process of creation. For this
reason Kundalini-Yoga is also called Laya-Yoga. One accomplished in this form of Yoga is thus said to be in possession of the
power to create and destroy the world at will.
The idea that the serpent power is a limitless source of energy
capable of investing the initiate, who has succeeded in arousing it,
with entire command over the forces of nature, has no basis in
reality, and is a product of the exaggerated accounts, contained in
the ancient manuals, about the marvellous attributes of kundalini.
These attributes aptly apply to the cosmic aspect of the creative
energy, or shakti, but when applied to the individual the limitations
that mark off the puny human creature from the almighty Cosmic
Being must be applied to the individual aspect of kundalini as well.
If it were not so, the very notion of “rousing Her from sleep” or
“conducting Her to the Sahasrara” or that “She should be led
upward as a rider guides a mare with the reins”, or that “She, the
young widow, is to be despoiled by force” or that “With practice a
Yogi becomes skilled in manipulating her” and other similar
expressions used by ancient authors would be unthinkable. It is
therefore obvious that the power alluded to is a potent life energy,
normally in a dormant state, but capable of being activated with
proper efforts directed to that end.
Considering the nature of the phenomenon to which it gives rise
this energy can be compared with a powerful organic electric
current of which, on the awakening of kundalini, the body be-

172

THE SECRET OF YOGA

comes the generator. About this marvellous organic force the
world of learning has no knowledge except that provided by
Tantras and books on Hatha-Yoga. One part of this amazing
energy, soaring high above the cloud of sensory knowledge, remains in perennial rapport with the pure, eternally bright sky of
Universal Consciousness, while the other, rooted deep in the
body, is governed by the laws of biology, depending for its
activity on the nourishment provided by flesh and blood.
The fact that ida and pingala are said to arise from the left
and right sides of the scrotum and the susumna from a place
corresponding to the root of the generative organ, or that many
of the practices of Hatha-Yoga, such as the position of the heels
in the siddhasana and padmasana where they press upon the
genital region or the repeated expansion and contraction of the
anus by the manipulation of the anal sphincter muscle,
advocated as a measure to facilitate the awakening, should not
be understood to mean, as is sometimes supposed, that these
practices are merely aimed to cause a stimulation of the sexual
region and that the awakening of kundalini is no more than the
reabsorption of the seminal fluid into the blood or its
sublimation to cause ecstatic conditions of the mind. The actual
fact is that the cerebro-spinal system, with the centre of
consciousness at the top and the reproductive region at the base,
actuates in man the twofold purpose of the evolutionary as well
as the reproductive mechanism. The three nerve channels, ida,
pingala, and susumna, are the arteries of communication
between the two extremities or poles. The confluence of ida,
pingala and susumna at the level of the Ajna Cakra is known as
Triveni. How deeply the concepts connected with kundalini
have entered into the fundamentals of Hinduism is clear from
the high degree of sanctity attached to the confluence of two or
three sacred rivers, where millions bathe on certain auspicious
occasions to wash away their sins or to gain liberation in
symbolic imitation of the purgatorial office performed by Shakti
(kundalini) on awakening. The solar and lunar nadis intersect
with susumna at the various
A
d

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

173

Cakras. Finally at the Ajna Cakra, the place between the eyebrows,
kundalini takes command of the mental functions, opening a new
channel of perception, the sixth sense or the Third Eye, signifying
the ascent to a higher step of the evolutionary ladder on the part of
the successful initiate. From the Ajna Cakra, ida and pingala, as is
said, proceed to the right and left nostrils respectively, and the
susumna enters the sahasrara.
If empiricism has not yet been able to locate the channel of
communication between the two poles of this vital, two-pronged
mechanism in the human body, the force of circumstantial
evidence gathered from objective sources, even without subjective
experience, would compel it to do so in the nearest future. The
sympathetic and parasympathetic gangliated chains, the spinal
cord, the reproductive system, and the brain are the greatest
repositories of prana, or the organic vital essence in the body. This
subtle organic medium is spread in every cell and part of the body,
and functions as the connecting link between the superphysical
cosmic prana and the flesh. The term prana repeatedly mentioned
in the books on Kundalini-Yoga, usually refers to this subtle
organic medium, the bridge between spirit and matter. In the living
body this medium is manipulated by cosmic intelligence residing
in the immaterial universal prana or Pranashakti. The marvellous
functioning of the organic bodies, the cyclical memory of the
genes, and the efficiency of the reproductive mechanisms, which
stagger the intellect, depend on the superhuman intelligence
present in the universal prana, the Source of all life in the cosmos.
Cosmic prana exists as a boundless universe of conscious energy,
as an invisible self-generated all-pervasive current of intelligent
electricity of illimitable power and unlimited speed, which, coming
within the range of internal perception of the Awakened Man,
brings into his consciousness other universes and other subtle
energies that go into the making of this marvellous creation,
whereof only an infinitesimal part is apprehended generally, by
man with all his senses and intelligence.

174

THE SECRET OF YOGA

The evolutionary-cum-reproductive mechanism in man
functions in a manner in which the evolutionary aspect of it is
completely shielded from the sphere of direct perception. While we
are made acutely aware of the existence of the procreative activity
of this mechanism by the constant presence of romantic and
amorous thoughts in the mind and the behaviour of the sexual
organs, we have no awareness of a direct impact on our thoughts
from the evolutionary aspect of it. Indirect evidence, complete
almost to the point of being conclusive, is furnished by the so far
imperfectly understood religious impulse and the unassuageable thirst for knowledge in the human mind, which, because of a
hitherto fundamentally mechanistic conception of evolution, we
have deplorably failed to explore and grasp. Kundalini is the key to
the evolutionary mechanism. It is, therefore, but natural that it
should be connected with and have influence over the spinal cord,
the autonomic nervous system and the brain, for any stimulus to
evolution to be effective must start from the cerebro-spinal
directorate, and in order to be fruitful must have its closest
cooperation and assistance at every step. Why it should be
connected intimately with the reproductive system is abundantly
clear from the very nature of Kundalini-Yoga, and the explanations
furnished by its exponents. With the awakening of kundalini the
successful initiate is in a position to utilize the tremendously potent
prana, or organic life force, present in this region, for the important
task of remodelling the brain and the nervous system to the point of
evolutionary perfection, where man begins to approach the stature
of a superman, adorned with new channels of perception and a
Transcendent Consciousness, able to penetrate to the supersensible,
subtle regions of the universe. This is the reason why KundaliniShakti has been revered by the ancients as a goddess and the
deepest homage and worship offered to her.
The question posed at the beginning of this chapter as to when
methods to manipulate this power centre were practiced in India
and were probably known to other countries also, why

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

175

the knowledge of it is so scarce and the number of successful
initiates so exceedingly small, provides in a way its own answer.
Almost all of those who had this spiritual power centre naturally
active from birth, not being aware of the biological nature of the
force at work in their bodies, usually attributed all manifestations
and developments to divine favour, and where things went wrong
to satanic or demonic influences, since from the very beginning all
the phenomena proceeding from kundalini were attributed to super
natural or divine agencies. In the case of those in whom the
awakening occurred through prolonged effort, the Grace of God or
the favour of the divine Shakti provided the answer to the weird
manifestations and extraordinary occurrences that marked the
course of the new development. That this has been so is fully
corroborated by Tantras and other ancient works relating to
kundalini. In dealing with kundalini we deal with a divine power
centre in man designed to lead him to a knowledge of his own
immortal, superearthly nature by a process of sifting, purification,
and remodelling, which, ordinarily might take hundreds, even
thousands, of years. There must, therefore, be a certain state of
preparedness and maturity, both mental and physical, in all those in
whom the self-launched efforts terminate in success. Even with all
these difficulties the number of those in whom the awakening,
whether present from birth or resulting from practice, was
successful in different parts of the world is surprisingly large. With
the knowledge now available and the rapid rate of progress in
almost all directions, the proportion of success is now likely to be a
hundred times greater, if this divine quest is earnestly taken up by
the luminaries of this age.
It hardly needs to be explained that for any system of Yoga or
any spiritual effort to be successful, it is necessary that there should
be a responsive agency in the body which the exercises can
stimulate or influence in order to attain those states of consciousness in which mystical or any other spiritual experiences
become possible. Without an agency of this kind and without some
objective proof, establishing the existence of a superior

176

THE SECRET OF YOGA

mental state, beyond the normal capacity of the brain, as has
been demonstrated by almost every genuine prophet, mystic, and
saint, the validity of the experience in the case of those whose
minds exhibit no other extraordinary development can be open to
serious doubt. It is obvious that for any marked enhancement of the
efficiency of the mind, beyond the normal limit, and for the
exhibition of a more concentrated form of consciousness a
biological readjustment of the brain would be absolutely neccessary. Therefore every successful product of Yoga, religious effort,
or occult practice must succeed in stimulating the device designed by nature to bring about the transformation, provided
all the other factors combine to elicit a favourable response to such
endeavour. This means that every effort which found access to
supersensory states of consciousness must have, wittingly or
unwittingly, made use of the evolutionary mechanism through its
master key, kundalini.
The reason why so many conflicts and controversies arise between the adherents of different creeds, different systems of Yoga,
or different schools of the occult is that the law underlying the
manifestations has not been correctly understood. Can it be
possible that the transcendent realm is so devoid of law that there is
no uniform procedure to regulate the entry to it? Even such an idea
is unthinkable. The prevailing belief that religious striving or Yoga
in any form is undertaken to procure union with the divine,
resulting in liberation from the bonds of flesh, is at the root of this
misconception. The very concept of liberation connotes the idea of
escape from the clutches of a painful world into the shielding arms
of a merciful Deity waiting to receive the afflicted soul. This in
turn implies that this desire in the heart of man to seek freedom
from the world with its sorrows and burdens in the quest of the one
Reality is inherent in the scheme of creation or, in other words, is
in accordance with the will of the Creator. If this is conceded it
would logically lead to the preposterous conclusion that all this
stupendous universe has been brought into existence to place
embodied souls deliberately

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

177

in such a tormenting environment that, as soon as they possess the
intelligence to understand their plight, they would fervently wish to
be rid of it. Such a conception is entirely incompatible with the
idea of a merciful Creator. The argument that bondage and
emancipation are the fruits of karma and that the soul itself and not
the Creator is responsible for it, does not provide a satisfactory
answer to the problem. Conceding that karmic laws exist, do we
know from which point they started? If not, how can we say where
they will end? For all we know man might have to evolve to the
stature of a god-like being in the millenniums he has still to live on
this earth, and our efforts to interrupt this march of evolution by a
premature withdrawal from the world might not be in accordance
with the cosmic plan about the future destiny of mankind.
Just as every form of study stimulates the centre of intelligence
in the brain, and every form of artistic activity trains the muscles of
the hand, the fingers, or the throat, leading to a better coordination
between the organ and the mind, or as regular exercise tends to
develop a particular group of muscles to which it is directed, so
every form of religious exercise, Yoga, or occult practice tends to
stir up kundalini which, in turn, by using a more potent prana and
the precious substances, present in the reproductive secretions,
starts an amazing process of remodelling designed to form a
supersensory compartment in the brain—the ultimate object of the
evolutionary impulse still active in man. The generally expressed
view that in Raja-Yoga, Bhakti-Yoga, Karma-Yoga, or JnanaYoga, or in other forms of religious striving, kundalini is not
awakened is not correct. It has already been discussed that for any
religious effort to be successful it is necessary that it should press
on some natural mechanism present in the body, failing which no
change in consciousness can ever be Possible. Swami Vivekananda
voiced the same truth when he said, “Whenever there is any
manifestation of what is ordinarily called supernatural power or
wisdom there must have been a little current of kundalini, which
found its way into the susumna.”

178

THE SECRET OF YOGA

Unless there exists a natural arrangement already present in
the brain by which its efficiency can be enhanced in the
direction of supersensory or extrasensory perception no amount
of mental training can lead to states of consciousness radically
different from or superior to the normal pattern which is the
common heritage of almost all mankind.
It cannot stand to reason that kundalini can be awakened only
by violent and forcible methods as are embodied in the various
schools of Hatha-Yoga. On the other hand, we can more realistically classify such methods as unnatural. If the existence of
an evolutionary mechanism in the human body is conceded, it
will also have to be admitted that its activity must be dependent
on the stimuli of a certain type, coming either from the outside
world or from the freely acting mind of the man himself. It will
also have to be accepted that some of these stimuli must be more
and some less effective in evoking a response, as is the case with
every other organ in man, and that this power of responding and
the mode of response must vary with the different individuals, as
is the case with all other reflex systems in the body as well. This
explains why some people are intensely religious, others
moderately, others only slightly, and still others not at all, in the
same way as some persons are very passionate, some
moderately so, some only slightly and some so little that they
seem to have no amorous feelings at all. In dealing with the
evolutionary mechanism, as compared with the sexual process,
we must remember the fact that, unlike the latter which has only
the satisfaction of the procreative or erotic urge in view, the
former expresses itself in the effort to find the solution to the
mystery of existence and one’s own being, the bedrock of
religious inquiry, and the pursuit of knowledge to find the
reasons for the natural phenomena urging one to raise oneself up
to a position of power and well-being, the quest of the intellect.
It is not therefore necessary that all people should be religious
minded. In those engrossed completely in the acquisition of
knowledge, to the exclusion of religion, the evolutionary impulse is also active.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF YOGA

179

In every case of genuine mystical experience and spiritual
illumination, the brain is fed by the superior, highly potent prana,
or life force, poured by kundalini into it through the spinal duct
after extraction from every part of the body. It is obvious that
unless there is superior mental activity or the emergence of a
higher consciousness to cause the phenomena, the whole
experience dwindles down to a hallucination. It is also manifest
that for a regular supernormal activity of the brain, a more potent
type of energy to serve as fuel for it would be necessary. This is
supplied by kundalini. The process of transformation, needed to
arrange a regulated supply of this energy in accordance with the
metabolic resources of the body, is a most complex and delicate
operation, which remains in progress from the time the practice
becomes effective. The aspirants to Yoga who believe that they can
force the gates of heaven open with this or that method do not
realize the stupendous nature of the task that they undertake.
Whatever the method used for gaining transcendent knowledge or
even occult powers and whatever the intensity of the effort the final
arbiter of the award is kundalini. It is for this reason that from time
immemorial the serpent power has been worshiped instinctively in
countless forms and in numerous guises by almost all the people of
the earth. Even those who place no reliance on religion and no faith
in God, considering intellect to be the sole guide and architect of
human fate, also pay homage to kundalini indirectly, for without
the constant seepage of the Elixir of Life into the brain through the
susumna, as an indispensable factor in the process of evolution,
human thought could never have attained the towering heights it
occupies at present.

9
The Harvest: Transcendence,
Genius, and Psychic Powers
It has already been explained that kundalini is the spiritual as
well as the biological base of all the phenomena connected with
religion, the occult, and the supernatural. Whenever during the
whole course of human history some man or woman exhibited
uncanny powers which fell in the province of magic, witchcraft,
augury, sorcery or mediumship and furnished conclusive evidence
that the manifestations were genuine, in every case without
exception, it signified the veiled activity of a slightly awake
kundalini. In the same way, whenever any man or woman laid
claim to prophethood, to direct communion with God or an
Almighty Source of Intelligence and furnished irrefutable proof of
suupernormal faculties, higher moral standards, and mystical
insights, it also, in every case, indicated a fully active kundalini
that found access to sahasrara, the highest centre in the brain. Just
as all variations, perversions, and distortions observed in the sexual
behaviour of individuals can only be attributed to the expression of
the sex instinct, rooted in the reproductive mechanism, in the same
way all the varied manifestations connected with religion and the
supernatural have their origin in the dynamic spiritual power
reservoir of kundalini.
In view of the fact that diverse conceptions about God, the
180

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

181

Soul, and the Beyond exist among people of different faiths, it is
by no means an easy task to present the revolutionary ideas,
embodied in this volume, so that they will coincide with the
infinite mass of divergent and conflicting views held by the
countless adherents of these various faiths. This task has become
particularly difficult because of the fact that the existing literature
on Yoga and kundalini, furnished by the modern popular treatises
on the subject, presents a picture of both which often does not
correspond to reality or the fundamental concept of Yoga as
presented by the ancient adepts. Yoga and kundalini are interchangeable terms, for there is no Yoga and no union of the individual with Cosmic Consciousness unless kundalini is activated.
The whole matter boils down to this: the human brain, as the result
of evolution, has now the capacity to exhibit another kind of
consciousness which can know itself or, in other words become
conscious of consciousness, look beyond Space and Time. What is
more surprising, instead of arriving at a conclusion by reasoning,
as every normal mind does, it can dive into an Ocean of
Knowledge in which all that is knowable is known, and all the
problems awaiting solutions are solved. From this ocean droplets
of fresh knowledge trickle down into normal consciousness,
according to the degree of attunement with the brain, and it is these
droplets of rare knowledge, not possible to recognize by empirical
methods, which have always been honoured as Revelation.
From the accounts of the transcendent state of consciousness,
left by the mystics and seers of both the East and West, it is evident
that the purpose of every form of religious striving, including
Yoga, is to acquire a new state of Being in which one possesses
new faculties higher than reason and thought. From the very
beginning of recorded history every individual who achieved this
state of Being invariably found it extremely difficult, even
impossible, to describe his experience in terms comprehensible to
his contemporaries. Even the most eloquent had to resort to
parable, paradox, and metaphor in order to express the

182

THE SECRET OF YOGA

inexpressible experience. This difficulty still persists. From this it
should not be inferred that we are expressing this difficulty as an
avenue of escape from the responsibility of providing acceptable evidence for the objective nature of the phenomenon. What we
are saying is that just as we cannot describe the taste of salt to
anyone who has never tasted it, so it is impossible through verbal
description to convey even a remote idea of the transcendent state
to those who have never experienced it.
Inexpressibility has always been a persistent feature of mystical
experience. “It is known to him,” says the Kena Upanishad (ii.2),
“to whom it is unknown. It is unknown to those who (think they)
know It well, and Known to those who do not know.” How the
knower of Brahman expresses his own bewilderment at the
experience is described in the verse preceding it: “I do not think I
know (Brahman) well enough: Not that I do not know: I know and
do not know as well. He amongst us who un stands that utterance:
‘Not that I do not know, I know and I do not know as well,’ knows
that (Brahman).” Those who are filled with an insatiable desire to
have a vision of God or to have access to higher planes of
consciousness are only motivated by promptings from the
evolutionary centre in the brain to overstep the bounds of human
consciousness. In the case of mystics and seers in the past, the
transition was sometimes sudden. This was achieved by intense
meditation, meditation, burning desire, and austerity, and the
higher centre began to function abruptly causing, as it were, an
explosion in consciousness, leaving the initiate shaken and
breathless with the vision of a stupendous and entirely unexpected transformation within himself. It is no wonder the
supramental, living Reality that now unfolded in the consciousness of the visionary was regarded as the Supreme Ruler,
Creator, or the Author of the universe.
The most pressing need of our age is to widen the horizons of
consciousness. This widening is necessary to counterbalance the staggering effect on the intellect caused by the presentday enormously increased knowledge of the universe, which

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

183

relegates the earth, the solar system, and even man, to a state of
utter insignificance in a gigantic whole. This sense of irrelevance
and isolation may not be so pronounced in the case of those who
hold dominating positions in any sphere of human activity: in
science, philosophy, art, industry, finance, politics, sports, and the
like, but its effect on the more intelligent and more sensitive among
the masses is often devastating. The explosive situation of the
world today is the direct outcome of the outer and inner imbalance.
The enormous increase in the number of drug addicts, the march of
millions toward an unbridled, chaotic life in the fruitless effort to
gain inner peace, the rush toward Yoga and other occult practices
in order to experience the numinous, the constant scenes of
disorder and destruction, violence, war, revolutions, and riots in an
age when technology has brought formerly undreamed-of
amenities within the grasp of every man, constitute a phenomenon
about which no explanation in terms of current knowledge is
possible. In actual fact, the real reason for this uncontrollable
situation is that with the growing complexity and widening of the
outer world a corresponding enlargement of the inner horizons is
also necessary to save man from being completely crushed under
the ponderous load of his own creation.
The development of mystical insight that grants to the overawed
intellect a glimpse of the nature of the inner Self cannot, therefore,
be considered either a luxury, a hobby, or a fancy with respect to
those who pursue the goal, but as an unavoidable necessity for the
survival of a sane and sober humanity. It is incredible that the
evolutionary purpose served by the mystical impulse has not been
recognized even by learned explanations, comparable to those
which primitive minds offered for the mysterious phenomena of
nature. The transporting effect of light and colour, of gems, of
beautiful coloured glass, of superb painting, sculpture, and music
becomes suspect since it is considered to be an aid to hallucinatory
experience, to an excursion into “the mind’s antipodes”. On the
contrary these objects serve

184

THE SECRET OF YOGA

to remind the ego-consciousness of the marvellous transformation
that is occurring in its depths, of the gradually developing wondrous state of Being which, when one looks inward, will appear
lustrous as “an isle of gems,” glowing as a “mountain of burnished
gold,” vast as the ocean, more alluring to the sense of sight, touch,
hearing, taste, and smell than all the most enchanting works of art,
music, and all the most delicious aromas, viands, and bodily
sensations put together. On the wings of destiny every member of
the human race is soaring inwardly toward a state of splendour,
harmony, and peace that has no parallel in the universe we observe.
The transporting effect of meditation on divine objects, of prayer,
of magnificent places of worship, the solemn atmosphere in
shrines, the touching life stories of prophets and saints, the
profound utterances of sages and seers lie in their appeal to the
evolutionary instinct which is drawing man toward a higher
dimension of consciousness, toward a glorious inner universe in
which all his uncorrupted ambitions, aspirations, and ideals will
find fulfillment.
Can there be any doubt that these instances portray a condition
of inner transformation. The ego-consciousness now in contact
with the Universe of Life, with the Ocean of which it is but a
droplet, feels one with It and yet overawed by the Majesty treats it
as Something beyond and above it. Even in the normal state, the
ultimate nature of the world we apprehend is something mysterious. It is a picture presented to us by our senses and the intellect.
Every species of fish, reptile, bird, and animal perceives a
different, though not a radically different, world. The mysterious
senses of ants, bees, bats, dogs, migratory birds, and the like are incomprehensible to us because the world is presented to each in a
different way so that certain things that are entirely beyond the
realm of our cognition are a normal feature of their perception. We
see and we know what we are permitted to see and know by our
mind, which is conditioned by the capacity of the brain. Problems
of life and death or the origin and the purpose of the universe do
not torment the animal. Even in the human sphere

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

185

these problems have different values and different degrees of
urgency for different people. What modern psychology fails to
recognize is the fact that different people are at different levels of
the evolutionary ascent, and that the human brain is still in a state
of transition. So long as this cardinal fact is not accorded due
recognition, no systematic study of mind is possible.
Problems of life and death, the here and the hereafter assume a
greater urgency for those who are spiritually oriented. For some
they become the most dominating influence in shaping the course
of life. Those endowed with this type of thirst not infrequently
change from one school of discipline to another and read avidly
one book after another to discover a way to assuage this thirst
without meeting any success. There is a strong reason for the
disappointments often encountered by people of this class in their
search. The thirst is the pointer to a certain target and the pole star
guiding the mind toward a certain altered condition of
consciousness in which the problem, never arising in the animal
mind but tormentingly pursuing man at every step, finding a
complete answer, then ceases to oppress. The problem arises in the
human mind because the intellect is constituted in this way, and as
long as it does not come across a mode of apprehension superior to
its own it can never feel satisfied and never come to rest. With the
enhancement of the intellect, unless there is degeneration, the
problem becomes more pressing. This is actually what has
happened in our time. Unless the knower in man overreaches the
senses and the intellect and asserts its own importance and position
of power in relation to the stupendous, mighty world the human
mind can know no peace. This is the reason why those thirsty for
knowledge of the Self are acutely conscious of disappointments
and failures, for until the transition is complete and the intellect
pacified with the vision, the mind continues to fret.
All that we are and all that we know are circumscribed by the
capacity of the knower in us. The world appears gigantic and
monstrous because we identify ourselves completely with the body
and measure the vastness of the universe by its size. Viewed

186

THE SECRET OF YOGA

apart from the body, unconditioned by the mind and intellect, the
knower transcends the known, for the latter can never exceed the
power of comprehension of the former and must always remain
subservient to its capacity. The moment transcendence occurs, the
objective universe loses its importance as well as its magnitude.
This is what Jacob Boehme tries to express, coloured of course
with ingrained theistic ideas, when he says: “In one quarter of an
hour I saw and knew more than if I had been many years together
at a University. For I saw and knew the being of all things, The
Byss and the Abyss and the eternal generation the holy Trinity, the
descent and origin of the world and of a creatures through the
divine wisdom. I knew and saw in myself all the three worlds, the
external and visible world of a pro-creation or external birth from
both the internal and spiritual worlds; and I saw and knew the
whole working essence, in evil and in good, and the origin of
existence; and likewise how the fruitful bearing womb of eternity
was brought forth. So that I did not only greatly wonder at it, but
did also exceedingly rejoice, albeit I could very hardly apprehend
the same in my external man and set it down with the pen. For I
had a thorough view of the universe as in a chaos, wherein all
things are couched and wrapt up, but it was impossible for me to
explicate the same.” *
The same idea of transcendence is expressed in the Rig-Veda
(x.90.1-3) in these words: “. . . He is the all-pervading Being
manifesting himself as all things. He has innumerable heads, eyes
and feet. It is He that has encompassed the whole universe and it is
He again who transcends it. . . . “That Being is this whole cosmos,
all that was and all that will be. He manifests Himself in the form
of the universe. He is also the lord and giver of immortality. . . . So
vast is His glory; but He, the universal Being, is greater than all
that. The manifested world forms but a small portion of His being;
in main He is unmanifest and
*The Three Principle of the Divine Essence, Jacob Boehme, K. W. Schiebler, Leipzig, 1922.

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

187

immortal.” Taittiriya Aranyaka (x.II) presents the same view thus:
“He transcends the whole world, and also manifests Himself as the
whole world. He is the eternal Being, the support of all, the
remover of evil. The existence of the whole world depends on
Him. He is the master of the world, the supreme Self, the eternal,
the permanent good, the changeless, the Cosmic Being, the great
goal of knowledge, the Self of the universe and the supreme
refuge. . . . ” The transformed consciousness, cognizant now of its
infinite nature, immeasurably superior to the universe known by
the senses, which continues to abide in its finite form, transcends
and overshadows it, calming the unrest of the intellect convinced
now beyond the least shadow of a doubt that the All-Pervading
Knower and not the conditioned Known is the substratum of the
universe.
Through divine dispensation, for some purpose which only the
future can disclose, this frail, human creature, with a limited span
of life, which some birds, fishes, and other lowly creatures exceed,
with a body so delicate that even one blow at a vulnerable spot is
sufficient to cause death, and a mind and memory so restricted that
it cannot grasp more than an infinitesimal fraction of the cosmos,
by the favour of Destiny with but a slight alteration in the vital
energy feeding the brain, overcoming the limitations imposed by
the senses, can soar to a state of Existence where the ruthless,
colossal world becomes a fleeting shadow and he the Effulgent
Sun. Death and fear then lose their hold, for what can harm the
Ocean of Everlasting Life beyond the farthest reach of any profane
material influence? It is in this sense of achieving a State of
Consciousness, characterized by immortality and infinitude that it
is said in the ancient works on Kundalini Yoga that the
accomplished Sadhaka can create, preserve, and destroy the world
at will. The underlying idea is that in the transcendent state which
he attains with full lucidity, the world image which first dominated
his unreal, sense-bound consciousness, recedes into insignificance.
Transcendence is as far removed from the hallucinatory states

188

THE SECRET OF YOGA

of mind brought about by drugs, autohypnosis, autointoxication,
and changes in body chemistry as the consciousness of absolute
power and incomparable dignity in an anointed king, ruling over a
vast empire, is removed from the delusive state of a psychotic who,
disorderly and unkempt, raves at the top of his voice about his
kingdom and his court. The general ignorance prevailing among
the people, including even scholars, about the real nature of the
beatific state is at the root of the present confusion, resulting in the
waste of precious lives of those who fall prey to the delusion that
drugs and other artificial methods can lead to the exalted state in
which man for the first time steps over the rigid boundaries of
mortal consciousness. It is not merely a change in the brilliance of
colours of the objects seen, nor alteration or distortion in their
shape, nor the revelation of a new significance in them, nor the
transitory awareness of a new insight that is decisive in
determining the genuineness of a mystical experience, but the
change that occurs in the Fount of personality or, in other words, in
the Knower, which is the distinguishing feature of the
phenomenon. The Knower undergoes a complete metamorphosis;
from a drop he becomes an ocean and from a point of awareness an
infinite circle of sovereign consciousness.
Shankaracarya in Vivekacudamani (389 and 394) expresses the
state of transcendence in these words: “The Self is within, and the
Self is without, the Self is before and the Self is behind, the Self is
in the south, and the Self is in the north; the Self likewise is above
as below. . . . What is the use of dilating on this subject? The Jiva
(embodied consciousness) is no other than Brahman (Universal
Consciousness), this whole extended universe is Brahman Itself,
the Shruti inculcates the Brahman without a Second, and it is an
indubitable fact that people of enlightened minds who know their
identity with Brahman and have given up their connection with the
objective world, live palpably united with Brahman as Eternal
Knowledge and Bliss.” The Knower, surpassing now both the
material universe and the world of thoughts or, in other words,
merging in itself the process of knowing and

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

189

the known, assumes an aspect which no language can express and
no intelligence grasp. “You cannot see the seer of sight,” says the
Brhadaranyaka Upanishad (3.4.2.). “You cannot hear the hearer of
hearing, you cannot think the thinker of thought, you cannot know
the knower of knowledge. This is your self that is within all.
Everything besides this is perishable.” The same idea of the
incomprehensibility of the eternal, unconditioned Knower is again
expressed in the same Upanishad (3.8.1) in these words: “He is
never seen but is the Seer; He is never heard, but is the Hearer; He
is never thought, but is the Thinker; He is never known, but is the
Knower. There is no other seer than He, there is no other hearer
than He, there is no other thinker than He, there is no other knower
than He. He is the Inner Controller—your own self and immortal.
All else but Him is perishable.”
A radical transformation in the foundations of a man’s personality, as comes to pass in the case of an accomplished Yogi, is
actually a transformation in the nature of the Knower who is now
in a position to perceive both the inner and the outer worlds. Such
an alteration cannot occur without changing the whole mental
structure of a man. This is exactly what this volume is intended to
pinpoint and to prove. The fact that people in general are not
properly educated about the real nature of the metamorphosis
brought about by Yoga is at the root of the present-day flood of
faulty literature on the subject from the pens of authors lacking
completely in experience of the mystical state. This has done and is
doing grave harm by disseminating wrong and sometimes even
dangerous information about an undertaking requiring expert
guidance and extreme care at every step. The other evil that has
resulted from this ignorance is that false prophets and sham Gurus
have sprung up and dominate the stage everywhere, especially in
the West, reducing this venerable system of spiritual discipline to a
farce, and in this way doing great disservice to a cause which in the
present critical situation of the world is of paramount importance.
The ancient authors, especially those writing on Kundalini

190

THE SECRET OF YOGA

Yoga, have made no secret of the divine attributes (vibhutis) and
miraculous powers (siddhis) that automatically develop in one who
attains perfection in Yoga. Patanjali, in his Yoga-Sutras, has
devoted one full chapter of his book to the discussion of supernatural powers (siddhis). There is another aspect, even more
important and fascinating, on which it is necessary to dwell here. If
purely from the aspect of commonsense we soberly consider the
idea of a metamorphosis of consciousness, involving a change
from a human to a transhuman level, would it not be but rational to
suppose that such a radical change in order to be genuine, and not
merely an illusion, must be attended by other attributes of mind
and intellect that are not found as a normal feature in human
beings? It would be inaccurate to maintain that one who comes in
contact with a Source of Infinite Intelligence in his ecstasies and
visions would continue to have the same mental calibre afterward
as he had before such an experience. His mental capacity and
intellectual stature must show an enormous improvement and
surpass in some respects, at least, the highest intellects of the time.
It was primarily on account of the fact that in their power of
expression and intellectual endowments the prophets and seers of
the past towered head and shoulders over their contemporaries that
they were able to win the respect and admiration of multitudes who
accepted their teachings.
While the ancient masters have paid due attention to this aspect
of Yoga and, in their writings, plainly brought out the fact that
success in the enterprise is attended by remarkable increase in
intellectual powers and by the development of literary talents and
gifts, the modern authors have maintained an unaccountable silence
over this important issue. Most of them have lavishly dwelt on the
higher states of consciousness and miraculous powers but one
notable achievement (the development of genius) has been, for
some reason, completely ignored. One reason for this can be that
they did not attach any importance to the repeated assertions made
in the ancient works, treating them as mere euphemisms, and the
other that the idea was so far from

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

191

their minds that they failed to grasp the significance of these
assertions though, in the course of their study, they must have
come across them repeatedly. The omission appears incredible
considering the emphasis that the ancient authors have laid on this
development. To the question of the present-day scholar, the
development of enhanced intellectual powers and genius in one not
endowed with them from birth is impossible because of the
hereditary factors involved, depending on the nature of the genes.
It is sufficient to say at this place that it is precisely in this aspect
of Yoga that the possibility of objective demonstration lies in its
most striking form.
It is evident (see also Appendix, pp. 204 to 207) that from Vedic
times, persisting through the Upanishads, and coming down almost
to our own day, there has always existed a strong belief that with
the arousal of a normally dormant divine energy in him, a man of
common clay can be transformed into an intellectual prodigy; an
invincible giant in polemics, a most eloquent speaker and a poet
whose “random talk even will take the form of poetry.” Making
every allowance for exaggeration, even if a fraction of the
affirmations of ancient authors are accepted as correct, it discloses
a tremendous possibility hidden in Yoga about which not only the
masses but even the learned are entirely in the dark at present.
There is every likelihood, considering the vein of extreme devotion
and utter surrender to the divine shakti (kundalini) permeating the
ancient treatises on the subject, particularly those in verse, that
many of the authors themselves were the recipients of the favour
and had witnessed the marvellous transformation in themselves.
There is hardly any well-known Yoga saint in India who has not
left a precious legacy of a priceless spiritual document in beautiful
verse. To the seeker who practices Yoga to gain visionary
experience or to develop psychic talents, this aspect of the
discipline might not seem to be of any particular worth, but,
considered from a pragmatic point of view, there is no side as
useful for the enlighten-

192

THE SECRET OF YOGA

ment of the seekers and as precious for a scientific exploration of
the possibilities, latent in it, as this.
If mystical experience of the genuine kind, whether brought
about by Yoga or any other form of religious discipline, represents
a real unfolding of the spirit, or a vision of God, it must be attended
by a blossoming of the mental fabric of the individual as well. If
the blossoming does not occur and the mystic merely revels in his
own enrapturing visions without possessing the ability to
communicate his experiences in order to share them with the
world, the whole achievement is reduced to the level of a fantasy or
a daydream which, however pleasant it may be for the daydreamer,
has no meaning or importance for others. Spiritual ideals and
institutional religions possess a meaning and a value for mankind
because the gifted individuals who popularized or founded them
possessed in ample measure the talent to express their ideas and
experiences in a manner that touched the heart and appealed to the
intellect of their contemporaries. The idea common to the devout
that their religion is revealed and God-ordained has a profound
bearing on our present theme. That the scriptures have emanated
from God, the Fountainhead of all knowledge and wisdom,
conveys indirectly the highest tribute to the intellectual calibre of
those who served as channels for the dissemination of the Revealed
Teachings. From whatever aspect we examine it, the conclusion is
irresistible that intellectual efflorescence is and should be an
inseparable companion to spiritual enrichment.
The close connection between these two highest expressions of
the human mind has, in its turn, a profound significance in relation
to the present explosive situation of the world. Intellectual
advancement must accompany spiritual growth. If the former
occurs without a corresponding spiritual development it is a sign
that the growth is one-sided and, therefore, abnormal, an indication
that something is radically wrong with the society and a warning
that danger lies ahead if the harmony is not restored. As spiritual
perfection connotes the manifestation of a higher

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

193

human personality that has crossed beyond the limit, where common mortals come to a halt, it necessarily implies an all-round
development in the mental capacity of the perfected person. It
would be an anomaly if those who attain a lofty stature spiritually
continue to be pygmies in intellect. The ancient authors, therefore,
give expression to a very plain truth when they associate
enhancement in intellectual acumen with spiritual perfection.
While for the ancient this synchronous development of the two did
not involve any factor antagonistic to the accepted ideas of the age,
the present position is not as favourable for the modern intellectual.
The transition from a state of mediocrity to a position of
intellectual eminence in the light of the beliefs current in this age is
for the average person an impossibility, and the concept that Yoga,
or any other form of spiritual discipline, provides a sure way to its
achievement is likely to be regarded with disbelief and even
ridicule.
It is precisely because the idea is so unacceptable to the modern
scholar, steeped in the materialistic trends of the time, that this
aspect of Yoga has a profound significance for our age. That it is
possible for one to blossom into a Samkara, a Michelangelo, a
Hafiz, a Newton, Vyasa, a Plato, or an Einstein, with a certain kind
of psycho-physiological discipline, is an idea so novel and so full
of undreamed-of possibilities in this age of science that it
outweighs all other present-day concepts by its importance and the
promises it holds. Even if this possibility is admitted, there is little
chance for any vast improvement of the world, since the
phenomenon is so rare and the chances of a successful termination
of the practice are so remote that the radical transformation
wrought in the whole of mankind by a few scores of men of genius
in this period of history is a sufficient guarantee that even a few
transformed adepts in this or in any future age cannot but prove a
most valuable asset to mankind. This is not all. There is every
chance that once the possibility is empirically demonstrated and
the law is established, the modern high degree of advance in the
knowledge of psychology, therapy and physiology

194

THE SECRET OF YOGA

would prove of inestimable value in improving the efficiency of
the disciplines and minimizing the risks. The day is not distant,
once the biological intricacies connected with the awakening of
kundalini are known, when this divine enterprise will provide the
most contested and most sought-after trophy for the luminaries of
the time.
We live in an age of surprises. At the same time, we experience
the horror of man-caused calamities. But no surprise has been so
great as will take place when this law is empirically demonstrated,
and no calamity has been so devastating as might befall if, in the
present stage of technological development, the law is still ignored.
The development of the human brain and the intellect is an
unavoidable consequence of evolution, but without spiritual
discipline and enlightenment the results can not only be unwholesome but also fatally poisonous. The scope of this volume does not
permit us to dwell on the kali aspect of kundalini, the punitive
phase when for the purpose of destruction, She, in a malignant
form, is awake from birth in a demagogue or a dictator. The effort
has been made here to bring into focus the vital issues involved in
a study of kundalini and the imperative need for controlled genius
in the present age. “With its roots above and branches below they
speak of the eternal Asvattha tree,” says the Bhagavad-Gita (xv.1).
“Whose leaves are the Vedas; he who knows this is a knower of
the Vedas.” The Asvattha tree is the evolving phenomenal world.
The impulse toward evolution comes from the root, that is, from
the unmanifested Eternal Intelligence acting through cosmic prana,
but for its correct translation and the proper adjustment of life, both
individual and collective, to the needs of this impulse, knowledge
of the Vedas, that is, both temporal and divine knowledge, is
necessary. In other words, it is essential in order to ensure smooth
progress and safety on the hazardous path of evolution that man
should not only be possessed of temporal knowledge but should
also know the laws that rule his spiritual growth. This is why
gayatri mantra (the knowledge of kundalini) is said to be the
quintessence of the Vedas.

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

195

How poor the current picture is of the lofty science of Yoga,
especially in the West, can be observed from the fact that one
dressing himself in a certain peculiar way, or one who can stand on
his head for a few minutes, or one who, when he touches you,
exhales a certain perfume, or one who sits calm and silent in a
certain posture for prolonged spells is regarded as a Yogi. There is
not the least inquiry as to the way by which such a person has
transcended the normal mental state of an intelligent man. If there
has been no such crossing of the boundary line, it means that Yoga
has not been accomplished and, however learned or calm or selfcontrolled or physically healthy or agile a man might be, he is still
as far from the consummation of Yoga as any other average
individual. Even the awakening of kundalini, unattended by a
metamorphosis of consciousness to the point of transcendence,
does not make one aware of the supersensory realms. One in whom
such an awakening occurs may display some psychic gifts, but in
other respects he rises no higher than a common medium or
sensitive. For real transformation or, in other words, for the fruition
of Yoga one must be in rapport with higher planes of existence and
have access to Supernal Wisdom which flows from the truly
enlightened even as fragrance exudes from a blooming rose.
The picture of the accomplished Yogi, presented by the ancient
authors, though exaggerated and distorted here and there, has a
solid core of truth so alluring and so precious, for both the
individual and the race, that no other human undertaking is
comparable to it. The moment transcendence occurs, the aspirant
blossoms into a genius of a high order. Simultaneously other
windows in the mind open and, to his unbounded surprise and joy,
he finds himself in possession of channels of communication
which, acting independently of the senses, can bring to him
knowledge of events, occurring at a distance, as also visions of the
past and future. His utterances may become prophetic (vaksiddhi)
and he may acquire the healing touch.
The one important lesson, especially relevant to this age, which
Yoga imparts is that the stupendous universe we live in is but a

196

THE SECRET OF YOGA

compartment in a mammoth edifice of which the other compartments are not perceptible to our senses. The other numerous
compartments might be as vast or even vaster than the one discernible to us to the farthest limits of space, and they all might be
interpenetrating or overlapping each other without the inhabitants
of one being aware of the proximity of the other. Just as some
pictures show the face of one person from one side and that of
another from the other, and of a third when viewed from the front,
in the same way the universe, perceptible to our senses might be
multifaced, that is, might have innumerable facets, presenting as it
were a different form to each separate level of consciousness,
appearing as an objective reality to a normal human mind and as a
vanished dream to one in turiya. It is also possible that there might
be innumerable other forms of life on different planes of
consciousness, operating with different types of sensitive
equipment. In the culminating state of Yoga we merely shift from
one plane of consciousness to another.
When this happens the world normally visible to us loses its grip
on the mind. It is in this sense that the Upanishads compare it to a
dream or to a rope imagined to be a snake or a mirage mistaken for
an oasis. The actual fact is that the world is not a myth or a pure
illusion, but though real in one dimension of consciousness,
becomes a shadow or vanishes altogether in the other. The
classification of human consciousness into three states of waking,
dream, and dreamless slumber, made by the ancient seers of India
is to bring into relief the fourth state, turiya, which includes in it all
the three states and yet is above and beyond them, or, in other
words, which represents another dimension of consciousness in
which the material world loses its objectivity for the Yogi, now in
direct contact with other planes of Being. This is how Sankaracarya
expresses these variations in consciousness in the beginning of his
commentary on the Mandukya Upanishad: “I bow to that Brahman,
which, after having enjoyed (during the waking state) all gross
objects by pervading the entire universe with the omnipresent rays
of Its immutable Conscious-

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

197

ness, embracing the entire variety of movable and immovable
objects; which, again, after having digested, as it were—that is to
say, experienced within (in the dream state)—all the variety of
objects produced by desires and brought into existence by the
mind, enjoys bliss in deep sleep and makes us experience that bliss
through maya; which further is designated in terms of maya as the
fourth (turiya), and which is supreme, immortal and changeless.”
Entrance into turiya is entrance into a dimension of consciousness, above the normal human level. This does not make the world,
perceptible at the human level, unreal or illusory in the least. To
say so would be to deny the reality of turiya also, for it is only
when viewed from the human aspect that the significance of turiya
can be understood. If there were no human level of consciousness
there would be no turiya either. As such it is fallacious to hold that
for one who has attained the knowledge of Brahman in turiya, the
world should cease to hold any value or importance. In actual fact,
a contrary view would be more sensible and accurate. As it is in the
world that our bodies and minds are nourished and, again, as it is
because of the world that the higher state of consciousness,
experienced in samadhi or turiya, is attained, it naturally devolves
as a duty on one who has tasted the Supreme Bliss of this
indescribable state to exert himself to the utmost to help others to
reach the same summit in order to repay the debt he owes to the
world and to the countless people of the world whose labour,
directly or indirectly, contributed in innumerable ways to his
existence, maintenance and, finally, to the achievement that
brought him such glory and joy. In a law-bound Creation it is
obvious that this higher plane of consciousness cannot be a prize,
reserved for a few; but what we have failed to recognize so far, is
that it must be a summit which every member of the race is
destined to reach one day. Those who climb to it first, acting as
pioneers, must guide others on the steep ascent until the task is
accomplished, and the whole caravan arrives safely at the top.

198

THE SECRET OF YOGA

There was a day when the earth was considered to be the centre
of the universe, around which the sun, the moon, and the stars
obediently revolved. Further investigation has revealed an altogether different picture of the cosmos and, far from being the
centre of creation, the earth, it has now been established, holds a
very insignificant position in a gigantic host. Is it not reasonable to
suppose that what applies to the outer universe might be true of the
inner one also and that the conception that turiya is the highest
state of existence and the last summit of consciousness might be as
illusory as was the notion that the earth is the primary centre of all
existence? This faulty conception might have been based on the
equally erroneous idea that man is the cream of all creation, a
clearcut symptom of arrogance and self-conceit, similar to that
which led ancient kings to claim a divine origin for themselves. To
hold that attainment to superconsciousness entitles one to claim
identity with the Creator or Brahman is tantamount to bringing the
Almighty First Cause down to the level of puny man or raising this
frail creature to the stature of the All-powerful Ruler of the
cosmos, both unmistakable symptoms of self-adulation and pride.
We have not yet been able to establish, to the satisfaction of all
sections of humanity, the reality of transcendent states of
consciousness, and the accounts of those who claim to have
attained it are so varied and divergent that it is not surprising that
doubts are raised about the validity of the whole phenomenon in
the minds of many people. To dismiss these genuine doubts as
mere delusion is not reasonable on the part of those who believe in
its reality and, if such an attitude is adopted by one who has
attained Transcendence, it reveals the continued existence in his
enlightened mind of that most stubborn of human frailties: pride.
“In the same way as the unwise act with attachment,” says the
Bhagavad-Gita (3.25 and 26), “so should the wise act without
attachment for the guidance of the world . . . (and) let not the wise
unsettle the understanding of the ignorant, attached to action, but
acting himself with equipoise should engage them in

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

199

action also.” In the present state of our knowledge when Transcendence is still an unverified and disputed phenomenon, and the
territory is still as foreign to the normal mind as the landscape of
an unseen planet, would it not be presumptuous on the part of one
who has entered a higher plane of consciousness to jump to
conclusions about the Ultimate, when he himself has not made sure
that he has touched the peak of human evolution and that there is
no other summit higher than the one he has reached? There can be
no more potent factor to humble a man of intelligence and to
deflate his pride than the contemplation of the starry firmament at
night and the realization of his own utterly insignificant position in
the innumerable host of colossal suns which he perceives.
Similarly, there is no more potent factor to humble the pride of an
Awakened man than the infinitely vaster dimensions of the
universe of consciousness he glimpses within. The most sensible
thing for both the intellectual and the man of vision, in the present
state of our knowledge, is to exchange ideas in order to identify the
basic factors underlying all genuine spiritual experience and then to
devise methods to establish the validity of the phenomenon beyond
doubt and dispute.
The investigation has to be undertaken in all humility because,
in approaching the supersensible, man for the first time comes in
conscious contact with Intelligent Forces that are not amenable to
mortal control. What those engaged in this investigation must
always keep before their minds is the indisputable fact that their
very existence, about which they know almost nothing, depends
entirely on the benign disposition of these Intelligent Forces. When
benignly disposed kundalini can transform a commonplace,
humble man into a seer, a prophet, an intellectual giant, or a world
teacher, with extraordinary talents and supernormal gifts, but
approached arrogantly or with impure motives, the same Energy,
malignantly disposed, can change the most clever man into a
gibbering maniac in such a dreadful state of self-torture that death
would be merciful in comparison. During the last approximately
one hundred years, in spite of repeated

200

THE SECRET OF YOGA

attempts made by competent investigators, including prominent
men of science, to place supernormal phenomena on a scientific
footing, the success achieved has been almost negligible and the
world is still torn by doubts about this momentous issue, close to
the heart of every human being. The reason for it lies in the fact
that approach to Divinity for enlightenment has to be made in a
different spirit and in a way other than that adopted for the
investigation of physical phenomena. The sphere of the spirit has
been carefully shielded by nature from the prying eyes of the
curious, and only those few who pass the scrutiny of the Cosmic
Forces that guard access to the Higher Planes of Consciousness,
are allowed to pass through. These screening devices are present in
the human brain, and are acted upon by the cosmic prana in the
same way as it acts on the genes. It is because access to the
spiritual kingdom is so closely guarded that the investigation of
psychic phenomena, carried on for the past several decades, has not
been decisive in solving the riddle or even in furnishing conclusive
evidence this way or that. The believers continue to believe, but the
skeptics are still unconvinced about the independent and deathless
nature of the spirit.
In their intellectual stature, the leading thinkers of the race have
almost touched the threshold of the divine, but, for access, a high
degree of perfection in all the three components of personality,
mental, moral, and physical, is necessary before the doors will
swing open. In support of our assertion it is enough to point out
that in every system of Yoga development of all three aspects of
personality is invariably kept in view. “The Self is not attained by
one devoid of strength,” says the Mundaka Upanishad (3.2.4), “nor
through delusion, nor through austerity devoid of system; but the
Self of that Knower, who strives through these means enters into
the abode that is Brahman.” The mighty problem of life and death
is the bait, dangled tantalizingly by nature before the human mind,
to draw man toward a higher state of consciousness. Those whose
minds treat this problem as the first priority are the ones who
accept Yoga or other forms of spiritual discipline

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

201

or who embrace monastic ways of life. The intellectual ferment
caused by the problems of existence and the spiritual fervour
caused by the mystery of creation and the riddle of our own being
owe their origin to one and the same source, kundalini. Taking into
account the fact that both spiritual knowledge and high intellectual
acumen develop with perfection in Yoga and the arousal of
kundalini, it becomes obvious that all those men and women who
are born spiritually more advanced or intellectually more brilliant
must have a proportionately active kundalini, pumping a tiny
stream of Her potent prana into the brain, from the very
conception, leading to the development of a superior organ of
thought, with a higher florescence of this or that faculty.
If we agree that intellectual superiority must accompany spiritual illumination, as the two have invariably been found in conjunction with each other in all the great seers and prophets of the
past, we must also take it for granted that those who display
intellectual pre-eminence in any sphere, not even excluding
skepticism, must be very close to spiritual enlightenment. The
evolutionary process, carrying mankind toward a higher state of
consciousness, it is plain, cannot make a distinction between this
man and that, and the law must operate uniformly. ‘Where discordance or disproportion occurs in the development, the reason
must lie in heredity, defective mode of life in putting excessive
emphasis on one of the two aspects, or in some fault in the
organism or environment. Considered from this aspect, it is safe to
infer that the unmistakable intellectual advance in this age could
not occur in isolation, without a corresponding spiritual
development, and the reason why this has not come to pass in the
majority of people must rest on some factor or factors responsible
for the disproportionate growth of the two. It is also safe to infer
that among the top-rank intellects there must be many trembling on
the verge of mystical experience which, because of an adverse
environment or a faulty mode of life, never materializes. Also there
must be millions upon millions of men and women in other ranks
in whom developing spirituality finds

202

THE SECRET OF YOGA

expression in the hunger for mystical experience, preoccupation
with the supernatural, the search for adepts to show the way,
burning interest in Yoga, spiritualism, astrology, psychical phenomena, palmistry, alchemy, and the like. There must also be
millions in whom the inexorable upsurge of spiritual tendencies,
denied a healthy expression due to a combination of disharmonious
factors, finds vent in hysterical, neurotic, or even psychotic
conditions of the mind.
Kundalini, by its very nature as the evolutionary instinct and
power mechanism in man, implanted with a divine purpose, covers
all the varied facets of human life. In the present critical situation
of the world there is no other branch of study so illuminating as
this to determine the direction of human evolution and the meaning
and purpose of human life. What first psychical research and now
parapsychology have so far failed to ascertain can be determined
with ease, correct to the last detail, with the arousal of kundalini.
We have not yet dwelt on the promises and potentialities for the
edification and exaltation of man pregnant in Her. Transcendence,
genius and psychic gifts comprise only a section of the inventory
of incomparable benefits obtainable through Her Grace.
Prolongation of life, vibrant health, preservation of youthful vigour
of the body and mind to the end of a long life, erotic radiation,
personal magnetism, command over Eros, and the like, about
which the ancient masters have written time and again, are the
other coveted prizes attainable through kundalini. They all are a
part and parcel of the evolutionary perfection toward which, at an
exceedingly slow rate of progress, man nevertheless is inexorably
being drawn. Kundalini bestows both Yoga (union with the Divine)
and Bhoga (enjoyment). But not the unwholesome enjoyment of a
libertine nor the morbid sensuous delight of a hedonist, nor the
unholy pleasure of one thirsty for power, nor the hectic acquisition
of one hungry for wealth, but the incomparable Bliss that wells up
from the Fount of Eternal Life within, invulnerable and perennial,
and the happiness that comes from an honourable, well-spent, and
consecrated life, de-

TRANSCENDENCE, GENIUS, AND PSYCHIC POWERS

203

voted to noble pursuits, partaking with great moderation and in a
most judicious manner of all the ecstasies and joys of life provided
by heaven for the delectation of man.
It has to be borne in mind that the evolutionary impulse is
carrying mankind toward a more glorious, more sublime, and more
happy life with all the attributes of mind, all healthy desires and
passions necessary for his survival both in his present state and in
the destined Higher Order toward which he is bound. The
superman of the future will live, thrive and beget, almost as we do,
with this difference—that all his actions and desires, obeying an
indomitable will, will naturally be well considered, balanced, and
chaste. He will have learned how to build a peaceful Eden, free
from every trace of violence, war, want, and disease, with a far
more harmonious and equalitarian social order, to permit every
individual to live undisturbed in the blissful paradise within
himself. Kundalini is the Divine Power, both individually and
collectively, which as the controller of evolution, raising man from
the position of a speck of protoplasm, is slowly moulding him into
a Man-god, amid all the uproar and unrest that characterizes our
age, in order to endow him with inner attributes and to crown him
with a glory in the millennia to come which are beyond our loftiest
dreams.

Appendix
In the Sat-Cakra-Nirupan, embodied by Arthur Avalon in “The Serpent
Power,” there are in all 55 verses out of which no less than ten in clear,
unequivocal terms refer to the development of surpassing intellectual powers and
literary talents in the Yogi who successfully awakens Kundalini. As this issue is
of utmost importance, nine of these verses are reproduced here:
Verse 3. “She is beautiful like a chain of lightning and fine like a (lotus)
fibre, and shines in the minds of the sages. She is extremely subtle; the awakener
of pure knowledge; the embodiment of all bliss, whose true nature is pure
Consciousness. The Brahma-dvara shines in her mouth. This place is the
entrance to the region sprinkled by ambrosia, and is called the Knot, as also the
mouth of Susumna.” Verse 7. “Here dwells the Devi Dakini by name; her four
arms shine with beauty, and her eyes are brilliant red. She is resplendent like the
lustre of many suns rising at one and the same time. She is the carrier of the
revelation of the ever-pure intelligence.” Verses 10 and 11. “Over it shines the
sleeping Kundalini, fine as the fibre of lotus-stalk. She is the world-bewilderer,
gently covering the mouth of Brahmna-dvara by Her own. Like the spiral of the
conch-shell, Her shining snake-like form goes three and a half times round Siva,
and Her lustre is as that of a strong flash of young strong lightning. Her sweet
murmur is like the indistinct hum of swarms of love-mad bees. She produces
melodious poetry and Bandha and all other compositions in prose or verse in
sequence or otherwise in Samskrta, Prakrta and other languages. It is She who
maintains all the beings of the world by means of inspiration
204

APPENDIX

205

and expiration, and shines in the cavity of the root (Mula) Lotus like a chain of
brilliant lights.” Verse 13. “By meditating thus on Her who shines within the
Mula-Cakra, with the lustre of ten millions Suns, a man becomes Lord of speech
and king among men, and an Adept in all kinds of learning. He becomes ever
free from all diseases, and his inmost Spirit becomes full of great gladness. Pure
of disposition by his deep and musical words, he serves the foremost of the
Devas.”
Verse 18. “He who meditates upon this stainless Lotus, which is named
Svadhisthana, is freed immediately from all his enemies, such as the fault of
Ahamkara and so forth. He becomes a Lord among Yogis, and is like the Sun
illumining the dense darkness of ignorance. The wealth of his nectar-like words
flows in prose and verse in well-reasoned discourse.” Verse 21. “Here abides
Lakini, the benefactress of all. She is four armed, of radiant body, is dark (of
complexion), clothed in yellow raiment and decked with various ornaments, and
exalted with the drinking of ambrosia. By meditating on this Navel Lotus the
power to destroy and create (the world) is acquired. Vani (goddess of speech)
with all the wealth of knowledge ever abides in the lotus of His face.” Verse 27.
“Foremost among Yogis, he ever is dearer than the dearest to women. He is preeminently wise and full of noble deeds. His senses are completely under control.
His mind in its intense concentration is engrossed in thoughts of the Brahman.
His inspired speech flows like a stream of (clear) water. He is like the Devata
who is the beloved of Laksmi and he is able at will to enter another’s body.”
Verse 31. “He who has attained complete knowledge of the Atma (Brahman)
becomes by constantly concentrating his mind (Citta) on this Lotus a great Sage,
eloquent and wise, and enjoys uninterrupted peace of mind. He sees the three
periods, and becomes the benefactor of all, free from disease and sorrow and
long-lived, and, like Hamsa, the destroyer of endless dangers.”
From immemorial times Revelation and inspiration have always been
associated with spiritual perfection. The ancient writers on Kundalini provide us
with a very valuable clue when they associate inspiration, enhanced intellectual
acumen and literary talents with a successful awakening of the Serpent-Power. In
view of the fact that Revelation has been a prerogative of the illuminati from
very ancient times, the conclusion becomes irresistible that in all such cases the
cause behind this extraordinary fruition was Kundalini. If this possibility is
admitted, and there is no other rational explanation for the phenomenon, other
than special favour of God, which is unacceptable, it provides a strong reason for
the acceptance of the other possibilities ascribed to this

206

APPENDIX

Divine Power, if not in their entirety, at least to certain reasonable extent.
Gayatri, the essence of the Vedas, is Kundalini. The three strands of the
sacred thread (Gayatri) worn by the Hindus, represent the three channels of
nerve-energy, Ida, Pingala and Susumna, and the knot, known as BrahmaGranthi, is the difficult-to-pierce knot that blocks the passage of Kundalini at the
entrance to the Ajna Cakra. It is after this knot is penetrated that surprising
changes occur in the mental condition of the Sadhaka. Gayatri (Kundalini) is
Saraswati, the Goddess of Learning and also Vagesvari, the Isvari of speech. In
Atharva Veda (19. 71. 1) Gayatri is said to be the bestower of longevity, Prana,
strength, fame, wealth and Brahma knowledge. “One who knows Gayatri
becomes proficient in all knowledge,” says Yogi Yajnavalkya. “Just as honey is
the extract of flowers and butter the extract of milk,” says Vyasa, “in the same
way Gayatri is the essence of all the Vedas. Perfection in Gayatri is like
Kamadhenu (the cow of Indra which fulfils every wish).” It is obvious that the
virtues attributed to Her in the Vedas and the Upanishads, the Puranas and the
Epics are the same as are ascribed to Kundalini in the Tantras and other books.
The ancient work, Pancastavi, refers to this bloom in the mental faculties of a
Sadhaka in several remarkable passages. We quote only one of them: “0
Saraswati (Kundalini as the Goddess of learning),” it says (1.8), “Verily there
pours out from the lotus mouths of those devotees who contemplate thy
entrancing resplendence, spotless like unto a heap of white lotuses, irradiating
the brain and dwelling in the forehead, akin to a stream of ambrosia, an
uninterrupted flow of words, clear and full of deep meaning, like the simmering,
wavy lustre of the milky way.”
Ananda-Lahari (Wave of Bliss), ascribed to the renowned philosopher,
Sankaracarya, which is one of the most magnificent hymns addressed to Divine
Sakti, consists of 41 verses out of which no less than six in clear words refer to
Kundalini as the bestower of knowledge, intellectual, pre-eminence and literary
talent. What is of particular interest is the fact that Ananda-Lahari, or the whole
work, Saundarya-Lahari, of which it is a part, is said to be based on the personal
experience of its great author, and his great Guru, Gaudpadacarya. Sankara is
said to have worked Kundalini to Sahasrara himself. He was an intellectual
prodigy, a literary genius and one of the greatest spiritual luminaries India has
ever produced. “Thou art the sun which illumines the inner darkness of the
ignorant. Thou art the channel running with the honey of Consciousness for the
unknowing” says Ananda-Lahri in verse 3.

APPENDIX

207

Karpuradi-Stotra (Hymn to Kali) contains only 22 verses out of which as
many as 8 dwell on this aspect of Kundalini.
The enterprise of Yoga is not aimed merely to procure peace of mind for the
aspirants or merely vision of God and psychic gifts, but it is designed to raise
one to the lofty stature of an intellectual prodigy, blessed with Vaikhari, that is
spontaneous flow of words whether in poesy or prose full of wisdom and worth.
Dispassionately considered, can psychic gifts and miraculous powers bear
comparison with genius? Do we need a greater testimony to prove the
incalculable worth of properly directed intellect than the amazing transformation
that has occurred in the world? In our time can there be any other branch of
knowledge as deserving of serious attention as that which can show the way to
the cultivation of this one of the most precious ornaments of the human mind?
So strong is the force of habit, however, that even after knowing of this
possibility, with all the authentic material that has been cited in its support, even
the erudite and the intelligent may be assailed by doubts and refuse to believe
until the truth of this great discovery of the ancient Indian savants is empirically
demonstrated.

About the Author

Gopi Krishna was born in 1903 to parents of Kashmiri Brahmin extraction. His
birthplace was a small village about twenty miles from the city of Srinagar, the summer
capital of the Jammu and Kashmir State in Northern India. He spent the first eleven years
of his life growing up in this beautiful Himalayan valley.
In 1914, his family moved to the city of Lahore in the Punjab which, at that time, was
a part of British India. Gopi Krishna passed the next nine years completing his public
school education. Illness forced him to leave the torrid plains of the Punjab and he
returned to the cooler climate of the Kashmir Valley. During the succeeding years, he
secured a post in the Public Works Department of the state, married and raised a family.
In 1946 he founded a social organization and with the help of a few friends tried to
bring about reforms in some of the outmoded customs of his people. Their goals included
the abolition of the dowry system, which subjected the families of brides to severe and
even ruinous financial obligations, and the strictures against the remarriage of widows.
After a few years, Gopi Krishna was granted premature retirement from his position in
the government and devoted himself almost exclusively to service work in the
community.
In 1967, he published his first major book in India, Kundalini — The Evolutionary
Energy in Man. Shortly thereafter it was published in Great Britain and the United States
and has since appeared in eleven major languages. The book presented to the Western
world for the first time a clear and concise autobiographical account of the phenomenon
of the awakening of Kundalini, which he had experienced in 1937. This work, and the
sixteen other published books by Gopi Krishna have generated a steadily growing interest
in the subjects of consciousness and the evolution of the brain. He also travelled
extensively in Europe and North America, energetically presenting his theories to
scientists, scholars, researchers and others.
Gopi Krishna’s experiences led him to hypothesize that there is a biological
mechanism in the human body which is responsible for creativity, genius, psychic
abilities, religious and mystical experiences, as well as aberrant mental states. He asserted
that ignorance of the working of this evolutionary mechanism was the main reason for the
present dangerous state of world affairs. He called for a full scientific investigation of his
hypothesis and believed that such an objective analysis would uncover the secrets of
human evolution. It is this knowledge, he believed, that would give mankind the means to
progress in peace and harmony.
Gopi Krishna passed away in July 1984 of a severe lung infection and is survived by
his wife, three children and grandchildren. The work that he began is currently being
carried forward through the efforts of a number of affiliated foundations, organizations
and individuals around the world.

208

INDEX
A
Abhinava Gupta, 24, 112

adhyatma, 109
Advaita Martanda, 51
Adya-Kali, 45
Agnihotra, 12
ajna chakra, 50, 101, 173, 206
Allah, 48
ambrosia, 48
anahata cakra, 50-51
ananda, 109

Ananda Lahari, 206
ancient religions, 134-137
antipodes, 183
Arhat, 42
asamprajnata samadhi, 103
asana, 94-95
ashrama, 93
Astikta, 7
astral force, 49

Asvattha Tree, 194
Atharva Veda, 206
Atman, 8

Atmopanishad, 109
austerities, 18, 79, 93-94
autohypnosis, 188
autointoxication, 188
Avalon, Arthur, 60, 162, 207
avidya, 18

B
bandhas, 63, 99
Bhagavad Gita, 6, 11, 12, 15, 25, 68, 70, 72, 89, 92, 93, 106, 114, 194, 198
Bhagavad Purana, 12
bhakti, 13, 14
Bhutta Shuddhi, 57
Bible, 68
bija mantra, 51, 54
body cleansing, 95

Boehme, Jacob, 24, 186
Boethius, 111
Brahma-Granthi, 206
Brahma-rendra, 161, 171

location of, 162
brahmacharya, 14
Brahman, 2, 7, ~9, 120, 188
Brahmragita, 13
brain, 64

Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 51, 58-9, 73, 189
Bronte, Charlotte, 23
Buddha, 33, 34, 42, 51, 78, 143
buddhi, 111
Buddhism, 18

C
caturthab, 104
cauda equina, 167
Chaitanya, 112
chakras, 44, 49, 50-66

and nerve plexuses, 53
and Sanskrit letters, 51, 60
location of, 162
number of, 51
Chaldea, 75

Chandogya Upanishad, 90
Christ, 33

citta, 45
citta-vrtti nirodhab, 14

coldness of the body, 162
concentration, 10
consciousness, channelling of, 120-1
modes of, 103

D
Dakini Shakti, 53

Darwin, Charles, 33
demonic influences, 175
Dhammapada, 68
dharana, 13, 106-109
dharma, 12
Dhauti, 95
dhyana, 5, 11, 13, 14,

106-9, 121
Dhyana-Yoga, 5, 14
Dhyana-Yogi, 163
Dionysius, 20
divya deha, 105
dogma, 30, 127
drugs, 17, 74, 8 1-84, 188
Durkheim, Emile, 141

E
Egypt, 75

ekagarta, 107-108
elements, 49
Eliade, Mircea, 103, 110-1, 165
elixir of life, 66
enhanced mental faculties, 190
etheric force, 49
Evans-Wentz, WY., 164
evolution, limits of, 40
progress of, 177
evolutionary mechanism, 174, 178
exorcism, 113

F
false gurus, 189
fana, 28

Frazer, J.G., 73, 142
Freud, Sigmund, 33, 138, 140

G
Gaudapada, 104, 206
Gayatri, 206
Gayatri mantra, 194
genuine enlightenment, 195
Gheranda Samhita, 94, 106
God, belief in, 7-8

Gorajah Nath, 87
Grace, 113-120
granthis, 100
Greece, 75
Gunjari-pada, 165

guru, purpose of, 101
Guru Nanak, 112

H
HAM, 164
Hamsa, 45

Hatha-Yoga, 14, 57
Hatha-Yoga Pradipika, 45, heat, 163-164
in pingala, 165

Hegel, G.W.F., 144
hermetic science, 55
Hira, 58
HUM, 164
humours, 96, 100

Huxley, Aldous, 80-82
hypnosis, 74-76
hypnotic states, 79-81

I
ida, 165, 172, 206
Indus Valley, 54, 55

Inge, Dean, 26
instinct, 184

intellectual illumination, James, William, 21, 75, 83, 13 1-2, 149
Jathar-Agni, 165
Jehovah, 48
jiva, 188
jivan-mukta state, 42, 103, 111, 153

jnana, 14
Jnana-Yoga, 5, 14
Jnaneshwar, 118

Jung, Carl G., 147

K
Kabir, 13, 112
kaivalya state, 120
Kala, 48
Kali aspect of Kundalini, 194
Kalidasa, 89

Kamadhenu, 206
kanda, 62
Kant, Immanuel, 144
Kapalabhati, 96

Karika of Gaudapada, 104
karma, 2, 14, 17, 116, 117, 125-6

Karma-kanda, 12
Karma-Yoga, 5, 14
karmic laws, source of, 177
Karpuradi-Stotra, 210
Katha Upanishad, 5, 12, 58, 69, 72, 114
Kavi, 45
kaya karma, 171
kaya sadhana, 97
Kena Upanishad, 182
kevala kumbhaka, 102

Khayyam, Omar, 89
Knower and the Known, 189
Koran, 68
Krishna, 12, 25

Kubera, 45
kumbhaka, 99, 102

Kundalini, ancient concept of, 47-8
and mental gifts, 207-8
and mystical states, 177
Kundalini mechanism, 161
Kundalini-Yoga, 44, 47, 50, 55, 57, 60

L
lalana chakra, 51
Lalleshwari, 27, 101

Lao Tse, 90
Laya-Yoga, 14
lunar nerve, 167-170, 172-3

M
magic, 2, 73, 142-3, 180

magical powers, 77
Maha-Shakti, 53
Mahanarayan Upanishad, 13
Mahanirvana Tantra, 44, 54
manes chakra, 51

Mandukya Upanishad, 20, 103, 196
manipura chakra, 50, 164
mantra, 5, 15, 17, 46, 54
Mantra-Yoga, 5, 14
Manu, 99

Marx, Karl, 33
maya, 8, 17, 27, 120, 197
McDougall, William, 138
Milarepa, 82

mind-body relationship, 150-1
moksha, 9, 12, 14

Montague, G.E., 23
morality, 92-9 3
morbid awakening, 165-6
Moses, 33
mudras, 63, 99

Muhammad, 33
muladhara chakra, 50, 163
Mundaka Upanishad, 12, 93, 59-70, 200
mundasana, 95
mystic, nature of, 31-2
mystical vision, occurrence of, 21-3

variations in, 23-6
mystics, attributes of, 130-1

N
nabhi-chakra, 51
nabhi-padma, 45
nadis, 50-66
Narada Purana, 106
nervous system, 167-8
neti, 96
Nietzsche, 23
nirbija samadhi, 103
Nirodha, 111

nirvana, 8
nirvikalpa samadhi, 25, 103, 123
niskama karma, 110
nitrous oxide, 8 3-84

niyama, 92

O
occult, 1
Om, 15, 102, 103
other realities, 196
Otto, Rudolf, 144

P
Panchastavi, 59, 206
Parameshvari Svaha, 53, 54
Patanjali, 3, 7, 9, 11, 14, 16, 51, 58, 73, 87, 92, 94, 99, 105, 107, 120, 159, 190
perceptual realms, 184
perineum, 95
pingala, 165, 172, 206
and heat, 165
Plato, 23, 33
Plotinus, 21
Porphyry, 21
Prabha, 163
prajna, 104
prakriti, 8, 111, 139
prana, 47-66, 99, 139
and fertility, 156
and food, 84
and heredity, 156

and physical matter, 61
and reproduction, 156
and the brain, 64

biological aspect of, 154
individual & universal, 173
measurement of, 57
perception of, 174
physical nature of, 64

Prana-Shakti, 47-48, 61, 173
Prana-Vayu, 61
pranayama, 15, 46, 57, 62, 97, 99-103
pratyahara, 105-106

prolongation of life, 97
Proust, Marcel, 23
psychic powers, 65
psychology, 11
puraka, 101
Puranas, 5
purusha, 111

R
Raja-Yoga, 14
Rakini Shakti, 53
Rama, 13

Ramanuja, 11, 112
recaka, 102

religion, as pathology, 128
religious impulse, origins of, 134-7
religious practices, history of, 158-161
religious teachers, classes of, 71-2
Rig Veda, 186

S
Sacred Thread, 206
sahasrara, 50, 163, 164, 173
samadhi, 8, 9, 10, 16, 19, 40, 106-112,
121-2, 139
types of, 103
samaskaras, 109
Samyama, 58
Sankhya, 6, 8, 15
Sankhya-Yoga, 139
Saraswati, 206
Sarvasarsana-Sangraha, 107
Sat-Chakra-Nirupana, 45, 48, 207
Sat-Chit-Ananda, 28, 109
satanic influences, 175
sattva, 126
Saundarya Lahari, 206
Schmidt, Wilhelm, 141
scientific method, 168-9
self-hypnosis, 129-130
self-mortification, 152

seventh centre, 44
Shaivism, 8-9, 139
Shakti, 8, 47, 49, 172
Shaktis, of chakras, 53
shaman, 10
shamanism, 142
Shams-i-Tabriz, 21, 29
Shankaracharya, 11, 33, 67, 112, 188, 196, 206
Shankaradeva, 13
shatkarma, 57, 97, 98, 100
shavasana, 95
shielding devices of the brain, 200
Shitalla, 114
Shiva, 7, 8
Shiva Samhita, 51, 59, 94, 165
siddha deha, 97
siddhasana, 95, 172
siddhis, 13, 16-7, 45-7, 87, 143, 159, 164, 190
and pranayama, 102
skeptics, 3
Socrates, 33
solar nerve, 165, 167-170, 172-3
soma chakra, 51
sorcery, 180
Spencer, Herbert, 137
sphincter muscle, 172
spinal cord, 156, 166-7
spinal nerves, 166-7
Sri Bhasya, 11
sristi-krama, 1 71
St. Angela of Foligno, 21
St. Ignatius Loyola, 84, 131-2
St. John of the Cross, 132
St. Macarius of Egypt, 28
St. Theresa of Avila, 123
success in Yoga, 185
Sufism, 10, 18, 28, 38
Surdas, 13
Sursagar, 13
Surta-Sabda-Yoga, 14
sushumna, 48, 49, 58, 108, 169-183, 206
svadishthana chakra, 50
Svetasvatara Upanishad, 5, 114

T
Taijasa, 104
Taittiriya Aranyaka, 187
Taittiriya Upanishad, 109
Tantra, 52
Tantras, 14, 57, 63, 65, 100
Tantrism, 38
Taoism, 10, 18
tapas, 14, 17, 163-4
Taylor, E.B., 137
Tennyson, Alfred Lord, 23
Thebaid, 82
totemism, 141
toxemia, 100
trataka, 96
Triveni, 172
turiya, 20, 41, 103-4, 196-8

U
universal prana, 173
Upanishads, 11
seers of, 93
upasana, 11, 14
Updesa-Sahasri, 69
urdhava-retas, 66
Usnisa-Kamla, 51

V
Vacaspati Misra, 51, 58, 99, 102, 107
vairagya, 14
Vaishnavism, 8, 9, 122
Vajroli mudra, 45
vaksiddhi, 195
Vani, 45
varieties of religion, 75
Vasti, 96
vayu, 61
Vedanta, 8, 9, 109, 110, 139
Vedas, 8, 11, 34, 194
Verna-mala, 51
vertebrae, 166-167
vibhutis, 190
Vishnu Purana, 107
visuddha chakra, 50
visva, 104
viveka, 14, 67
Vivekachudamani, 67, 188
Vivekananda, 177
Vyasa, 105, 107, 108, 120, 206

W
Whitman, Walt, 23
witchcraft, 180
Wordsworth, William F., 23

Y
Yajnavalkya, 33, 93, 206
yama, 14, 92
Yoga, aim of, 65, 66
and mode of life, 70-71
definition of, 5-6, 36
in the Upanishads, 4
limbs of, 92
meaning of, 2
origins of, 134-139
risks of, 98-99
types of, 92
Yoga-Sara-Sangraha, 99, 102, 106, 107, 110
Yoga-Sutras, 3, 7, 9, 11, 16, 51, 58, 73, 87, 92, 99, 190
Yoga-ttatva Upanishad, 102
Yoga-Vasishtha, 99
yonisthana chakra, 51

Z
Zen, 10, 18.

