 
                                          9. KURMA  PURANA  
 
 
Introduction  
 
 
(The samudra manthana story is given in great detail in the Ramayana and the Mahabharataa.  As 
for Lakshmi, some of the Puranas state that she was born as the daughter of Khyati and the  sage 
Bhrigu. She was t hen married to Vishnu. But the demons defeated the gods and Indra. The  sage 
Durvasa therefore cursed Lakshmi that she would have to live in the ocean. And when the  ocean 
was churned, Lakshmi emerged yet  again.)  
 
Indra, the other gods, and the sages were ch armed at Lakshmi's beauty when she appeared.  
"Who is this wonderful goddess?" they asked  Vishnu.  
"This is Lakshmi," replied Vishnu. "She is also known as Shakti. It is with her help that I  delude 
the universe  and its inhabitants  with my illusions  (maya).  It is Lakshmi  who gives  me all my 
powers, although she is no different from me in  essence."  
 
Vishnu then proceeded to tell the gods and the sages the story of  Indradyumna.  
   
 
Indradyumna  
Many  years  ago, there  was a king named  Indradyumna.  He ruled  the world  well and, when  he 
died,  was reborn  as a brahmana,  (The  brahmanas  constitute  the first of the four classes,  their 
primary duties are to study the Vedas and perform  sacrifices.)  
 
As a brahmana,  Indradyumna  observed  religious  rites and meditated.  He also stared to pray to 
the goddess  Lakshmi.  When  Lakshmi  appeared,  Indradyumna  begged  of her, "Please  tell me 
about yourself. Please give me insight into what constitutes true  knowledge."  
 
"Even the gods and the sages are unable to comprehend my true nature," repli ed Lakshmi. "I  an 
Vishnu's illusions and there is no difference between him and me. As for knowledge, it is  beyond 
my powers to grant you that. You will have to pray to the great Vishnu  himself."  
 
Having  said this, Lakshmi  disappeared,  and Indradyumna  started to pray to Vishnu.  Several 
years  passed,  but Indradyumna  continued  to meditate.  Finally,  Vishnu  appeared  and instructed 
Indradyumna on the path to true  knowledge.  
 
"What  did you tell Indradyumna?"  asked  the gods  and the sages.  "What  was this wonderful 
knowledge?"  
 
"I will repeat it for your benefit," replied  Vishnu.  
 
Since  Vishnu  repeated  his teachings  while  in the form  of a turtle  of Kurma,  these  sacred  words 
are known as the Kurma Purana. There are many subjects that Vishnu's instructions covered,  but 
let us first start with the concept  of varna  ashrama  dharma,  Dharma  means  righteousness  and 
these  precepts  lay down  the fundamental  principles  of righteous  conduct.  This is typified  in the 
system of four varnas (classes) and four ashramas (stages of  life). 
   
 
VarnAshrama  Dharma  
Vishnu said that before creation began, there was only water in the universe and Vishnu slept  on 
these waters. When it was time for creation to begin, Brahma emerged from Vishnu's body.  And 
Shiva emerged from Vishnu's anger. Lakshmi t oo was created from Vishnu's body and took  her 
place by Vishnu's  side. 
 
Brahma  told Vishnu,  "Please  use this goddess  to delude  the beings  whom  I will create.  Tell her 
to sow the seeds of illusions in their minds. Please tell her to make the righteous  prosp er." 
Vishnu complied. He requested Lakshmi, "Please delude and destroy gods, demons and  humans 
who are about  to be created.  But please  leave  the righteous  alone  and make  them  prosper.  I will 
tell you how to know  the righteous.  They  are those  that follow  the precepts  of varna  ashrama 
dharma."  
 
The brahmanas constitute the first of the four classes. Brahma created nine sons from his  mental 
powers.  Their  names  were  Marichi,  Bhrigu,  Angira,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Daksha,  Atri and 
Vashishtha. These sons becam e sages and they were the first brahmanas. They were created  from 
Brahma's  mouth.  There  are six types  of action  that are recommended  for brahmanas.  These  are 
yajana  (performing  sacrifices),  yajana  (acting  as priests  at sacrifices),  dana  (donation  of alms),  
pratigraha (receiving gifts), adhyapana (teaching and adhyayana (studying). A brahmana  who 
performs these tasks well, attains the wonderful place known as prajapatya. (This would seem  to 
be synonymous with Brahma's residence of  Brahmaloka).  
 
The kshatriya s constitute the second of the four classes. They were created from Brahma's  arms. 
The duties of kshatriyas include dana (donation of alms), adhyayana (studying) and  performing 
yajnas (sacrifices). But their primary duties are to take up arms and fight. It  is their job to  punish 
the evil and protect the good. A kshatriya who performs these tasks well, attains Indra's  residence 
of Indraloka.  
 
The vaishyas  constitute  the third  of the four classes.  They  were  created  from  Brahma's  thighs. 
Like the kshatriyas,  the vaishyas  can also donate  alms,  study  and perform  sacrifices.  But their 
primary  duty is agriculture,  (In many  other  Puranas,  trade  and animal  husbandry  are mentioned 
in addition  to agriculture).  A vaishya  who performs  these  tasks  well,  gets to live with Vayu,  the 
god of the  wind.  
 
The shudras  constitute  the last of the four classes.  They  were  created  from  Brahma's  feet. Their 
primary duty is to serve the other three classes. In addition, a shudra can adopt artisanship as  an 
occupation,  A shudra  who perfo rms these  tasks  well,  will live with the gandharvas  (singers  of 
heaven).  
 
Generally  speaking,  all four classes  have  to observe  the religion  that is prescribed  in the vedas. 
There  are various  other  shastras  (religious  texts)  that circulate  on earth.  But many of them  are 
against the Vedas. The religion that is prescribed in such anti -Vedic texts must not be  followed. 
Only sinners follow such religions, and they are doomed to eternal  damnation.  
 
There  are four ashramas  (stages  of life).  The first one is brahma charya  (celibate  studenthood). 
The primary  duties  of a person  who is in this stage  of life are studying  the Vedas  and serving 
one's  guru (teacher)  well.  He has to live on alms  that are obtained  through  begging.  When  this stage of life if over, there are tw o options that are available to the individual. In rare instances,  he 
may desire  to devote  the rest of his life to studying  and meditation.  Such  a person  is known  as 
naishthika.  More  commonly,  individuals  wish  to step into the next stage  of life. An indivi dual 
who does so is known as an  upakurvana.  
 
The second  stage  of life is Grihastha  (householder  stage).  A householder's  primary  duties  are 
serving  guests,  performing  sacrifices,  donating  alms,  worshipping  the gods  and keeping  the 
sacred  fire burning  in the house  at all times.  In cases  where  the householder  is absent  from  the 
house, these functions are to be performed by his wife or sons, or even by his priest.  a 
householder  must  not also forget  to study  a little bit of the Vedas  every  day. The householder 
stage  is superior  to the other  three  stages  of life. The reason  is that the alms  provided  by a 
householder are the means of sustenance for individuals who are in the other three stages of  life. 
A householder may be one of two types. He may be a sadhaka, in  which case his chief  obsession 
is that of satisfying  his friends  and relatives.  Alternatively,  there  may be a householder  who is 
udasina.  This means  that he is not really  interested  in his wife,  his sons or in the acquisition  of 
material wealth. His chief  obsession is that of being freed from the bonds of the  world.  
 
The third  stage  of life is vanaprastha  (forest  dwelling  stage).  Such  a person  retires  to the forest 
and lives  on fruits  and roots.  He studies  the Vedas,  performs  tapasya  (meditation)  and obser ves 
religious rites. but one should never embark on a forest -dwelling stage unless one's mind is  ready 
for it. This also means  that one must  have  had sons.  Without  sons to carry  on the line, it is not 
recommended that a householder venture out on the fores t-dwelling stage. There are two types  of 
forest -dwellers. The first type consists of individuals who primarily devote themselves  to 
worshipping the gods and performing religious ceremonies. Such an individual is known as  a 
tapasya,  because  he does do some  tapasya.  But there  are individuals  who devote  themselves 
entirely  to meditation.  Such  a person  is known  as a sannyasika,  since  there  is very little of 
difference between him and a sannyasi  (hermit).  
 
The fourth and final stage of life is sannyasa (hermith ood). Such individuals spend all their  time 
in meditating.  They  beg food for a living.  It is not proper  to become  a hermit  unless  one's  mind 
has achieved detachment from the world. There are two types of hermits. The first type  consists 
of those who are tr ying to realise the true nature of the atman (human soul). Such a person  treats 
all other individuals as he would treat himself and is known as a yogi. But there are also  hermits 
who go through intense meditation so as to attain the supreme wisdom. Such a person is  known 
as a paramaeshthika.  
 
There  are various  other  traits  that are demanded  by the righteous  way of life. One must  forgive 
and display  pity. One must  not be jealous  and must  be ready  to sacrifice  one's  own selfish 
interests.  One must  be truthful , practice  non-violence  and learn  to control  the senses.  One must 
also visit tirthas  (places  of pilgrimage).  It is also important  to realise  that one does not perform 
actions  for the sake of the fruits  of the actions.  The fruits  of all actions  vest with the Brahman 
(the divine  essence).  In fact, it is a gross  misconception  to think  that the specific  action  is being 
performed by an individual. All actions are performed by the Brahman, the  ordinary  human 
being is merely an instrument. As long as this realisa tion is missing, an individual is ignorant  and 
is doomed to the shackles of worldly  bonds.  
   
 
Creation  
Vishnu next narrated to the gods and the sages the history of  creation.  
 
In the beginning,  the Brahman  was everywhere.  The Brahman  had no form,  but nor was it 
without  form.  It had no beginning  and no end. It had no traits,  but nor was it without  traits.  The 
Brahman is impossible to describe, sense or  see. 
Brahma,  Vishnu  and Shiva  are derived  from  the Brahman,  Brahma  performs  the function  of a 
creator, Vishn u that of a preserver and Shiva that of  destroyer.  
 
When  it was time for creation  to begin,  the Brahman  created  water  throughout  the universe. 
Before  that, there  was nothing.  In the water,  there  appeared  a golden  (hiranya)  egg (anda).  The 
egg grew in size and Brahma, the creator, appeared inside the egg. Everything that there is in  the 
universe  was already  there,  in in embryonic  form,  inside  the egg. There  were  gods,  the demons 
humans,  the sun, the moon,  the stars,  the planets  and the wind.  The word  garbha  means  womb 
and since Brahma originated from inside a golden (hiranya) egg, he is known as  Hiranyagarbha. 
Brahma was the first being to be created. He had four faces. He had no birth (janana) in the  real 
sense  of the term.  He is therefore  also referred  to as Aja (without  birth).  It is also true that he 
created  (bhuva)  himself  (svayam).  It is because  of this that Brahma  is known  as Svayambhu. 
Brahma  was to be the lord (pati)  of all the subjects  who were  going  to be born (praja).  Thus, 
Brahma acquired the name  of Prajapati.  
 
To appreciate  how creation  took place,  it is first necessary  to have  some  conception  about  the 
nature of  time.  
   
 
A Digression on  Time  
The smallest  unit of time is a nimesha.  Fifteen  nimeshas  make  one kashtha,  thirty  kashthas  are 
one kala and thirty  kalas  constitute  one muhurta.  There  are thirty  muhurtas  in a span of day and 
night  (ahoratra).  Thirty  such ahoratras  make  up a month.  There  are two pakshas  (fortnight)  in 
every month. Six months constitute an ayana and two ayanas a year. There are  thus twelve 
months  in every  year.  The names  of the two ayanas  are uttarayana  and Dakshainayana.  While 
humans  pass through  uttarayana,  the gods  pass through  only one day. Similarly,  when  humans 
pass through  Dakshainayana,  the gods  pass through  merely  one night. One year for humans  is 
equivalent to a time span of one day and one night for the  gods.  
 
Twelve  thousand  years  of the gods  make  up one mahayuga.  This is subdivided  into four yugas 
(eras).  The names  of these  eras are Satya  Yuga  or Krita  Yuga,  Treta  Yuga, Dvapara  Yuga  and 
Kali Yuga. Satya Yuga has four thousand years, Treta Yuga three thousand, Dvapara Yuga  two 
thousand  and Kali Yuga  one thousand.  This adds up to ten thousand  years.  But there  are also 
periods that join two yugas: (sandhyamsha). Satya Yu ga has a sandhyamsha of four  hundred 
years, Treta Yuga of three hundred, Dvapara Yuga of two hundred and Kali Yuga  of  one 
hundred, There will therefore be seven hundred additional years between Satya Yuga and  Treta 
Yuga,  five hundred  between  Treta  Yuga  and Dvapara  Yuga  of two hundred  and Kali Yuga  of 
one hundred.  There  will therefore  be seven  hundred  additional  years  between  Satya  Yuga  and 
Treta Yuga, five hundred between Treta Yuga and Dvapara Yuga, three hundred  between 
Dvapara  Yuga  and Kali Yuga  and five hundred  between  Kali Yuga  and the next Satya  Yuga. 
These are two thousand additional years, and when added up to the earlier figure of ten  thousand, 
make up twelve thousand  years.  
 
There  are a little over seventy -one manvantaras  (eras)  in each mahayuga.  Each  manvantara  is a 
time period  that is ruled  over by a Manu.  The first Manu  in the present  kalpa  (cycle)  was 
Svayambhuva Manu  and  there  were several  other Manus  after him. Each  kalpa in  fact  passes  
during  one of brahma's  days and there  are fourte en manvantaras  in a kalpa.  Stated  differently, 
there are one thousand mahayugas in every  kalpa.  
 
Three  hundred  and sixty  kalpas  constitute  one of Brahma's  years.  One hundred  times  this time 
period  is known  as a parardha.  At the end of this period,  the whol e universe  is destroyed  and 
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva are also destroyed. At the end of the destruction, creation starts  afresh 
and this creation is known as  sarga.  
 
There  is a smaller  process  of destruction  that takes  place  at the end of every  kalpa.  Brahm a 
Vishnu and Shiva are not destroyed, but everything else is. The creation that comes at the end  of 
this minor destruction is known as  pratisarga.  
 
The present  kalpa  is known  as Varaha  kalpa.  The one that preceded  it was known  as padma 
kalpa.  
 
"Why is the present kalpa called Varaha kalpa?" the gods and the sages asked  Vishnu. 
Vishnu told them the story of his boar  incarnation.  The Boar  Incarnation  
A Varaha  is a boar and the boar incarnation  is usually  catalogued  as the third  of Vishnu's  ten 
incarnations.  
 
When  the universe  was submerged  in water  after the destruction  that came  at the end of padma 
kalpa, Vishnu slept on the waters. Thus he slept for a thousand mahayugas. Since the word  nara 
means water and ayana means resting -place, Vishnu is also referred to as Narayana.  
 
Brahma  decided  to start creation  afresh,  but discovered  that the earth  was submerged  in water. 
How  would  his creations  survive  if there  was no earth?  He therefore  requested  Vishnu  to bring 
the earth up from under the  water.  
 
Vishnu adopted  the form of a boar and went to the underworld. He discovered the earth there and 
raised  her up on the tusks  of the boar.  The boar carefully  raised  the earth  and laid her to rest on 
top of the water. The earth began to float like a gigantic  boat.  
 
Since  Vishnu  raised  the earth  in the form  of a boar at the beginning  of the kalpa,  the present 
cycle is known as Varaha  kalpa.  
 
(The  story  of the boar incarnation  is rather  summarily  disposed  of in the Kurma  Purana.  The 
other  Puranas  describe  it at great  length.  Apart from  the question  of raising  up the earth  from 
under  the water,  the story  revolves  around  the demon  Hiranyaksha.  This demon  was the son of 
the sage Kashyapa and his wife Diti. He defeated the gods and drove them out of heaven.  In 
desperation,  the gods  started  to pray to Vishnu.  Hiranyaksha  used to live under  the water  and 
Vishnu  entered  the water  in his form  of a boar and killed  Hiranyaksha.  He also recovered  the 
Vedas which had been stolen by  Hiranyaksha.)  Creation  continued  
Brahma  first created  five sons through  his mental  powers.  Their  names  were  Sanaka,  Sanatana, 
Sanandana, Kratu and Sanatakumara These five sons became sages and did not have  any 
offspring. Brahma therefore had to create some more beings so that the population of  the 
universe might increase. But prior to that, he decided to perform tapasya. However,  the 
meditation  did not yield  him any results  and Brahma  became  very angry  and disheartened.  He 
started to weep and a teardrop fell on the ground. From this drop, there emerged  Shiva.  
 
Brahma bowed before Shiva and said, "Please create some living  beings."  
 
This Shiva proceeded to do. But all the beings that Shiva created were mirror images of  himself. 
That is, they were all  immortal.  
 
"I beg your pardon," retorted Shiva. "That I refuse to do. Old age and disease are not objects  that 
should be sought after. In fact, they are evil. I flatly refuse to create such  evil."  
 
"All right then." said Brahma. "I will take care of creation myself. Please stop  creating."  
 
The first objects  that Brahma  created  were  water,  fire, the sky, heaven  (svarga),  wind,  rivers, 
mountains, oceans, trees, herbs and  time.  
 
Brahma  next created  eleven  sons from  his mental  powers.  Their  names  were  Marichi,  Bhrigu, 
Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Daksha, Atri Vashishtha,  Dharma and  Sankalpa.  
 
(In the earlier  section  on varna  ashrama  dharma,  only nine sons were  mentioned.  Dharma  and 
Sankalpa did not figure in that  list.) 
 
Thereafter,  Brahma  created  four classes  of beings.  These  were  gods,  demons,  ancestors  (pitris) 
and hum ans. The demons were born from Brahma's thighs, the gods from his mouth. The  snakes 
(sarpa),  the yakshas  (demi -gods),  the ghosts  (bhuta)  and the Gandharvas  were  born next.  Cows 
were born from Brahms's stomach, and horses, elephants, donkeys, deer, camels a nd mules  from 
his feet. Herbs and trees emerged from Brahms's  body -hair. 
 
(This  account  contradicts  a more  common  account  given  in some  of the other  Puranas,  such as 
the Bhagavata Purana. In the more usual account, all beings are descended from the  sage 
Kashyapa. Kashyapa married thirteen of Daksha's daughters. These daughters were named  Aditi, 
Diti, Danu, Kashtha, Arishtha, Surasa, Ila, Muni, Krodhavasha, Tamra, Surabhi, Sarama  and 
Timi.  Aditi's  offspring  were  the gods  (adityas),  Diti's  the demons  (daityas ). Danu's  offspring 
were other demons (danavas), Kashtha's children horses, Arishtha's gandharvas, Surasa's  demons 
(Rakshasas), Ila's offspring trees and herbs, Muni's the apsaras (dancers of  heaven), 
Krodhavasha's ghosts (pishachas), Tamra's birds, Surabh i's cattle, Sarama's wild animals  and 
Timi's marine creatures. The Kurma Purana itself refers to this alternative account  subsequently).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 To return  to the present  account  of the Kurma  Purana,  Brahma  thereafter  divided  his body  into 
two. One half was male a nd was called Svayambhuva Manu. The remaining half was female  and 
was called  Shatarupa.  Manu  and Shatarupa  married  and had two sons and two daughters.  The 
sons were  named  Priyavrata  and Uttanapada  and the daughters  were  named  Prasuti  and Akuti. 
Since all humans are Manu's descendants, they are known as  manava.  
 
Prasuti married Daksha and they had twenty -four daughters. (The Puranas are not at  all 
consistent  about  the number  of daughters  Prasuti  and Daksha  had. The number  is sometimes 
twenty -four,  sometime s fifty and sometimes  sixty).  Thirteen  of the twenty -four daughters  were 
married to Brahma's son Dharma. Of the remaining eleven, Khyati was married to Bhrigu, Sati  to 
Shiva,  Sambhuti  to Marichi,  Smriti  to Angira,  Priti to Pulastya,  Kshama  to Pulaha,  Sanna ti to 
Kratu,  Anasuya  to Atri, Urjja  to Vashishtha,  Svaha  to the fire-god Agni  and Svadha  to the 
ancestors  (pitris).  
  Brahma, Vishnu and  Shiva  
The gods  and the sages  told Vishnu,  "We are getting  a bit confused.  You have  told us that 
Brahma  emerged  from  Vish nu's body.  And yet you have  also told us how Brahma  was born 
inside  a golden  egg. Which  of these  is the correct  account?  Then  again,  you have  told us that 
Shiva  was born from  one of Brahma's  tears.  But we have  sometimes  heard  otherwise.  Which  is 
right? Ple ase remove this  confusion."  
 
"There is no confusion," replied Vishnu. "Let me explain it for  you."  
 
Brahma was born from the golden egg right at the beginning, at the time of the original  creation. 
But at the end of every  kalpa  there  is a minor  destructio n when  all living  beings  other  than 
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva die. When the destruction is over, creation has to start  afresh.  
 
At the end of the last kalpa,  there  was water  everywhere  in the universe.  The heaven,  the earth 
and the underworld,  were  all flooded with water.  There  were  no gods  and no sages.  Only  the 
great Vishnu slept on the water. He had a thousand hoods, a thousand eyes, a thousand arms  and 
a thousand feet. This was his form of Ananta, the snake  (naga).  
 
(The  Kurma  Purana  completely  identifie s Vishnu  with Ananta.  More  commonly,  the Puranas 
state that the snake  Ananta  was the son of Kadru  and the sage Kashyapa.  He pleased  Brahma 
through  his prayers  and obtained  from  Brahma  the boon  that he would  be permitted  to hold up 
the earth  on his hoods.  The Kalika  Purana  specifically  states  that, at the time of destruction, 
Vishnu and Lakshmi rest on Ananta's central hood. The Vishnu Purana adds the information  that 
Ananta  was one of Balarama's  avataras.  The names  Shesha  Vasuki  and Gonasa  are often  used 
synonymously with  Ananta.)  
 
While  Vishnu  thus slept  on the water,  a wonderful  lotus  sprouted  from  his navel.  The lotus  was 
gigantic and shone like the sun. Its fragrance spread in all directions. Brahma appeared inside  the 
lotus. Since padma means lotus and yoni means place of birth, Brahma is also known  as 
Padmayoni.  
 
Brahma saw Vishnu sleeping on the water and woke him up. "Who are you?" asked  Brahma.  
"I am Vishnu." replied Vishnu. "I am the origin of everything. That will be there in the  universe 
is insid e my  body."  
 
"Is that really so?" asked Vishnu. "Let me  see."  
 
Vishnu thereupon entered Brahma's body. He really found the three worlds, the gods, the  demons 
and the humans  inside  Brahma's  stomach  and was greatly  surprise.  He emerged  from  Brahma's 
mouth  and told Brahma,  "What  I have  seen inside  your body  is truly  wonderful.  But I too can 
show you many worlds inside my body. Please enter and see for  yourself."  
 
It was now Brahma's  turn to enter  Vishnu's  body.  But when  Brahma  did this, he could  find no 
end to  Vishnu's stomach. It was true that there were many worlds inside Vishnu's  body. 
However, Brahma could find no way of coming out from Vishnu's stomach. He finally started  to 
emerge through Vishnu's navel, through the stalk of the lotus that was  there.  
 
"How dare you try to confine me inside your body?" demanded Brahma, as soon as he  managed 
to get  out.  
"Please  do not get angry."  replied  Vishnu.  "I merely  thought  that I would  play with you for a 
while. Otherwise, it is inconceivable that anyone should dare  to confine the great Brahma.  Please 
pardon me. And as a token of your pardon, please grant me the boon that henceforth, you will  be 
known as my son. After all, you did emerge from a lotus that grew out of my  navel."  
 
"Agreed."  said Brahma.  "Let us make  peace. After  all; there  is no one else. We are the lords  of 
everything, we are parts of the  Brahman."  
 
"Please  do not forget  Shiva,"  responded  Vishnu.  "Your  words  will anger  him and bring  about 
your undoing."  
 
While  the two were  thus conversing,  Shiva  appear ed on the scene.  He had a third  eye in the 
middle of his forehead and his hair was matted. A trident could be seen in his  hand.  
 
"Who is this fellow?" asked Brahma. "He looks like an  upstart."  
 
Vishnu calmed Brahma down. He also gave Brahma divine eyes so that Brahma  could 
comprehend the true nature of Shiva. Brahma then started to pray to Shiva. Pleased  with 
Brahma's prayers, Shiva agreed to grant Brahma a  boon.  
 
"Please grant me the boon that you will be born as my son," said  Brahma. 
Shiva agreed to do so  and went  away.  
   
Rudra  
Brahma returned to his seat on the lotus  flower.  
Suddenly, two demons named Madhu and Kaitabha appeared. They were exceedingly strong  and 
threatened to destroy everything that Brahma would create. Brahma therefore requested  Vishnu 
to kill these  two demons.  Vishnu  created  two beings  from  his own body  and these  two beings 
killed the  demons.  
 
(The  Madhu  and Kaitabha  story  is given  in greater  detail  in other  Puranas,  such as the Kalika 
Purana. While Vishnu was sleeping, the two demons wer e born from his ears. One of  them 
desired to have some honey as soon as he was born. Since the word for honey is madhu, he  came 
to be known as Madhu. The other one looked like an insect. Since the word for insect is kita,  he 
came  to be known  as Kaitabha.  These brothers  attacked  Brahma  and Vishnu  had to fight  with 
them so as to rescue Brahma. The fight went on for five thousand years before Vishnu could  kill 
them. After the demons were killed, the fat (meda) from their bodies formed the earth. That is  the 
reason why the earth is known as  medini.  
 
After  Madhu  and Kaitabha  had been  killed,  Brahma  could  start to create.  He first created, 
through his mental powers, the sons whose names have earlier been mentioned. Since Shiva  had 
promised  that he would  be born as Brahma's  son, Brahma  decided  to perform  tapasya  so as to 
accomplish  this. He prayed  for many  years,  but nothing  happened.  In utter frustration,  Brahma 
began to cry. The ghosts (bhuta and preta) were born from these tears. Brahma was so  disgusted 
at having  created  these  awful  creatures,  that he committed  suicide.  It was then that Shiva  was 
born from Brahma's mouth and Brahma  revived.  
 
(You  will have  noticed  the contradiction.  Earlier,  it had been  stated  that Shiva  was born from  a 
teardrop  and there  had been no mention  of Brahma's  suicide.  The suicide  is not mentioned  in 
other  Puranas  either,  nor is there  any mention  of Shiva  or Rudra  being  born from  a teardrop.  In 
the Vishnu  Purana,  he suddenly  appeared  in Brahma's  lap. In the Padma  Purana,  he was born 
from  Brahma's furrowed  brows).  
 
The baby started to cry as soon as he was  born.  
 
"Don't cry," said Brahma. "Since you cried when you were born, you will be known as  Rudra."  
 
(The  Kurma  Purana  is not specific  on why the baby  cried.  The other  Puranas  state that the baby 
cried for the want of a name. Brahma therefore gave the boy the name of Rudra, as the word  rub 
means  to cry. The boy continued  to cry and Brahma  gave  him several  other  names  as well.  The 
Puranas however disagree about what these various names  were ). 
 
In addition  to Rudra,  Brahma  gave  the boy the names  Bhuva,  Sarva,  Ishana,  Pashupati,  Bhima, 
Ugra  and Mahadeva.  In these  eight  different  forms,  Shiva  was to live in the sun, the water,  the 
sky, the fire, the wind, the trees, the bodies of brahmanas and the moon.  
   
Parvati's Thousand  Names  
Shiva was married to Daksha's daughter Sati. Sati died and was reborn as Parvati, the daughter  of 
Himalaya and his wife Mena (alternatively, Menaka). Parvati was married to  Shiva.  
In fact, Himalaya and Mena prayed so th at they might have the goddess as  their  daughter. 
Pleased with their prayers, the goddess arrived before Himalaya and Mena and showed them  her 
divine form. She also promised them that she would be born as their  daughter.  
 
There  were  a thousand  names  of the goddess  that Himalaya  recited  in the course  of his prayers 
(one thousand  and eight  to be precise).  These  names  are as follows.  For convenience,  we have 
reproduced them in groups of ten names  each.  
 
(1) Shiva, Uma, Paramashakti, Ananta, Nishkala, Amala, Shant a, Maheshvari, Nitya,  Shashvati.  
 
(2) Paramakshara, Achintya, Kevala, Shivatma, Paramatma, Anadi, Avyaya, Shuddha,  Devatma, 
Sarvaga,  
 
(3) Achala, Eka, Anekavibhagastha, Mayatita, Sunirmala, Mahamaheshvari, Satya,  Mahadevai, 
Niranjana,  Kashtha.  
 
(4) Sarvantarastha, Chi tshakti, Atilalasa, Nanda, Sarvvatmika, Vidya, Jyotirupa Amrita,  Akshara, 
Shanti.  
 
(5) Sarvvapratishtha, Nivritti, Amritaprada. Vyomamurti, Vyomalaya, Vyomadhara,  Achyuta, 
Amara, Andinidhana,  Amogha.  
 
(6) Karanatma, Kalakula, Svatahprathamaja, Amritanabhi, Atmasa mshraya,  Praneshvarapriya, 
Mata, Mahamahishaghatini, Pranarupa,  Pradhana -Purushaeshvari.  
 
(7) Sarvvashakti, Kalakara, Jyotsna, Sarvvakaryaniyantri, Sarvvabhuteshvari,  Samsarayoni, 
Sakala, Sarvvashaktisamudbhava, Samsarapota,  Durvara.  
 
(8) Durnirikshya, Durasada, P ranashakti, Pranavidya, Yogini, Paramakala,  Mahavibhuti, 
Durddharsha,  Mulaprakritidsambhava.  
 
(9) Anadyanantavitava, Paramaghapakarshini, Svargasthityan Tarakarani,  Sudurvvachya, 
Duratyaya, Shabdayoni, Shabdamayi, Nadakhya, Nadvigraha,  Anadi.  
 
(10) Avyaktaguna, Mah anada, Sanatani, Akashayoni, Yogastha,  Mahayogeshvareshvari, 
Mahamaya, Sudushpara, Mulaprakriti,  Ishvari.  
 
(11) Pradhana Purushatita, Pradhana Purushatmika, Purana, Chinmayi, Adi  Purusharupini, 
Bhutantavastha, Kutastha, Maha Purushasamjnita, Janmamrityujaratita , Sarvvashaktisamanvita.  
 
(12) Vyapini, Anavachhinna, Pradhananu Praveshinin, Kshetrajnashakti,  Avyaktalakshana, 
Malavarjjita, Anadimayasambinna, Prakritigraha, Mahamayasamutpanna,  Tamasi.  
 
(13) Pourushi, Dheuva, Vyaktatmika, Krishna, Avyaktatmika, Rrakta, Shukla, P rasutika,  Akarya, 
Karyajanani.  (14) Nityaprasavadharmini, SargaPralayanirmukta, Srishtisthityantadharmini,  Brahmagarbha, 
Chaturvimsha, Padmanabha, Achyutatmika, Vaidyuti, Shashvati,  Youni.  
 
(15) Jaganmata, Ishvarapriya, Sarvvadhara, Maharupa, Sarvvaisharyasamannita , Vishvarupa, 
Mahagarbha, Vishveshechhanuvartini, Mahlyasi,  Brahmayoni.  
 
(16) Mahalakshmisamudbhava, Maha Vimana -Madhyastha, Mahanidra, Atmahetuka,  Sarvva - 
Sadharani, Sukshma, Avidya, Paramarthiki, Anantarupa,  Anantastha.  
 
(17) Purushamohini, Devi, Anekakarasamsthan a, Kalatrayavivarjita, Brahmajanma,  Harimurti, 
Brahmakhya, Brahmavishnu -Shivatmika, Brahmeshavishnujanani,  Brahmasamshraya.  
 
(18) Vyakta, Prathamaja, Brahmi, Mahati, Brahmarupini.  Vairagyaishvaryadharmatma. 
Brahmamurti, Hridisthita, Apamyoni,  Svayambhuti.  
 
(19) Mana si, Tattvasambhava, Ishvarani, Sarvvani, Shankararddhasharirini, Bhavani,  Rudrani, 
Mahalakshmi, Ambika, Maheshvara -Samutpanna.  
 
(20) Bhuktimuktifalaprada, Sarvveshvari, Sarvvavandya, Nitamuditamanasa,  Brahmendro - 
Pendranmita, Shankarechhanuvartini, Ishvararddha sanagata,  Maheshvarapativrata, 
Sakridvibhata,  Sarvvartisamudraparishoshini.  
 
(21) Parvati, Himavatputri, Paramanadadyini, Gunadhya, Yogaja, Yogya, Jnanamurti,  Vikashini, 
Savitri,  Kamala.  
 
(22) Lakshmi, Sri, Anantavakshahsthalasthita, Sarojanilaya, Ganga, Yoganidra , Asurardini 
Sarasvati, Sarvvavidya,  Jagajjveyashtha.  
 
(23) Sumangala, Vagdevi Varada, Avachya Kirti, Sarvvarthasadhika, Yogishvari,  Brahmavidya, 
Mahavidya,  Sushobhana.  
 
(24) Guhyavidya, Atmavidya, Dharmavidya,Atmabhavita, Svaha, Vishvambhara,  Siddhi, 
Svadha, Medha,  Dhriti.  
 
(25) Shruti, Niti, Suniti, Sukriti, Madhavi, Naravahini, Pujya, Vibhavati, Soumya,  Bhogini.  
 
(26) Bhogashayini, Shobha, Vamshakari, Lola, Manini, Paramaeshthini,  Trailokyasundari, 
Ramaya, Sundari,  Kamacharini.  
 
(27) Mahanubhava, Sattvastha, Mahamahisha -Mardini,  Padmamala,  Papahara, 
Vichitramaukutangada, Kanta, Chitramabaradhara,  Divyabharana -Bhushita.  
 
(28) Hamsakhya, Vyomanilaya, Jagasrishtivivarddhini, Niyantri, Yantramadhyastha,  Nandini, 
Bhadrakalika, Adityavarna,  Koumari.  (29) Mayuravaravahana, Vrishasanagata, Gouri,  Mahakali, Surarchita, Aditi, Niyata,  Roudri, 
Padmagarbhavivahana.  
 
(30) Virupakshi, Lelihana, Mahasuravinashini, Mahafala, Anavadyangi, Kamarupa,  Vibhavari, 
Koushiki, Vichitraratnamukuta,  Pranatarti -Prabhanjani.  
 
(31) Karshani,  Ratri,  Tridashartivinashini,  Vahurupa , Virupa,  Surupa,  Rupavarjita,  
Bhaktartishamani, Bhavya,  Bhavatapavinashini.  
 
(32) Nirguna, Nityavibhava, Nihsara, Nirapatrapa, Tapasvini, Samagiti,  Bhavankanilayalaya, 
Diksha, Vidyadhari,  Dipta.  
 
(33) Manendrarinipatini, Sarvvatishayini, Vidya, Sarvvasiddhipradyini , Sarvveshvarapriya, 
Tarkshi, Samudrantaravasini, Akalanka,  Niradhara.  
 
(34) Nityashiddha, Niramaya, Kamadhenu, Vrihadgarbha, Dhimati, Mohanashini,  Nihsankalpa, 
Niratanka,  Vinaya.  
 
(35) Vinayapriya,  Jvalamalasahasradhya,  Devadevi,  Manomayi,  Mahabhagavati,  Bhaga,  
Vasudevasamudbhava,  Mahendrapendrabhagini.  
 
(36) Bhaktigamya, Paravara, Jnanajneya, Jaratita, Vedantavishaya, Gati, Dakshaina,  Dahana, 
Danta,  Sarvvabhutanamaskrita.  
 
(37) Yoganmaya,  Vibhagajna,  Mahamoha,  Gariyasi,  Sandhya,  Brahmavidyashraya,  
Vijankurasamudhbuti, Mahas hakti, Mahamati,  Kshanti.  
 
(38) Prajna,  Chiti,  Samvit,  Mahabhogindra -Shayini,  Vikriti,  Shankari,  Shanti,  
Ganagandharvasevita, Vaishvanari,  Mahashala.  
 
(39) Devasena, Guhapriya, Maharatri, Shivananda, Shachi, Duhsvapnanashini, Ijya,  Pujya, 
Jagaddhatri,  Durvineya.  
 
(40) Surpini, Guhalvika, Gunotpatti, Mahapitha, Marutsuta, Havyavahantaragadi,  Havyavahasa - 
Mudhbhava, Jagadyoni, Jaganmata,  Janmamrityujaratiga.  
 
(41) Vuddhi,  Mahavuddhimati,  Purushantaravasini,  Tarasvini,  Samadhistha,  Trinetra,  
Divisamsthita, Sarvvendriyamanomata, S arvvabhutahridisthita,  Samsaratarini.  
 
(42) Sattvashuddhikari,  Shuddhi,  Malatrayavinashini,  Jagatpriya,  Jaganmurti,  Trimurti,  
Amritashraya, Nirashraya, Nirahara,  Nirankushapododbhava.  
 
(43) Surupa, Bhavini, Harini, Prabha, Unmilani, Sarvasaha, Sarvvapratyayasakshini , Susoumya, 
Chandravadana,  Tandavasaktamanasa.  (44) Sativashuddhikari,  Shuddhi,  Malatrayavinashini,  Jagatpriya,  Jaganmurti,  Trimurti,  
Amritashya, Nirashraya, Nirahara,  Nirankushapadodbhava.  
 
(45) Chakrahasta,  Viochitrangi,  Sragvini,  Padmadharini,  Paravaravidhanajna , 
Mahapuushapurvaja, Vishveshvarapriya, Vidyut, Vidyujjihva, Jitashrama.  
 
(46) Vidyamayi,  Sahasrakshi,  Sahasravadanatmaja,  Sahasrarashmi,  Sattvastha,  
Maheshvarapadashraya, Kshalini, Mrinmayi, Vyapta,  Padmavodhika.  
 
(47) Taijasi, Mahamayashraya, Manya, Mahadevamanaor ama, Vyomalakshmi,  Simharatha, 
Chekitana, Amitaprabha, Vireshvari,  Vimanastha.  
 
(48) Vishoka, Shokanashini, Anahata, Kundalini, Nalini, Padmabhasini, Sadananda,  Sadakriti, 
Vagdevata,  Sarvvabhutashrayasthita.  
 
(49) Brahmakala,  Vishnushivagraja,  Paragati,  Kshobhika,  Bandhika,  Bhedya,  
Bhedabhedavivarjita, Kalalita,  Kalarani.  
 
(50) BrahmaSri,  Brahmahridaya,  Vyomashakti,  Kriyashakti,  Jamashakti,  Abhinna,  
Bhinnasamsthana, Vashini, Vamshakarini,  Guhyashakti.  
 
(51) Gunatita, Sarvada, Sarvatomukhi, Bhagini, Bhagavatpatni, Sakala, Kala karini,  Sarvvavit, 
Sarvvatobhadra.  
 
(52) Guhyatita, Guharani, Prakriya, Yogamata, Ganga, Vishveshareshvari, Kapila,  Akapila, 
Kanta,  Kamalabha.  
 
(53) Kalantara,  Punya,  Pushkarini,  Bhoktri,  Puranadarapurahsara,  Poshani, 
Paramaishvaryabhutida, Bhutibhushana,  Panchabrah masamutpatti.  
 
(54) Paramarthavigraha,  Dharmodaya,  Bhanumati,  Yogijneya,  Manojava,  Manorama,  
Manoraska, Tapasi, Vadarupini,  Vedashakti.  
 
(55) Vedamata, Vedavidyaprakashini, Yogeshvareshvari, Mata, Mahashakti, Manomayi,  , 
Viyanmurti, Vidyunmala,  Vihayasi.  
 
(56) Kinnari,  Surabhi,  Vidya,  Nandini,  Nandivallabha,  Bharatai,  Paramananda,  
Paraparavibhedika, Sarvvapraharanopeta,  Kamya.  
 
(57) Kameshvareshvari, Achintya, Anantavibhava, Bhulekha, Kanakaprabha,  Kushmandi, 
Dhanaratnadhya, Sugandha, Gandhadayini,  Trivikramapadodbhuta.  
 
(58) Dhanu shpani, Shivodaya, Sudurlabla, Dhanadhyaksha, Dhanya, Pingalalochana,  Shanti, 
Prabhavati, Dipti,  Pankajayatalochana.  (59) Adya, Hritamalodbhuta, Gomata, Ranapriya, Satkriya, Girisha, Shuddhi,  Nityapushta, 
Nirantara,  Durga.  
 
(60) Katyayani, Chandi, Charichitanga, Su vigraha, Hiranyavarna, Jagati,  Jagadyantrapravartika, 
Sarada, Mandaradrinivasa,  Svarnamalini.  
 
(61) Ratnamala, Ratnagarbha, Pushti, Vishvapramathini, Padmanana, Padmanibha,  Nityatushta, 
Amritodbhava, Dhunvati,  Dushprakampa.  
 
(62) Suryamata, Drishadvati, Mahendrabhag ini, Soumya, Varenya, Varadayika,  Kalyani, 
Kamalavasa, Panchachuda,  Varaprada.  
 
(63) Vachya,  Amareshvari,  Vandhya,  Durjjaya,  Duratikrama,  Kalaratri,  Mahabega, 
Virabhadrapriya, Hita,  Bhadrakali.  
 
(64) Jaganmata,  Bhaktamangaladayini,  Karala,  Pingalakara,  Kamabheda,  Mahasvana,  
Yashasvini, Yashoda, Shadadhvaparivartika,  Shankhini.  
 
(65) Padmini, Sankhya, Samkhyayogapravartika, Chaitra, Samvatsararuda,  Jagatsampuranai, 
Indraja, Shumbhari, Khechari,  Khastha.  
 
(66) Kamburgriva,  Kalipriya,  Khagadhvaja,  Khagaruda,  Varahai,  Pugamalini,  
Aishvaryapadmanilaya, Virakta, Garudasana,  Jayanti.  
 
(67) Hridguhagamya, Shankareshtaganagrani, Samyastha, Sankalpasiddha, Sarvvavijnandayini, 
Kalikalkavihantrui, Guhyanpanishaduttama, Nishtha,  Drishti.  
 
(68) Smriti,  Vyapi,  Pushti,  Tushti,  Kriyavati,  Vishvamareshva sreshana,  Bhukti,  Mukti,  Shiva, 
Amrita.  
 
(69) Lohitasarpamala, Bhisani, Naramalini, Anantashayana, Ananta,  Naranarayanodbhava, 
Nrisimhi, Daityamathini, Shankachakragadadhara,  Ambika.  
 
(70) Sankarshanasamutpatti,  Padasamshrava,  Mahajvala,  Mahabhuti,  Sumurti, 
Sarvvaka madhuka, Suprabha, Sustani, Souri,  Dharmakamarthamokshada.  
 
(71) Bhrumadhyanilaya, Purva, PuranaPurusharani, Mahavibhutida, Madhya,  Sarojanayana, 
Sama, Anadya, Nilotpaladalaprabha,  Asthadashabhuja.  
 
(72) Sarvvashaktyasanaruda, Dharmadharmavivarjita, Vairagyajnananir ata, Niraloka,  Nirindriya, 
Vichitragahanadhara, Shvashvatasthanavasini, Sthaneshvari, Nirananda,  Trishulavaradharini.  
 
(73) Asheshadevatamurti,  Devatavaradevata,  Ganambika,  Giriputri,  Nishumbhavinipatini,  
Avarna, Varnarahita, Trivarna, Jivasambhava,  Anantavarna . (74) Ananyastha, Shankari, Shantamanasa, Agotra, Gomati, Goptri, Guhyarupa, Gunottara,  Go, 
Gih. 
 
(75) Govyapriya,  Gouni,  Ganeshvaranamaskrita,  Satyabhama,  Satyasandha,  Trisandhya,  
Sandhivarjita, Sarvvavadashraya, Samkhya,  Samkhyayogasamudbhava.  
 
(76) Asamkhyeya,  Apram aeyakhya,  Shunya,  Suddakulodbhava,  Vindunadasamutpatti,  
Shambhuvasa, Shashiprabha, Pishanga, Bhedarahita,  Manojna.  
 
(77) Madhusudani, MahaSri, Srisamutapatti, Tamohparepratishthita, Tritattvamata,  Trividha, 
Susukshmapadasamshraya, Shantyatita, Malatita,  Nirvika ra. 
 
(78) Nirashraya,  Shivakhya,  Chittanilaya,  Kashyapai,  Shivajnanasvarupini,  
Daityadanavanirmukhi, Kalakarnika, Shastrayoni, Kriyamurti,  Chatruvargapradarshika.  
 
(79) Narayani, Narodbhuti, Koumudi, Lingadharini, Karmuki, Kalita, Bhava,  Paravaravibhutida, 
Vadava,  Pararddhajatamahima.  
 
(80) Vamalochana, Subhadra, Devaki, Sita, Manasvini, Vedavedangaparaga,  Manyumata, 
Mahamanyusamundbhava, Amanyu,  Amritasvada.  
 
(81) Puruhuta, Purushatuta, Ashouchya, Bhinnavishaya, Hiranyarajatapriya,  Hiranyarajani, 
Haimi, Hemabharanabhushita, Vibhrajamana,  Durjneya.  
 
(82) Jyotishtomafalaprada, Mahnidrasamudbhyuti, Anidra, Satyadevata, Dirgha,  Kakudmini, 
Hridya, Shantida, Shantivarddhini,  Lakshyadishaktijanani.  
 
(83) Shaktichakrapravartika,  Trishaktijanani,  Janya,  Shadurmiparivarjita,  Sudhama,  
Karmakarani , Yugantadahanatmika, Sankarshini, Jagaddhatri, Kamayoni.  
 
(84) Kiritini, Aindri, Trailokyanamita, Vaishnavi, Paramaeshvari, Pradyumnadayita,  Datri, 
Yugamadrishti, Trilochana,  Madotkata.  
 
(85) Hamsagati, Prachanda, Chandavikrama, Vrishavesha, Vishyanmatra,  Vindhyapa rvatavasini, 
Himavanmerunilaya, Kailasagirivasini, Chanurahantritanaya, Nitijna.  
 
(86) Kamarupini, Vedavedya, Vratasnata, Brahmashailanivasini, Virabhadrapraja, Vira,  Siddha, 
Mahakamasamudbhava,  Vidyanadharanirakriti.  
 
(87) Apyayani, Haranti, Pavani, Poshani, Kala, Matrika, Manmathodbhuta, Varija,  Vahanapriya, 
Sudha.  
 
(88) Karishini, Vani, Vinavadanatatpara, Sevita, Sevika, Sevya, Garudatmati,  Arundhati, 
Hiranyakshi.  (89) Mrigakshi, Manadayini, Vasuprada, Vasumati, Vasudhara, Vasundhara,  Dharadhara, 
Vararoha, Characharasahsra da, Srifala.  
 
(90) Srimati, Srisha, Srinivasa, Shivapriya, Sridhari, Srikari, Kalya,  Sridhararddhasharirini, 
Anantadrishti,  Akshudra.  
 
(91) Dhatrisha, Dhanadapriya, Daityasamuhaniyantri, Simhika, Simhavahana,  Suvarchala, 
Sushroni, Sukirti, Chhinnasamshaya,  Rasajna.  
 
(92) Rasada, Rama, Lelihana, Amritasrava, Nityodita, Svayamjyotih, Utsuka,  Mritajivani, 
Vajratunda,  Vajrajihva.  
 
(93) Mangalya, Mangala, Mala, Nirmala, Malaharini, Gandharvi, Garudai,  Chandri, 
Kambalashvatarapriya,  Soudamini.  
 
(94) Janananda, Bhrikutikutilanana, Karnika rakara, Kakshya, Kamsapranapaharini,  Yugandhara, 
Yugavarta, Trisandhya, Harshavardhini,  Pratyakshadevata.  
 
(95) Divya, Divyagandhathivasana, Shakrasanagata, Shakri, Sadhya, Charusharasana,  Ishta, 
Vishishta, Shishteshta,  Shishtashishtaprapujita.  
 
(96) Shatarupa, Sha tavarta, Vinata, Surabhi, Sura, Surendramata, Sudyumna,  Sushumna, 
Suryasamsthita,  Samiksha.  
 
(97) Satpratishtha, Nivritti, Jnanaparaga, Dharmashastrarthakushala, Dharmajna,  Dharmavahana, 
Dharmadharmavinirmatri, Dharmikamangalaprada, Dharmamayi,  Dharmashakti.  
 
(98) Vidharma, Vishvadharmini, Dharmantara, Dharmamayi, Dharmapurva,  Dhanavaha, 
Dharmopadeshtri, Dharmaksha, Dharmagamya, Dharadhara.  
 
(100) Mahadevaikasakshini, Sadashiva, Vishaynmurti, Vedamurti, Amurtika,  Paramaeshvari, 
Shobha, Vishala, Prasannavadana,  Hrisht atma.  
 
This completes the list of the one thousand names given to the goddess. Although Himalaya  had 
used on thousand and eight names in the course of his prayers, ten of these names are missing  in 
the list. You will also have noticed that a few of the nam es occur more than  once.  
   
 
The Line of  Uttanapada  
It is hoped that you have not forgotten that Svayambhuva Manu and his wife Shatarupa had a  son 
named Uttanapada. Uttanapada's brother was Priyavarta. Dhruva was Uttanapada's son.  Dhruva 
was so devoted  to Vishnu that Vishnu  earmarked  for him a place  in the heaven  known  as 
Dhruvaloka.  (Dhruva  became  the Pole Star. The complete  story  of Dhruva  and his tapasya  in 
given in the Vishnu  Purana).  
Also in Uttanapada's line was born Chakshusha. He became a manu. (Chaks husha was the  sixth 
Manu of the present kalpa). In Chakshusha Manu's line was born Vena, and Vena's son  was 
Prithu. Prithu milked the earth and obtained foodgrains on which people can survive. That is  the 
reason why the earth is known as Prithivi. (Prithu' s story is given in several Puranas, in  addition 
to the Mahabharataa and the  Harivamsha).  
 
Prithu's son was Shikhandi and Shikhandi's son was Sushila. Sushila was a very religious  person. 
He faithfully  studied  the Vedas  and visited  several  places  of pilgri mage.  His travels  eventually 
brought him to the Himalayas, through which the sacred river Mandakini flowed. Near the  banks 
of the river  was a beautiful  hermitage.  It was there  that Sushila  began  to pray to Shiva.  While 
Sushila  was thus praying,  a sage name d Shvetashvatara  arrived.  The sage's  body  was lean with 
tapasya and he was smeared with  ashes.  
 
Sushila  finished  praying  to Shiva  and worshipped  the sage.  "I am indeed  fortunate  that I have 
met you," he told Shvetashvatara. "Please make me your disciple an d teach me all that there is  to 
know."  
 
The sage agreed.  He taught  Sushila  and several  other  disciples  the knowledge  of the shastras 
(sacred  texts).  
 
Shikhandi had a brother named Havirddhana. Havirddhana's son was Prachinavarhi. He  married 
Savarna,  the daughter  of the ocean,  and had ten sons.  These  sons were  known  as the Prachetas. 
The Prachetas  were  devoted  to Vishnu  and prayed  to Vishnu  for several  years.  (The  Vishnu 
Purana  states  that they meditated  for ten thousand  years  under  the ocean.)  All ten Prachetas 
married  Marisha  and Daksha  was born as a result  of this marriage.  (Marisha's  story  is given  in 
the Vishnu  Purana.)  It was this Daksha  who had earlier  been  born as Brahma's  son. Because  he 
quarrelled with Shiva, Shiva cursed Daksha that he would be bo rn as the son of the  Prachetas.  
 
"Tell us the story of Daksha," the sages requested  Lomaharshana.  
 
(The  Prachetas  are not to be confused  with a sage named  Pracheta.  The sage Pracheta  was 
Brahma's son, as per the Brahmavaivarta  Purana.)  
   
 
Daksha's  Story  
Daks ha was Brahma's  son and had a daughter  named  Sati. Sati was married  to Shiva.  Daksha 
was thus Shiva's  father -in-law. 
 
Once  Daksha  came  to visit his son-in-law. But although  Shiva  worshipped  him with all due 
respect,  Daksha  felt that he had been  slighted.  Subsequently,  when  Sati went  to visit her father, 
Daksha severely reprimanded  her. 
 
"Your  husband  is worse  than useless,"  he told his daughter.  "My other  sons-in-law are far 
superior to him. You are not welcome in my house. Return to your worthless  husband. " 
Sati could  not bear to hear this abuse  of her husband  and immolated  herself.  She was later born 
as Parvati, the daughter of Himavana (the Himalayas) and married Shiva  again.  
 
Shiva was furious to learn that Sati had died. He visited Daksha and cursed hi m that he would  be 
born on earth  as the son of a kshatriya.  It was thus that Daksha  had been  born as the son of the 
Prachetas.  
 
(Dakhsa's  story  is full of inconsistencies  in the Puranas.  There  is an account  of a yajna  that 
Daksha performed. Shiva either de stroyed this yajna himself, or had it destroyed by  Virabhadra. 
But which Daksha performed this yajna, the one who was the son of Brahma or the one who  was 
the son of Prachetas? The Kurma Purana suggests that it was the son of the Prachetas  who 
performed th is ceremony. The more customary account, such as that in the Bhagavata Purana,  is 
that it was Brahma's son who performed the sacrifice. Daksha was angered at Shiva because,  on 
one particular occasion, Shiva did not stand up to show him respect, although Da ksha happened 
to be Shiva's father -in-law. Daksha therefore organised a yajna to which he did not invite  Shiva. 
Sati went to the ceremony uninvited, and immolated herself when her father started criticise  her 
husband. Hearing of Sati's death, Shiva destroy ed the yajna. He also cursed Daksha that  Daksha 
would have to be born as the son of the  Prachetas.)  
 
To return  to the account  of the Kurma  Purana,  the Daksha,  who was the son of the Prachetas, 
organised  a yajna.  All the gods  and sages  were  invited  to this ceremony.  But as a result  of 
Daksha's earlier enmity with his son -in-law, Shiva was not  invited.  
 
There  was a sage named  Dadhichi  who protested  at this slight  to Shiva.  "How  can you have  a 
religious ceremony without inviting Shiva?" he told  Daksha.  
 
"Shiv a is a worthless  fellow,"  replied  Daksha.  "He is not fit to be worshipped  together  with the 
other gods. He wears skulls and destroys all that is created. How can he be treated as an equal  of 
the great Vishnu, the preserver of all that one can see? My yajna  is dedicated to Vishnu. It is not 
meant for the likes of  Shiva."  
 
Dadhichi tried to persuade Daksha that Shiva should not be ignored, but Daksha was in no  mood 
to listen.  Dadhichi  refused  to take part in such a yajna  and assured  Daksha  that his ceremony 
would not be successfully completed. He also cursed the other sages, who had  sided  with 
Daksha, that they would go to hell and would deviate from the path laid down in the Vedas.  (The 
Mahabharataa  also records  Dadhichi's  protest.  According  to the Mahabhara taa, Dadhichi  was 
devoted to  Shiva.)   
Daksha went ahead with his yajna. The other gods, including Vishnu, came to attend  the 
ceremony.  
 
Meanwhile,  Parvati  got to know  about  the yajna  and told Shiva,  "How  can there  be a ceremony 
at which  you are not invited ? Although  Daksha  used to be my father  in my earlier  life, this evil 
act of his should not be condoned. Please destroy the  ceremony."  
(If one goes by the more customary account, the question of Parvati's asking Shiva to destroy  the 
yajna does not arise. S ati died on the occasion of the ceremony and it was the grief of Sati's  death 
that led Shiva to exact vengeance. This happened much before Parvati was born as the  daughter 
of Himavana.)  
 
Because of Parvati's bidding, Shiva created a demon named Virabhadra.  Virabhadra had  a 
thousand heads, a thousand feet, a thousand eyes and a thousand arms. His body shone  with 
radiance  like the sun at the time of destruction.  The thousand  arms  held all sorts  of weapons  in 
them.  
 
"What are my orders?" Virabhadra asked  Shiva . 
"Go and destroy Daksha's yajna," was the  reply.  
Virabhadra ascended a bull and set out for Daksha's house. He created thousands and  thousands 
of demons who would aid him in the task of destruction. These demons were armed with  spears, 
tridents,  maces,  clubs and stones.  Parvati  also created  a goddess  named  Bhadrakali  who would 
help Virabhadra.  
 
This strange army arrived at the place where the yajna was being held and said, "We are  Shiva's 
followers. We have come to receive Shiva's share of the  offerings."  
 
"No offerings have been earmarked for Shiva," replied the gods and the sages. "He has not  even 
been invited to the  sacrifice.  
 
These words angered Virabhadra and he began his task of destruction. His companions  uprooted 
the scaffoldings that had been ere cted on the occasion of the sacrifice. The sacrificial horse  was 
flung  into the waters  of the river  Ganga.  (This  was an ashvamedha  yajna  (horse  sacrifice)  that 
was being performed on the banks of the river  Ganga.  
 
Virabhadra  caught  hold of Bhaga  (identifie d as the sun-god Surya)  and tore out his eyes.  He 
smashed  the teeth  of the god Pusha  (also  identified  as another  manifestation  of the sun-god 
Surya).  As for the moon -god Chandra,  Virabhadra  gave  him a resounding  kick and sent him 
reeling. The fire -god Agni  had his arms and tongue sliced off by Virabhadra's companions.  The 
sages were kicked and  boxed.  
 
Vishnu himself came to intervene and Virabhadra began to fight with  Vishnu.  
 
Vishnu has a wonderful weapon named sudarshana chakra (a bladed -discuss) and he h urled  this 
at Virabhadra. But Virabhadra easily repelled this weapon with his arrows. Vishnu is carried  by 
Garuda, king of the birds. Garuda attacked Virabhadra, but so fierce was Virabhadra, that  Garuda 
had to flee. The entire universe marvelled to see th at Virabhadra could thus vanquish Vishnu  and 
Garuda.  Brahma  now arrived  and sought  to put an end to the fighting.  He started  to pray to Shiva  and 
Shiva  and Parvati  arrived  on the scene.  The assembled  gods  and sages  also began  to pray to 
Shiva and Parvati.  Parvati was moved to pity by these  prayers.  
 
"These  gods  and sages  have  now sought  refuge  with you,"  she told Shiva.  "Please  pardon  them 
their sins."  
 
"Agreed,"  replied  Shiva.  "You  have  my blessing  snow.  But please  remember  that one cannot 
have a religiou s ceremony without I being  worshipped."  
 
The gods  and the sages  realised  that Shiva  was no different  from  Vishnu.  They  were  really  one 
and the same, different manifestations of the same universal  force.  
 
When Daksha had earlier been born as the son of Brah ma, he had married Asikli, the daughter  of 
Virana.  (There  is a minor  contradiction  here as well.  Earlier,  the Kurma  Purana  has stated  that 
Daksha's  wife was Prasuti.  It is of course  possible  that Prasuti  and Asikli  were  different  names 
for the same  individ ual.) 
 
Daksha  and Asikli  had one thousand  sons.  But the sage Narada  had persuaded  these  sons to 
become  hermits,  disinterested  in worldly  pursuits.  (The  Vishnu  Purana  given  a more  complete 
account. First, five thousand sons named the Haryashvas had been bo rn and Narada  had 
persuaded  these  sons to become  hermits.  Next,  one thousand  sons named  the Shavalashvas  had 
been born and these had also become hermits at Narada's instigation. Thereafter, sixty  daughters 
had been  born.)  
 
To return to the account of Kurma  Purana, Daksha and Asikli had had sixty daughters had  been 
married to Dharma, Brahma's son. (There is again a contradiction. In the section on creation,  the 
Kurma Purana had stated that thirteen daughters had been married to Dharma.) The ten  daughters 
who had been  married  to Dharma  were  Marutvati,  Vasu,  Yami,  Lamba,  Bhanu,  Arundhati, 
Sankalpa, Muhurta, Sadhya and Vishva. Vishva's sons were the gods known as the  vishvadevas, 
Sadhya's  sons the gods  known  as the sadhyas,  Marutvati's  sons the gods  known  as the bhanus. 
(More  usually,  the Puranas  have  a completely  different  account  of the birth  of the maruts.  They 
were  born as the sons of Diti, Kashyapa's  wife.)  Muhurta  gave  birth  to time,  Lamba  to cattle 
(ghosha), Yami to snakes (nagas), Arundhati to all the obj ects (vishaya) on earth and Sankalpa  to 
resolution  (sankalpa).  
 
Thirteen of Daksha's daughters had been married to the sage Kashyapa. Their names were  Aditi, 
Diti, Arishta, Danu, Surasa, Khasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasha, Ira, Kadru and  Muni. 
Twel ve gods  known  as the adityas  were  born as the sons of Aditi.  Their  names  were  Amsha, 
Dhata, Bhaga, Tvashta, Mitra, Varuna, Aryama, Vivasvana, Savita, Pusha, Amshumana  and 
Vishnu.  
 
Danu's sons were demons (danavas). Chief among them were Tara, Shambara, Kap ila, Shankara, 
Svarbhanu and Vrishaparva. (Some Puranas mention forty such  sons.)  
Surasa gave birth to the Gandharvas. (More usually, it is stated that Surasa was the mother of  the 
snakes  (nagas).)  
 
Aristha's sons were thousands and thousands of snakes  (sarpas). 
Kadru's sons were also snakes  (nagas).  Tamra's daughters were the ancestors of the birds. Surabhi gave birth to cows and buffaloes  and 
Ira to trees and  herbs.  
 
Khasa was the mother of yakshas (demi -gods), Muni of apsaras and Krodhavasha of  rakshasa s. 
 
Vinata had two sons named Garuda and Aruna. These two sons performed very difficult  tapasya. 
Garuda pleased Vishnu and obtained the boon that he would carry Vishnu around. Aruna  pleased 
Shiva and obtained the boon that he would become the sun's chariot eer. (The story of the  rivalry 
between  Vinata  and Kadru  and their respective  offspring  is given  in the Bhagavata  and Matsya 
Puranas.)  
 
This leaves Diti. She had two sons named Hiranyakashipu and  Hiranyaksha. These two  sons 
were  demons  and their children  came  to be known  as the daityas.  Hiranyakashipu  was elder  to 
Hiranyaksha.  (The  Puranas  do not agree  on this. In some  Puranas,  Hiranyaksha  is referred  to as 
the elder  brother.)  
  Hiranyakashipu  
Hiranyakashipu pleased Brahma through his prayers. As a result o f the boon that he  received 
from  Brahma,  he became  invisible  and started  to oppress  the world.  He drove  the gods  out of 
heaven.  
 
The gods and the sages went to Brahma to persuade him to do something about  Hiranyakashipu.  
 
"I cannot  really  help you,"  said Brahma.  "Go to the northern  shores  of the great  ocean  and pray 
to Vishnu there. I will accompany you. It is Vishnu alone who can find a  solution."  
 
Brahma led the gods and the sages to the shores of the great ocean and started to pray to  Vishnu 
there.  
 
Vish nu appeared before them. "Why have all of you come here?" he asked. "What do you  want?"  
 
"It is Hiranyakashipu,"  replied  the gods  and the sages.  "He is oppressing  the world  thanks  to a 
boon received from Brahma. Because of the boon, he can only be killed b y you. Please kill  him 
and save the  universe."  
 
Vishnu created a being out of his body. This being was as gigantic as Mount Sumeru and held  a 
lotus  (padma),  a conch -shell  (shankha)  and a mace  (gada)  in his hands.  "Go and kill 
Hiranyakashipu," Vishnu instru cted the  being.  
The being  thereupon  ascended  Garuda  and left for Hiranyakashipu's  capital.  His roars  made  the 
ramparts of the city  quake.  
 
Hiranyakashipu  had four sons named  Prahlada,  Anuhrada,  Samhrada  and Hrada.  (The  more 
usual  names  are Prahlada,  Anuhl ada, Samhlada  and Hlada.)  Accompanied  by Hirayakashipu's 
demon soldiers, these four sons came out to fight with the being easily repelled all of these.  The 
four princes  then unleashed  divine  weapons  on the being.  Prahlada  used brahmastra,  Anuhrada 
vaishnav astra, Samhrada koumarastra and Hrada agneyastra. But these divine weapons could  do 
the wonderful being no harm. He merely picked up the princes and flung them far  away.  
 
On seeing  that his sons had thus been  disposed  of, Hiranyakashipu  came  to fight.  He gave the 
being a resounding kick on his chest and the creature fled in pain to  Vishnu.  
 
Vishnu now realised that he would have to take care of Hiranyakashipu himself. He adopted  the 
form of a being who was a half -man and half -lion. Since nara means man and simha means  lion, 
this came to be known as the narasimha incarnation (avatara) of  Vishnu.  
 
"Go and kill this peculiar creature," Hiranyakashipu instructed  Prahlada.  
 
Prahlada  and his brothers  tried to fight  with Vishnu,  but were  defeated  easily.  Hiranyaka shipu 
now sent his brother  Hiranyakasha  to fight.  Hiranyakasha  used several  weapons  on Vishnu, 
including the diving weapon known as Pashupata. But these weapons could do Vishnu no  harm.  
 
Meanwhile, Prahlada had realised that this being could be none other than Vishnu. He started  to 
pray to Vishnu.  He requested  his brothers,  uncle  and father  not to fight  with Vishnu.  Vishnu 
smote  Hiranyakashipu's  chest  with his claws  and thereby  killed  him. He also killed  Anuhrada, 
Samhrada and  Hrada.   
(A fairly  common  story  in the Puranas,  such as the Vishnu  Purana,  is the story  of Prahlada. 
Despite being Hiranyakashipu's son, Prahlada was devoted to Vishnu from his  childhood. 
Hiranyakashipu had no desire to have a son who was devoted to Vishnu and did his level best  to 
kill Prahlada. But Prahlada was protected by Vishnu and survived all these attempts. In the final 
incident,  narasimha  appeared  while  Hiranyakashipu  was arguing  with Prahlada  and killed  the 
demon -king. Vishnu then crowned Prahlada king in Hiranyakashipu's place . There was  no 
question  of Hiranyaksha  becoming  king after Hiranyakashipu.  In the more  common  account, 
Hiranyaksha  was the elder  brother  and had already  been  killed  by Vishnu  in his boar (Varaha) 
incarnation. It was Hiranyakasha's death that led to Hiranya kashipu's hatred of Vishnu. There  is 
thus some variance between this more common account and that related by the Kurma  Purana.)  
   
 
Hiranyaksha  
After Hiranyakashipu died, Hiranyaksha became the king of the  demons.  
 
Hiranyaksha  promptly  began  to oppress  the world. He defeated  the gods  and drove  them  out of 
heaven.  He also took the earth  down  to the underworld.  The gods  again  went  to Brahma  in 
search of a solution and Brahma took them to Vishnu. They prayed to Vishnu so  that 
Hiranyaksha might be  killed.  
 
Vishnu  adopted  the form  of a boar and killed  Hiranyaksha.  He also raised  the earth  up to its 
rightful place. (This was the story that was alluded to when the Kurma Purana  mentioned 
Vishnu's boar  incarnation.)  
 
When Hiranyaksha was killed, Prahlada became the kin g of demons. Initially, he ruled well.  He 
worshipped  Vishnu  and performed  yajnas.  The kingdom  thrived  and prospered.  But on one 
occasion, Prahlada forgot to worship a brahmana through  inadvertence.  
 
The brahmana  was furious  as he thought  that Prahlada  had done  this knowingly.  "You  have 
dared  to ignore  me because  you thank  that you are blessed  by Vishnu,"  said the brahmana.  "I 
curse you that you will forget all about Vishnu. Your delusions will make you fight with  Vishnu 
and you will lose all your  powers."  
 
As a result  of the brahmana's  curse,  Prahlada  deviated  from  the righteous  path.  He ignored  the 
brahmanas and the Vedas. He desired to have revenge on Vishnu for having killed his father  and 
uncle.  Prahlada  fought  a long and bitter  war with Vishnu.  When  he was eventually  defeated  by 
Vishnu, he realised the folly of his evil ways and sought refuge with  Vishnu.  
 
After Prahlada's death, Hiranyaksha's son Andhaka became the king of the  demons.  
   
 
A Digression on  Goutama  
Many  years  ago, there  was a terrible  drough t on earth.  There  was no food to be had and famine 
prevailed. There were several sages who lived in the forest, and they too, suffered from a lack  of 
food.  
 
Goutama  was a very powerful  sage and he had a hermitage  in the forest.  Such  were  the powers 
that Goutama  had that it never  stopped  raining  in his hermitage.  There  was no famine  there  and 
plenty of food was to be had. The other sages therefore went to Goutama's hermitage and  begged 
him to provide them with food and shelter. This request Goutama readily a greed to, and the  sages 
lived there  happily.  
 
After  twelve  years  had passed,  it began  to rain again.  The drought  had passed  and foodgrains 
started to grow. The sages no begged their leave of  Goutama.  
 
"Stay for a few more days," said Goutama. "Be my guests  and bless my  household."  
 
The sages  tarried,  but they were  jealous  of Goutama  and his powers.  They  therefore  plotted  to 
bring about Goutama's downfall. With their own powers, they created a black calf. This calf  was 
nothing  but an illusion.  But having  created it, the sages  sent it to Goutama.  Goutama  found  the 
calf wandering around and decided to take it to his cowshed. But as soon as he touched the  calf, 
the calf seemed  to die. All this was because  of the illusion,  but Goutama  did not know  this. He 
was th understruck at having killed a  cow.  
"You  are evil, you have  killed  a cow,"  the sages  told Goutama.  "It would  be a sin to remain  as 
your guest. We are  leaving."  
 
By then,  Goutama  had got to know  that the calf had been  an illusion.  He was extremely  angry 
with the sages and cursed them, "because you have been evil, you have deviate from the path  laid 
down by the Vedas. You will rot in hell and will have to be born several times to be freed of  your 
sins."  
 
The sages started to pray to Vishnu and Shiva. They wi shed that their sins might be  cleansed.  
 
"What shall we do with these sages?" Shiva asked Vishnu. "Shall we pardon them? They  are 
praying for  deliverance."  
 
"Never,"  replied  Vishnu.  "Those  who do not follow  what  is laid down  in the Vedas  will surely 
rot in hell. But since  they are not permitted  to follow  the sacred  shastras,  let us compose  some 
other  shastras  for them.  They  will follow  those  evil shastras,  rot in hell and be born on earth 
several times. That is their  penance."  
 
To delude  the sages,  Shiva  himself  pretended  to be a great  religious  teacher.  He preached  evil 
ways and the stupid brahmanas began to follow what he  preached.  
   
 
Andhaka  
While  Shiva  was gone,  he left his companion  Nandi  to look after his household.  He also gave 
Vishnu the overall respo nsibility of ensuring that all was well with Parvati and the gods and  the 
sages.  
 
Realising that Shiva was away, Andhaka thought that this was the opportune moment  for 
abducting Parvati. He found that Nandi stood guard at the entrance to Shiva's house and began  to 
fight with Nandi. Nandi struck Andhaka on the chest with a  trident.  
 
This angered  Andhaka  and he created  a thousand  other  demons  who were  just like him in 
appearance.  This army  of demons  defeated  Nandi  and the gods.  Nandi  did not know  what  to do 
and started to pray to Vishnu. Vishnu created some goddesses from his body and these  goddesses 
killed the demon soldiers. Andhaka also  fled. 
 
After twelve years had passed, Shiva returned and learnt what had  transpired.  
 
By then,  Andhaka  had recovered  and he returned,  determined  in his bid to abduct  Parvati.  Both 
Shiva and Vishnu started to fight with Andhaka's  army.  
 
Vishnu told Shiva, "Kill this demon. No one but you can kill Andhaka. Please kill the demon  and 
deliver the  universe."  
 
Shiva pierced Andhaka' s chest with a trident. He held the trident aloft, with Andhaka  transfixed 
to one of its prongs. And with his trident held aloft, Shiva began to  dance.  
But all the evil had deserted Andhaka's body and mind as soon as he had been pierced by  Shiva's 
trident . He started to pray to Shiva. These prayers pleased  Shiva.  
 
He lowered  the trident  and told Andhaka,  "I am pleased  with your prayers.  My companions  are 
known as the ganas. Stay by my side and be a ganapati, that is, a lord over the ganas. You will  be 
Nand i's companion."  
  Bali 
With Andhaka thus taken care of, Prahlada's son Virochana became the king of the demons.  He 
ruled his kingdom  well.  
 
There was a sage named Sanatakumara who once went to visit Virochana. Virochana  was 
delighted  to see the sage and Sanatakumara  instructed  Virochana  on the true nature  of the 
universe. These teachings so impressed Virochana that he no longer had any desire to be a  king. 
He went off to meditate, after having crowned his son, Bali, as the king of the  demons.  
 
Bali was a goo d and righteous king. He ruled well and observed religious rites faithfully. But  he 
defeated  Indra  and the other  gods  and won over heaven  from  them.  Indra  and the other  gods 
started to pray to Vishnu for  deliverance.  
 
The mother  of all the gods  was Aditi  and she was despondent  at seeing  her children  suffer  thus. 
She too, started to pray to Vishnu. Stirred by these prayers, Vishnu appeared before  Aditi.  
 
"What boon do you desire?" he  asked.  
 
"Please grant me the boon that you will be born as my son." replie d Aditi. "And as my son,  you 
will take care of  Bali."  
 
Vishnu  granted  the boon  and was born as Aditi's  son. As Aditi's  son, Vishnu  studied  the Vedas 
under the sage  Bharadvaja.  
 
Meanwhile, Bali arranged a yajna and Vishnu came to attend the ceremony in the form of  a 
dwarf  (Vamana).  (In more  usual  accounts,  such as the Bhagavata  Purana,  Vishnu  was born as a 
dwarf.)  
 
Bali was not going  to refuse  anything  to anyone  on the occasion  of the sacrifice.  As soon  as he 
saw the dwarf,  he worshipped  him and said, "I am fortunate  that you have  come  to attend  my 
ceremony. Please tell me what I can do for  you."  
"Grant me as much of land as can be covered in three of my footsteps," replied the  dwarf.  
This boon  Bali granted.  The dwarf  immediately  assumed  a gigantic  form.  With one footstep, 
Vishnu covered the entire earth. With a second, he covered the sky. And with the third and  final 
footstep,  he covered  heaven.  The entire  universe  is inside  and egg (anda)  and outside  the egg 
there is water. Vishnu's foot cracked the shell of the egg and some of the water that was  outside,  
poured in. This water began to flow through the sky and became the heavenly Ganga. (The  story 
of the heavenly Ganga (identified as the Milky Way) descending to earth is a separate story.  The 
story of Gan ga being born from Vishnu's body is given in the Brahmavaivarta  Purana.)  
Having traversed all the land that was available, Vishnu resumed his form of a  dwarf. 
"You have now donated to me all the three worlds," he told Bali. "Where will you  stay?" 
"I seek refuge with you," was Bali's  answer.  
Vishnu  then instructed  Bali to go and live in the underworld.  As for heaven,  it was restored  to 
Indra.  
 
This is the story of Vishnu's dwarf (Vamana)  incarnation.   
Vana  
Bali had a hundred sons, the eldest among whom was Vana. Vana was devoted to Shiva. He  was 
also extremely powerful. He defeated Indra and conquered the three  worlds.  
 
Indra and the other gods went to Shiva. "Your devotee, Vana is oppressing us," they told  Shiva. 
"Please take care of  him."  
 
Shiva took up a  single arrow and with this, he completely burnt up Vana's  city. 
 
(This  is deviation  from  the usual  account  of the Puranas,  such as the Vishnu  Purana  or the 
Bhagavata  Purana.  In those  accounts,  Krishna  fought  with Vana  and defeated  him, although 
Shiva  fought on Vana's  side. It was because  of Krishna's  blessings  that Vana  became  Shiva's 
companion. Vana's capital was named  Shonitapura.)  
 
When Vana's city was being burnt up, Vana emerged and started to pray to Shiva's linga  (image 
of Shiva).  Pleased  at Vana's  prayers,  Shiva  made  Vana  a ganapati.  Thus,  Vana  came  to be 
Shiva's constant  companion.  
   
 
The Solar  Dynasty  
The sun -god, Vivasvana, was the son of Kashyapa and Aditi. He had four wives, Samjna,  Rajni, 
Prabha and  Chhaya.  
 
Samjna's son was Vaivasvata Manu. Raj ni's children were Yama, yamuna and Revanta.  Savarni, 
Shani, Tapati and Vishti were Chhaya's children and Prabha's son was  Prabhata.  
 
(The names do not tally across the Puranas. For example, in the Markandeya Purana, the sun  had 
only two wives, Samjna and Chhaya. Yama and Yamuna were also the children of  Samjna.)  
Vaivasvata  Manu  had nine sons.  Their  names  were  Ikshvaku,  Nabhaga,  Arishta,  Karusha  and 
Prishadhra. Manu also had a daughter named Ila, from whom the lunar dynasty  originated.  
 
Ikshvaku's  son was Vikukshi  and this was the line of Kakutstha.  In this line was born Rama,  of 
Ramayana  fame.  
 
The names  of several  kings  of the solar  dynasty  are given.  But these  we will not reproduce,  as 
they are merely a catalogue of  names.  
   
The Lunar  Dynasty  
Budha  was the son of the moon -god Chandra.  Budha  married  Ila and they had a son named 
Pururava.  
 
Pururava married the apsara Urvashi and they had six sons. One of these sons was Ayu and 
amongst Ayu's descendants was a king named  Yayati.  
 
Yayati  had two wives.  The first was Devayani,  daughter  of Shukracharya,  the preceptor  of the 
demons. The second wife was named Sharmishtha and she was the daughter of Vrishaparva,  the 
king of the danavas. Yayati and Devayani had two sons, Yadu and Tursavu. Yayati  and 
Sharmishtha had t hree sons, Druhya, Anu and Puru. When it became time for Yayati to retire  to 
the forest, he gave puru the bulk of the kingdom and Puru's descendants came to be known as  the 
Pauravas.  Yadu  was given  some  land towards  the south -west and his descendants  were  the 
Yadavas. Turvasu ruled to the south -east, Druhya to the west and Anu to the  north.  
 
One of Yadu's descendants was the king Kritavirya and Kritavirya's son became famous  as 
Kartavirya  Arjuna.  He had a thousand  arms  and was the most  skilled  of fighters.  He eventually 
met his death at the hands of  Parashurama.  
 
Kartavirya Arjuna had several hundred sons. But the five most important ones were  Shura, 
Shurasena, Krishna, Dhrishna and Jayadvaja. Jayadvaja was devoted to Vishnu, but his  brothers 
were more incli ned towards the worship of  Shiva.  
 
The four brothers  told Jayadhvaja.  "Stop  worshipping  Vishnu.  Our father  was a devotee  of 
Shiva's and it is our duty to follow the example set by our father. Let us worship  Shiva."  
 
"It is my duty to worship Vishnu," repli ed Jayadhvaja. "Vishnu is the lord of everything, he is  the 
preserver. How can I do  otherwise?"  
 
The brothers debated about the virtues of worshipping Shiva vis -a-vis Vishnu, but could arrive  at 
no consensus.  They  therefore  decided  to seek the advice  of the seven  great  sages  (saptarshi), 
chief amongst whom was  Vashistha.  
 
Vashishtha told the brothers, "One worships the god that one chooses. There are no rules in  this 
regard. All gods yield the desired fruit, if properly worshipped. To the extent that there are rules, 
there are as follows. Kings worship Vishnu and Indra; brahmanas worship Agni, Aditya,  Brahma  
and Shiva;  the gods  worship  Vishnu;  the demons  worship  Shiva;  the yakshas  and gandharvas 
worship  Chandra;  the sages  worship  Brahma  and Shiva;  and women  worship  Parvati.  But for 
humans,  the best way is to realise  that Shiva  is no different  from  Vishnu  and that Shiva  and 
Vishnu should therefore be worshipped  simultaneously."  
 
The Kurma  Purana  also gives  the names  of several  kings  belongings  to the lunar  dynasty.  But 
these we will gloss over, as they are merely only a catalogue of  names.  
   
 
Durjaya and  Urvashi  
There used to be a king named Durjaya. He was learned in the shastras and a good  king. 
His wife was a beautiful and good  woman.  
One day, King  Durjaya  went to the banks  of the river  Kalindi.  There  he met the apsara  Urvashi 
and fell in love with her. He married Urvashi and lived with her for many  years.  
 
After  several  years  had passed,  Durjaya  remembered  his kingdom  and wife.  He told Urvashi, 
"Please let me  return to my home  now."  
 
"Not yet, king," replied Urvashi. "Please stay with me for one more  year."  
 
"I will return as soon as I have visited my kingdom," said Durjaya. "I promise you that I will  not 
tarry there. Therefore, let me  return."  
 
"I will let you go on condition  that you do not live as the husband  of any other  woman,"  replied 
Urvashi.  
 
Durjaya  agreed  to this condition  and returned  home.  But because  of the word  that he had given 
Urvashi,  he stayed  away  from  his wife and did not venture  near her. His wife tried to find out 
what the matter was, but Durjaya would not reply. Finally, the queen got to know what  Durjaya 
had done and realised that her husband had committed a sin. He should not have married  Urvashi 
while  his wife was still alive.  The quee n therefore  told Durjaya,  "You  have  sinned.  You must 
perform penance. That is the sort of action that befits a king, not this despondency that you  have 
become addicted  to." 
 
King Durjaya went and met the sage Kanva to ascertain what sort of penance should  be 
performed  for the sin that he had committed.  Kanva  advised  him to go to the Himalayas  and 
meditate.  
 
While Durjaya was going to the Himalayas, he met a Gandharva king. The Gandharva king  wore 
a divine garland, Durjaya remembered Urvashi. He thought that  the garland was a  fitting 
adornment for no one but Urvashi. He began to fight with the Gandharva over the possession  of 
the garland. Durjaya managed to defeat the Gandharva king and obtain the garland.  He 
immediately hastened to banks of the river Kalindi , because he thought that he might  find 
Urvashi there. But Urvashi was not to be found, and Durjaya roamed the world in search of  her. 
Finally,  Durjaya  arrived  in the region  of Mount  Sumeru.  The lake Manasa  is located  there.  And 
by the shores  of the lake,  Durjaya  found  Urvashi.  He gave  the apsara  the garland  and lived 
happily with her for some  time.  
 
After a few days had passed, Urvashi asked Durjaya, "King please tell me what transpired  when 
you went  home."  
 
 
 
 Durjaya thereupon told Urvashi about the conver sation that he had with his wife and about  what 
the sage Kanva had asked him to  do. 
 
Urvashi was alarmed when she heard the king's account. "What have you done?" she  exclaimed. 
"Hasten back, otherwise Kanva and your wife will curse the two of  us." 
 
But Dur jaya was so smitten with love for Urvashi that he refused to listen to Urvashi's  entreaties. 
Urvashi therefore made herself very ugly. This repelled Durjaya, and he gave Urvashi  up. 
 
For twelve years Durjaya performed difficult tapasya, living only on frui ts and roots. For  another 
twelve  years,  he lived  only on air. After  having  thus meditated  for twenty -four years,  Durjaya 
went to Kanva's hermitage and told the sage all that he had  done.  
 
"I am pleased  that you have  realised  the folly  of your ways  and have performed  tapasya,"  said 
Kanva.  "But that alone  is not enough.  Your  sin has been  too severe.  Go to the city of Varanasi 
and live there. Shiva is ever -present in that city and he will pardon all your  sins."  
 
Durjaya did this and was pardoned all his sins.  Such are the benefits of praying to Shiva and  such 
are the virtues of the wonderful city of  Varanasi.  
   
 
Krishna's  Tapasya  
Krishna was the eight incarnation of Vishnu and he was born as the son of Devaki and  Vasudeva.  
 
Initially,  Krishna  did not have  any sons. Desirous  of obtaining  a son, Krishna  went  to visit the 
sage Upamanyu. The sage's hermitage was beautiful. Wonderous were the trees and flowers  and 
grew  there.  The constant  chanting  of the Vedas  could  be heard.  Wild  animals  lost their ferocity 
as soon a s they entered the hermitage. Lotus flowers bloomed in the ponds. Sages came from  all 
over the country to meditate in the hermitage. The sacred river Ganga flowed past the  hermitage.  
 
Krishna greeted the sages and they worshipped him in  return.  
 
Upamanyu w elcomed Krishna with various offerings and said, "Our meditation has been  amply 
rewarded by your visit. The great Vishnu has himself come to grace us by your presence. But  is 
there any particular reason as to why you have come to the  hermitage?"  
 
"I wish t o meet Shiva," replied Krishna. "How does one get to met  him?"  
"Shiva appears if a devotee performs difficult tapasya," said Upamanyu. "It helps if  the 
meditation is accompanied by great  faith."  
 
Hearing these words, Krishna began a difficult religious ri te known as pashupata vrata.  He 
donned  clothes  made  out of the barks  of trees,  smeared  ashes  on his body  and continuously 
chanted Shiva's name. After many years had passed, Shiva and Parvati appeared before  Krishna.  
 
"Krishna, why are you performing tapasy a?" asked Shiva. "You are the great Vishnu  himself. 
Any object  that you desire  is immediately  attained.  Why  are you then engaged  in this task of 
meditation?"  
 
"I wish to have a son who is just like you," said Krishna. "Please let him also be devoted to  you." 
 
Shiva gladly granted the boon and the son who was born was Shamba (alternatively, Samba).  He 
was the son of Krishna and  Jambavati.  
 
(Stories about Shamba are to be found in the Vishnu Purana, and also in  Mahabharataa.)  
   
 
The YUGAS  (Eras)  
You probably  remember  that there  are four yugas  or eras - Satya  Yuga  or Krita  Yuga,  Treta 
Yuga, Dvapara Yuga and Kali  Yuga.  
 
Lomaharshana next told the sages about the characteristics of these four  eras. 
 
Kali Yuga is the worst of the four eras. People are sinful and fo rget the dharma of the four  varnas 
and the four ashramas. In fact, men are so sinful that no prescribed penance atones for their  sins. 
The only place which is free from such sins is the sacred city of  Varanasi.  
 
In Satya  Yuga,  the best course  to be pursued  is meditation;  in Treta  Yuga  it is the pursuit  of 
knowledge  (jnana);  in Dvapara  Yuga  it is the performance  of yajnas;  and in Kali Yuga  it is the 
donation of alms. Brahma is the primary god in Satya Yuga, Surya in Treta Yuga, Vishnu  in 
Dvapara Yuga and Shi va in Kali  Yuga.  
 
Envy and jealousy were unknown in Satya Yuga and everyone was happy. There was  no 
superiors  and inferiors  and all individuals  were  equally  healthy  and equally  handsome.  There 
were  no fixed  places  for people  to live in, no cities  and no villages.  Men lived  in the mountains 
and on the shores of the  oceans.  
 
In Satya  Yuga,  water  was always  freely  available.  This was no longer  the case in Treta  Yuga. 
Water  only became  available  when  it rained.  Rain  was unknown  earlier.  And as it rained,  trees 
began  to grow.  People  lived  on these  trees.  The fruit from  these  trees  provided  the sustenance 
required to make a living. But gradually, anger and jealousy came to be known and many of  the 
wonderful trees disappeared as mankind picked up evils ways. Howeve r, enough trees were  left 
to ensure  that people  did not die of starvation.  They  lived  on honey  gathered  from  the trees. 
Although  men looked  on Satya  Yuga  with nostalgia,  ill-health  and disease  continued  to be 
unknown  even  in Treta  Yuga.  But towards  the end of Treta  Yuga,  people  became  really  sinful. 
All the trees  disappeared.  To make  a living,  mankind  had to resort  to agriculture  and animal 
husbandry. The weather became inclement and seasons like summer, monsoon and winter led  to 
hardship. Notions of prope rty were also introduced. Individuals appropriated mountains,  rivers, 
land,  trees  and herbs  as their own.  To instil  righteousness  in the minds  of people,  the principles 
of varna ashrama dharma were set out towards the end of Treta  Yuga.  
 
In Dvapara  Yuga,  hatred,  anger  and jealousy  became  much  more  common.  Fighting  started.  It 
was then that Veda Vyasa spread amongst ordinary people, the knowledge that was in the  Vedas, 
by dividing them. Drought, death and disease came to be known in Dvapara  Yuga.  
 
In Kali Yuga, fraudulence  is the  norm.  There are  severe  droughts  and famines.  Revolutions  take place.  
People are liars and sinners. They are easily angered. They d not respect the brahmanas.  The 
brahmanas,  on their part, forget  all about  the Vedas  and yajnas.  Shudra s become  kings  and oppress  the 
brahmanas.  Some  Shudras  shave  off their heads  and wear  saffron  clothes.  They  pretend  to be religious  
teachers. And horror of horrors, people start to believe in these fraudulent teachers. Women  wear  
hairpins  in their hair. As if this alone  were  not enough,  they refuse  to obey  their husbands.  Thieves  are 
everywhere.  The only redeeming  feature  of Kali Yuga  is the fact that even  if one worships  Shiva  just a 
little bit in Kali Yuga, one attains undying punya (store of  merit).  
   
 
Lingas 
A linga  is an image  of Shiva.  There  are several  wonderful  lingas  in the wonderful  city of 
Varanasi.  
 
There  is a gigantic  linga  named  Omkara.  Amongst  other  famous  lingas  located  in the city are 
Krittivaseshvara, Madhyadeshvara, Vishveshvara and  Kapardd ishvara.  
 
The Kurma  Purana  recites  the glories  of these  lingas.  It also enumerates  the various  tirthas 
(places of pilgrimage) that are to be found in the city of  Varanasi.  
 
It goes on to list the virtues of the Ganga, the Yamuna and the city of Prayaga  (modern 
Allahabad).  
   
 
Geography and  Astronomy  
It is hoped  that you have  not forgotten  that Svayambhuva  Manu  had a son named  Priyavrata. 
Priyavrata had ten sons. Their names were Agnidhra, Agnivahu, Vapushmana,  Dyutimana, 
Medha, Medhatithi, Bhavya, Savana, Putr a and  Jyotishmana.  
 
Medha,  Agnivahu  and Putra  had no desire  to rule. They  were  not interested  in material  pursuits 
and became  hermits.  
 
Priyavrata  divided  the earth  amongst  the remaining  seven  sons.  Thus  it was that the earth  came 
to be divided into seven regions or dvipas. The names of these regions are  Jambudvipa, 
Plakshadvipa, Shalmalidvipa, Kushadvipa, Krounchjdvipa, Shakadvipa and  Pushkaradvipa. 
Agnidhra    ruled    over    Jambudvipa,    Medhatithi    over    Plakshadvipa,    Vapushmana  over 
Shalmali dvipa, Jyotishmana over Kushadvipa, Dyutimana over Krounchadvipa, Bhavya  over 
Shakadvipa and Savan over  Pushkaradvipa.  
 
Agnidhra,  the ruler  of Jambudvipa,  had nine sons.  Their  names  were  Nabhi  KimPurusha,  Hari, 
Ilavrita, Ramaya, Hiranyavana, Kuru, Bhadrash va and Ketumala. Agnidhra divided  Jambudvipa 
into nine regions  (varshas)  and gave  each of his sons a region  to rule over.  A king named 
Bharataa  was one of Nabhi's  descendants.  After  the name  of Bharataa,  the region  that Nabhi 
ruled over has come to be know n as Bharataavarsha.  
 
There  are fourteen  regions  (lokas)  in the universe.  Seven  of them  form  the upper  regions.  Their 
names are bhuloka, bhuvarloka, svarloka, maharloka, janaloka, tapolaka and satyaloka.  Bhuloka 
is the earth  and its limits  extend  upto the points  that can be lit up the rays of the sun and the 
moon.  Take  the distance  from  bhuloka  to the solar  circle.  An equal  distance  beyond  the solar 
circle  constitutes  bhuvarloka.  The region  from  the limits  of bhuvarloka  to the region  of Dhruva 
(the Pole Sta r) is svarloka or svarga (heaven). Above the solar circle is the lunar circle and  above 
that come, successively, the regions of the stars (nakshatras), Budha (Mercury), Shukra  (Venus), 
Mangala (Mars), Brihaspati (Jupiter), the saptarshis' (the constellatio n Ursa Majoris or the  Great 
Bear) and  Dhruva.  
 
Shani  (Saturn),  Brihaspati  and Mangala  move  slowly.  The sun, the moon,  Budha  and Shukra 
move relatively fast. The sun's chariot is drawn by seven horses named Gayatri,  Vrihati, 
Ushnika, Jagati, Pamki, Anusht upa and Trishtupa. In each month, the sun adopts a specific  form 
known  as an aditya.  There  are thus twelve  adityas  - Dhatta,  Aryama,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Shakru, 
Vivasvana, Pusha, Parjanya, Amshu, Bhaga, Tvashta and  Vishnu.  
 
Maharloka  is above  the world  of Dhruv a (Dhruvaloka).  It is reserved  for those  who have  been 
freed  from  the bonds  of the world.  Janaloka  is still further  away.  Brahma's  sons live there. 
Tapaloka  is beyond  janaloka  and satyaloka  is beyond  tapaloka.  Another  word  for satyaloka  is 
brahmaloka, sinc e Brahma lives there. Vishnu lives there as  well.  
 
(The Kurma Purana does not mention the seven lokas that constitute the lower regions of  the 
universe. This is the underworld  (patala).)  
 
 
 There are seven seas that surround the seven dvipas on earth. The na mes of the seas are  Kshara, 
Ikshu, Sura, Ghrita, Dadhi, Kshira and Svadu. (The names of the seven oceans often differ  from 
Purana to  Purana.)  
 
Right  in the center  of Jambudvipa  is Mount  Sumeru.  To its south  lie the mountains  Himavana, 
Hemakuta and Nishadha ; and to its north the mountains Nila, Shveta and Sringi.  Bharataavarsha 
is to the south of Mount Sumeru. Brahma's assembly is located on the peak of Mount  Sumeru.  
   
 
Manvantaras  
You already  know  what  a manvantara  is. The titles  of the seven  great  sages  (saptarshi),  the 
names of the gods and the title of Indra change from the manvantara to  another.  
In the present kalpa (cycle), six manvantaras have  passed. 
The first Manu was  Svayambhuva.  
The second  Manu  was Svarochisha.  The gods  then were  the paravatas  and tushitas  and the title 
of Indra  was held by Vipashchita.  The seven  great  sages  were  Urjja,  Stamba,  prana,  Dambholi, 
Vrishabha, Timira and  Arvarivana.  
 
Uttama  was the third  Manu.  The gods  of this manvantara  were  the sudhamas,  stayas,  shivas, 
pratardanas and vashavartis and the name of the Indra was Sushanti. Rajah, Gotra,  Urddhavahu, 
Savana, Anagha, Sutapa and Shukra were the seven great  sages.  
 
The fourth  Manu  was Tamasa.  The gods  of this era were  the suravas,  haris,  satyas  and sudhas 
and the title of Indra was held by Shibi. The seven great sages were Jyotirdhama, Prithu,  Kavya, 
Chaitra, Agni, Varuna and  Pivara.  
 
In the fifth manvantara, the Manu was Raivata and the title of Indra was held by Vibhu. The  gods 
were the bhutis and the vaikunthas and the seven g reat sages were Hiranyaroma,  VedaSri, 
Urddhavahu, Vedavahu, Suvahu and Suparjanya. (The name of the seventh great sage  is 
missing.)  
 
The Manus  Svarochisha,  Uttama,  Tamasa  and Raivata  were  all descended  from  Svayambhuva 
Manu.  
 
The sixth Manu was Chakshusha  and the Indra then was Manojava. The gods were known as  the 
adyas, prasutas, bhaVyasa, prithukas and lekhas. Sumedha, Vrija, Havishmana, Uttama,  Madhu, 
Abhimana and Sahishnu were the seven great  sages.  
 
The seventh manvantara is the one that is now curren t and the Indra now is Purundara. The  Manu 
is Shradhadeva,  the gods  are the adityas,  the vasus,  the rudras  and the maruts.  The names  of the 
seven great sages are Vashishtha, Kashyapa, Atri, Jamadagni, Goutama, Vishvamitra  and 
Bharadvaja.  
 
In the present  kalpa, there  will be seven  more  manvantaras  in the future.  Thereafter,  the world 
will be  destroyed.  
 
(It should  be mentioned  that the names  given  in this section  do not necessarily  tally with the 
names  given  in the other  Puranas.  Not only do the names  of the gods,  the sages  and the Indras 
differ, the names of the future manvantaras also sometimes differ from Purana to  Purana.)  
   
 
Veda  Vyasa  
In every  Dvapara  Yuga,  a Veda  Vyasa  is born so as to divide  the Vedas  and disseminate  their 
knowledge.  In the present  era, there  have  been  twenty -eight  Dvapara  Yugas  and there  have 
therefore  been  twenty -eight  individuals  who have  held the title of Veda  Vyasa.  The Kurma 
Purana gives their names as  follows.  
(1) Svayambhuva  Manu.  (2) Prajapati.  (3) Ushana.  (4) Brihaspati.  (5) Savita.  (6) Mrityu.  (7) 
Indra. (8) Vashishtha. (9) Sarasvata. (10) Tridhama. (11) Rishabha. (12) Suteja.      (13)  Dharma.  
(14) Sachakshu. (15) Trayaruni. (16) Dhananjaya. (17)    Kritanjaya.  (18) Ritanjaya.  (19) 
Bharadvaja. (20) Goutama. (21) Vachashrava. (22) Narayana.       (23) Trinavindu. (24)  Valmiki.  
(25) Shaktri. (26) Parashara. (27) Jatukarna. (28) Krishna  Dvaipayana.  
 
Krishna Dvaipayana Veda Vyasa divided the Vedas into four parts and taught them to four of  his 
disciples. He taught Paila the Rig Ve da. Vaishampayana the Yajur Veda, Jaimini the Sama  Veda 
and Sumantu the Atharva Veda. As for the Puranas, they were taught to  Lomaharshana.  
   
 
Shiva's  Incarnations  
Most Puranas only mention Vishnu's incarnations (avataras). The Kurma Purana is one of  the 
great ones which mentions Shiva's  incarnations.  
 
In each Kali Yuga, Shiva has had an incarnation. The names of these incarnations are as  follows.  
 
(1) Shveta.  (2) Sutara.  (3) Madana.  (4) Suhotra.  (5) Kankana.  (6) Lokakshi.  (7) 
Jaigishavya.  (8) Dadhivaha.  (9) Rishabha.  (10) Bhrigu.  (11) Ugra.  (12) Atri. (13) Bali.  (14) 
Goutama. (15) Vedashirsha. (16) Gokarna. (17) Shikhandaka. (18) Jatamali.          (19)  Attahasa.  
(20) Daruka. (21) Langali. (22) Mahavama. (23) Muni. (24)  Shuli.  (25) Pindamunishvara.  
(26) Sa hishnu. (27) Somasharma. (28)  Nakulishvara.  
   
 
The Ishvara  Gita 
While  Lomaharshana  was reciting  the Kurma  Purana  to the assembled  sages,  Krishna 
Dvaipayana Veda Vyasa arrived on the scene. Lomaharshana and the other sages requested  Veda 
Vyasa to instruct the m about the path to true knowledge. This is what Veda Vyasa told  them.  
 
The Paramatman (the divine soul) is the only truth. It is ever pure and ever present. It is from  the 
Paramatman that the universe is created and it is into the Paramatman that the univ erse merges  at 
the time of its destruction. The Paramatman is not the earth. It is not water, energy, wind or  sky. 
It cannot be touched, nor can it be  sensed.  
 
The Paramatman is always present in the jivatman (human soul). Any sense of  distinction 
between  the Paramatman  and the jivatman  is due to illusions  and the presence  of the ego. The 
truly  learned  rise above  such illusions.  Therefore,  a wise person  does not see any distinction 
between  his own self and other  objects.  The same  Paramatman  pervades  everyth ing. Just as all 
rivers unite with the ocean, a learned person realises that all individuals jivatmans unite with  the 
Paramatman.  
 
Yoga (literally, union) is a technique of meditation that helps to bring about this sense of  identity 
between the jivatman an d the Paramatman. Yoga has eight components. The first is  Pranayama. 
This means  the control  of one's  breath.  The breath  of life is known  as prana  and ayama  means 
control. There are three parts to any Pranayama exercise. When the breath is being exhaled,   that 
is known  as rechaka;  and the process  of inhalation  is known  as puraka.  When  the breath  is 
neither being inhaled nor exhaled, that is  kumbhaka.  
 
The second  component  of yoga  is pratyahara.  This connotes  the control  of one's  senses.  Yoga 
must  always  be performed  in a proper  posture  and this is the third  component  of asana.  The 
fourth component is called yama. This means the practice of non -violence, truthfulness and  pity. 
The fifth component is known as niyama. This encompasses worship, studying the  Vedas, 
cleanliness and  meditation.  
 
Yoga has a sixth component named dhyana. In this process, one conjures up an image of  the 
Paramatman  and meditates  continuously  on it. The process  of fixing  this image  in one's  heart  is 
the seventh  component,  dharana.  And the final component,  samadhi,  is a situation  where  the 
individual realises the complete identity between the jivatman and the  Paramatman.  
   
 
Rituals  
The sacred  thread  (upavita)  ceremony  is very important  and must  always  be performed  at eight 
year of age. Brah ma had created  the cotton  tree so that sacred  threads  might  be made  out of 
cotton. But on occasions it is permissible to make sacred threads out of  grass.  
 
A guru (teacher)  is always  to be respected  and worshipped.  In principle,  a guru is anyone  from 
whom  knowledge might be gained. But apart from usual teachers, a father -in-law, a  grandfather 
and an individual  belonging  to a superior  varna  are also recognised  as gurus.  A mother,  a 
grandmother, a guru's wife, an aunt, a mother -in-law and the wife of an elde r brother  are 
recognised as being equivalent to a guru. One must never show a guru disrespect or argued  with. 
A person who hates his guru is certain to go to  hell. 
 
Amongst gurus or those who are equivalent to gurus, the most important are a father, a moth er, a 
teacher, an elder brother and a husband. These have to be respectfully served at all  costs.  
 
A brahmana  must  always  wash  his mouth  after eating,  drinking,  sleeping,  bathing,  spitting  or 
changing clothes. The mouth must also be washed before sitting d own to study. It is also 
recommended  that the mouth  be washed  after talking  to those  who do not believe  in the Vedas, 
shudras, outcasts and women. If a mouthwash is not possible, one can cleanse oneself  by 
touching a piece of clothing is touched inadverten tly, the act of purification requires the touching 
of water, wet grass or the  earth.  
 
One of the most sacred mantras (incantations) that one can chant is the gayatri. Before  chanting, 
thirty -two-cells must be drawn, as shown, and the letters of the mantra must be written down in 
the cells,  as indicated.  To recite  the gayatri,  one now reads  the letters  as they occur  in the 
numbered  cells.  That is, one starts  with cell number  one, moves  to cell number  two and so on 
and so  forth.  
 
5      13     21     29     2 8     20   12   4  
 
wr    sya    pra    se     ja      nah  va  tu 
 
6 
 
re 14 
 
dhi 22 
 
cho 30 
 
sa 27 
 
ra 19 
 
yo 11 
 
de 3 
 
vi 
7 15 23 31 26 18 10 2 
ni ma da va ro yo rgo tsa 
8 16 24 32 25 17 9 1 
 
yam  hi     yat     dom  pa   dhi  bha  ta 
 
 
 
 
 A person who ki lls a brahmana, drinks wine, or steals gold from a brahmana, has to  perform 
penance by killing himself. A person who kills a brahmana may also build a hut in the forest  and 
live there for a period of twelve years. But throughout the period, he has to bear  a mark 
signifying the dead brahmana's head on his palm. He is also not permitted to visit  another 
brahmana or a temple as long as the penance is going on. It needs to be mentioned that the sin  of 
killing a brahmana can be thus pardoned only if the killing  was done inadvertently. If the  killing 
was conscious, no penance will suffice. Under such circumstances, the sinner had best  immolate 
himself in a fire, drown himself, or fast to  death.  
 
For other sins, the observance of a religious rite (vrata) is often  indicated. The major vratas are  
as follows.  
 
(i) Santapana:  This involves  living  for one whole  day on cow's  urine,  cowdung,  cow's  milk, 
curds made from cow's milk and clarified butter made from cow's milk. The next day is a day  of 
fasting.  
 
(ii) Mahasantapana:  This is a more  severe  version  of the earlier  vrata.  In the case of santapana 
vrata,  five items  were  listed  as permissible  food.  Mahasantapana  vrata  lasts for a period  of six 
days,  and on each of these  days,  only one of the five items  mentioned  may be partaken  of. The 
seventh day is day of  fasting.  
 
(iii) Prajapatya or krichha: If this vrata is to be observed, one can eat only during the day. For  the 
first three  days,  one is only permitted  to eat twenty -six handfuls  of food,  each handful  being  as 
large as a hen's  egg. 
 
For the next three days, twenty -two handfuls are permitted, but only in the evenings. And for  
the final three days, twenty -four handfuls are  permitted.  
 
(iv) Atikrichha: This is a more severe version of the earlier vrata. For the first three days, a  
single h andful  of food is permitted  during  the day. For the next three  days,  one handful  is 
permitted  in the evenings. One handfuls of food, each handful being as large as a hen's  egg. 
 
For the next three days, twenty -two handfuls are permitted, but only in the ev enings. And for  
the final three days, three -four handfuls are  permitted.  
 
(v) Paraka: Twelve continuous days of fasting are required for  this. 
 
(vi) Taptakrichha: This vrata lasts for a period of twelve days, during which time one  is 
permitted  to bathe  only once  a day. For the first three  days one drinks  only water;  for the next 
three  days one lives  on milk;  one has to live on clarified  butter  for the ensuing  three  days are 
days of  fasting.  
 
(vii) Krichhatikrichha: If one is to observe this vrata, one has to live only on milk for the space  of 
twenty -one days.  
 
(viii) Padakrichha:  This vrata  lasts for four days.  For the first day one eats only one meal;  the 
second  day is a day of fasting;  on the third  day one can eat as much  as one wants;  and on the 
fourth and final day, one fasts . 
 
 
 (ix) Chandrayana:  This vrata  lasts for an entire  month  and begins  on the day of the full moon 
(purnima). On the first day, fifteen handfuls are to be eaten. Thereafter, one handfuls less is  eaten 
on successive days, until on the day of new moon (amavasya), o ne fasts completely. On each  day 
that follows, the amount of food eaten is increased by one handful. Finally, on the day of the  next 
full moon, fifteen handfuls of food are eaten and the vrata is  completed.  
 
As mentioned earlier, those who kill brahmanas,  steal their gold, or drink wine, are sinners.  Also 
sinners are those who associate with these aforementioned sinners for more than one year.  Those 
who associate with outcasts for more than a year are also  sinners.  
 
A brahmana  who drinks  wine  should  drink  boiling  wine  as a penance.  It is also permitted  to 
drink  cow's  urine  as atonement.  A person  who steals  gold from  brahmanas  will go to the king 
and confess  his guilt.  His penance  will be completed  when  the king beats  him to death  with a 
club. The only excep tion is a case where the thief himself happens to be a brahmana. He can  then 
perform  penance  by meditating.  It is always  a king's  duty to punish  sinners.  If the king fails in 
this task, the sins vest with the  king.  
 
A person who associates with sinners has  to observe taptakrichha vrata for one year. A man  who 
takes  on outcast  for a wife has to observe  taptakrichha  or santapana.  A brahmana  who kills a 
kshatriya  is required  to observe  prajapatya,  santapana  or taptakrichha  for one year.  In case the 
victim  is a vaishya,  krichhatikrichha  or chandrayana  are indicated.  If a shudra  is killed,  five 
hundred cows have to be donated. If an elephant is killed, taptakrichha vrata has to be  observed. 
Chandrayana will suffice if a cow is killed inadvertently. But if a cow i s consciously killed,  there 
is no penance that is  adequate.  
 
For minor  thefts,  the stolen  goods  have  to be returned  to the rightful  owner  and santapana 
observed. But if a brahmana steals foodgrains, he has to observe prajapatya for an entire year.  A 
cannib al can purity  himself  through  chandrayana  vrata.  A person  who eats the meat  of a crow, 
dog or elephant, has to observe taptakrichha. Santapana is for those who happen to  eat 
mongooses, owls or cats. An eater of camels or donkeys observes  taptakrichha.  
A brahmana who becomes an atheist can cleanse himself through prajapatya. If he revolts  against 
the gods  or against  his guru,  the act of purification  involves  taptakrichha.  A brahmana  who 
recites the Puranas to outcasts has to observe  chandrayana.  
 
There are several other forms of penance that are catalogued by the Kurma  Purana.  
   
 
The Sita who was an  Illusion  
It is certain that you know the story of the Ramayana and you therefore also known that  Ravana, 
the king of Lanka,  abducted  Sita, Rama's  wife.  But you certainly  do not know  the story  of the 
Sita who was an illusion (maya  Sita).  
 
This story clearly illustrates that no harm can come to a person who is  righteous.  
 
Ravana disguised himself as a hermit and came to abduct Sita. But Sita got to know of Ravana's 
plan and was determined to foil it. She therefore began to pray to Agni, the god of  fire. 
 
Thus stirred by Sita's prayers, Agni appeared and produced a Sita who was really an  illusion. 
This maya sita he left in the real Sita's place. As for the real Sita, she was absorbed into the  fire. 
Without realising the substitutions, Ravana abducted the illusory Sita and the entire war  was 
fought over a Sita who was not even  real. 
 
When  Rama  triumphed  over Ravana  and recovered  Sita, a test by fire (agni  pariksha)  was held. 
In the process,  the Sita who was an illusion  was returned  to the fire and the real Sita emerged 
once again. Thus the real Sita was never tainted by Ravana's  touch.  
 
(The story of the Sita who was an illusion is also given in the Brahmavaivarta  Purana ). 
   
 
Shiva and  Brahma  
Many  years  ago, Brahma  lost his head  slightly.  He began  to imagine  that he was superior  to 
Shiva  and Vishnu.  He told all the sages,  "I am the supreme  godhead.  There  is no one else but 
me."  
 
While  Brahma  was thus instructing  the sages,  Vishnu  arrived  and was enraged  at Brahma's 
behaviour. "You are indeed ignorant," he told Brahma. "I am the supreme godhead. You are  only 
the creator. But I am, after all, the  preserver."  
 
While Vishnu and Brahma were thus arguing the four Vedas adopted ani mate forms  and 
appeared  before  them.  Each  of the Vedas  tried to persuade  Brahma  and Vishnu  that Shiva  was 
superior to both of them. Vishnu was persuaded by this reasoning, but Brahma was  not. 
 
He told the Vedas,  "You  must  be joking.  How  can Shiva  be superi or to the two of us? He is 
always wandering around with ghosts and demons for  companions."  
While all this was going on, who should arrive but Shiva? Brahma promptly proceeded to  insult 
Shiva.  Shiva  then created  a being  named  Kalabhairava  from  his own body  and Kalabhairava 
started  to fight  with Brahma.  In those  days,  Brahma  used to have  five heads.  In course  of the 
fighting, Kalabhairava chopped off one of Brahma's heads. Ever since that day, Brahma has had 
four heads and four  faces.  
 
(In many other Puranas , there is no mention of Kalabhairava. Shiva performed the chopping  off 
himself).  
 
Brahma died as soon as his head had been cut off. Shiva did manage to revive him. But the mere 
fact that Shiva  had killed  Brahma,  meant  that Shiva  and committed  the sin of killing  Brahma,  a 
brahmana.  As a result  of this sin, Brahma's  severed  head  got stuck  to Kalabhairava's  palm  and 
would  not be dislodged.  (In accounts  where  Shiva  was himself  responsible  for the killing,  the 
severed head adhered to Shiva's  palm).  
 
Kalabhairav a roamed  around  the world  and the head  accompanied  him on his travels.  For a 
thousand years of the gods, Kalabhairava continued to travel. Eventually, Vishnu  advised 
Kalabhairava to go to the sacred city of  Varanasi.  
 
As soon as Kalabhairava arrived at th e city of Varanasi, the head (kapala) got  dislodged 
(mochana).  A tirtha  is a place  of pilgrimage.  The exact  spot where  this wonderful  happening 
took place is accordingly known as Kapalamochana  tirtha.  
 
There are many other tirthas that the Kurma Purana des cribes. Among these are  Prayaga, 
Kurukshetra, Gaya and Madhuvana (Mathura), The glories of the river Narmada are  also 
described. The waters of the river Sarasvati purify a sinner after three days of bathing, while  the 
waters  of the river  Yamuna  takes  an entire week.  The mere  touch  of a drop of water  from  the 
river  Ganga  purifies  a sinner.  But as for the river  Narmada,  the sight  of the waters  alone  is 
enough.  
 
 
 Nandi  
There used to be a sage named Shilada. He was righteous and learned in the  shastras.  
 
To obtain a son, Shilada  began  to pray to Shiva.  The tapasya  went  on for a thousand  years  and 
Shiva appeared before  Shilada.  
 
"I am pleased with your meditation." said Shiva, "what boon do you  desire?"  
 
"Please grant me the boon that I may obtain a son who will n ot be born from a mother. "  replied 
Shilada, "And my son should be  immortal."  
 
Shiva granted the desired  boon.  
 
When  Shilada  was ploughing  the land,  a handsome  boy suddenly  appeared  on the top of his 
plough.  The four directions  shone  with the boy's  radianc e and the boy began  to address  Shilada 
as "father".  
 
The son studied the shastras and became learned. He was given the name of  Nandi.  
 
Nandi wished to see Shiva and he also wished to become immortal. He therefore went to  the 
shores of the ocean and started  to pray to Shiva. He chanted the required mantra one crore  times. 
When Shiva appeared and wished to grant a boon. Nandi said. "Please grant me enough of life  so 
that I can chant the mantra one crore times  more."  
 
Shiva appeared once again, and Nandi desir ed the same  boon.  
 
When  this had happened  three  times.  Shiva  said, "Enough  is enough.  There  is no need  for any 
more  chanting  of incantations.  I make  you immortal.  I also make  you a ganapati,  lord over the 
ganas. You will be my constant  companion."  
 
The pla ce where Nandi chanted the incantation has become famous as japyeshvara  tirtha.  
 
The maruts had a daughter named Suyasha. Shiva himself arranged that Nandi should be  married 
to Suyasha.  
   
 
Epilogue  
Vishnu  completed  his recital  of the Kurma  Purana  and the sages saluted  him. They  sung  his 
praise.  The Kurma  Purana  is most  sacred.  A person  who reads  it attains  Brahmaloka.  A person 
who reads  only one chapter  of the text is forgiven  all his sins. Undying  punya  is attained  by an 
individual who donates this Purana t o brahmanas in the months of Vaishakha or  Kartika. 
Particularly sacred is the part that is known as the Brahmi  Samhita.  
 
But the text should never be read or recited in the presence of shudras. A person who ignores  this 
injunction  will surely  go to hell. There is also a similar  injunction  about  reciting  the text to those  who are 
disbelievers  (that is, those who  do not believe  in the Vedas),  a person  who violates  this injunction  will be 
born as a dog in his next  life. 
 
 
 