                                           6. MARKANDEYA  PURANA  
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Once  Jaimini,  a disciple  of sage Veda  Vyasa  expressed  his curiosity  before  Markandeya - 'O 
Lord! In the great epic Mahabharata, which was created by Veda Vyasa, description of  Dharma, 
Arth,  Kama  and Moksha  appears  to be intertwined  at times  and at other  times,  it appears  to be 
separate  from  one another.  Veda  Vyasa  had described  the norms,  the stages  and the means  to 
perform the duties in all the four stages. This epic contains cr yptic knowledge of Vedas. Hence  O 
great sage! I have approached you in order to grasp the full knowledge contained in  Mahabharata 
with your help. Why did Lord take human incarnation even though He is the cause of the  origin, 
perpetuation and destruction of  the universe? How did Draupadi become the wife of  five 
Pandavas? How did Balarama expiate for the sin of killing a Brahmin? How did Draupadi's  sons 
give up their lives? Kindly narrate all these things in detail.  ' 
Markandeya  says- 'O Muni!  Presently  I am engaged  in evening  worship.  Hence  I do not have 
time to narrate these things in detail. But I am telling you about the birds which will narrate  you 
the entire  content  of Mahabharata.  Those  birds  will also remove  all your doubts.  Sons  of the 
great bird Dron a- Pingaksha, Vibodha, Suputra, Sumuk etc. stay in the caves among the hills  of 
Vindhyachal. They are proficient in Vedas. Go and ask them, they will remove all your  doubts.'  
 
Markandeya's words surprised Jaimini. To confirm, he asked again - 'It is surpris ing that the  birds 
could  narrate  the content  of Mahabharata  just like human  beings.  It is even  more  surprising  that 
they are proficient  in Vedas  knowledge,  which  is even  rare to find among  humans.  Kindly  tell 
me how did they come  to acquire  such profound  knowledge  despite  having  being  born in the 
form of birds. Why do you call them as the sons of  Drona?'  
 
Markandeya says - 'Long ago, a strange event took place in Nandanvan involving Indra,  Devrishi 
Narada  and some  of the apsaras.  One day, Indra  was enjoying  his time in the Nandanvan  forest 
along with his apsaras. At the same time Narada also arrived there. Indra welcomed and  offered 
him a seat. The apsaras also greeted Narada. Indra then said - 'Munivar! Tell me what you  desire 
now? If you desire to listen to a song, should I order the Gandharvas or if you wish to watch  the 
dance, should I order one of my apsaras, Menka, Rambha, Mishrakeshi or Urvashi? Any of  these 
four can perform a seducing dance before  you.'  
 
Narada  expressed  his desire  to watch  the dance  of an apsara,  who was superior  in beauty  to the 
other  apsaras.  This led to a row among  the apsaras.  Each  one of them  was proud  of her beauty 
and talent. Narada then advised them to test their beauty by breaking sage Durvasa's  penance 
who was at that time sta ying on a hilltop. All the apsaras expressed their inability to perform  this 
task successfully.  Only  an apsara  named  Vapu,  driven  by her haughtiness  accepted  to break  the 
penance of sage  Durvasa.  
 
Accordingly  she reached  the hill where  Durvasa  was staying  and began  to sing an infatuating  song  in her 
sweet  voice.  Very soon,  the song  began  to show  its effect  on Durvasa.  Attracted  by the sweet  voice,  
Durvasa went in search of the origin of the voice and found Vapu singing at a distance.  Durvasa  
understood  that the apsara  had come  to break  his penance.  Angrily,  he cursed  the apsara  that she would  
take birth in the lineage  of the birds  for sixteen years,  she would  not bear a child and ultimately  would  be 
killed by a weapon to regain her heavenly abode. After sayi ng this, sage Durvasa migrated  to 
Akashganga.  
   
 
VARIOUS CREATIONS AND FAMOUS MYTHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS 
BIRTH OF FOUR  BIRDS  
Markandeya says - 'In the lineage of the avian King Garuda, there were two brothers - Kank  and 
Kandhar. One day, Kank visited Kailash Parbat where a demon Vidrayudrup, who was a slave  of 
Kubera, was enjoying privacy with his wife and drinking wine. Seeing Kank, the demon  showed 
his displeasure  at his arrival  at an improper  time.  But Kank  boldly  asserted  his right  on the 
mountain as accor ding to him, it belonged to all. The infuriated demon decapitated Kank with  his 
sword.  
 
Hearing  the news  of his brother's  killing,  Kandhar  resolved  to kill the demon.  After  performing 
the last rites of his brother,  he also arrived  on the mountain  where  the demon  Vidrayudrup  was 
still drinking wine with his wife. The demon lost his temper again. Kandhar then challenged  the 
demon to have a fight with him. A fierce battle ensued between them. Ultimately, Kandhar  killed 
the demon. The demon's wife Madanika find ing herself in a helpless situation accepted  Kandhar 
as her husband. Thus, Kandhar returned to his palace with a newly found wife. Madanika was  in 
fact the daughter  of Menka,  the apsara  and could  change  her guise  at will. After  marrying 
Kandhar, she took t he guise of the bird. The bird Madanika was born as apsara Vapu in her  next 
birth due to the curse of sage Durvasa. Kandhar named her  Tarkshi.  
 
A Brahmin named Mandapal had four sons. Drona was the youngest among them and  proficient 
in scriptures,  Vedas  etc. Kandhar  married  his daughter,  Tarkshi  to Drona.  After  their marriage, 
Drona  and Tarkshi  were  spending  their time happily.  Tarkshi  conceived  during  the same  time 
when  the battle  of Mahabharata  was going  on. As destiny  would  have  it, Tarkshi  flew over the 
battlefield  where  she saw Arjuna  and Bhagdatt,  the king of Pragjyotishpur,  fighting  valiantly 
against each other. Accidentally an arrow aimed at Bhagdatt went in the direction of Tarkshi  and 
struck  her in the abdomen  and tore it apart.  As a result  of this, four eggs fell on the ground.  At 
the same  time,  a huge  bell fell from  Supratik's  neck,  the elephant  of Bhagdatt,  and covered  the 
eggs safely.  
 
After the battle of Mahabharata was over, a sage Shami visited the battlefield. There  he 
happened  to spot the bell and heard  faint chirping  coming  from  underneath  the bell. The sage 
removed  the bell and discovered  four wingless  chicks  beneath  it. Surprisingly  he said to his 
disciples - 'Look!  Falling  of these  eggs and getting  safely  covered  by the bell simultaneous ly 
shows  that these  chicks  are no ordinary  birds.'  Then  he instructed  his disciples  to carry  the eggs 
to the hermitage and keep it securely at a place safe from predators. The disciples did as  told. 
   
 
BIRDS MIGRATE TO  VINDHYACHAL  
Sage  Shami  thereafter  began to foster  the chicks  in his hermitage.  With  time,  the chicks  grew 
feathers  and began  to fly here and there.  But every  time the birds  went  out, they returned  to the 
hermitage by evening. The birds also gained Vedic knowledge by hearing the discourses,  which 
sage Shami used to give daily to his  disciples.  
 
One day, when sage Shami was preaching his disciples, the birds arrived there and said - 'O great 
sage! You are like our father because you have protected us. You are our teacher also because  we 
have  gained knowledge  from  you. Now  we have  grown  up, kindly  tell us what  should  we do?'. 
The birds speaking like learned people amazed the sage as well as his  disciple.  
 
He asked  the birds - 'Tell us, how did you speak  so clearly  and is there  any curse  behind  your 
present condition?'. The birds replied - 'O sage! Long ago, there used to live a sage,  Vipulasvan. 
He had two sons- Sukrish  and Tumbaru.  In our previous  birth,  we were  the sons of Sukrish. 
When  our father  and uncle  performed  Yagya,  we brought  them  all the required  materials.  One 
day, Indra arrived at our hermitage disguised as an aged bird. The aged bird was starving,  hence 
we requested  our father  to provide  him with some  food.  Upon  enquiring  by our father,  the bird 
expressed his desire to eat human flesh. Our father tried to dissuade the bird but it did not give  up 
its insistence.  Then  our father  called  us and said that he had promised  the bird to feed it with 
human  flesh.  So, we were  asked  to donate  our body  in order  to satisfy  the bird's  hunger.  But 
being  frightened, we expressed our inability to meet the demand of the starving bird.  This 
infuriated  our father  for we were  violating  his promise  that he had made  to the bird. He then 
cursed  us to take birth  as birds  in our next life and himself  got ready  to donate  his body.  As our 
father was breathing his last, Indra resumed his real self and said - 'O great sage! I took this  guise 
only to test your character.  Kindly  forgive  me and tell me what  you desire  now?'  Indra  blessed 
our father to have divine knowledge and penance free from all obstacles. Thereafter we also  fell 
at our father's  feet and begged  for his pardon.  We requested  him to take back  his words  but he 
said that his words  would  not go futile.  But still he blessed  us to have  supreme  knowledge  even 
in the form of  birds.'  
 
Concluding  their talk, the birds  said- 'O lord!  Thus  controlled  by destiny,  our father  cursed  us. 
After sometime, we took birth in bird form in the battlefield where you found us and fostered  us 
in your hermitage. Now we are strong enou gh to fly long distances. So kindly free us from  your 
obligation.' Hearing the words of the birds, sage Shami said to his disciples - 'Look! I had  already 
told you that these birds were no ordinary creatures. They even survived the battle  of 
Mahabharata. It  shows their greatness.' Then sage Shami granted them permission to migrate  to 
the Vindhyachal. The birds decided to pass their time by studying the Vedas and doing  penance 
as long as they stayed  there.  
   
 
DIVINE PLAYS OF  GOD  
Sage Jaimini reached Vindhyac hal and arrived before the birds as per Markandeya's  instructions. 
He said- 'O birds!  I am Jaimini,  the disciple  of Veda  Vyasa.  I have  come  here with a desire  to 
have your glimpse.' The birds welcomed him saying - 'It is our great fortune that you have  arrived 
here. Your arrival has made us feel as if God himself has arrived.' Jaimini said - 'O learned  birds! 
Kindly  listen  to the purpose  of my visit.  Sage  Markandeya  instructed  me to come  here and see 
you. You kindly  answer  my questions  that I have  in the context of Mahabharata.'  The birds 
assured him of every possible explanation as per their knowledge. Sage Jaimini proceeded - 'Why 
did Lord  take human  incarnation  even  though  He is the cause  of the origin,  perpetuation  and 
destruction of the universe? How did D raupadi come to be the queen of five Pandavas? How  did 
Balarama expiate for the sin of killing a Brahmin? How were Draupadi's sons attain  martyrdom? 
Kindly narrate all these things in  detail.'  
 
The birds  say- 'The omnipotent,  omniscient  and the omnipresent  Almighty  God is worshipped 
even  by the deities.  We salute  that Lord  Vishnu  who is the originator  of this universe  and who 
pervades everywhere. We salute Brahma from whose four mouths, the Vedas appeared  and 
sanctified  all the three  worlds.  We bow down  at the feet of Mahadeva.  Those  sages  who have 
metaphysical  knowledge  assert  that Narayan  exists  in four forms,  which  are both tangible  and 
intangible.  His first form  is Vasudev,  appearance  of who is more  imaginative  in nature.  This 
form exists everywhere and in every  ages.  
 
The second  form  of Narayan  is the one that bears  the earth  on his head.  This form  of god is 
known  as Shesh.  Being  Tamasi  in nature,  this form  has taken  a serpent  incarnation.  The third 
form of God exhibits his divine power and plays. It fos ters all the creatures, protects religion,  and 
is known as Pradyumna. Yet another form of God known as Aniruddh rests on the serpent's  bed 
in the abysmal depth of water. It carries out the task of  creation.  
The third  form  of God destroys  the irreligious  demons.  In the past, this same  form  rescued  the 
earth  from  the abyss  in the incarnation  of a boar (Varaha  avatar)  and killed  the demon  King 
Hiranyakashipu  in the form  of Narsimha  (lion  face with human  body).  This same  form  of God 
has appeared now in Lord Kri shna's  incarnation.  
   
DRAUPADI'S  FIVE  HUSBANDS  
 
The birds  say- 'Frightened  by the severe  penance  of Trishira,  Indra  killed  him to protect  his authority  and 
power.  But the sin of killing  a Brahmin  took away  Indra's  radiance.  Trishira  was the son of Twashta . 
Twashta  became  furious  at his son's  death.  He plucked  one strand  of hair from his hair-lock and offered  it 
in the sacrificial  fire. This resulted  into the creation  of a formidable  and strong  demon  named  Vritrasur.  
This demon was created with the objectiv e of killing  Indra.  
 
Learning about the birth of Vritrasur, Indra sent Saptarishis as emissaries to work out a pact  with 
the demon.  The Saptarishis  effected  a friendship  between  Indra  and Vritrasur.  But Indra  had 
other  ideas.  He took Vritrasur  by surprise  and killed  him. This deceitful  action  of Indra  further 
enraged  the clans  of the demons.  Soon  the atrocities  of the demons  increased  to unbearable 
limits.  Even  Prithvi  felt unable  to bear the burden  of their atrocities.  She approached  the deities 
and reques ted them to get her rid of the  burden.  
 
Thus, to relieve Prithvi of her burden, the deities began to take incarnation on earth. Dharma  and 
Vayu implanted Indra's radiance in the womb of Kunti. This resulted in the birth of  Yudhisthira 
and Bhima.  Then  Indra  himself  produced  Arjuna  from  Kunti.  Nakul  and Sahadev  were  born 
because  of Indra's  radiance  implanted  by Ashwini  kumars  in the womb  of Madri.  Thus  all the 
five Pandavas  originated  from  the same  source  even  though  they appeared  as distinct  entities, 
wherea s Draupadi was none other than Shuchi, the wife of Indra, produced from the altar  in 
Drupad's palace. In human incarnation, Draupadi got five Pandavas as her  husband.  
   
 
EXPIATION OF  BALARAMA  
Sri Krishna's  brother  Balarama  had remained  impartial  in the battle of Mahabharata.  Instead  of 
championing  the cause  either  for the Pandavas  or for the Kauravas,  he had preferred  to go on a 
pilgrimage.  His wife Revati  also accompanied  him on this pilgrimage.  Once  while  travelling, 
Balarama drank toddy and entered a be autiful garden known as Raivat. Taking a stroll,  Balarama 
and Revati then reached a  hut. 
 
In the hut, many  Brahmins  were  sitting  and listening  to Suta's  oration.  When  the Brahmins  saw 
Balarama,  they stood  up and felicitated  him. Only  Suta did not stand  up. Balarama  felt insulted 
and at once killed him. When Balarama regained his composure after the intoxication receded,  he 
felt guilty  for his deed.  His belief  that killing  of Suta would  enable  him to attain  a place  in 
Brahma loka proved to be based on false notion as the Brahmins had shunned him for his  deed.  
 
After  Balarama  realised  his folly,  he began  to curse  himself  and resolved  to observe  a twelve - 
year long fast in order to expiate for his sin. Thereafter, Balarama migrated to a place  of 
pilgrimage know n as Pratiloma Saraswati to carry out his  expiation.  
  KILLING OF DRAUPADI'S  SONS  
In Treta  Yuga,  there  was a king named  Harishchandra.  Once  he was hunting  in the Mahabahu 
forest  when  suddenly,  he heard  loud cries  of a woman - 'Save  me! Save  me!' It was followed  by 
the cries  of many  women.  Hearing  those  cries,  King  Harishchandra  shouted  loudly - 'Don't  be 
afraid'  and dashed  in the direction  of the cries.  The cries  however  were  an illusion  created  by 
Vighnaraj,  the lord of the obstacles.  At that time when  King  Harishchandra  heard  those  cries, 
sage Vishwamitra  was observing  severe  penance  in the forest.  In order  to test Harishchandra's 
virtuosity,  Vighnaraj  entered  his body.  As soon  as Vighnaraj  entered  Harishchandra's  body, 
Harishchandra  lost his temper  and bega n to abuse  Vishwamitra,  which  enraged  him. His anger 
destroyed  all the knowledge,  he had acquired  due to his severe  penance.  Seeing  the angry 
Vishwamitra, King Harishchandra began to shiver. With folded hands, he begged  Vishwamitra's 
pardon.  He said- 'O great sage!  It is my duty to protect  the subjects.  Kindly  forgive  me. Your 
wrath could greatly affect the performance of my duties as a king. Vishwamitra said - 'O king! If 
you are a true follower of religion, tell me, who should be given a donation? Who shou ld be 
protected and who should be fought with?' Harishchandra answered - 'O great  penancer! 
Donations  should  be made  only to such a Brahmin  who indulges  in fast and religious  actions. 
Protection should be extended to those who are afraid and battle should b e fought with  enemies.'  
 
Vishwamitra said - 'If you are a religious king, give me Dakshaina (donation) as I am a  Brahmin 
seeking salvation.' Harishchandra said - 'Tell me your desire. I am ready to grant it.  Vishwamitra 
said- 'O king!  Just presume  that I have received  whatever  you would  donate  me. Now,  give me 
Dakshaina for the Rajsuya  Yagya.'  
 
Harishchandra  said- 'Ask me whatever  you wish  to have  as the Dakshaina  of Rajsuya  Yagya.' 
Vishwamitra  said- 'O king!  Give  me all you have  except  your own body,  your wife and child.' 
Feeling  pleased,  King  Harishchandra  granted  what  Vishwamitra  desired.  Vishwamitra  said- 'O 
king!  Tell me, who is the lord of your kingdom?'  Harishchandra  said- 'Since  the moment  I have 
presented  this kingdom  to you, you are its master.'  Vish wamitra  said- 'If I am the master  of this 
kingdom,  what  are you doing  here?  Leave  at once!  But before  leaving,  remove  all your clothes, 
ornaments and other royal insignia and go out wearing tree's bark  only.'  
 
Thus after losing his kingdom, King Harishchan dra got ready to leave with his wife Shaivya  and 
son Rohit.  Vishwamitra  then intercepted  him and said- 'Where  are you going  without  paying  a 
Dakshaina for Rajsuya Yagya. Harishchandra said - 'O lord! I have donated my whole  kingdom. 
Now only our bodies rema in with us. What can I give you now?' Vishwamitra said - 'You  cannot 
leave without paying a Dakshaina because you have promised me.' Harishchandra said - 'Don't  be 
angry,  O Brahmin!  I have  nothing  at present  in my position  but I will definitely  pay you your 
Dakshaina in due time.' Vishwamitra said angrily - 'Specify the time period within which you  will 
give me my Dakshaina or else be ready to get cursed by me.' Harishchandra said - 'I will pay  the 
Dakshaina  within  a month.'  Thereafter,  Harishchandra  started  to live in seclusion  with his wife 
and children. Seeing the king's pitiable condition, his entire subjects began to follow him.  Seeing 
their condition, Harishchandra halted and took a look on his subjects. At the same time,  sage 
Vishwamitra also arrived ther e and began to curse Harishchandra for having attachment  towards 
his subjects.  Hearing  the harsh  words  of Vishwamitra,  Harishchandra  left the kingdom  with his wife Shaivya  and son Rohit.  To drive  the king away  as soon  as possible,  Vishwamitra  began  to 
beat the queen's back with a  stick.  
 
Vishwamitra's abhorrent action enraged the five guardian deities of the directions and  they 
condemned  him. Enraged  Vishwamitra  cursed  them - 'O sinners!  Go and take birth  as human 
beings.'  This curse  of Vishwamitra  frighten ed the deities.  They  begged  his pardon.  Pleased  by 
their prayers, Vishwamitra said - 'My words cannot be undone. But despite having incarnation  of 
human  beings,  you will remain  bachelors  throughout  your life. You will never  feel attachment 
and allurement  for anybody.'  Thus  due to Vishwamitra's  curse,  those  five guardian  deities  took 
birth as the five sons of Draupadi. Dronacharya's son, Ashwatthama, ultimately killed  them.  
   
 
KING  HARISHCHANDRA  
After being thrown out from his kingdom by Vishwamitra, Harishc handra reached the holy town 
of Varanasi,  which  was an abode  of Lord  Mahadeva.  There  Harishchandra  saw Vishwamitra 
standing  before  him. Vishwamitra  said- 'A month  has been  completed  now.  Now,  give me my 
Dakshaina.'  Harishchandra  said- 'There  is still half an hour in the completion  of this month. 
Please  wait.  I will give your Dakshaina.'  Vishwamitra  said- 'I will come  after half an hour.' 
Saying this, Vishwamitra  departed.  
 
When  Vishwamitra  left, Harishchandra  started  to worry  as to what  would  happen  to him in his 
next birth  if he did not keep  his promise  made  to a Brahmin.  Seeing  him perplexed,  queen 
Shaivya  tried to console  him. She said- 'Man  requires  a wife only to produce  a child.  Now  we 
already  have  a child - Rohit.  Hence  I am no longer  useful  for you. You sell me and pay the 
acquired  wealth  as Dakshaina  to the Brahmin.'  Harishchandra  fainted  after hearing  his wife's 
words.  The queen  began  to wail at her husband's  condition.  Thus  wailing,  the queen  also fell 
unconscious.  The little Rohit  also felt perplex ed by his parent's  condition.  He began  to cry- 'O 
father!  O mother!  I am hungry.  Give  me food.'  At the same  time,  Vishwamitra  arrived  there  in 
the guise  of Kal. After  sprinkling  water  on Harishchandra's  face,  he made  him conscious  and 
said- 'O king! Get up  and pay my Dakshaina. Your sorrows will increase if you do not fulfil  your 
promise.'  
 
Harishchandra  was regaining  his consciousness  slowly  but seeing  Vishwamitra  he fainted  once 
again. This further enraged Vishwamitra. He said - 'O king! If you have even s lightest of  respect 
for Dharma,  give my Dakshaina  at once.  I will wait till evening  and curse  you if you fail to pay 
my Dakshaina.'  Saying  this Vishwamitra  departed.  The fear of the curse  began  to terrorise 
Harishchandra. Meanwhile the queen also regained consciousness. She once again insisted to  sell 
her in order  to pay the Dakshaina.  This time,  Harishchandra  accepted  her proposal  and took the 
queen to the township. There addressing the crowd, he said - 'O dear citizens, kindly listen to  me. 
I am selling  my wife who is dearer  to me than my own life. Anybody  interested  in buying  her, 
please  do so before  evening.'  An old Brahmin  stepped  forward  from  the crowd  and said- 'I will 
buy her.' Hearing his words, Harishchandra became extremely sad that he could not e ven utter  a 
word.  The Brahmin  then stuffed  the money  in the bark clothes  of Harishchandra  and began  to 
drag the queen  by her hair. The boy Rohit  began  to cry holding  the hem of her mother.  Seeing 
the condition of her son, the queen requested the Brahmin - 'O Arya! Kindly let me see the face  of 
my child  for once.'  Then  the queen  turned  towards  Rohit  and said- 'O son! Your  mother  is no 
longer free now. She has become a slave. Do not touch me because I have become an 
untouchable.'  
 
Then  the old Brahmin  began  to forcibly  drag the queen  with him. Rohit  also followed  them 
crying loudly for his mother. The old Brahmin angrily kicked him. But still the boy did not  give 
up following them. At last, the queen requested the Brahmin - 'O lord! I will not be able to  serve 
you without my son. So kindly buy him also.' Hearing the words of the queen, the Brahmin  once 
again stuffed some more money in the clothes of Harishchandra and tied the boy with the  queen 
and began to drag both of them. Meanwhile Vishwamitra also appeared t here and demanded  the 
Dakshaina.  Harishchandra  gave  him all the money  he had got from  selling  his wife and son. 
Seeing  that amount  of money,  Vishwamitra  boiled  with anger  and said- 'O wretched  among  the 
Kshatriyas!  You call this small  amount  of money  as Dakshaina!   
 Now  look at the powers  of my penance.' Harishchandra trembled with fear and said - 'O lord! 
Please wait a little  more.' Vishwamitra  said- 'Now  only,  a quarter  of the day remains.  I will wait 
only for this period  and not  more.'  Saying  this, Vishwa mitra  went  away.  With  stooped  face,  
Harishchandra  once  again said  addressing  the crowd - 'Now  I am available  for sale. Whoever  
wishes  to buy me, please come forward before sunset.' Dharma in the guise of a Chandala 
stepped forward from  the crowd.  He had a huge  stinking  body.  He said- 'I will buy you.'  
Harishchandra  asked - 'Who  are you?'  The Chandala  said- 'I am a Chandala.  My name  is 
Praveer  and I am the resident  of this very town.' Harishchandra thought - 'It is better to accept the 
curse than accepting the  slavery of  a Chandala.' At the same time, Vishwamitra also arrived there 
and said angrily - 'This Chandala  is ready to pay you a lot of money. Why don't you then pay my 
Dakshaina?' Harishchandra said - 'O lord!  I am born in Suryavansh.  Accepting  the slavery  of a 
Chandala  causes  great  pain for me. I have  no money  now.  Since  now onwards,  I will be your 
slave  and do whatever  you will ask me to do.' Vishwamitra said - 'If you are my slave and ready 
to obey me, then I sell you to  this Chandala  for 1000  gold coins.  Go and become  his slave.'  The 
Chandala  then presented  many villages  that were  spread  over an area of 100 Yojans  to 
Vishwamitra  and tying  Harishchandra with a rope dragged him to his  town.  
 
In the Chandala's house, Harishchandra contemplated - 'The queen mu st be thinking that I  would 
soon  get her freed  from  the slavery  of the old Brahmin  after paying  his dues.  But she does not 
know that I myself have become the slave of a Chandala.' After a few days, the  Chandala 
appointed Harishchandra as the supervisor of the cremation place and instructed him to be  there 
present  all the time and to cremate  each dead  body  only after thorough  investigation.  He also 
instructed  him to collect  the toll for cremating  every  dead  body  and divide  it in such a way that 
one sixth par t of the toll goes to the king and from the remaining five parts, three parts should  be 
reserved for him he should take only the remaining two parts as his remuneration. Since that  day, 
Harishchandra  began  to live in the cremation  ground.  He always  remembe red the glorious  days 
of his kingdom,  his queen  and his son. He had great  regret  that just because  of the anger  of 
Vishwamitra,  he lost everything.  Very  soon,  his new found  occupation  began  to show  on his 
appearance.  His hair grew  long and was unkempt,  his body  dry and stinking.  In this guise,  he 
began to roam in the cremation ground always carrying a stick in his hand. His whole day  passed 
in the assessment of the cremation toll and its division among the various claimants. He had  lost 
his mental  stature  as he even  forgot  the count  of the days and could  not distinguish  between  the 
day and  night.  
One day, a snake bit Rohit as a result of which, he died. Shaivya brought Rohit, crying  and 
wailing  to the cremation  ground.  Even  in the unkempt  guise,  she recognis ed Harishchandra. 
Hearing  her wailing,  Harishchandra  went  near her expecting  to get the clothes  of the deceased. 
There  he saw a woman  carrying  a dead  boy wrapped  in a black  cloth.  He could  not recognise 
queen  Shaivya  but the royal  appearance  of the boy forced him to think - 'To which  royal  family 
did this unfortunate  boy belong  to? How  pitiable,  the cruel  Kal did not even  spare  this boy. My 
son Rohit  would  have  attained  the same  age by now.'  His silence  further  hurt the queen  who 
said- 'O lord!  O king!  How  come,  you have  been  living  here without  caring  for your wife and 
son? We have already lost our kingdom. Now, we have lost our son also. O destiny! Did you  not 
destroy  everything  of Harishchandra?'  Harishchandra  began  to think  who that woman  could  be 
and who that dead  boy was?  'Isn't she my wife?'  Thus  recognising  his wife and dead  son, 
Harishchandra  began  to cry loudly  and fainted.  The queen  after seeing  her husband's  condition 
fainted  too. After  sometime  both of them  regained  their consciousness.  Then  the king took the 
dead boy in his lap and once again fainted. Queen Shaivya began to wonder why  Harishchandra 
was staying  in the cremation  ground.  For a moment,  she forgot  her sorrow  and began  to look at 
her fainted husband. Then she noticed the stick in Harish chandra's hand. Usually Chandalas  used 
to carry that kind of stick. She became dejected with the thought that she had become the wife  of 
a Chandala.   She then began  to curse  the destiny  and began  to wail embracing  King Harishchandra  and 
said- 'O king!  I don't know  whether  I am dreaming  or it is a reality.  I have lost the power of  
thinking.'  
 
Hearing the words of the queen, the king opened his eyes and narrated the whole events that  led 
to his becoming  a Chandala.  Then  the queen  narrated  her experiences  and how their son Rohit 
died because  of snakebite.  Harishchandra  fell on the ground  and began  to hug his dead  son. He 
was wailing - 'How unfortunate I am that even my wishes are not under my control. Without  the 
permission of the Chandala, I cannot even commit self-immolation. But now, I will  not 
differentiate  between  the sin and virtuosity.  I will destroy  my body  in the pyre of my son.' The 
queen said - 'O king! I am also unable to bear the burden of sorrows. I will also  commit 
immolation  with you. Then  all three of us will stay unitedly  in the heaven.  It won't  matter  to us 
even if we suffer the tortures of hell.' Then the king arranged a huge pyre and put his dead son  on 
it. With the queen, he began to pray to God. Just then all the deities arrived there led by  Dharma. 
Sage  Vishwamitra  also accompanied  them.  They  praised  Harishchandra.  Then  Dharma,  Indra 
and Vishwamitra came closer to the  king.  
 
Dharma said - 'O king! You have satisfied me with your merits like patience,  endurance, 
truthfulness etc.' Indra said - 'Harishchandra, you are very fortunate. You have won our  hearts 
along  with your wife and son. You have  even  won the heaven  with your action.  I invite  you to 
stay in heaven along with your wife and son.' Then Indra sprinkled ambrosia on the dead  Rohit. 
Rohit  got up and sat up in no time.  Harishchandra,  his wife and son Rohit  were  clad in divine 
clothes and garlands. Indra invited them to stay in the heaven forever but Harishchandra said - 'O 
king of the deities! Without the permission of this Chandala, I canno t go anywhere.  
 
'Dharma said - 'O king! I had learnt in advance about the miseries you would suffer in  future. 
That's  why I took the guise  of a Chandala  and showed  you all the grotesque  action.'  Indra  once 
again  invited  them  to heaven  but once  again,  Harish chandra  refused  saying  that in Koshal, 
people  must  have  been  living  mournfully  in his absence.  'I cannot  leave  them  in that pitiable  
condition  to enjoy  the comforts  of the heaven',  said Harishchandra.  Then,  Indra,  Dharma  and 
Vishwamitra led Harishchandra t o Ayodhya, the capital of Koshal. There they carried out  the 
coronation of Rohit. Thereafter, they took Harishchandra and his queen Shaivya to the  heaven.  
   
 
THE STORK AND THE  PARTRIDGE  
The birds say - O great sage Jaimini! When, King Harishchandra attaine d his heavenly  abode, 
their family  priest,  sage Vashishta  re-emerged  from  water.  He came  to know  about  the entire 
development.  He was angry  at Vishwamitra's  stubbornness.  He at once  cursed  Vishwamitra  to 
become a  stork.  
 
On the other  hand  Vishwamitra  curse d Vashishta  to become  a partridge.  Thus  both of them 
turned into birds and began to fight. Their fight caused great panic all around. At  last 
accompanied  by the deities,  Brahma  himself  arrived  at the scene  and dissuaded  the birds  from 
fighting. But Brahma could not convince them and they continued to  fight.  
 
Brahma  then destroyed  their avian  appearances  and both the sages  regained  their original  form. 
Their  enemity  too ended  at the same  time.  Brahma  explained  to them  that Vishwamitra  had not 
done any harm t o Harishchandra. In fact he had felicitated Harishchandra's ascend to the  heaven. 
Both the sages felt ashamed and they embraced each other before leaving for their  respective 
hermitages.  
 
The birds say - O great sage Jaimini! When, King Harishchandra attain ed his heavenly  abode, 
their family  priest,  sage Vashishta  re-emerged  from  water.  He came  to know  about  the entire 
development.  He was angry  at Vishwamitra's  stubbornness.  He at once  cursed  Vishwamitra  to 
become a  stork.  
 
On the other  hand  Vishwamitra  cursed Vashishta  to become  a partridge.  Thus  both of them 
turned into birds and began to fight. Their fight caused great panic all around. At  last 
accompanied  by the deities,  Brahma  himself  arrived  at the scene  and dissuaded  the birds  from 
fighting. But Brahma  could not convince them and they continued to  fight.  
 
Brahma  then destroyed  their avian  appearances  and both the sages  regained  their original  form. 
Their  enemity  too ended  at the same  time.  Brahma  explained  to them  that Vishwamitra  had not 
done any harm to Harishchandra. In fact he had felicitated Harishchandra's ascend to the  heaven. 
Both the sages felt ashamed and they embraced each other before leaving for their  respective 
hermitages.  
   
 
BIRTH OF LIVING  CREATURES  
Jaimini  says- O great  birds,  how does a living  being  take birth?  How  does it grow  in the womb 
bearing all the pain? How does it grow after taking birth? What happens to the soul after  death? 
How does it experience the fruits of his Karmas? The greatest surprise is how does a little  foetus 
survive in the womb. Kindly clear all these  doubts.  
Birds say - Once upon a time, a Brahmin lived along with his son - Sumati. One day, the  Brahmin 
instructed Sumati to study Vedas under the tutelage of a teacher and himself went to the forest  to 
attain Brahmagy an- the knowledge which frees the soul from transmigration. But due to  his 
laziness, Sumati did not pay heed to his father. When his father repeated his instruction,  he 
simply  laughed  and said- 'O father!  I know  everything.  I have  studied  all the Vedas  in my 
various births. I have experienced the darkness of mother's belly for many times. I have  suffered 
thousand  kinds  of diseases  in my previous  lives.  I have  experienced  the authority  as well as 
slavery in my previous births. I had killed as well as got kil led by others. Hence, I feel, I have  all 
the knowledge and I am sure that I will definitely attain Brahmapad.' Sumati's father was  pleased 
at his son's claims and asked him how he attained such  virtuosity.  
 
Sumati  said- 'O father!  I was a Brahmin  in my previous  birth.  I had attained  the designation  of 
Acharya.  After  sometime,  I became  a recluse.  I was blessed  with an extraordinary  memory, 
which I retained even after my death. This is the reason why I remember the self  knowledge 
attained  in my previous  birth . With  the support  of this knowledge  and religious  virtues,  I will 
attempt to attain salvation. Tell me what you expect from me. I will try to fulfil  your 
expectations.' The Brahmin then asked many questions related to life and death.  Sumati 
explained thos e queries  thus:  
 
Those  who never  tell a lie, who have  faith and devotion,  only such people  die peacefully. 
Whoever's mind is free from the evils like Kama, Krodh, Moha, Dwesh etc. (lust,  anger, 
affection,  jealousy  etc.) and who are altruistic  in nature  and make  donations  liberally  die in 
peace. Those who lack these virtues suffer great pain at the time of death. As soon as such  people 
sight  Yamadoot  they begin  to cry and call their relatives.  But their relatives  do not understand 
their calls.  Then  the dying  person  turns  away  his eyes and grasps  for breath.  He feels  great  pain 
when his soul leaves his body. Even after death, sufferings of such people do not end. They  have 
to undergo  scores  of tortures  in hell. Those  who donate  umbrella,  shoes,  clothes  and cereals 
attain heaven. The sinners on the other hand pass through different hells and take birth as  inferior 
creature  in their next lives.  After  continuous  transmigration  through  lower  life forms,  these 
sinners once again take birth as human beings but are im perfect. They remain dwarf, hunched  or 
have any other deformity. Then they pass through all the four castes - Shudra, Vaishya,  Kshatriya 
and Brahmin classes. As their action improves, they might even attain the position of  Indra.'  
   
 
DESCRIPTION OF DIFFERE NT HELLS 
INTRODUCTION  
The Brahmin says - O son! Describe in detail about  hell. 
 
Sumati says - O father! Yamadoots carry and lynch those people who eat inedible things, who  deceive  
and dishonor their friends, who indulge in illicit relationships, who desert t heir wife, and who  destroy  
public  properties  like garden,  water  sources  etc. Yamadoots  tie hands  and legs of such  people  and throw  
them into  the fire. On their way to hell, such  people  are bitten  by crows,  storks,  wolves,  vultures  etc. They  
stay in the inf erno for thousand  years.  
 
Then they are shifted to another hell named Tama, which is always shrouded in  darkness. 
Sinners who kill the cows and their brothers are thrown into this hell. They panic due to  darkness  
and extreme  cold.  They  get nothing  to eat and drink.  Moreover,  chilling  winds  aggravates  their 
miseries by making their bones stiff. These sinners then drink their own blood and eat their  own 
flesh. They stay there until all their sins have been attenuated  completely.  
 
Then  they are thrown  into yet another  hell named  Nikrintan,  which  revolves  like the wheel  of a 
potter. Hoisting the sinners on the wheel, Yamadoots cut their organs but still their sufferings  do 
not end because  the cut organs  rejoin  and get cut repeatedly.  This continues  for thousand  of 
years.  Then  the sinners  are put in Aprathisth  hell where  they experience  unbearable  sorrow  and 
miseries.  The sinners  are then put in Chakrasankar  hell where  they are tormented  with wheels 
and huge bells. They are disembowelled and their eyes are also p ricked. The sinners have to  pass 
through different hells namely Asipatra, Taptakumbha and  Lohakumbha.  
   
 
YAMADOOT AND THE KING OF  VIDEHA  
Sumati says - I was born in a Vaishya family, seven births before this present one. In that birth,  I 
once prevented cow s from drinking water. As a result of this sin, I was thrown in the hell  named 
Darun where I spent one hundred years without a drop of  water.  
 
Suddenly one day, cool pleasant wind began to blow, its cool touch gave some relief to me. I  saw 
that a Yamadoot  was guiding  a gentle  looking  man.  Besides  me, all the inmates  of the hell felt 
extreme joy by the sight of that gentleman. The gentleman was asking that Yamadoot as to  why 
he was being  taken  to the hell. From  the words  of that gentleman,  it appeared  that he was a 
renowned  scholar.  That man was in fact the ruler  of a kingdom  named  Videha  and was popular 
as the fosterer of his  subjects.  
   
 
Description Of Tortures In  Hell 
Thus asked by the gentleman, Yamadoots replied politely - 'O king! You once  deliberately 
prevented your wife Pivari from conceiving because you were more attracted to your  second 
wife- Sushobhana. It is because of that action that you have been brought here to undergo  severe 
torture.' The religious minded king said - ' I am willing to go where ever you want to take me,  but 
before  doing  that I would  like to have  answers  to my questions.  I see many  people  undergoing 
severe tortures in this hell. Big and frightening crows prick their eyes. Tell me, for what sin  they 
are facing such  tortures.'  
 
Yama doot said- 'O king!  Humans  suffer  or enjoy  according  to their Karmas.  The effect  of their 
Karmas  diminishes  in proportion  to their sufferings.  These  crows  are pricking  the eyes of such 
people who had seduced other women and deceitfully acquired others' wea lth. These people  will 
suffer  for the same  number  of years  as their eyes blinked  during  the leering.  These  crows  prick 
the tongues of those people who had criticised Vedas, deities, Brahmins and teachers. Those  who 
caused  differences  between  friends,  husba nd-wives,  father  and sons and relatives,  or killed  the 
performer  of the Yagyas  are suffering  under  the saw. Those  who insulted  their parents  and 
teachers  have  been  thrown  in the pit of pus, faeces  and other  excretions  with their head  down. 
Those  who had food before  offering  it to the deities,  guests,  servants,  father  and elders,  fire and 
birds,  stay in a pit of pus. Iron nails  are hammered  into the ears of those  people  who gleefully  
heard the criticism of creatures, deities, Brahmins and Vedas. Those who re married  their 
daughters  to another  person  despite  her former  husband  being  alive  are cut into pieces  and 
thrown into a saline river. Those who betrayed their friends are tied tightly with a rope.  Worms, 
scorpion,  crows  and owls  then bite their bodies.  Thos e who enjoyed  carnal  intimacy  during 
daytime  or had illicit  relations  with women  are hammered  with nails  to a prickly  Bombax  tree. 
Those who insulted Vedas and fire are thrown from the lofty peaks of mountain. O king!  Those 
who steal gold,  those  who kill Brahmin,  those  who drink  wine  and those  who rape the wife of 
their teacher are burnt in  fire.' 
   
 
Attenuation Of  Sins  
Yamadoot  says- As a result  of accepting  money  from  a degraded  person,  a Brahmin  takes  birth 
as an ass. A Brahmin  who carries  out Yagya  for a degraded  person  takes  birth  as worm  after 
undergoing severe sufferings in different types of hell. A person takes birth as an ass or  an 
inferior  bird as a result  of abusing  his parents.  A person  who does not worship  his tutelary  god 
before  eating  takes  birth  as a monkey.  Traitors  take birth  as fish. Those  who steal cereals  take 
birth as mice. A Shudra, who manages to establish intimacy with a Brahmin woman, takes  birth 
as a worm. Similarly, killers of woman and children also take birth as worms. Ungratef ul people 
take birth as worm, insects, grasshoppers, scorpion, crows etc. Encroacher of land takes birth  as 
grass  shrubs,  creepers  and inferior  trees.  Butchers  who kill bulls  take birth  as eunuchs.  Thus  a 
person has to face the result of his Karma accordin g to the gravity of his  sins. 
 
Sumati  says- As Yamadoot  began  to push  the king ahead,  all the creatures  in hell gave  a loud 
cry- 'O king! Please stay here for few more moments. The wind that blows towards us  after 
touching  your body  gives  us immense  joy. This wind  has ended  our sufferings  and pains.  Have 
pity on us.' The king asked  the Yamadoot - 'Why  are these  people  so joyous  by my presence? 
Yamadoot  said- 'O king!  Initially,  you used to sustain  your body  by the leftovers  of the deities, 
ancestors,  guests  and ascetics.  This is the reason  why the wind  that blows  touching  your body 
causing such pleasure to these  people.  
 
'The king said- 'If I can eliminate  the sufferings  of these  sinners  merely  by standing  here,  I will 
definitely stay here.' Yamadoot said - 'No, you cannot stay here. It is a place for the sinners  only. 
Come  with us. You will have  to enjoy  the pleasure  of your pious  action.'  The king said- 'No, I 
will not go anywhere  leaving  these  poor people  in this pitiable  condition.'  Yamadoot  said- 'O 
king! Look, Dharma and Indra have themselves arrived to escort you to the  heaven.  
 
'Dharma  said- 'O king!  You have  worshipped  me. Hence  follow  me to the heaven.'  The king replied - 'No, I 
will not go anywhere  leaving  these  thousands  of people  in the hell.' Indra  said- 'Everyone  has to taste  the 
fruits  of his Karmas.  You cannot  help them.'  The king said- 'O Indra!  Tell me, how virtuous was  I in my 
previous  life?' Dharma  said- ' Though  your pious  actions  are fathomless,  be sure that their significance  
are not much  than drops  of water  in an ocean,  the stars  in the sky. The kindness  you have  shown  
towards  these  sinners  has further  enhanced your  virtuosity.'  The king said- 'If it is so, may all these  people  
be released  from their sufferings  by the virtue  of my good  Karm as.' Indra  said- 'O king!  By your words,  
your pious action has increased like the height of the mountain and these sinners have also  been   
released from their  sufferings.'  
   
 
FAMOUS MYTHOLOGICAL  CHARACTERS  
BEING CHASTE AND BIRTH OF DURVASA, DATTATREYA,  CHANDRAMA  
 
Brahmin says - O son! Tell me, what should I do  now?  
 
Sumati  says- Now,  you should  become  a Vanprasthi  and lead a life of a Bhikshu  by having 
control  over your senses.  You will attain  that rare Yoga,  which  helps  a man to unite  with the 
almighty aft er freeing him from the cycles of birth, death and  rebirth.  
 
Brahmin says - O son! Now explain to me about this Yoga, which bestows liberation to a  man.  
 
Sumati says - I am now describing to you, the same text related with Yoga that was once  narrated 
by Datt atreya to  Alarka.  
 
The Brahmin asked Sumati - Who was Dattatreya's father? How did he acquire the knowledge  of 
Yoga? Who was  Alarka?  
 
Sumati says - In ancient Pratisthanpur (modern Paithan) there lived a Brahmin. He was  inflicted 
by leprosy  because  of the sins he had committed  in his previous  birth.  The Brahmin  was very 
short -tempered and used to scoff at his wife frequently. But his wife was very chaste in  character 
and worshipped  him like a deity.  One day, the Brahmin  ordered  his wife to carry  him to the 
prostitute's house, as he had become too weak and feeble. Being chaste, the wife collected  some 
money  and began  to carry  the Brahmin  on her shoulders  to the home  of the prostitute.  On their 
way, they reached a place where sage Mandavya was hanged but still w as alive. In the  darkness, 
the woman  could  not see the things  clearly  and the Brahmin  who was riding  her shoulders 
happened  to touch  the sage.  The sage cursed  angrily  that whoever  had touched  him would  die 
before sunrise. Hearing the words of the sage, the  Brahmin's wife thundered that there would  be 
no sunrise  tomorrow.  
 
Words  of the woman  came  to be true as next morning,  the Sun did not rise. Thus  the whole 
world  was shrouded  in darkness  as a result  of which,  the deities  became  worried.  The deities 
appreh ended that without the occurrence of sunrise, the whole universe might be destroyed. They 
were  also worried  that without  the differentiation  of day and night,  how could  the months  be 
calculated and the seasons known. Even the calculation of year would be i mpossible.  The 
chastity of Brahmins wife had forced even the mighty sun to eschew its daily routine. As a  result 
of this, religious  activities  like Havan,  Yagya  etc. also came  to a halt. Seeing  them  perplexed, 
Brahma advised the deities to eulogise Ansuya,  the wife of sage Atri. All the deities then  pleased 
Ansuya  who assured  them  to convince  the wife of the Brahmin  to retract  her words.  After  that, 
Ansuya reached the Brahmin's hut and said to his wife - 'O fortunate one! May you always  serve 
your husband wi th full dedication. A chaste woman enjoys half the virtues of her husband,  which 
he earns by his religious  activities.'  
 
Brahmini said - 'I am blessed today that the deities have at last glanced at me. Now, tell me,  what 
should  I do?' Ansuya  said- 'O Sadhvi ! In the absence  of the day, all the religious  activities  have 
ceased  to exist.  The world  is on the verge  of extinction.  Only  your wish  can protect  the world 
from  imminent  calamity.  Hence,  be pleased  now and allow  the Sun to rise as usual.'  Brahmini 
said- 'O fortunate  one! Sage  Mandavya  had cursed  that my husband  would  die with sunrise.  
 
  
I cannot afford to lose my husband.' Ansuya said - 'Don't worry, O chaste woman! I will  resurrect 
your husband. So, kindly allow the Sun to rise  now.'  
 
Then,  Ansuya  invoke d the Sun by offering  water  as an oblation.  However,  the leper -inflicted 
Brahmin  died as soon  as the Sun rose.  Then  by the powers  of her penance,  Ansuya  resurrected 
the Brahmin and transformed him into a disease -free handsome young man. She also blessed  the 
couple  to live for hundred  years.  The deities  were  pleased  with Ansuya  and asked  her to seek a 
boon. Ansuya expressed her desire to give birth to the trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh  as 
her sons.  The trinity  blessed  her with this boon.  In due course  of time,  Brahma,  Vishnu  and 
Mahesh took birth as Chandrama, Dattatreya and Durvasa from  Ansuya.  
   
 
DATTATREYA'S PREACHES KARTAVEERYA  ARJUNA  
Sumati  says- O father!  After  the demise  of Kartaveerya,  his ministers  and priests  decided  to 
crown his son Arjuna a s their new king. But Arjuna refused saying that he would not become  the 
king unless  and until he had attained  the status  of a Yogi.  Sage  Garg  then advised  Arjuna  to 
worship Dattatreya who had helped the deities to reunite after the defeat of the  demons.  
 
Afterwards, Arjuna migrated to Dattatreya's hermitage and began to worship and serve  him. 
Pleased  by his penance  and service,  Dattatreya  asked  Arjuna  to seek a boon.  Arjuna  said- 'O 
lord!  Kindly  bless  me with such a power,  which  enables  me to perform  my duties as a king in a 
just manner.  May nobody  match  me in war and may I have  one thousand  arms.  I wish  to get 
killed  only by such a person  who is more  virtuous  than me and may I guide  the people  towards 
the right path. May nobody in my kingdom remain poor an d may my devotion for your lotus  feet 
be eternal.'  Dattatreya  said- 'O son! All of your wishes  shall  come  true. With  my blessings,  you 
shall rule over all the four directions.' Then, Dattatreya crowned Arjuna as the king.  Large 
number of people witnessed h is crowning ceremony. Soon after becoming the king,  Kartaveerya 
Arjuna ordered that nobody in his kingdom should wield a weapon except  him. 
   
 
KUVALAYASHVA AND THE HORSE  KUVALAYA  
Sumati says - O father! Now listen to the tale of a Brahmin named Alarka. Lon g ago, there lived  a 
king named Shatrujit who had a meritorious son, Ritudhwaj. Prince Ritudhwaj had many  friends 
with whom  he used to play with.  In course  of time,  two sons of Ashwatar,  the king of Nagas 
became  his friends  in the guise  of Brahmin  boys.  Both of them  were  young  and good -looking. 
Both  of them  used to pass the entire  day in the company  of Ritudhwaj.  They  would  return  to 
their abode  in Patal  loka only at night.  On being  enquired  by their father,  they revealed  the 
reason  about  their late arrival  at home.  They  said- 'O father!  Up there  on the land,  there  is a 
prince  named  Ritudhwaj.  He is the son of King  Shatrujit.  He is very handsome,  gentle,  brave, 
truthful, knowledgeous and meritorious. We enjoy his company.' Ashwatar said - 'Prince 
Ritudhwaj  is really  blessed  for even  the meritorious  people  like you praise  him. But have  you 
done  anything  to make  him happy?'  His sons asked - 'What  can we do for his pleasure?  We find 
ourselves incapable of pleasing such a person whose riches are even rare for Patal  loka.' 
Ashwatar said - 'Even then, I wish to hear about the characteristics of your new  friend.'  
The sons said- O father!  Once  the prince  narrated  us a tale, we are going  to relate  it now.  A 
Brahmin named Galav lived in King Shatrujits kingdom. One day, he  arrived in the court of  the 
king riding on a horse and said - 'O king! For the past many months, a wretched demon has  been 
tormenting  me and causing  severe  disturbances  in my daily  rituals.  He is capable  of taking  any 
guise at will. Disguising as an elepha nt, lion, tiger, wolf and many other wild animals,  he 
terrorises me. It has become very difficult for me to do my meditation. One day in  my 
frustration, I let out a deep sigh. As soon as I did so, this divine horse descended from the sky.  I 
heard a heaven ly voice, which said - 'O Brahmin! This horse is capable of circumambulating  the 
entire earth without getting tired. It can climb lofty mountains effortlessly and can also run in  all 
the three  worlds  with the same  speed.  Hence,  this horse  shall  be renowned  as Kuvalaya.  Riding 
it, the son of King Shatrujit will kill the demon that torments you day and night. 'O king! That  is 
the reason that I have arrived in your court with this horse. Kindly accept it and instruct your  son 
to ride it and kill the demon.'  King Shatrujit  saw his son Ritudhwaj  off with the Brahmin  riding 
that divine  horse.  
 
Kuvalaya  goes to Patal  Loka,  killing  of demon  Patal  Ketu  and marriage  with Madalasa  Prince 
Ritudhwaj stayed in the hermitage of sage Galav and helped him to perform his Yagya s without 
any problem by clearing all the minor obstacles. The demons were not aware of his arrival in the 
hermitage. One day, a demon arrived in the hermitage disguised as a wild boar and began to  rub 
his bushy head against the body of sage Galav. Seeing this, his disciples began to scream.  Prince 
Ritudhwaj  at once  rode the horse  and wielding  a weapon  dashed  after the boar.  The prince 
injured the boar with an arrow, which was sickle -shaped. The demons fled from the scene.  Prince 
Ritudhwaj  followed  the boar everywhere  it went  on the mountains,  in the forests  and on the 
riverbank.  He was determined  to slay the demon  that had been  disturbing  the sage for long. 
Ultimately,  the boar jumped  into a pit. Ritudhwaj  also followed  it but could  not see the boar 
anywher e in the pit. Instead  he saw a beautiful  town  which  could  have  matched  even  the abode 
of Indra.  He entered  the town  where  he saw an extremely  pretty  girl who was walking  briskly. 
Ritudhwaj  tried to know  about  her destination  but she ignored  him and climbed  the stairs  of a 
palace.  Ritudhwaj  also followed  her and in the palace,  he saw a beautiful  girl sitting  on a 
bedstead.  As soon  as the girl saw him, she fainted.  Her beauty  attracted  even  Ritudhwaj.  He 
assured  her that there  was nothing  to be afraid  about.  Then  the same  girl whom  Ritudhwaj  had 
sighted  earlier  came  there  and began  to fan the fainted  lady.  The prince  enquired  about  the 
reason of her unconsciousness.   But the girl did not say anything. Instead she  whispered something in the ears of her friend w ho 
then said - 'O stranger! This is the daughter  of Vishwavasu, the king of Gandharvas. Her name is 
Madalasa. One day, while she was playing  in her  garden,  a demon  Patalketu  abducted  her. 
Since  then she stays  here in his captivity.  On the coming thirteenth day of this month that 
demon will marry her. But he doesn't deserve to be  her husband.  Yesterday,  she was ready  to 
commit  suicide  but the cow Surabhi,  assured  her that a man  from  the earth  would  come  and 
kill the demon.  Only  he would  be suitable  for my friend. I am her friend. My name is Kundala. 
I am the daughter of Vindhyavan and wife of  Pushkarmali. My  husband  had been  killed  by the 
demon  Shumbh.  Since  then I have  been  touring  various places of pilgrimage in order to 
receive salvation. That wretched Pata lketu had taken the guise  of a boar but a brave  man has 
injured  him with his arrow.  I have  arrived  here only to investigate who  is that man.  Do not 
worry  about  my friend's  unconsciousness.  She has fainted  because  of your infatuating 
handsomeness. She has b egun to love you but her problem is that only that  man can  marry  her 
who has injured  the boar.  This thought  has caused  her to lose her consciousness. Now reveal 
your identity.'  
 
Ritudhwaj said - 'I am the son of King Shatrujit. I have been staying in the h ermitage of  sage 
Galav  to protect  the sages.  Just a few days back,  a boar arrived  in the hermitage  and began  to 
torment  the sages.  I have  injured  that boar with my arrow.  Now  I have  arrived  here following 
that boar and happened to see  you.'  
 
Hearing the wo rds of Ritudhwaj, Madalasa felt shy as well as extreme joy. Kundala then said  to 
her friend - 'The prince  speaks  the truth.  Words  of Surabhi  cannot  go wrong.'  She then said to 
Ritudhwaj - 'O brave man! Doubtlessly you have killed the demon, Patalketu. My  friend 
Madalasa  is blessed  now.  Now  its your duty to marry  my friend  and take her home  as your 
bride.'  Ritudhwaj  said- 'How  can I marry  your friend  without  the permission  of my father.  I am 
still not fully independent.'  Kundala  said- 'Please  do not say this. My friend  is a divine  beauty. 
Marry her right now.' Prince Ritudhwaj then agreed to marry Madalasa then and there.  Madalasa 
happily remembered their family priest Tumbaru who arrived there instantaneously. In the 
presence of sacred fire, Tumbaru carried o ut the rituals of marriage and tied them in nuptial  knot. 
Thereafter blessing the newly wed couple, Tumbaru and Kundala took to their respective  paths.  
 
On the other hand, when Ritudhwaj and Madalasa started off riding the horse,  Kuvalaya, 
demons' army su rrounded them. A fierce battle followed. In no time, prince Ritudhwaj slayed  the 
entire army and reached his kingdom. There he narrated the whole incident to his  father 
Shatrujit.  King  Shatrujit  felt very much  pleased  by the prowess  of his son and blessed  them 
heartily.  Thereafter,  Ritudhwaj  came  to his palace  with his wife Madalasa.  They  then began  to 
live happily.  
   
 
SEPARATION OF  MADALASA  
The newly -wed couple  had hardly  spent  few months  together  when  King  Shatrujit  once  again 
instructed Ritudhwaj to tr avel across the entire earth and see whether the Brahmins  were 
performing  their religious  duties  without  any obstacles.  Ritudhwaj  obeyed  the dictates  of his 
father.  He used to scale  vast distances  for the whole  day and returned  to his wife only at night. 
One day he noticed that a sage was staying at the bank of river Yamuna. He was in fact  Talketu, 
the younger brother of Patalketu. But the prince could not recognise him. That sage  approached 
Ritudhwaj and requested him to extend his protection over his herm itage, as he was about to  start 
Yagyas. He also begged for the precious necklace of the prince on the pretext that he had nothing 
to pay as Dakshaina.  The gullible  prince  gave  his necklace  to the sage.  Then  instructing  the 
prince to guard the hermitage and  promising to return soon, the sage  left. 
 
In fact, the sage who was actually a demon arrived in the court of King Shatrujit. Madalasa  was 
also present  in the court.  He said- 'Prince  Ritudhwaj  sacrificed  his life fighting  with the demon 
while  protecting  my hermitage.  Before  his death,  he gave me his necklace.  His horse  has been 
captured by the demon. I have brought this necklace to you to inform you about  that  sad 
incident.' After giving the necklace to Madalasa, the demon returned to the  hermitage.  
Hearin g the news of her husband's death, Madalasa also gave up her life. Mourning  soon 
enveloped  the entire  palace.  Seeing  the death  of his daughter -in-law, Madalasa,  King  Shatrujit 
was in a dilemma as for whose death should he mourn. A little contemplation led him to  the 
conclusion that it would be futile to mourn his son - Ritudhwaj's death because he had died for  a 
noble cause. But his daughter -in-law had followed the steps of her husband, so her death  should 
be mourned  for. The queen  also supported  the king.  Thereafter  the king performed  the last rites 
of both of  them.  
 
When Talketu returned to his hermitage, he found Ritudhwaj still standing alert. In a sweet  tone, 
Talketu  said- 'I am obliged  by you, O prince!  Staying  here with unwavering  mind,  you have 
execut ed my desired task. I have met my objective, so you may go now.' Prince Ritudhwaj  then 
returned to his palace riding his  horse.  
   
 
MADALASA IS  REBORN  
When prince Ritudhwaj reached the capital, everyone expressed his pleasure with  surprise. 
Ritudhwaj  met everyone  happily  and went  to the palace  of his parents.  Though  the king and the 
queen blessed him but sad expression on their face surprised the prince. Upon enquiry, the  king 
related the entire incident and also how his wife Madalasa had died. The news of Madalsa's  death 
shocked  Ritudhwaj.  Then  consoled  by his parents  and friends,  prince  Ritudhwaj  carried  out the 
necessary consecrations to pacify the soul of his dead wife. He had decided never to marry  again.  
 
The sons of the Nag said- 'O father!  Now  prince  Ritudhwaj  lives  like an ascetic.  He never  casts 
his eyes on women and only indulges in playing with people of his age. Hence all we can do  for 
him is to keep him  happy.'  
 
Hearing  the entire  tale, Nagraj  fell in deep  thought.  After  sometime  he said to his sons with a 
laughter - 'O sons! Now I will do such a thing that will bring back the smile of Ritudhwaj.'  Saying 
this, Nagraj Ashwatar reached Plakshavataran, a place of pilgrimage at the foothills  of 
Himalayas  along  with his brother  Kambal.  There  they bega n to do severe  penance  to please 
Goddess  Saraswati.  At last, Saraswati  appeared  before  them  and asked  them  to seek a boon. 
Ashwatar  requested  her to bless  both of them  with a sweet  and melodious  voice.  After  granting 
them  this boon,  Goddess  Saraswati  disap peared.  By her blessings,  Ashwatar  and his brother, 
Kambal  became  famous  singers.  Then  they began  worshipping  Lord  Shiva  singing  sweet  and 
melodious  hymns.  Pleased  by their prayers,  Lord  Shankar  also asked  them  to seek a boon.  At 
that Ashwatar  said- 'O lord! I wish  that Ritudhwaj's  wife Madalasa  takes  birth  as my daughter.' 
Lord  Shankar  said- 'With  my blessings,  your wish  shall  come  true. During  the Shradha  period, 
you yourself take the middle portion of the Pind (food offered to dead ancestors)  and 
contemp lating on me, offer oblations to your ancestors. Madalasa will emerge from  your 
'middle -hood'.  
 
Bowing  before  Lord  Shiva  thereafter,  both the brothers  returned  to their kingdom  in Patal  loka. 
Ashwatar  organised  a Shradha  in the same  way as told by the Lord  and consumed  the middle 
portion of the food offered to the ancestors. Then contemplating on the desired object, he let  out 
a deep sigh. Instantaneously, Madalasa emerged from his 'middle -hood'. Ashwatar did not  reveal 
this fact to anybody and made adequa te arrangements so that she could live in  secrecy.  
Thereafter one day, he instructed his sons to bring their friend Ritudhwaj to the palace. Both  the 
sons once  again  joined  the company  of Ritudhwaj.  One day while  playing,  they insisted  him to 
visit their palace.  The prince  gladly  accompanied  them.  In Patal  loka,  he was amazed  to see his 
Brahmin friends getting transformed into serpents. They took Ritudhwaj through the streets  and 
lanes of their kingdom. Ultimately they reached the palace of Ashwatar. Introd ucing  Ritudhwaj, 
the serpent  princes  said- 'O father!  This is our brave  friend,  Ritudhwaj.'  Ritudhwaj  greeted 
Ashwatar respectfully and received his blessings. Ashwatar said to him - 'Long live O prince!  My 
sons always sing praise of your divine virtues. I request you to stay with us for a few months  and 
enjoy the pleasures of Patal  loka.'  
   
 
RITUDHWAJ RE -UNITES WITH  MADALASA  
Ritudhwaj  stayed  in the palace  of Ashwatar.  Nagraj  did his best to keep  Ritudhwaj  happy  and 
forget  the sorrow  of his wife's  separatio n. During  his stay, Ashwatar  tried many  times  to coax 
Ritudhwaj into revealing his heartiest desire. But every time Ritudhwaj intelligently avoided  the 
topic.  Once,  King  Ashwatar,  in Ritudhwaj's  presence,  asked  his sons what  should  be done  to 
please him. T hey informed the king that nothing less than Madalasa would please the  prince 
most and that the prince was eager to see his deceased wife once  more.  
 
Prince  Ritudhwaj  also said shyly  that he would  be greatly  obliged  if Nagraj  could  help him to 
have  a sight of his deceased  wife.  Ashwatar  said- 'O son! If you wish  to see the illusion,  come 
on, have  a sight  of your deceased  wife.'  Saying  this, Nagraj  called  Madalasa  who was staying 
secretly in his palace and asked Ritudhwaj - 'Take a good look, O son, if she i s your wife.'  Seeing 
his wife before him, the prince fainted. When he regained his consciousness, he stepped  forward 
to touch her but Ashwatar stopped him cautioning that she was not real but illusionary and  would 
vanish as soon as he touched  her. 
 
Hearing  this, Ritudhwaj once again lost his consciousness. When he regained his  consciousness, 
he uttered  nothing  but 'She's  mine!  She's  mine!'  Seeing  the pitiable  condition  of the prince, 
Nagraj revealed the whole story of Madalsa's resurrection. Ritudhwaj becam e extremely  joyous 
after re-uniting  with his wife.  Then  he contemplated  on his divine  horse  as a result  of which,  it 
appeared within a moment. Riding the horse, prince Ritudhwaj returned to his kingdom with  his 
wife Madalasa.  
   
 
BIRTH OF MADALASA'S  SONS  
After returning  to his father's  kingdom,  Ritudhwaj  narrated  the whole  incident  to his parents  of 
how he regained  Madalasa.  Then  they began  to live happily.  After  many  years,  King  Shatrujit 
crowned  Ritudhwaj  as the king.  After  King  Ritudhwaj's  accession  to the throne,  Madalasa  gave 
birth to her first son. Ritudhwaj named the child as Vikrant. After sometime, Madalasa gave  birth 
to her second son whom Ritudhwaj named as Subahu. Subsequently, their third son was born  and 
named Shatrumardan. After the naming cer emony of the third son, Madalasa could not  help 
laughing, as she was very amused by such a name given to her son. The  metaphysical 
knowledge,  which  Madalasa  gave  to her three  sons,  had helped  them  to become  ascetics.  When 
their fourth  son was born,  the king sought  her approval  on the name  being  given  to him. This 
made  the queen  laugh.  The king asked  her to name  the child.  Madalasa  named  this child  as 
Alarka.  
 
Hearing the name, the king ridiculed its relevance. Madalasa said that the names  have 
significance only for worldly matters. She also reminded the king about the futility of the  names 
given to their previous children. As Madalasa began to preach her fourth son about  the 
metaphysics,  the king stopped  her by saying  that she had already  preached  all the three sons on 
the path of renunciation. He requested her to spare the fourth child so that he could grow up  and 
become the king one -day. Madalasa then blessed her son - 'You are blessed my son because  you 
will rule the earth  without  obstacles.  Now  cultivate  in your heart  the desire  to do well to others. 
Never caste your eyes on women other than your wife. Always contemplate on Murari to  destroy 
the evil thoughts in your  heart.'  
   
 
PREACHINGS OF  MADALASA  
Madalasa used to preach the little prince while played. When Alarka attained boyhood, he  asked - 
'O mother!  What  should  I do in order  to mastery  over physical  and metaphysical  matters?  How 
can I serve my subjects in the best possible  way?'  
 
Madalasa said - 'Looking after the welfare of the subjects religiously is  the supreme duty of a king.  He 
should  always be  alert against  the activities  of his enemies.  With the help of spies,  the king should  keep  a 
watch  on the activities  of his minister  so that he could  not make  friends  with the enemies.  It is unwise  for 
the king to trust everybody  but under  certain  circumstances,  he may trust even  his enemies.  A king must  
control  his lust but at the same  time,  he should  make  efforts  to increase  the boundaries  of his kingdom.  
Surrendering  to sensual  comfort  is like death  for a king. A king should  appear  as all pervasive  and 
omnipresent.  Fostering  the subjects  with total righteousness  enhances  the wisdom  of the king.'  
   
 
DUTIES OF PEOPLE BELONGING TO VARIOUS  ASHRAMAS 
VARNA ASHRAMA  DHARMA  
Alarka says - 'Tell me about the duties of the different classes and stages of  life.' 
 
Madalasa says - 'Donation, study and Yagya, these three are the religion of a  Brahmin. 
Performing Yagya for others, teaching and accepting donation are the three vocations  of 
Brahmin.  Donation,  study  and Yagya  are also the religious  duties  of Kshatriyas.  Protection  of 
land and using weapons are vocation for Kshatriyas. Religious duties of a Vaishya are also  same 
like that of the Brahmins  such as donation,  study  and Yagya.  For a living,  Vaishya  may take up 
animal  rearing,  agriculture  and trade  as profession.  Serving  all these  three  above  mentioned 
castes  as well as making  donations  and performing  Yagya  are the religious  duties  of a Shudra. 
Tilling the earth, serving Brahmins, feeding animals, selling and purchasing items  are 
professions of a Shudra. A person belonging to Dwij class may relatively enjoy freedom until  his 
sacred  thread  ceremony  has not been  performed.  After  the sacred  thread  ceremony,  he should 
come  to stay at the home  of his teacher  and observe  celib acy strictly  while  studying  scriptures. 
There he is expected to serve the Guru sincerely. At the completion of education, he should  pay 
Dakshaina to his Guru. He may get married and start the second stage of his life that is  Grihastha 
ashrama. He should th en subsequently opt for Vanprastha and Sanyas  respectively.  
After  the completion  of education  and paying  all the dues,  the disciple  is ready  to start second 
stage  of his life that is Grihastha  ashrama.  For this he should  first find a suitable  girl from  his 
caste  and get married.  Grihastha  ashrama  is considered  as the best stage  of life. It is in itself  a 
complete  Yagya.  As a householder,  he is expected  to foster  those  who are dependent  on him. 
During  this stage  of his life, he should  earn his livelihood  by occupations  ascribed  for his caste. 
He should please the deities by performing Yagyas, his ancestors by making oblations,  Prajapatis 
by producing  children,  spectres  by offering  sacrifices  of cereals  and society  by showering  love. 
Even the ascetic and celib ates depend on married people for their daily bread. Hence married  life 
or Grihastha ashrama is stated to be superior among all the  ashramas.  
 
A Grihastha must welcome and treat even his unexpected guests with great warmth.  A 
householder  who fails to satisfy his guest  never  succeeds  in religious  matters.  The Yagyas  that 
are offered  in such households  go futile.  Hence  it is not proper  for the householder  to show  ego 
and abuse a guest otherwise he will have to expiate for it  later.  
 
When the children of the h ouseholder grow up and his body becomes senile, he should go to  the 
forest  after relinquishing  the world.  There,  he should  pass his time by indulging  himself  in 
austerities  and religious  activities.  This stage  is known  as Vanprastha  ashrama  and is most 
necessary for the sanctification of his soul. This stage is followed by Sanyas ashrama - the stage, 
which requires complete renunciation, celibacy, control of senses and anger etc. The virtues  like 
truthfulness, sanctity, non -violence, tolerance, forgiveness, kindness, generosity and  contentment 
are the religious merits applicable to all the ashramas equally. Those who abide by their  religion 
stay in the abode of Brahma till the reign of fourteen Indras. The king punishes those who  violate 
this religious  code.  If the king doesn't  punish  them,  he is himself  destroyed.  Hence  a king must 
first of all abide by the duties as prescribed for different ashramas in his life and only then he  has 
the right to punish those people who violate these dictates.  ' 
 
 
 DUTIES OF A  GRIHASTHA  (HOUSEHOLDER)  
 
Alarka  says- What  are the duties  of a married  man by discharging  which  he becomes  free from 
all kinds of bondage and attains salvation. Kindly tell me about these  things.  
 
Madalasa says - O son! Those people who discharge their dut ies as a householder by fostering  all 
the living beings attain to the heaven automatically. All the living creatures of the  world 
including the deities and the dead ancestors are dependent on their nurturing on the  householder. 
They  always  look at the face of the married  man for their living.  In fact, Grihastha  ashrama  can 
be compared  to a cow that fosters  others  with her milk.  All the four Vedas  are present  in this 
'cow' that is Grihastha ashrama. Entire universe is reflected in this  ashrama.  
 
Daily after the bath in the morning, a Grihastha must perform oblations to the deities, to the  sages,  
Prajapati  and ancestors  by offering  water  to them.  Then  he should  perform a  Yagya and  offer cereals  in 
the sacrificial  fire. There  are certain  places  in the house,  which are reserved  for specific  deities  and where  
offerings  are made  to them.  Sacrifice  to Brahma  should  be offered  in the central  part of the home,  to 
Vishwadeva in the eastern side of the home, to Dhanvantari in the northern side, to Indra again in  the 
eastern side, to Yama in the southern side, to Varuna in the western side and to Soma in the  northern  
side of the home.  At the threshold  of the house,  sacrifice  should  be offered  to Dhata  and Vidhata.  One 
must  sit facing  the south  while  offering  sacrifice  to his dead  ancestors.  For the dogs  and birds,  sacrifices  
should  be given  on the ground  in the morning  and evening.  At the arrival  of a guest,  a Grihastha  must  
worship  him by offering  water,  cereals,  flowers  etc. as per his financial  condition.  If possible,  a Grihastha  
should  feed one or more  Brahmins  in order  to pacify  his ancestors.  He should  give alms  to a beggar  and 
a celibate.  Without  giving  alms,  a Grihastha  must  not proceed  to dine.  He should  also feed starving  and 
diseased  people  first. Such  kind of living definitely  benefits  a Grihastha.  
  SHRADHA AND ITS RITUALS REGULAR  AND CAUSAL  
DUTIES  
Madalasa says - O son! A Grihastha has three kinds of duties - regular, causal and a  combination 
of both. Rituals, which are connected with oblations and carried ou t daily, are called  regular 
duties. Rituals and consecrations performed at the birth of a child are called causal duties.  Yearly 
performance  of Shradha  for the dead  ancestors  is a combination  of regular  and causal  duties. 
Now listen about the causal  duties . 
 
At the time of a child's  birth,  different  kinds  of rituals  and consecrations  are carried  out in the 
household. During the time of marriage ceremony also, many more rituals are carried out. At  the 
time of marriage however, performance of the Shradha name d Nandimukh is a must. During  the 
Shradha, the host should sit facing the north or the east and offer a loaf made of barley flour  and 
yoghurt. Then he should circumambulate around two Brahmins and worship  them.  
 
Rituals and Shradha carried out in the house hold after the occurrence of any death in  the 
household comes under the category of causal duties. During the Shradha period, all kinds  of 
sacred  activities  are forbidden.  Only  the use of Kusha  grass  is permitted.  Donation  of 'Pind' 
comprising of barley fl our, yoghurt, honey etc. is made for only one time to pacify the soul of  the 
dead person. Then oblation of water with sesame seeds should be offered in the name of the  dead 
person. This ritual should continue for a year - once every month. After a year, Shr adha  is 
organised in which one, three or five Brahmins are fed. Thereafter, every year, during the  darker 
phase  of Ashwin  month,  a Shradha  should  be carried  out for the dead  ancestors.  This ritual  is a 
combination of regular and causal  duties.  
 
Sages  have  made  provision  for appeasement  of dead  ancestors  up to the last seven  generations. 
Cereals,  which  the people  offer  in the name  of their dead  ancestors,  pacify  those  souls  who stay 
in Pishach  Yoni.  Water  falling  on the earth  at the time of wringing  the clothes after one's  bath 
pacifies those souls, who have taken the form of vegetation after their death. Water falling  during 
the bath satisfies  those  souls  who have  attained  the status  of deities.  Cereals  that fall during  the 
lifting  of Pind satisfy  those  souls who are in lower  life forms.  The cereals  that scatter  here and 
there  and swept  aside  satisfy  souls  of those  people,  who had died in their childhood  before  the 
accomplishment  of any consecration.  The waste  water  falling  down  while  Brahmin  washes  his 
hands  after dining and pacifies all the other  souls.  
 
Every month, during the waning phase of the Moon or on the day of Amavasya, Shradha  should 
be carried  out. Besides  it, eighth  day of darker  phase  in the month  of Paush  is also good  for 
carrying  out Shradha.  If a virtuous  Brahmin  is available,  time of solar  and lunar  eclipses  is also 
good  for  Shradha.  The  time  when  the  Sun  crosses  the  equator  during  its  northward    and 
southward  journey  is also good  for Shradha.  Apart  from  these  above  mentioned  situations,  one 
can also organise Shradha in the following circumstances - at the time of great  calamity, 
availability of items suitable for Shradha, after a nightmare, during the period of birth  Nakshatra 
and during  the period  of unfavourable  stars etc. On the first day of the Shradha,  a virtuous 
Brahmin should be invited while the host must observe total restraint. It is said that such a  man, 
who indulges in sexual intercourse on the same day after carrying out Shradha or eating food  of 
Shradha,  causes  his dead  ancestors  to sleep  in semen  for one month.  Ancestors  of such a man, 
who performs Shradha immediately after having a sexual intercourse, drink urine and semen  for 
one month.  Hence  a virtuous  Brahmin,  whom  the host is intending  to feed,  should  be inform ed 
about the Shradha one day earlier in advance. If a Brahmin is not available, a true celibate can  be 
fed on the day of  Shradha.   
After  the Brahmin  has carried  out all the necessary  rituals,  Havan,  oblation  etc., he must  be 
formally  insisted  to dine.  All kinds  of edible  items  that a Brahmin  may wish  to eat should  be 
offered. While reciting the Rakshodhn mantra, grains of sesame and mustard should be  scattered 
on the ground.  After  the Brahmin  has dined,  he should  be offered  with water  to wash  his hands 
and some cereals that should be scattered on the ground with his permission. Then sitting on  the 
seat of Kusha grass, the host should offer a Pind made of sesame seeds, barley flour, sugar,  ghee 
etc. An oblation  of water  should  follow  it. At the end, the Brahm in should  be seen off with 
proper Dakshaina. Only then the host is free to dine himself along with other invited guests  and 
family  members.  
   
 
DO'S AND DON'TS DURING A  SHRADHA  
Madalasa  says- O son! I am now narrating  about  the do's and don'ts  to be followed  during 
Shradha.  Many  kinds  of edible  items  can be offered  in the Shradha.  These  include  cereals  like 
barley, wheat, rice, millet, corn, etc., fish, flesh of deer, rabbit, bird, wild boar, goat and  Neelgai 
(antelope). All these kinds of items are capable o f pacifying the soul of dead ancestors  for 
different period of time depending on the nature of offerings being made. Likewise  cereals 
offered  in sacred  fire cause  satisfaction  for one month.  Fish causes  satisfaction  for two months. 
Flesh  of deer causes  satisfaction  for three  months.  Flesh  of rabbit  causes  satisfaction  for four 
months.  Flesh  of bird causes  satisfaction  for five months.  Flesh  of wild boar causes  satisfaction 
for six months.  Flesh  of goat causes  satisfaction  for seven  months.  Flesh  of differen t types  of 
deer and antelope causes satisfaction for eight, nine and ten months  respectively.  
 
Food  items  made  of cow's  milk and ghee  and kheer  cause  satisfaction  to the dead  ancestors  for 
one year.  Different  varieties  of rice, barley,  millet,  wheat,  sesam e, moong  dal, mustard  etc. are 
extremely satisfying food for the ancestors. Different types of pulses and corn can also  be 
offered. Use of garlic, carrot, onion, radish, refined salt, red gum, gourd etc. is prohibited.  Water 
that is stinking,  frothy,  stale or otherwise  incapable  of quenching  a cow's  thirst  should  also be 
discarded. Milk of doe, camel, goat, buffalo and other one -hoof animals, yak and such a cow  that 
was milked  for the past ten days is also forbidden  for use in Shradha.  Soil that is infested  with 
insects,  dry, baked  with fire, stinking  or collected  from  an unholy  place  should  not be used. 
Similarly, such people who are violent, wretched, killers of Brahmins, impotent or have  fiendish 
characters should not be involved in the Shradha. Cocks and  pigs should also be kept away  from 
the place  of Shradha.  This is the reason  why sesame  seeds  are scattered  at the site of Shradha  
secretly.  The host must  not see a woman  in menses.  It is also not necessary  to feed a host of 
Brahmins.  Instead  it is suffic ient to feed only one meritorious  Brahmin  with complete  devotion 
and respect. It is enough to appease the dead ancestors. Appeasement of ancestors  automatically 
lead to appeasement of the deities, planets, Nakshatras and all whose blessings can transform  the 
living condition of the  person.  
   
 
AUSPICIOUS DAYS AND  MONTHS  
Madalasa  says- Shradha  can be performed  on any day during  the dark lunar  phase  in the Hindu 
month of Ashwin i.e. from the first day to the Amavasya. Performing of Shradha on any of  these 
days brings  the following  benefits - Performing  Shradha  on the first day or Pratipada  brings 
monetary  gain.  Shradha  performed  on the second  day brings  prosperity,  Shradha  performed  on 
the third  day blesses  the performer  with a boon.  Performing  Shradha  on the fourth day leads  to 
the destruction  of enemies.  Performing  Shradha  on the fifth day gives  benefit  from  a woman; 
Shradha  performed  on the sixth  day helps  a man to acquire  respect  in the society.  Shradha 
performed on the seventh day makes the performer an able leader; Shradha performed on  the 
eighth day enhances the intelligence. Shradha performed on the ninth day brings the company  of 
the attractive  women.  Shradha  performed  on the tenth  day leads  to the fulfilment  of all the 
desires.  Performing  Shradha  on the eleventh  day helps  him to attain  the knowledge  of Vedas. 
Shradha performed on the twelfth day makes the performer victorious. Shradha performed on  the 
thirteenth  day leads  to long life and luxuries.  Shradha  performed  on the fourteenth  day and 
Amavasya lead to the fulfilment of all the  desires.  
 
Fruits of Shradha performed during different  Nakshatras:  
 
NAKSHATRA   RESULT  
NAKSHATRA  RESULT  
 
KRITIKA  Heaven  abode  
 
ROHINI  Progeny  
 
MRIGSHIRA  Radiance  
 
ARDRA  Bravery  
 
PUNARVASU  Land  
 
PUSHYA  Health  
 
ASHLESHA  Sons  
 
MAGH A Family  help PURVAPHALGUNI  Fortune  
UTTARAPHALGUNI  Virtues  
HASTA   Greatness  
CHITRA  Beauty/  personality 
SWATI   Trade  
VISHAKHA  Progeny/desires  
 
ANURADHA  Respect  
 
JYESHTHA  Dominance  
 
MOOLA  Disease -free 
 
PURVASARHA  Popularity 
UTTARASARHA  No sorrows  
SHRAVANA  Heaven  abode  
DHANISHTHA  Wealth  
 
ABHIJIT  Vedas/medicine  
SHATABHISHA  Animal  wealth  
PURVABADRAPAD  Knowledge/cattle 
UTTARABADRAPAD Precious  metals 
REVATI   Horses  
ASHWINI  Increase  in life 
 
BHARANI  ProsperityFORBIDDEN AND PERMITTED  ITEMS  
Madalasa  says- O son! Now,  I will tell you the do's and don'ts  for healthy  living.  Stale  cereals, 
oil and fats stored  over a prolonged  period  of time,  items  prepared  from  wheat  and barley  and 
food items which is not prepared from pure ghee or milk should not be consumed. Flesh  of turtle, 
porcupine  etc. is worth  eating  whereas  flesh  of village  pigs and cocks  should  not be consumed. 
Brahmin  can eat flesh  offered  to him in a Shradha.  Things  like conch,  stone,  gold,  pearl  etc. are 
purified simply by washing in water. Cereals either  touched or washed by unwarranted people  is 
not fit for any purpose. Flesh of animals killed by Chandala or killed for the purpose of  oblation 
in Shradha is also considered pure. Seat, bed, vehicle, boat, grass, rays of the Sun and Moon  and 
air are natural ly pure things. Touch by a woman who is in her menses, dog, jackal, a mother  who 
has recently  given  birth  to a child,  a Chandala,  carriers  of the brier  etc. is defiling  in nature.  A 
person  however  can become  pure once  again  by taking  bath if touched  by any of these  people 
and animals.  One should  not neglect  the appearance  of blood  and cough.  Excretions  and water 
collected after washing the feet should be thrown out of the home at once. Getting touched by  the 
people  who criticize  deities,  ancestors,  Yagya,  mantra  etc. is also defiling.  Sighting  of the Sun 
however purifies the defiled  person.  
 
Duties  of the woman:  Different  male  and female  deities  dwell  at the threshold  of the home. 
Hence this portion of the home should be worshipped properly everyday. At daw n, the  threshold 
should  not be left vacant  or it may have  adverse  effect  on one's  lineage.  The whole  area inside 
the home should be plastered with cow dung daily or washed with pure water. All these  activities 
should  be carried  out by the better  half of the householder.  Those  women,  who prepare  food 
during the last quarter of the night, suffer from infertility in future births. Those women, who  do 
not sweep their home in the evening, remain unmarried and are bereft of wealth in future  births. 
Such  women  also lose their wealth,  lifespan  and reputation.  Kicking  the following  things  like 
broom,  hearth  and mortar  etc. or touching  them  with feet also leads  to the loss of progeny  and 
wealth.  
 
The householder should not use broken seat, board and black blanket for sitting purpose.  He 
should  not comb  his hair while  facing  south.  Those  who do not dine,  perform  Havan  or make 
donations  at the appropriate  time are no better  than eunuchs.  Those  who shun  these  activities 
despite  having  wealth  are worse  than mice.  Those  who do not respect  the deities,  teachers,  wife 
of the teacher,  cow,  Brahmin  etc. are boycotted  by the society.  Naked  are those  who are devoid 
of Vedas,  other  religious  scriptures  and rituals.  Such  a house  is really  contemptible,  which  is 
boycotted by the Brah mins and where daily routines are not followed  regularly.  
 
After birth or death in the family, a Brahmin becomes purified in ten days. During this period  of 
ten days,  he should  avoid  all the religious  activities.  In similar  conditions,  a Kshatriya  gets 
purified in twelve days after a birth or death in his family, a Vaishya in fifteen days and a  Shudra 
in one month.  Dead  body  of a person  should  be cremated  outside  the boundaries  of the village. 
His family members should offer oblation of water to pacify his soul on the first, fourth,  seventh 
and ninth  days after the cremation.  Ashes  should  be collected  from  the fourth  day. In case of 
deaths caused by a snake bite or poisoning family members may get purified after a day. There  is 
no impurity  in case of the death of a child,  an immigrant  and the one who has renounced 
everything. Even their cremation is not carried out nor oblation of water is  made.  
If one more  death  occurs  in the family  while  the mourning  period  of the earlier  death  is still 
continuing,  impuri ty of the second  death  lasts as long as that of the first one. Similar  rules  are 
applied  to the impurity  caused  by the birth.  Thus  abiding  by these  norms,  the householder  can 
easily attain the four objectives of life that is Dharma, Artha, Kama and  Moksha.   
KING ALARKA AND HIS QUERIES ABOUT  YOGA  
KING ALARKA'S RING AND  WISDOM  
 
After  reaching  youth -hood,  Prince  Alarka  got married.  By that time,  his father  King  Ritudhwaj 
had also grown old. Hence before Grihastha, he crowned his son as the new king. At the tim e of 
crowning, queen Madalasa presented him a ring and said  - 
 
'O son! This ring contains  a note which  will teach  you on how a king should  administer  the 
kingdom.' Saying this, Madalasa blessed Alarka and left the palace with her husband  Ritudhwaj 
to spend  their lives in the  forest.  
 
After  his accession  to the throne,  King  Alarka  ruled  justly.  In due course  of time,  he got many 
sons.  He followed  the dictates  of Dharma,  Arth and Kama  while  ruling  his kingdom.  Inspite  of 
enjoying all the luxuries, Alarka sti ll could not experience bliss and felt as if he was  missing 
something  in his life. Very  soon,  Subahu  came  to learn  about  the royal  luxuries  of his brother 
Alarka and got tempted to enjoy the same luxuries. To attain his objective, Subahu took the  help 
of the king of Kashi.  The king of Kashi  sent an envoy  to Alarka  with a message  to give the 
kingdom to Subahu, which Alarka refused. Instead, he sent a reply that the request must be  made 
by Subahu himself. 'I will not give him my kingdom out of fear of war,' s aid Alarka. But  Subahu 
did not pay heed  and with the help of the king of Kashi,  launched  a massive  attack  on his 
kingdom and conquered it. Now Alarka's days of sorrow had  begun.  
 
He then remembered the ring presented by his mother Madalasa. He opened the r ing and found  a 
letter in it. The letter said - 'When you lose your everything, give up the company of your  present 
advisors  and join the company  of learned  sages.'  This message  made  Alarka  to pine for the 
company of the learned sages. Very soon, he went to  the refuge of Dattatreya and requested  him 
to remove his miseries. Dattatreya assured him of removing his miseries at once but before  doing 
that, he wanted to know the reasons for his miseries. Alarka said - 'I do not long for pleasures  but 
my elder brothe r wants to grab my kingdom.'  
   
 
DATTATREYA PREACHES  ALARKA  
Alarka  says- 'O lord!  With  the arising  of disenchantment  in my heart,  I have  no miseries  now. 
Only  those  people  feel drowned  in the ocean  of miseries  who are attached  to worldly  things.  A 
man feels  all kinds  of sorrows  due to his attachments  towards  the luxuries  in which  his mind 
indulges. Now neither sorrow nor joy can affect  me.' 
Dattatreya  says- 'O king!  Whatever  you said is correct.  Attachment  is the cause  of both sorrow 
and happiness.  It is because of the knowledge  I gave to you that the 'mist  of attachment'  has 
disappeared  from  your heart.  A small  sprout  of ego ultimately  develops  into a huge  tree of 
ignorance.  Affection  is the trunk  of this tree. Home  and family  are the branches  and wife and 
children are the leaves of this tree. Wealth and cereals are the flowers and happiness and sorrow 
are the fruits  of this tree. Relation  that emerges  out of affection  is the canopy  of this tree. This 
tree grows  day by day and obscures  the path of liberation.  This tree is full of desires  and those 
who sit under  the lee of this tree can never  attain  salvation.  Hence  felling  of this tree is of 
foremost importance for a person desirous of attaining  'Brahmatva.'  
   
 
YOGADHYAY  
Dattatreya  says- O king!  With  the attainme nt of knowledge,  people  come  to conjugate  with the 
Supreme  Almighty  and which  results  into dispersion  of their ignorance.  To attain  Moksha,  it is 
necessary  for a man to shun  attachment  first of all. Only  after that, he will become  free from 
sorrows. When h e becomes free from sorrow, he unites with the supreme almighty.  This 
phenomenon  is known  as Yoga.  Unification  with the supreme  almighty  enables  a man to attain 
knowledge and finally Moksha (salvation). It is therefore essential for the all those  seeking 
salvation  that first of all they should  renounce  affection  and attachment  for the worldly  objects 
including their near and dear  ones.  
 
Knowledge  and renunciation  are nothing  but two sides  of the same  coin and one is necessary  to 
give rise to the other.  Hom e is nothing  but the place  for staying,  food is nothing  but the energy 
required  sustaining  our body  and knowledge  is nothing  but an aid to attain  salvation.  Anything 
that caused obstacles in the way of salvation is ignorance. A living being is bound to rec eive the 
fruits  of action  no matter  whether  they are good  or bad. Hence  one should  carry  out his duties 
without  bothering  for the results.  With  the attenuation  of the results  of the action  performed  in 
the previous  births,  a living  being  becomes  free from  the cycles  of life and death.  With  the 
attainment of Yoga, Yogis take refuge in none other than Brahma. But the path of attaining  Yoga 
is indeed difficult, if not impossible. One has to conquer his soul first of all because the  soul 
itself  is regarded  as invincible.  Control  of physical  impurities  with the help of Pranayama,  sins 
by determination,  lust by self-restrains  and contemplation  on God are the ways  to conquer  the 
soul.  
   
 
PERFECTION IN YOGA AND DAILY  ROUTINE  
Dattatreya says -During the process of conq uering the soul, different kinds of allurements  begins 
to divert the mind of the Yogis. It is imperative for the Yogi to keep his mind busy by  observing 
fast, worshipping and contemplating in God. It is the duty of the Yogi to always contemplate  on 
God, on ly then he can seek solace in Him. Thus, after controlling his senses, a Yogi ought to  eat 
and sleep  less, attain  unification  with the Supreme  Being.  O king!  A Yogi  unifies  with Brahma 
once  his physical  and mental  faults  are removed.  Then,  he never  separat es from  the Supreme 
Being.  
Alarka says - O lord, now kindly narrate about the daily routine, a Yogi should abide by in  order 
to preserve his  piousness.  
 
Dattatreya says - O king! Respect and insult are the two reasons for love and hatred. Yogis  attain 
perfe ction  by understanding  insult  as respect  and vice versa.  A Yogi  should  therefore  never 
attend  social  functions  like Shradha,  marriage  ceremonies  or other  festivities.  He should  not 
accept the hospitality of others and should shun unnecessary journeys. A Yo gi should seek alms 
only after the householder and his family has dined. A Yogi should accept alms only from  those 
households whose inmates are gentle, religious and free from blemishes and should accept  things 
like whey, milk, fruits, edible roots, gram f lour etc. Before going to dine, a Yogi should offer  his 
food to the deities reciting he following mantras - PRANANYAY SWAHA APANAY  SWAHA 
SAMANAY SWAHA UDANAY SWAHA VYANAY  SWAHA  
 
After  reciting  these  mantras  one by one and offering  food to the deities  who are present  in his 
body as different forms of air, the Yogi may now proceed to  dine.  
 
Control of senses and greed, celibacy, renunciation and non -violence are the five resolutions of  a 
Yogi.  Control  of anger,  service  to the Guru,  sanctity,  eating  less and studying  Vedas  regularly 
are the five norms for a Yogi. A Yogi must practice meditation at a desolate place, forest, cave  or 
peak  of a mountain.  A true celibate  has full control  over his speech,  mind  and action.  Iron and 
gold have equal worth in his eye; he loves no one and hates no  one. 
 
Dattatreya says - Those Yogis who abide by their resolution are never degraded from  their 
supreme position. Such Yogis always recite Om while contemplating on the eternal God. 'A',  'U' 
and 'M', these  three  syllables  constitu te the body  OM or AUM.  These  three  syllables  represent 
the virtues (gunas) of Satva, Tamas and Rajas respectively. Thus, by contemplating on God  and 
reciting  Om, a Yogi  ultimately  achieves  unification  with that eternal  spirit.  But there  are still 
some  disastrous  traps  that a Yogi  should  guard  himself  against,  otherwise  his entire  penance 
might turn futile at the time of death. Hence every Yogi must be aware of these disastrous  traps.  
   
 
DESCRIPTION OF DISASTROUS  TRAPS  
Dattatreya  says- A person  who is unable  to see the path of the deities,  or the heavenly  bodies 
like- Dhruva,  Shukra  (Venus),  Soma  (Moon),  or his own shadow  or Goddess  Arundhati,  must 
understand  that his death  is near.  For those  people  to whom,  the Sun appears  without  radiance 
but fire appears as the Sun, die within eleven months. Sighting of gold and silver in  urine  or 
stools signifies death within ten months. Those who see ghosts, Gandharvas and gold tree in  the 
dreams live for nine months only. Those who become fat or thin suddenly live for eig ht months 
more. Those Yogis whose heels appear cracked while walking on sand or mud die within  seven 
months. Getting perched on the body by volatile birds like vulture, pigeon, owl, crow  etc. 
indicates that the concerned person will live for only six month s. Those who see their shadow  in 
opposite  direction  live for four or five months  more  only.  Those  who sight  lightning  without 
clouds or rainbow during the night time, in their dream live for two or three months more.  Those 
who cannot see their reflection i n ghee, oil, water and mirror die within a month. A person  whose 
body smells like a cadaver die within fifteen days. Those whose hands and feet remain dry  even 
after taking  bath and dry even  after taking  light refreshments  live only for ten days.  Those  who 
sight hair, cinders, ash, snakes and dried rivers in the dream, die on the eleventh day. Those  who 
feel hungry even after eating to their fill also die  soon.  
 
O king!  There  are many  more  disastrous  symptoms  that indicate  death.  A Yogi  must  always  be 
alert regarding  these  signs.  Whenever  a Yogi  perceives  the appearance  of all or some  of these 
disastrous symptoms, he must at once take to Yoga to minimise the  effects.  
 
Brahmagyan - A Yogi experiences extreme joy when he meditates while doing Yoga. Only  then 
can he experience  Brahma.  Physical  body  is ephemeral;  hence  a true Yogi  does not mourn  over 
the loss of physical  body.  Hence,  a Yogi  must  train his mind  in Yoga  ignoring  sorrow  or 
affection. This is indeed a difficult task to  achieve.  
 
Alarka says - O Brahmi n! By your blessings, my ignorance has ended. Now I will do  everything 
so that ignorance does not grip me once  again.  
 
Then  taking  Dattatreya's  permission,  Alarka  went  back  to the king of Kashi  and said- 'O king! 
You have a desire for the kingdom, so take this kingdom and enjoy its luxuries yourself or give  it 
to Subahu.'  The king of Kashi  asked  Alarka  as to why he was renouncing  the kingdom  without 
fighting  a war. He also tried to instigate  Alarka  by saying  that his conduct  did not suit the 
Kshatriyas. Ala rka said - 'Only Brahma is truth, all the other things are false. Now controlling  my 
senses, I will attain perfection in  Yoga.'  
   
 
ALARKA MASTERS YOGA AND PENANCE OF  JADA 
AND HIS  FATHER  
Words  of Alarka  pleased  the king of Kashi.  Even,  Subahu  got up gladly  and after embracing 
Alarka  said to the king of Kashi - "O king,  I had taken  your refuge  to win the kingdom.  Now,  I 
have got it without fighting a war and without a drop of blood being shed. But, I am leaving  now, 
renouncing  everything."  
 
The king of Kashi  said- "Subahu,  why had you taken  refuge  in me? What  have  you received 
now?"  
 
Subahu said - "O king! My younger brother Alarka had been so far indulging in luxuries  despite 
having  metaphysical  knowledge.  He was in fact experiencing  miseries  in his household.  When 
the miseries cross all limits, only then renunciation arises in the mind, as is the case with Alarka. 
That was why I had taken your refuge. My job is finished now. So I am leaving to  attain 
perfection  in Yoga.  O king,  I regard  those  people  who ignore  their near and dear ones in their 
miseries as  heartless.  
 
Such  people  are degraded  from  their position  of Dharma,  Artha,  Kama  and Moksha  and are 
criticised  everywhere."  
 
The king of Kashi  said- "O Subahu,  You have  saved  your brother  Alarka.  Now  kindly  save me 
also."  
Subahu said - "Attainment of Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha are the four major objectives  for 
the attainment  of which  humans  have  been  created.  You have  already  attained  Dharma,  Artha 
and Kama. Only Moksha remains to be attained now. 'It is mine',  'It is me' etc. are expressions  of 
ego. Guarding the self from these thoughts is the true knowledge. A man must know 'What is  to 
be known?  'Who  is to know?'  and 'Who  is he?' A knowledge  of these  automatically  leads  to the 
knowledge of all." Saying these w ords, Subahu left the  palace.  
 
The king of Kashi  too returned  to his kingdom.  Alarka  crowned  his elder  son as the new king 
and he began to practice Yoga in a forest. After many years of rigorous practice, Alarka  attained 
salvation and his abode in Brahma  loka. 
 
The Brahmin's  son said- "O father!  Now  you too must  take refuge  in Yoga  in order  to attain 
Brahma. I too will try to attain  salvation."  
 
The birds say - "O Brahmin! Thus the father and son began their penance and attained  salvation.  
  THE UNIVERSE AND LORD BRAHMA'S  MANIFESTATION  
 
THE ORIGIN OF THE  UNIVERSE  
Jaimini thanked the birds for enlightening him with self -knowledge. But he was still  not 
satisfied. There were many questions to which he had no answers. He asked the  birds - 
 
'How did this universe c ome into being? What will happen to it during the time of  final 
annihilation? How did the deities, the sages, the ancestors and the living creatures  originate? 
How did the Manvantaras arrive? I am anxious to know about all these  things.'  
 
The birds  replied - 'O Jaimini!  We salute  the same  Jagannath  who creates  in the form  of lord 
Brahma, nurtures the world as Lord Vishnu and ultimately annihilates the world as Lord Shiva  in 
his most  terrifying  form.  We will now reveal  the knowledge  which  was once  narrated  by sage 
Markandeya.'  
 
The birds  then narrated  the following  tale as was originally  told by sage Markandeya.  'In the 
beginning of creation, as soon as lord Brahma manifested himself, all the four Vedas  and 
eighteen  Puranas  came  out from  his four mouths.  Lord  Brahma  then created  the Saptarishis 
merely by wishing, who took all the Vedas and Puranas in their  possession.'  
 
'Later on, sage Chyavan got the Puranas from one of the Saptarishis - sage Bhrigu and read out  its 
contents  to the assembled  sages.  The sages  then retold  the Puranas  to Daksha.  Daksha  narrated 
the contents of the Puranas to me (Markandeya). The virtues of listening to Puranas are  capable 
of destroying all sins of a man. Now I am going to reveal to you that secret knowledge of  Purana 
as was told to  me by  Daksha.'  
 
'Brahma - the cause and effect of everything pervades the universe even after the  final 
annihilation. All the three gunas are present in him. When the time is appropriate  for 
commencing  the process  of creation,  the whole  atmosphere  is cover ed by the great  element  
(Mahatatva), which itself comprises of the three basic gunas - Satva (pure), Rajas (semi -pure)  and 
Tamas  (dark).'  
 
'Ego manifests  itself  from  the great  element  (Mahatatva).  Even  the ego remains  covered  by the 
great element. The ego then creates 'Shabda tanmatra' (subtle forms of matter  related  with 
sound). The sky which symbolizes the Shabda (sound) is created from this very  Shabda 
tanmatra.' 'The ego then covers the whole sky. After that Sparsh tanmatra (subtle forms of  matter 
related with touch)  comes  into being.  Air, which  signifies  the quality  of touch,  then comes  into 
being.  After  the creation  of air, light is created  without  which  the forms  and appearance  cannot 
be perceived.'  
 
'The deformity  of life results  into the creation  of Rasa  matra.  From  this very Rasa  matra,  water 
comes  into being.  The water  is enveloped  by the Roop  matra  (subtle  forms  of appearance).  The 
water then gets deformed and as a result Gandha matra comes into being, from which the earth  is 
created. All the wor lds are established in this  earth.'  
 
'First of all, the gunas enter into the atoms and create the seven basic elements which are a  must 
for procreation. The seven basic elements then establish themselves in Purusha and Prakriti.  The 
union  of Purusha  and Prakriti  results  into the creation  of egg. This egg keeps  expanding  in its 
size while being in  water.'   
'Lord  Brahma  who is also known  as Kshetragya  and who is also the creator  of all the souls 
dwells  in that egg.' The same  Brahma  pervades  all the three  worlds. All the creatures  of the 
world including the deities, demons and human beings along with islands, mountains, oceans,  air 
and sky etc. are present inside the  egg.'  
 
'The Mother  Nature  along  with the great  element  covers  this egg. This way,  the seven  natural 
coverings  envelop  the egg. Beyond  the Prakriti  (nature)  is established  the Purusha  (Almighty).' 
'Now  I am going  to reveal  the identity  of Brahma  to you. Just as drops  of water  fall down  from 
the body  of a wet man immersed  in water,  in the same  way,  Lord Brahma  too discards  off the 
egg in the end. The nature is nothing else but Kshetra (space, area) and Brahma is also known  as 
Kshetragya. This way, the whole creation came into being just like  lightning.  
   
 
LORD BRAHMA'S  LIFESPAN  
Kraustuki  said- 'Tell me! O lord!  How  were  the living  beings  created  as the period  of final 
annihilation was approaching its  end.' 
 
Markandeya replied - 'When the nature establishes herself in the soul of the Purusha  (supreme 
Almighty), all the created matter gets annihilated. Prak riti and Purusha are established in  the 
mode of parallelism. During that period, Satva and Tamas become neutrally balanced. Even  the 
quality of Rajas establishes itself within the qualities of Satva and  Tamas.'  
 
'The life span of Brahma  consists  of Dwipara rdha.  The day and night  of Brahma  are of equal 
duration.  Brahma  is the origin  of this universe.  He is the inconceivable  soul,  the supreme  lord 
and the cause  of all the events.  He is beyond  the reach  of activities.  He enters  into Prakriti  and 
Purusha - excites both of them  to get unified.  When  Prakriti  gets excited,  the Supreme  Lord 
manifests  Himself  in the egg as Brahma.  He then commences  his creation.  The same  Brahma 
attains  the form  of Vishnu  due to the effect  of his Satva  guna  and nurtures  the whole  creation. 
Under the influence of Tamas guna, He attains the form of Rudra and finally annihilates  the 
whole creation. He then goes into  hibernation.'  
 
'This  way,  the same  Almighty  God in his three  different  forms  of Brahma,  Vishnu  and Mahesh 
performs his dutie s of creation, nurturing and annihilation respectively. The life span of  Brahma 
consists of one hundred years. The division of time is as follows - One Kashtha consists of  fifteen 
Nimeshas.  One Kala  consists  of thirty  Kashthas  whereas  thirty  Kalas  make  one Muhurta.  One 
day and night of this material world consists of thirty Muhurtas. Thirty days and nights  are 
equivalent to one month or two fortnights  (Pakshas).'  
 
'Six months make one Ayan. Two Ayans make a year. A day and night of the deities  are 
equivalen t to one year of this material world. Similarly twelve thousand years of the deities  make 
the four yugas. Satya Yuga consists of the four thousand years of the deities. Treta Yuga  consists 
of three thousand years of the deities. Dwapar Yuga consists of two  thousand years of the  deities 
whereas  Kali Yuga  consists  of one thousand  years  of the deities.  Similarly  Sandhya  (evening) 
period  of Satya  Yuga  consists  of four hundred  years  and Sandhyansh  (part  of evening)  consists 
of the same period that is four hundre d years. Thus the total number of years that Satya Yuga  has 
come up to 4000+400+400= 4800 years. In the same way, the Sandhya and Sandhyansh of  Treta 
Yuga consist of 300 years each. Thus, the total number of years in Treta Yuga comes up  to 
3000+300+300=  3600 years.  Sandhya  and Sandhyansh  period  of Dwapar  Yuga  is of 200 years 
each. Thus the total number of years in Dwapar Yuga comes up to 2000+200+200= 2400  years. 
Sandhya  and Sandhyansh  period  of Kali Yuga  are of 100 years  each.  Thus  the total number  of 
years in Kali Yuga comes up to 1000+100+100= 1200  years.  
 
A day of Brahma consists of thousand times of the twelve thousand years of the deities.  Fourteen 
Manus  appear  in succession  during  the whole  day of Brahma.  Each  Manavantar  comprises  of a 
Manu and his pr ogenies, Indra and the other deities, Saptarishis ganas and Nripati ganas  etc. 
 
A Manavantar  consists  of seventy -one Chaturyugas.  On the basis  of the years  of this material 
world, a Manavantar consists of 30,67,20,000 years or 8,52,000 years of the deities . A Brahma's 
day consists  of 4,29,40,00,000  years  of this world  or 1,19,28,000  years  of the deities.  The 
dissolution,  which  occurs  at the end of the day of Brahma,  is also known  as causal  dissolution (Naimittik  Pralaya).  During  the time of causal  dissoluti on, all the residents  of Bhur,  Bhuva  and 
Swarga lokas temporarily go to Mahar loka. The residents of Mahar loka shift their base to  Jana 
loka. The entire universe is submerged in the ocean during the time of causal dissolution and  this 
is the time for Brah ma to take rest i.e. at night. Brahma starts his creation at the end of the  night. 
This way,  after the completion  of three  hundred  and sixty  years  of Brahma,  his one-year is 
complete. One hundred such years of Brahma make one Para and five hundred such yea rs make 
one Parardha. One Parardha of Brahma has already passed at the end of which  Padram 
Mahakalpa  occurred.  The present  period,  which  falls under  the second  Parardha,  is also known 
as Varaha  Kalpa.  
 
NATURAL AND FLAWED  CREATIONS  
Kraustuki asked curiousl y- 'Tell me how Brahma did his  creations?'  
 
Markandeya replied - 'When Brahma got up from his sleep after the end of dissolution  (Pralaya) 
named Padram, he found a void all around himself. He remembered Narayana who is also  known 
by the name  of Nastanu  i.e. one who dwells  in water.  Narayana  was engrossed  in his eternal 
sleep. After waking up, he rescued the earth, submerged in the ocean just like he had done in  the 
previous  Kalpas  by taking  the forms  of a boar,  a fish and tortoise  etc. But even  after the earth 
was brought up from the seabed and was established above the ocean, it was still swinging like  a 
boat.  Narayana  then created  the mountains  to stop the earth  from  swinging.  But the mountains 
were  burnt  down  by Agni  (fire)  named  Samvartak.  The mountains  submerged  into the ocean. 
The mountains  after having  displaced  the water  had become  fixed  at their respective  places. 
Therefore,  Narayana  divided  the whole  earth  into seven  islands  and created  the four lokas  just 
like before.  After  that, five Avidyas  came  into being.  This way,  the whole  creation  established 
themselves  in five ways.  The whole  creation  was hidden  in darkness  till this period.  After  this, 
Narayana created the ignorant animals, which symbolised the Tamas guna. After the animals  the 
deities who s ymbolised the Satva guna were  created.'  
 
'Brahma  was extremely  satisfied  by the creations  of Narayana.  But he was desirous  of creating 
even  more  superior  creatures.  As a result  a group  of Sadhakas  named  Arvaksrota  came  into 
being. These Sadhakas were huma ns who possessed Rajas guna. The fifth creation of  Anugraha 
was itself  sub-divided  into four parts - Viparyaya,  Siddhi,  Shanti  and Srishti.  The sixth  creation 
was of those special people who had the knowledge of past and present events. These people  had 
wives, enjoyed  life in a balanced  way but were  of evil nature.  These  people  were  known  as 
Bhutadik.'  
 
'The first creation was related with the manifestation of lord Brahma himself. This great  creation 
was known  as the Maha  Srishti.  The second  creation  related  with the part of Brahma  is called 
Bhutsarga. The third creation is called Prakrit and which consists of creatures  possessing 
intelligence and flawed sensual perceptions. The fourth creation consists of the Sthawars who  are 
unable to move (e.g. vegetation) . The fifth creation consists of four -footed animals. The  sixth 
creation consists of the deities whereas the seventh creation that of human beings  which 
originates  from  Arvaksrota.  The eighth  creation  is known  as Anugraha.  The ninth  creation  of 
Brahma is k nown as Prakrit (natural) and Vikari (flawed). These are the nine types of creation  of 
Brahma. The root causes of this universe are Prakrit and  Vikari.'  
   
 
CREATION OF THE  DEITIES  
Kraustuki then asked Markandeya about the origin of the deities. Markandeya re plied - 'With  the 
objective  of creating  the deities,  demons,  ancestors  and human  beings,  Brahma  abandoned  the 
part of his physical  body  in the ocean.  The demons  originated  from  the thighs  of his abandoned 
body.  Lord  Brahma  blessed  the demons  with physical  bodies,  which  were  Tamasik  in nature. 
This part of Brahma's body became famous as Ratri (night). After that Brahma created the  deities 
from  his mouth  with the help of Satva  guna.  The deities  were  given  pure bodies.  This part of 
Brahma's body which was Satvi k (pure) in nature became famous as  day.'  
'After this, Brahma acquired another physical body and created the ancestors. After creating  the 
ancestors, he abandoned his body, which transformed itself in the evening. Brahma then  acquired 
another body, which was affluent of Rajas qualities and thus was created human being. He  again 
abandoned his body and from it was created Jyotsna - the transition period of day and  night.'  
 
'Jyotsna,  evening  and day contain  the quality  of Satva  in themselves.  Night  has the quality of 
Tamas  in itself.  The deities,  demons  and human  beings  are most  powerful  during  the day, night 
and Jyotsna  period  respectively.  The ancestors  are most  powerful  and invincible  during  the 
evening  time.'  
 
'Brahma then created creatures who had moustach es and beard on their face. Some  creatures 
among  them  started  attacking  the others.  Those  who were  being  attacked  and pleaded  'save  us' 
were  called  the Rakshasas  (demons).  The attackers  who thundered  'we would  devour  you up' 
were known as Yakshas (celestia l beings).  
 
'Brahma was very displeased by their tantrums. Some of his hair fell down on earth and  thus 
were  created  the snakes.  The flesh -eating  Ganas  were  next to be created.  These  Ganas  were 
extremely volatile in nature. After that, Brahma created the  Gandharvas.'  
 
'This  way after having  created  these  eight  types  of divine  creation,  Brahma  created  all the 
animals  and birds  from  his body.  He created  the goat from  his mouth,  lamb  from  his heart,  cow 
from  his stomach  and back,  animals  like horse,  elephant,  donkey,  rabbit,  deer,  camel  and mule 
were  created  by Brahma  from  both his legs. Variety  of vegetation  and medicinal  plants  were 
created from the hair of his body.' 'Brahma then created the following things from the first of  his 
four mouths - Gayatri,  Tri- rik, tri- vrit, Sam,  Rathantar  and Agnishtom.  From  his mouth  facing 
south,  he created  Yajuh,  Traishtumchhand,  Panchadasha -stom,  Vrihatsam  and Uktha.  From  his 
mouth  facing  west,  he created  Sham,  Jagatichhand,  Panchadasha -stom,  Vairoop  and Atiratra. 
From his  mouth facing north, he created twenty -one Atharva, Aptoryam, Anushtubha  and 
Vairaj.'  
 
'In the beginning of Kalpa, Brahma created the natural things like lightning, Vajra,  cloud, 
rainbow and birds. After that he created the deities etc. He then created st able things  like 
mountains,  living  creatures  that could  move,  demons,  birds,  animals  and snakes  etc. All these 
living  creatures  take birth  and rebirths,  reap the fruits  of the past Karmas  done  in their previous 
life. This is the way Brahma had done creatio n at the end of the dissolution  period.'  
   
 
COPULATIVE  CREATIONS  
Markandeya says - Brahma created one thousand couples from his mouth in the beginning  of 
creation. These couples were radiant and possessed virtuous qualities (Satvik). Once  again, 
Brahma  create d one thousand  couples  from  his chest  but this time they possessed  the quality  of 
Rajas. This phenomenon was repeated for the second time and once again one thousand  couples 
manifested  themselves  from  his chest.  These  couples  were  both Rajas  as well as Tamasik by 
nature.  At last Brahma  created  one thousand  more  couples  from  both his legs. These  couples 
were  completely  Tamasik  by nature.  The couples  started  copulating  and this process  has been 
continuing since  then.' 'Brahma now became worried as  to  how t o  accommodate such a    large  
number of people. Initially, these people used to roam about every where, as there were  no 
permanent residences to accomodate them. At the arrival of Treta Yuga, they  developed 
attachment and started living in houses. Subseq uently they started living in various types  of 
abodes - Pura, Village, Dronimukha, Shakhanagar, Kharvatak, Drami, Gram and Sanghosh  etc.' 
   
 
DAKSHA'S  LINEAGE  
Markandeya  says- 'Brahma  on seeing  that inspite  of all his creations  the population  was not 
increasin g, he decided to create his Manasputras. These Manasputras were created merely by  his 
wish.  Their  names  were  Bhrigu,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Angira,  Marichi,  Daksha,  Atri and 
Vashishta. After this, he first created the ferocious Rudra and then Sankalpa an d Dharma. But  all 
these people were very virtuous, knowledgeable and unaffected by worldly desires. They  showed 
their disinclination towards the purpose for which they have been created by Brahma  i.e. 
increasing the population. Brahma became very furious i n his anger and created an entity  whose 
half portion resembled a man's body while the remaining half resembled that of a  woman.  
 
Brahma  instructed  that entity  to bisect  his body  into two distinct  forms  of a man and a woman. 
The entity  followed  Brahma's  instruction  and this way Swayambhu  Manu  and Shatrupa  came 
into being.  Manu  accepted  Shatrupa  as his wife.  Two sons were  born to them - Priyavrata  and 
Uttanpada. Apart from these two sons, two daughters were also born to them - Akuti and  Prasuti. 
Prasuti  was married  to Daksha  while  Akuti  was married  to Ruchi.  Twenty -four daughters  were 
born to Daksha and Prasuti out of which thirteen of them were married to Dharma.  The 
remaining eleven daughters were married to sages like Bhrigu, Mahadeva, Marichi, Angira,  Atri 
etc.' 
 
'Dharma fathered Kama from Shradha. Sri gave birth to Darpa, Dhriti and Niyama. Tushti  gave 
birth  to Santosh,  Pushti  to Lobha,  Medha  to Shrut,  Kriya  to Dand,  Buddhi  to Bodh,  Lajja  to 
Vinay,  Vapra  to Vyavasay,  Shanti  to Kshema,  Siddhi  to Sukh  and Kirti gave  birth  to Yash. 
Kama, the son of Dharma was the father of  Atihrishta.'  
 
'Himsa - the wife of Adharma  gave birth  to Anrita.  Anrita  was married  to Nirriti.  Two sons 
named Narak and Bhaya and two daughters named Maya and Vedana were born to  them.'  
 
'Maya gave birth to Mrityu, whereas Dukha was born as a result of Narak's marriage  with 
Vedana. Five children were born to Mrityu - Vyadhi, Jara, Shoka, Trishna and Krodha. All  of 
them  were  very irreligious  by nature  and they never  got an opportunity  get marri ed and have 
progenies.'  
 
'Mrityu's  wife- Nirriti  is also known  by the name  of Alakshmi.  Altogether  fourteen  sons were 
born to them. All these fourteen sons of Mrityu dwell in the organs of human beings, during  the 
time of destruction.  Out of these  fourteen  sons,  ten dwell  in the sense  organs  of human  beings 
and the eleventh son dwells in the mind. They influence the sense organs and the mind of a  man 
in a negative  way by means  of attachment  and anger.  The twelfth  son exists  in the form  of 
arrogance. The thi rteenth son Apar adversely affects the intelligence of a  man.  
The fourteenth  son- Duhsah  resides  in the house  of males.  Duhsah  is naked,  always  hungry,  his 
mouth facing downwards and caws like the  crow.  
   
 
DESCENDANTS OF  DUHSAH  
Markandeya says - 'Nirmashti, the wife of Duhsah was the daughter of Yama. Altogether  sixteen 
children  were  born to Duhsah  and Nirmashti.  Out of them  eight  were  sons and the remaining 
eight were daughters. The name of the sons were - Dantakrishti, Tathokti, Parivarta,  Angadhruka, 
Shakun i, Ganda, Pranrati, Garbhaha and Sasyaha while the names of the daughters  were 
Niyojika, Virodhini, Swayamaharini, Bhramani, Rituharika, Smritihara, Beejhara  and 
Vidveshini.  Dantakrishti  causes  the teeth  of the child  to make  a grinding  sound.  Tathokti  is 
commonly  used while  men are conversing  by saying,  'So be it' (Tathastu).  Parivarta  becomes 
happy  by establishing  an alien  foetus  in the womb  of women.  Angadhruka  causes  the organs  of 
human  beings  to throb  and enables  him to express  the emotions  of joy and sorrow.  Shakuni 
resides in the bodies of birds like crow and animals like dog or  fox.' 
 
'Ganda  destroys  all the virtues.  Garbhaha  destroys  the foetus  in the womb  of a woman  while 
Sasyaha destroys all kinds of  wealth.'  
 
'Among the daughters, Niyojika encour ages a man to have illicit relationship and also to steal  the 
wealth  of others.  Virodhini  causes  differences  between  husband  and wife and also among  the 
family members. Swayamaharini destroys the prosperity of a man. Bhramani causes  restlessness 
and anger  in the heart  of a man living  at one place  for a long time.  Rituharika  destroys  the 
menstrual  cycle  of women.  Smritiharika  causes  loss of memory.  Beejhara  destroys  the sexual 
powers  of a man and woman.  Dweshini  causes  jealousy  in the heart  of a man and woma n. 
Altogether  38 children  were  born to all the 16 children  of Duhsah  and Nirmashti.  All of them 
were wicked and caused miseries to  people.'  
   
 
THE CREATION OF  RUDRAS  
Markandeya  says- 'Now  I am going  to tell you about  Rudrasarga.  One of the eight  sons of 
Brah ma started  wailing  after being  created  from  his (Brahma)  body.  Brahma  asked  him as to 
why he was crying. The crying child requested Brahma to give him a name. Brahma named  him 
as Rudra since he was wailing at the time of his birth. But even after getting h is name, the  child's 
wailing  did not stop.  He wailed  for seven  times  and as a result  seven  more  children  were 
manifested from his cries. Brahma named these seven children as Bhava, Sharva,  Ishan, 
Pashupati,  Bheem,  Ugra  and Mahadeva.  He also gave  them  abode s so that they could  live. The 
following  eight  things  respectively  symbolize  the forms  of all these  eight  rudras - Sun, water, 
earth,  fire, air, sky, Dikshit  Brahmin  and Soma.  All these  eight  rudras  were  also given  their 
respective wives who were Suvarchala , Uma, Vikeshi, Swadha, Swaha, Dik, Diksha and  Rohini.'  
 
'The eight sons of all the eight rudras are Shanaishwar, Shukra, Lohitang, Manojav, Skand,  Sarg, 
Santan and Buddh  respectively.'  
'Rudra had accepted Sati as his wife. Sati gave up her life because h er father Daksha had  shown 
disrespect to her husband - Rudra. Sati took her second birth as Parvati, the daughter of  Himavan. 
Mainak was her brother. Bhava married Parvati. Khyati was Bhrigu's wife. They had  two 
children - Dhata  and Vidhata.  Lakshmi  was the consort  of Narayana.  Meru  had two daughters - 
Ayati  and Niyati.  Both  of them  were  married  to Dhata  and Vidhata  respectively.  Each  one of 
them  had two sons.  Ayati  had named  her son as Pran while  Niyati  named  her son as Mrikandu. 
The same  Mrikandu  is my (Mark andeya)  father.  My mother's  name  is Manaswini  and my son's 
name is  Vedashira.'  
 
'Sambhuti - the wife of Marichi gave birth to Paurnmas. Smriti - the wife of Marichi gave birth  to 
four daughters - Siniwali, Kuhu, Raka and Anumati.' 'Ansuya, the wife of sage At ri gave birth  to 
three  sons- Soma,  Durvasa  and Dattatreya.  Dutt and Dambholi  were  born to Preeti,  the wife of 
Pulastya. He became famous as Agastya during the time of Swayambhuva  Manavantar.'  
 
'Three sons - Kardam, Arvaveera and Sahishnu were born to Kshama , the wife of  Pulaha. 
Sannati,  the wife of Ritu gave  birth  to 60,000  Balkhilyaganas.  Urja- the wife of Vashishta  gave 
birth  to seven  sons- Raja,  Gatra,  Urdhwabahu,  Sabal,  Anagh,  Sutapa  and Shukra.  These  seven 
are famous as the  Saptarishis.'  
 
'Agni was mar ried to Swaha. Three sons were born to them - Pavak, Pavamana and  Shuchi.'  
   
 
THE VARIOUS  MANVANTARS  
 
SWAYAMBHUVA  MANVANTAR  
Markandeya says - 'Swayambhuva Manu had ten sons. He had divided the whole earth into  seven 
continents. In the beginning of Treta Yuga,  the sons of Priyavrata had done the same.  Prajavati - 
the daughter  of Kardam  Prajapati  had ten sons and two daughters  from  Priyavrata.  Names  of 
these ten sons were - Agnighna, Medhatithi, Vayushman, Jyotishman, Dyutiman, Bhatya,  Savan, 
Medha, Agnibahu and M itra. Among all these ten sons, the last three never ruled any  kingdom.  
 
The remaining seven sons were made the rulers of all the seven continents by  Priyavrata. 
Agnighna was made the ruler of Jambudweep, Medhatithi that of Plakshdweep. Vayushman  was 
given  Shalmalidweep whereas Jyotishman was made the ruler of Kushdweep.  Similarly, 
Dyutiman  was given  Kraunchdweep  to rule while  Bhatya  was given  Shakdweep.  The seventh 
son, Savan was made the ruler of Pushkardweep. Savan had two sons - Medhavi and  Dhataki. 
Sava n sub -divided the Pushkardweep into two parts and each part was given to each of the  sons. 
Bhatya had seven sons - Jalad, Kumar, Sukumar, Marnavak, Kushottar, Medhavi and  Mahadrum. 
Bhatya too sub -divided the Shakdweep into seven parts and distributed them a mong all his  sons. 
Similarly,  Dyutiman  too had seven  sons to whom  were  distributed  his kingdom  Kraunchdweep 
after sub -dividing it into seven parts. Jyotishman, Vayushman and Medhatithi made  their 
respective  sons the rulers  after giving  them  kingdoms.  Agnig hna was the ruler  of Jambudweep. 
He had nine sons.  His kingdom  was equally  distributed  among  all of them.  Nabhi - the son of 
Agnighna  was the father  of Rishabh.  Bharata  was the son of Rishabh.  Bharata  was given  the 
southern part of Rishabh's kingdom. Our co untry is named after  Bharata.'  JAMBUDWEEP  
Markandeya says that the total area of Jambudweep comprises of one lakh Yojan while the  area 
of Plakshdweep  is twice  the area of Jambudweep  i.e. two lakh Yojans.  Similarly,  Shalmali  is 
twice the area of Plaksh whi le Kusha is twice the area of Shalmali. The area of Kraunchdweep  is 
twice the area of Kushdweep whereas the area of Shakdweep is twice the area of  Kraunchdweep.  
 
The island  of Pushkar  is twice  the area of Shak.  Seven  mountains  are situated  in all these  seven 
islands. They are Himavan, Hemkut, Rishabh, Meru, Neel, Shwet and Sringi. Ilavrit is situated  in 
the middle of six mountains, which themselves are situated in the middle of the  ocean 
surrounding  all the seven  islands  named  earlier.  Sumeru  Mountain  is situated  in the central  part 
of Ilavrit. People belonging to all the four castes - Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra  reside 
in Ilavrit.  
 
Just above  Ilavrit  are the dwelling  places  of Lokpals  like Indra  etc. Lord  Brahma's  assembly  is 
situated at the cent er. Beneath Ilavrit are situated the four mountains - Mandar,  Gandhmadan, 
Vipul and Suparshva. These four mountains are situated in each of the four directions. The  Great 
Mountain  Nishadh  is situated  towards  the west of Meru,  while  the Great  Mountain  Pariya tra is 
situated just behind it. Towards the south of Meru are situated the great mountains, Kailash  and 
Himavan. The mountains Sringvan and Jarudhi are situated towards the north of Meru  Mountain. 
River Jambu flows all around the Meru Mountain in a circula r path.  
   
 
THE ORIGIN OF  GANGA  
Markandeya says - 'River Ganga originates from a place named Dhruvadhar. This particular  place 
is related  with Narayana.  River  Ganga,  then falls on the Sumeru  Mountain  and gets distributed 
into four main streams. One of these st reams flows towards Chaitrartha forest. The name of  this 
particular  stream  is Sita. The same  Sita Ganga  enters  into the Varunaoda  reservoir  and from 
there,  it moves  towards  the ocean  and again  changes  its course  to get submerge  into that stream 
of Ganga,  which has fallen  on the Gandhmadan  Mountain  and which  is known  as Alaknanda. 
Alaknanda after submerging into Mansarovar subsequently entered the Mahadri Himalaya  where 
Lord  Shankar  held her in His locks  of hair. He released  river  Ganga  only at the request  of sage 
Bhagirath.  
 
After  being  released,  river  Ganga  got subdivided  into seven  streams  and ultimately,  all those 
seven streams submerged into the ocean. The stream of Ganga which originates from the west  of 
Sumeru Mountain is known as Suchakshu. This strea m gets submerged in the ocean towards  the 
south,  after passing  through  many  mountains.  The fourth  stream  reaches  Savita  forest  after 
passing  through  two mountains - Suparshu  and Meru.  This particular  stream  is famously  known 
as Bhadrasoma. Bhadrasoma Ganga ultimately get submerged into the ocean after  passing 
through mountains like Shankhkoot and  Vrishabh.  
   
 
BHARATAVARSHA  
Kraustuki asked Markandeya - 'O lord! Please describe about Bharatavarsha.'  Markandeya 
replied - 'Bharatavarsha  is surrounded  by oceans  on all its three  sides.  People  living  towards  the 
east of Bharatavarsha are known as Kirat while people living towards the west are called  Yavan. 
The central part of Bharatavarsha is inhabited by all the four castes - Brahmin,  Kshatriya, 
Vaishya and Shudra. Th e seven mountains are situated in the central part of Bharatavarsha.  They 
are Mahendra,  Malaya,  Sahaya,  Shaktiman,  Riksh,  Vindhya  and Pariyatra.  There  are thousands 
of hills situated in the vicinity of these seven mountains. The central part of Bharatavars ha is 
sub-divided into Janpadas. The residents of these Janpadas are known as Mlechha and Arya.  All 
the major rivers of Bharatavarsha like Ganga, Saraswati, Sindhu, Chandrabhaga,  Yamuna, 
Shatadru, Vitasta, Irawati, Gomti, Vipasha and Gandki etc. originate from the mountains  situated 
in the central parts. The names of the prominent Janpadas situated in the central part  of 
Bharatavarsha are Matsya, Ashwakoot, Kulya, Kuntal, Kashi, Koshal, Arbuda, Kalinga,  Malak, 
Vrik etc. River Godavari flows towards the nort h of Sahya  Mountain.  
 
A city named Govardhan is situated near this mountain. Some other prominent places situated  in 
the vicinity of this mountain are Bahalik, Vataghan, Amir and Kaltoyak. Kshatriya, Vaishya  and 
Shudras live in the following states - Shudr a, Pahalav, Charmakhandika, Gandhar,  Yavan, 
Sindhu, Sauveer, Bhadrak, Shatadruj, Parad and Kekaya. The following states are situated in  the 
north of Bharatavarsha - Tamas, Hansmarg, Kashmir, Shulik, Kuhak, Urna, Darva etc. States  like 
Abhrarak, Mudgarak, An tagiri, Plawang, Mal, Damal, Vartik, Uttarbrahma, Pragjyotish,  Madra, 
Videha, Tamraliptak, Malla and Magadh are situated in the east of Bharatavarsha. States  situated 
in the south  of Bharatavarsha  are Pandya,  Kerala,  Chola,  Maharashtra,  Mahishik,  Kalinga  and 
Amir. These are the Janpadas where Shabar  live.'  
 
'Janpadas  situated  in the west of Bharatavarsha  are Suryarak,  Kalibala,  Durg,  Kaha,  Pulind, 
Toshal  and Koshal  etc. Bharatavarsha  is the only country  in the whole  world  where  all the four 
yugas - Satya, Tr eta, Dwapar, and Kali occur in a cyclic way. Bharatavarsha is the root of  all 
forms of divinity where deities reside and almighty God takes  incarnation.'  
   
 
TORTOISE  INCARNATION  
Kraustuki asked Markandeya - 'O lord! How does Sri Hari live in the form of a  tortoise?'  
 
Markandeya  replied - 'Sri Hari in the form  of a tortoise  sits facing  east. States  situated  in the 
central  portion  of his body  are Vedi,  Madra,  Mandavya,  Shalva,  Khasa,  Saraswat,  Matsya  etc. 
States  which  are situated  in the mouth  of the tortoise  are Vrishadhwaj,  Anjan,  Kasha,  Magadh, 
Pragjyotish,  Mithila,  Koshal  etc. In the right  foot of the tortoise  are situated  states  like Kalinga, 
Banga  etc. Vindhya  Mountain  is also situated  in the right  foot. States  which  are situated  in the 
tail of the tortoise  are Manimegha,  Kshuradri,  Khanj,  Konkan,  Panchmad,  Vamana,  Sharkar, 
Chulik, Ashwakesha etc. Mandakya, Chandarwar, Ashwa, Kaland, Ghor, Ghuratwadi are  the 
states that are situated in the left foot of the tortoise. Janpadas like Kailash, Himalaya,  Kraunch, 
Kaikaya,  Takshashila,  Gandhar,  Kharas,  Yaudheya  and Rajanya  etc. are situated  in the left side 
of the tortoise's  abdomen.'  
 
Narayana in the form of tortoise is that inconceivable soul in which reside all the lords of  deities 
and constellations.  
   
BHADRASHVA  VARSHA  
Markandeya says - 'Bhadrashva Varsh is situated towards the east of the great mountain  Devakut. 
Five more  mountains  are situated  within  its area- Kauranj,  Shwetaparna,  Neela,  Shaiwal  and 
Parnashalagra. Bhadrashva consists of thousands of Janpadas. Nu merous rivers like  Sita, 
Shankhavali, Bhadra and Chakravarta flows there. People living in Bhadrashva Varsh are full  of 
radiance  and they live for 1000  years.  Narayana  dwells  in Bhadrashva  in his incarnation  of 
Hayagreev.'  
 
'Now I am going to tell about Ke tumal Varsh which has seven mountains within its area - Vishal, 
Kambal, Krishna, Jayant, Hariparvat, Vishoka, and Vardhaman. There are thousands of  smaller 
hills apart from these seven major mountains where people live. The names of the rivers  flowing 
at Ketumal  Varsh  are Vankshuyama,  Swakambha,  Amogha,  Kamini,  Shyama  etc. Narayana 
dwells in Ketumal Varsh in his incarnation of a boar  (Varaha).'  
 
'Now  listen  about  Uttarkurudesha.  There  are thousands  of trees,  which  are fruit laden  in all the 
seasons. Apparel s are made from the bark of the trees and ornaments from its fruits. After  being 
degraded, the residents of Devaloka take birth here. Uttarkuru has two mountains - Chandrakant 
and Suryakant. The river - Bhadrasoma flows between these two mountains. Narayana in his 
incarnation  of Matsya  (fish)  lives  at Uttarkuru.  Chandradweep  and Bhadradweep  are the two 
famous islands situated at  Uttarkuru.'  
   
 
KIMPURUSHA VARSHA  
Markandeya  says- 'The people  residing  in KimPurusha  Varsh  enjoy  a long life. They  live for 
10,000 yea rs. They are never bothered by any kind of disease or sorrow. Just behind  Kimpurusha 
Varsh is situated Hari Varsh. The residents of Hari Varsh enjoy an eternally youthful life  because 
of the sugarcane juice they intake. Meru Varsh, which is situated near H ari Varsh, is also  known 
as Ilavrit.  It is devoid  of the light of the Sun but gets sufficient  light from  the radiant  Sumeru 
Mountain.  It is so bright  that even  the Sun gets overshadowed.  People  living  in Meru  Varsh 
enjoy a very long life for 30,000 years. Similarly people living in Ramyak Varsh  sustain 
themselves  by drinking  fruit juice.  They  live for 10,000  years.  Hiranyamay  Varsh  is situated 
towards the north of Ramyak Varsh where the river Hiranvati flows. The residents  of 
Hiranyamay are powerful, rich a nd handsome in  appearance.  
   
 
SWAROCHISH  MANVANTAR  
Kraustuki asked Markandeya - 'O great sage! Now tell me something about  Swarochish 
Manavantar?'  
 
Markandeya replied - 'Once upon a time, there lived a Brahmin at the bank of river Varuna.  One 
day, a guest  arrived at his place.  The Brahmin  treated  his guest  with due respect.  After  formal 
introduction,  the Brahmin  became  aware  that his guest  was not an ordinary  person.  He had 
travelled  around  the world  with the help of some  special  mantras  he knew  and medicinal  herbs, 
which  he had in his possession.  The Brahmin  was quite  impressed.  He too wanted  to see the 
whole  earth.  He requested  his guest  to give the mantra  and the medicinal  herb so that he could 
travel around the world just like him. The guest applied some me dicinal solution on his  legs. 
After this the Brahmin went to see the Himalaya Mountain. While wandering there, the  solution, 
which had been applied on his legs, got washed away. As a result, he now became immobile.  He 
started looking all around himself. He  found numerous Apsaras entertaining the  Kinnars, 
Gandharvas and deities. The Brahmin was very much pleased to see the happy  atmosphere 
prevailing  all around  Himalaya.  He thought  of going  back  to his place  but was unsuccessful,  as 
the medicinal solution ha d been washed. He became very sad. An Apsara by the name  of 
Varudhini saw him in a miserable condition. She became infatuated by him. When she went  near 
him, he asked - 'Who are you? Who is your husband? What are you doing  here?'  
 
After this, he narrated hi s own story and said - 'I had come from Aruna nagar to see  the 
Himalaya.  But I am unable  to return  home  as the medicinal  solution,  which  was applied  on my 
legs has been  washed.  Varudhini  told the Brahmin  that she was an Apsara.  She also expressed 
her deep  love towards  the Brahmin.  She requested  the Brahmin  to stay there  and not to go back 
home. She assured him if he did, as per her instructions then he would enjoy an eternal youth.  He 
would never become old. Varudhini forcibly tried to embrace the Brahmin. This made  the 
Brahmin very  angry.  
 
He said - 'Varudhini! The sacred scriptures prohibit a Brahmin from indulging in  sensual 
pleasures  because  it gives  sorrow  not only in this world  but also after his death.'  But Varudhini 
was not satisfied by his answers. She threatened to give up her life if the Brahmin did not  marry 
her. The Brahmin  did not agree.  The Brahmin  purified  himself  by performing  Achaman  and 
began  worshipping  Agni.  He said- 'O Agni!  You are the root cause  of all Karmas.  The deities 
bless  us with rain only after you are pleased.  O Agni!  I need  your blessings.  I want  to go back 
home.'  
   
 
VARUDHINI'S MODESTY  BREACHED  
Markandeya says - 'Agni became pleased by the Brahmin's devotion. Agni entered into his  body. 
The Brahmin's  body  illuminated  due to Agni' s radiance.  When  Varudhini  saw this, she was 
fascinated  by the Brahmin's  appearance.  The Brahmin  proceeded  towards  his home.  Feeling 
helpless, Varudhini cursed her  fate.'  
 
Varudhini  had once  insulted  a Gandharva  named  Kali sometime  in the past. Chancing  upon the 
opportunity,  Kali went  to Varudhini  take his revenge.  He had disguised  himself  as a Brahmin. 
When  she saw him, she said- 'I need  your protection  if you heed  to my request  then you will 
certainly attain virtuosity. Kali did not want her to know about  his real identity, so he replied - 'If 
you really  want  my protection,  then you must  have  your eyes closed  while  having  copulation.' 
Varudhini  agreed.  
   
 
HIS MARRIAGE WITYH  MANORAMA  
In due course  of time,  Varudhini  became  pregnant.  She gave  birth  to a child  who was named 
Swarochi.  The child  was extra -ordinary.  In a very short  time,  he became  proficient  in all the 
scriptures.  One day, young  Swarochi  saw a terrified  girl near the Mandar  Mountain.  When  the 
girl saw Swarochi, she pleaded for help. Swarochi assure d her and asked about her identity.  She 
said- 'My name  is Manorama.  Once  I had made  fun of a sage who was doing  penance  near the 
Kailash  Mountain.  At that time,  two of my companions - Vibhavari  and Kalavati  were  also 
present  with me. The sage cursed  all three of us. Vibhavari  and Kalavati  got inflicted  with 
leprosy  and tuberculosis  due to his curse.  Even  I was not spared.  I am being  chased  by a 
ferocious  demon  since  then.  I need  your protection  from  that demon.  I am giving  you this very 
powerful weapon with which you can successfully kill the  demon.'  
 
Swarochi took the weapon. During the conversation between Swarochi and Manorama, a  demon 
arrived just then. The demon wanted to devour Manorama. Swarochi was confused, as he did  not 
want  the sage's  curse  to go futile.  He allowed  the demon  to get hold of Manorama,  who then 
started  wailing.  Hearing  her wail,  Swarochi  thought  of killing  the demon.  Becoming  afraid,  the 
demon  released  Manorama  from  his clutches  and pleaded  Swarochi  to spare  his life. He then 
narrated  his own story. He said - 'You have rescued me from sage Brahmamitra's curse.  Actually, 
my name  is Indivaraksha.  I had requested  Brahmamitra  to teach  him the nuances  of Ayurveda, 
which  he refused.  I decided  to learn  Ayurveda  while  sage Brahmamitra  taught  his disciples  by 
hiding  myself.  One day, the sage came  to know  of this. He cursed  me to become  a demon.  I 
begged  for his forgiveness.  He said- 'Whatever  I have  said will definitely  come  true. You will 
certainly  become  a demon.  After  becoming  a demon,  you will try to devour  your own daughter 
but would  regain  your original  form  of Gandharva  due to the touch  of Astranal  weapon  with 
which you would be attacked. O great soul! Since you have liberated me from the  curse, 
therefore, I hand over this girl to you. Acce pt her as your wife. I will also bestow the  knowledge 
of Ayurveda, which I had learnt from sage  Brahmamitra.'  
 
Manorama  requested  Swarochi  to cure her companions  from  the diseases  they were  suffering 
from. Swarochi assured Manorama that he would certainly cure her companions with the help  of 
Ayurveda, which the demon had taught him. Both Swarochi and Manorama got  married. 
Swarochi then went to her companions and cured them from their  diseases.  
   
 
SWAROCHI'S OTHER  MARRIAGES  
Markandeya  says- 'After  getting  cured from  their respective  diseases,  both the companions  of 
Manorama  expressed  their gratitude  to Swarochi.  Swarochi  married  both Vibhavari  as well as 
Kalavati.  To show  her gratitude,  Vibhavari  taught  Swarochi,  a special  art that helped  him to 
understand the language of all the living creatures. Kalavati on the other hand while narrating  her 
tale, said- 'A demon  named  Ali had asked  my hand  in marriage  from  my father  but my father 
refused. The demon got angry and killed my father. I wanted to commit suicide but  Sati; the  wife 
of Shambhu  prevented  me from  doing  so by saying - ' You would  be fortunate  to become  a wife 
of great soul  Swarochi.'  
   
 
SWAROCHI'S  REPROACHMENT  
Markandeya says - After getting married, Swarochi started living happily along with all his  three 
wives at Malaya Mountain. One day, impressed by the mutual love, Swarochi and his wives  had 
for each other,  a female  ruddy  goose  told another  one- 'Very  rarely  are found  such couples  who 
have  love for each other.'  But the other  female  ruddy  goose  did not agree.  She replied - 'You  are 
wrong. Swarochi is not a blessed man. Actually, he deceives all of his three wives. Even his  love 
for all the three  wives  is varied.  When  one wife is desirous  of his love,  he embraces  the other 
wife.  So where  is the question  of having  mutual  love for one another?  In comparison,  my 
husband and I are blessed because we have mutual love and respect for each  other.'  
 
Swarochi,  who was listening  to their conversation,  realised  how true the ruddy  goose  was. But 
still, he did not change  his ways  and continued  to live with his wives  for 100 years.  One day 
while wandering, Swarochi saw a deer surrounded by a herd of doe. One of the doe on having  a 
desire  to copulate  with the deer started  sniffing  him in anticipation.  But the deer became  angry 
and said- 'Do you think  I am as shameless  as Swarochi?  A man,  who is sought  by numerous 
beauties,  his condition  becomes  laughable.  Not only does the daily  routine  of such a man gets 
disturbed, but also his behaviour is never fair towards his  wives.'  
   
 
THE ORIGIN OF SWAROCHISH  MANU  
Markandeya says - 'Swarochi became very sad after hearing the deer's utterances. He  realised 
how lowly  and mean  he had become.  He decided  to renounce  life after abandoning  his wives. 
But this did not happen because as soon as he met them, he forgot everything about  renunciation. 
He continued  to live with his wives.  In due course  of time,  Swarochi  begot  three  sons- Vijay, 
Merunand and Prabhav. Swarochi ordered the construction of three cities for his sons, which  he 
donated  to each of them.  The city situated  towards  the east was given  to Vijay  while  the city 
situated  towards  the north  named  Nandvati  was given  to Merunand.  The city named  Tal, which 
was situated in the south, was given to  Prabhav.  
 
Swarochi then lived happily with h is wives. One day, Swarochi had gone for hunting. He saw  a 
wild boar and adjusted his arrow on the bowstring to kill it. Just then, a doe arrived and  requested 
him to kill her instead  of killing  that boar.  She said- 'Kill me with your arrow  so that I get 
liberated  from  my sorrows.  I don't  want  to live because  I have  become  infatuated  with such a 
'person' whose heart lies somewhere else. My aspirations remain unfulfilled. So death is my  only 
refuge.'  
 
Swarochi was very much amazed. He asked - 'Who is that fel low?' The doe replied - 'It is nobody 
than you.' Swarochi was puzzled, 'How can this be? I am a man whereas you are an animal.'  The 
doe then requested Swarochi to embrace her, which Swarochi agreed to do. As soon as  Swarochi 
embraced that doe, she got trans formed into a beautiful lady. Swarochi was very  much 
astonished but the doe said that - 'Don't get puzzled. I am the presiding deity of this forest. I  have 
come to seek your help on the request of the deities. It is your duty to help me in giving birth to  a 
son named Manu. Swarochi married her and in course of time, she gave birth to a son. The  whole 
atmosphere became joyous and happy at the birth of that child. Gandharvas started singing  songs 
and the Apsaras  danced.  The deities  showered  flowers  from  heave n. The child  was so radiant 
that all the four directions  became  illuminated  by his brilliance.  Swarochi  named  this child  as 
Dyutiman. This child was later on also known as Swarochish, the son of  Swarochi.  
One day, while  wandering,  Swarochi  saw a swan  who was telling  his wife- 'Now,  we have 
become  old, so what  is the use of remaining  attached  to each other.  Its time,  we must  seriously 
start thinking  of renouncing  life.' But his wife said- 'This  world  is meant  for enjoying  sensual 
pleasures.  Even  the Brahmin s perform  Yagyas  with that purpose  in their mind.  All the virtuous 
people indulge in virtuous activities with the sole desire of experiencing the pleasures of  life. 
How  come  the idea of renunciation  has entered  your mind?'  The swan  replied - 'One who is not 
attracted  towards  sensual  pleasures  is totally  devoted  to God.  One who is attached  by worldly 
matters can never reach God. Have you not seen the state of Swarochi? How can he be  liberated 
from  the sorrows  of the world  if he is not even  willing  to shun  the attachments?  I am not like 
Swarochi. I know that after enjoying a fully satisfied life, this is the time to renounce everything.' 
After hearing this, Swarochi was very much ashamed of himself. He decided to do penance.  His 
wives also accompanied him. All of them ultimately went to heaven by the virtue of  their 
penance.  
   
 
SWAROCHISH  MANVANTAR  
Markandeya says - 'During this Swarochish Manavantar, Indra was famously known as  Vipaschit. 
The other deities were known as Paravat and Tushit. The names of the Saptar ishis who  lived 
during  this Manavantar  were  Urja,  Stamb,  Pran,  Dutt,  Ali, Rishabh,  Nischar  and Arvaveera. 
Swarochish  Manu  had seven  sons who were  very mighty  and brave.  Chaitra  and Kimpurusha 
were two of them. The descendants of Swarochish ruled the earth till the end of this  Manavantar.  
 
Kraustuki asked - 'O lord! Tell me about the treasures of this  world.'  
 
Markandeya replied - 'Goddess Lakshmi is the presiding deity of learning (Vidya)  called 
Padmini.  After  getting  perfection  in this Vidya,  a man becomes  the master  of eight  types  of 
treasures - Padma,  Mahapadma,  Makar,  Kacchupp,  Mukunda,  Nandak,  Neel  and Shankh.  The 
treasure  called  Padma  is pure in nature.  A man who becomes  the master  of this treasure  mainly 
deals in things like gold and silver etc. Not onl y he, but also his descendants derive benefits  from 
this particular  treasure.  A person  who is the master  of Mahapadma  deals  in things  like pearls, 
corals etc. This particular treasure does not abandon a man till his seventh generation.  The 
treasure called Makar is Tamasik in nature. A man who is the master of this particular treasure  is 
basically Tamasik by nature. Such a man has mastery in handling over various weapons  like 
swords, bows and arrows etc. This particular wealth remains with a man only for one  generation. 
The treasure  called  Kacchupp  is also Tamasik  in nature.  A master  of this particular  treasure 
enjoys  all the pleasure  of this world  and he does not trust any person  easily.  This treasure  also 
remains  with a man only for one generation.  The treasure called  Mukunda  comprises  of Rajas 
quality.  A master  of this treasure  becomes  proficient  in four types  of musical  instruments  like 
Veena,  Venu,  Mridang  etc. Such  a man earns  lot of money  by exhibiting  his art. The treasure 
called Nandak is a combinatio n of Rajas and Tamas qualities. A man who gets influences by  this 
treasure  becomes  immobile.  Such  a man deals  in things  like metals,  jewels,  cereals  etc. The 
master of this treasure is very benevolent and kind hearted. This particular treasure remains  with 
a man till the seventh  generation.  The treasure  called  Neel  is also a combination  of Rajas  and 
Satva  qualities.  A master  of this treasure  deals  in things  like clothes,  cotton,  pearls,  fruits, 
flowers  and things  made  from  wood.  This particular  treasure  remains with a man till three 
generations. A possessor of this treasure is a great social worker and constructs bridge, ponds  etc. 
The treasure called Shankh comprises of Rajas and Tamas qualities. Only one person can  master 
this particular  treasure.  Such  a man enjoys  good  food and is fond of wearing  expensive  clothes. 
Normally, this type of man does not give shelter to other people and is constantly thinking of  his 
own betterment.  ' 
   
 
AUTTAM  MANVANTAR  
 
KING UTTAM ABANDONS HIS  WIFE  
Kraustuki says - 'O lord! Now  tell me about the Auttam  Manavantar.'  
 
Markandeya  replied - 'Uttanpada  and Suruchi  had a son named  Uttam.  Uttam  was married  to 
Bahula.  Bahula  did not love Uttam  and always  showed  disrespect  towards  him. One day, while 
both of them  were  sitting  in the court , watching  the proceedings,  Uttam  offered  a betel  leaf to 
Bahula which she refused, King Uttam felt dishonored. He ordered his attendant to abandon  the 
queen  in the forest.  Bahula  too was very happy,  thinking  that now she will not have  to be in the 
company  of Uttam. This way, Bahula was taken to the  forest.  
 
One day, a sad Brahmin  came  to Uttam  and said- 'O king!  Somebody  has abducted  my wife.  I 
need your help in finding out my lost wife. Uttam asked the Brahmin about the nature,  physical 
construction  and about  the age of his wife.  The Brahmin  revealed  all the facts  related  with his 
wife.  The king was not impressed.  The facts,  which  the Brahmin  had furnished,  went  to prove 
that his wife was not a chaste  lady.  The king expressed  his view  about  his wife in so many 
words. He said - 'What is the use of having such a wicked wife? Forget about her. I will give  you 
another one with all the good qualities.' The Brahmin replied - 'O king! It is one's duty to  protect 
one's  wife no matter  how wicked  she may be. By protec ting your wife,  your children  also get 
protected.  A man who does not protect  his wife,  has a son of hybrid  class.  His ancestors  are 
degraded  from  the heaven  because  of such type of sons.  I am not able to perform  my religious 
obligations because of the abse nce of my wife. O king! Please help  me.' 
 
While searching the Brahmin's wife, King Uttam saw a sage at a secluded place. When the  sage 
saw King  Uttam,  he wanted  to offer  some  Ardhya  (some  type of offering)  to him, which  his 
disciples prohibited him from do ing. Then, the sage changed his mind and offered his seat to  the 
king. The king asked about the reason why he changed his mind of offering the Ardhya.  The 
sage replied - 'Though you are the descendant of Swayambhu Manu, but since you have 
committed  a grave  sin by abandoning  your wife,  I decided  that you are not fit to be offered  the 
Ardhya. No matter how mean your wife is, it is your duty to protect her at all costs.' King  Uttam 
was very ashamed  of himself.  He asked  the sage about  the whereabouts  of the Brahmin's  wife. 
The sage replied - 'His wife has been abducted by the demon, Balak - the son of Adri. He has  kept 
her in the forest  called  Utpalavat.  Go and help the Brahmin  to meet  his wife so that he doesn't 
commit a grave sin like  you. 
   
 
BRAHMIN'S WIFE RETURN S HOME  
Markandeya says - 'When King Uttam reached Utpalavat forest, he saw a woman eating a  Sriphal 
fruit.  The king asked  that woman  whether  she was the wife of that Brahmin - Susharma.  The 
woman replied in the affirmative and said - 'The demon abducted me w hile I was sleeping.  Since 
that day, he has kept me here.  I am very afraid  of that demon.'  The king then asked  the woman 
about  the demon's  whereabouts.  The woman  pointed  towards  the direction  of the demon's  path. 
The king went in that  direction.  
 
When the demon saw the king approaching him, he bowed down in reverence and said - 'O king! 
What can I do for you?' The king asked - 'Why have you abducted the wife of this Brahmin.'  The 
demon  replied - 'I am not the demon  who devours  human  beings.  I devour  their 'flaws'. I have 
many beautiful wives. So where is the need of aspiring for another woman? Actually,  the 
Brahmin  is a very learned  man and has mastered  the mantras.  By chanting  Rakshodna  mantras 
during oblations, he has increased my hunger by making incantation s. Therefore, I have  abducted 
his wife to prevent him from accomplishing any  Yagya.'  
 
The king became  very sad. He thought - 'What  a grave  sin I have  committed  by abandoning  my 
wife! Earlier, that sage too did not find me fit for giving Ardhya. Now, this d emon is also  aware 
of the importance of one's wife in religious ceremonies. How cruel I have been to my wife.'  The 
demon told the king - 'O king! What should I do for you?' The king replied - 'Devour the flaws  of 
this woman  so that she becomes  humble.  After  that, carry  her back  home.  The demon  acted  as 
per the instructions  of King  Uttam.  As a result,  the Brahmin's  wife became  very humble.  She 
said to the king - 'It seems, there is no fault of this demon. Perhaps, I must have caused  separation 
between a husband  and wife, in my previous life and for that very reason, I was forced to  suffer 
this separation with my husband in this present life. The demon said - 'O king! What else do  you 
want  from  me? The king said- 'You  must  be present  before  me whenever  I remember  you.'  The 
demon agreed. He carried the Brahmin's wife to her  home.  
   
 
THE SAGE AND KING UTTAM AND BIRTH  OF 
AUTTAM  MANU  
Markandeya  says- 'King  Uttam  wondered  as to what  should  he do to get liberated  from  the sins 
of abandoning his wife. He requested the sage to help him in this regard. The sage informed  the 
king that his wife was living  at Ranatal.  The king of the serpents - Kapotak  is looking  after her. 
Kapotak  has a daughter  named  Nanda.  Being  concerned  about  her mother's  future,  Nanda  had 
hidden  your wife.  The sage became  very furious  and cursed  her. As a result,  she became  dumb. 
Uttam,  your wife was always  a chaste  woman.  It was only due to evil influences  of the planets 
that she was not paying adequate attention to you. Now, you should go and take her back to your 
home. Uttam returned back to his  palace.'  
 
Markandeya  says- 'Uttam  met the Brahmin  and told him that now as he had reunited  with his 
wife,  it was now his turn to help him (king)  to re-unite  with his wife.  The Brahmin  assured 
Uttam  that he would  perform  a Yagya  named  Mitravinda,  which  would  help him to achieve  his 
goal. He requested Uttam to bring his wife so that the Yagya could be performed.  Uttam 
remembered Nisachar, a demon and requested him to bring his wife. Nisachar went to Patal  loka 
and brought his wife.  The queen  was very happy  to see her husband  once  again.  She requested  
him to cure Nanda  who had become  dumb  for no fault of hers.  Saraswat  Japa was chanted  to 
cure Nanda.  When  Nanda  regained  her voice,  she came  to the oblation  site and after embracing 
the queen,  blessed  her by saying  that she would  become  a proud  mother  of a very famous  son 
named Manu. After that, she went back to Patal loka. In due course of time, the queen gave  birth 
to a son who was named Auttam by the sages.  ' 
   
 
AUTTAM  MAN VANTAR  
Markandeya  says- 'O sage!  The following  Ganas  who reigned  during  Auttam  Manavantar  are 
very famous.  They  are the first Gana - Swadhama.  The second  Gana  Satya  was related  with the 
deities.  The third  Gana  was Shiva,  the fourth  was named  Pratardan  and the fifth Gana  was 
Vashvarti.  Each  of the Ganas  are the master  of twelve  deities.  Indra  by the name  of Sushanti 
rules all the three worlds by the virtue of accomplishing one hundred Ashwamedha Yagyas.  He 
along with Shiva and Satya etc. bestows peace to the world. The descendants of Auttam ruled  the 
whole earth for the full period of Auttam Manavantar. The Saptarishis during this  Auttam 
Manavantar  were  the sons of sage Mahatapa.  The description  of this third  Manavantar  is now 
complete.  Now  I am going  to tell you about  the fourth  Manavantar,  which  is also known  as 
Tamas Manavantar.  ' 
   
 
TAMAS  MANVANTAR  
Markandeya says - 'There used to live a king named Swarashtra. The deity Surya had blessed  him 
with a long life. The king had one hundred wives, but they were not as lucky as he was as far  as 
enjoying a long life was concerned. One by one, all of them died. A king from the  neighbouring 
state named Vimard defeated him in a battle. After being defeated, Swarashtra went at the  bank 
of river Vitasta and started doing  penance.  
 
One day, it rained  heavily  and the king was swept  by the ferocious  current.  The drowning  king 
saw a doe and held her tail to save his life. The doe told the king that she was aware  about  the 
lust of the king. She also told her that her pregnancy wa s causing hindrance in making love.  The 
king was amazed.  He asked  as to how she could  speak  like a human  being  despite  of being  an 
animal.  The doe replied  that she was his most  beloved  queen  Mahishi  in her previous  life. She 
had killed  a pair of deer while  they were  making  love.  The doe had died but the deer survived. 
He had cursed  her to become  a doe in her next life. The deer also revealed  to the queen  that she 
would give birth to the mighty Lola. The same Lola would later on become famous as  Manu 
after defeating his father's enemies. The king was very pleased at this. In due course of time,  the 
doe gave  birth  to a son after which  she went  to the heaven.  The sages  named  the son Tamas. 
When Tamas became young, he did penance to please Surya. Surya gave him  many weapons  by 
the help of which  Tamas  was able to defeat  all his enemies.  He brought  all the enemies  in front 
of his father but Swarashtra forgave everybody. He gave his kingdom to  Tamas.  
 
Markandeya  says- 'Tamas  ruled  over the whole  earth.  Four  types  of deities  were  famous  during 
this Manavantar - Satya  Gana,  Sudhi  Gana,  Surup  Gana  and Hari Gana.  Indra  was known  as 
Shikhi during this Manavantar. The names of these Saptarishis who lived during this  Manavantar  
were  Jyotirdharma,  Prithu,  Kavya,  Chaitra,  Agni, Balak  and Peevar.  The sons of Tamas  Manu 
were very mighty. Their names were Nar, Kshanti, Shant, Dant, Jahnu and Jangha  etc. 
   
 
RAIVAT  MANVANTAR  
Markandeya says - 'Now I am going to tell you about Raivat Manu. His father was Ritvak.  Raivat 
was born in Revati Nakshatra.  Later  on, he became  infamous  for his loose  character.  His father 
was very worried about him. Ritvak asked sage Garg as to how such a mean child had been  born 
to him. Sage  Garg  replied - 'The negative  qualities  of your son is due to his birth  in Revati 
Nakshatra. Ritvak became very furious with Revati Nakshatra and cursed it as a result of  which, 
Revati Nakshatra fell down on Kumud  Mountain.  
 
All the four directions  became  illuminated  and a reservoir  was created.  A girl manifested  from 
that re servoir. A sage named Pramauchi brought that girl to his hermitage and named her  as 
Revati.  When  the girl became  young,  the sage was very worried  about  her marriage.  One day, 
Hutashan  revealed  to him that she would  get married  to Durgam,  the eldest  son of Swayambhu 
Manu.  One day Durgam  arrived  at Pramauchi's  hermitage.  He saw Revati  and asked  her- 'O 
beautiful lady! Can you tell me where sage Pramauchi is? I have come here to pay my obeisance 
to him. At that time, sage Pramauchi was busy performing his Yagy a. Hearing his voice, he  came 
out. Seeing Durgam at his hermitage, he instructed his disciple, Gautam to bring Ardhya for  him. 
The sage said - 'Durgam is not only a king but also my son -in-law.' Durgam was very surprised  at 
what  sage Pramauchi  had said. He asked  sage Pramauchi  as to how could  he be his son-in-law 
and who was his wife?  The sage replied - 'Your  wife is none  other  than the girl whom  you met 
sometime earlier. Her name is Revati. Then the sage narrated the whole story how sage Garg  had 
prophesised  about Revati's marriage with Durgam.' Durgam started contemplating on  this 
peculiar  situation.  
 
Sage Pramauchi started to make arrangements for the marriage. When Revati saw  the 
arrangements  being  made  for her marriage,  she requested  him to get her marrie d in Revati 
Nakshatra. Sage Pramauchi revealed to her that this particular Nakshatra did not exist in the  sky 
any more.  Revati  then requested  him to establish  this Nakshatra  in the sky. Sage  Pramauchi  re- 
established  Revati  Nakshatra  in the sky by the help of his divine  powers.  Thus,  Revati  and 
Durgam  got married.  After  getting  married,  Durgam  requested  the sage to bless  him with a 
mighty  son. Sage  Pramauchi  blessed  him. After  sometime,  Revati  gave birth  to Raivat  Manu. 
Raivat  Manu  was proficient  in all the scriptures.  The chief  Ganas  of Raivat  Manavantar  were 
Sumedha, Bhupati, Vaikunth and Amitabhaichar. There were fourteen deities present in each  of 
the Ganas. The presiding deity of these deities was Indra by the name of Vibhu. The  Saptarishis 
present duri ng this Manavantar were Hiranyaroma, VedSri, Urdhvabahu, Vedbahu,  Sudhama, 
Mahamuni,  Paryanya  and Vashishta.  Raivat  Manu  had four sons- Balabandhu,  Mahaveerya, 
Suyastanya and  Satyak.  
   
 
CHAKSHUSH  MANVANTAR  
Chakshush  had manifested  from the eye (Chakshu)  of Lord Brahma  in his previous  birth.  For this reason,  
he was known  as Chakshush.  Chakshush  was born to Anmitra  and Giribhadra.  After  taking  birth,  he was 
abducted  by Jatharini  and exchanged  with the son of King Vikrant  who was sleeping  besides  his mother.  
Being unaware of this event, Vikrant considered him as his own son and named him as Anand.  When  
Anand grew up, once, his Guru instructed him to make salutations to his mother. Anand replied - "To  
whom should I make salutations? The one who has given birth to  me or to the one who has brought  me  
up and nurtured  me? The Guru  was surprised  by his reply.  He said- "O son! Haimini,  the wife of Vikrant  
has given  birth to you  and so, she is your mother.  But Anand  replied  back - "This  woman  is not my mother.  
I have  taken birth from somebody  else's womb.  This woman  is the mother  of Chaitra.  I am the son of 
Anmitra  and Giribhadra.  Jatharini  had abducted  me and brought  me here.  She had also carried  Chaitra  to 
Punarva's  place  and kept him over  there.  Jatharini  had devoured  the son of Punarva.  Now tell me, who is 
my mother  and to whom should  I make  salutations?"  The Guru  became  confused,  so were  the king and 
the queen. Anand went to the forest and started doing penance. Prajapati became pleased by  his 
tremendous penance and a ppeared before him. He said - "O son! What makes you undertake such  a 
severe  penance?  Anand  replied - "O lord! I am doing  this penance  with the purpose  of becoming  free from 
all the bondage  of my Karma  and to purify  myself.  Brahma  said- "Only  the mortal  men are fit to become  
liberated  because  they are bound  by their Karmas  but you being  a virtuous  person  are not bound  by your 
Karmas.  With my blessings,  you would  become  the sixth Manu.  There  is no need  for you to do penance.  
Lord Brahma named him as Chakshush.  Later on, he became famous as Chakshush Manu.  When  
Chakshush Manu attained marriageable age, he married Vidarbha, the daughter of Ugra.  Markandeya  
says- "Apya  was the most  prominent  Gana  of Chakshush  Manavantar.  He was the master  of eight  deities.  
The second Gana  was called  Prasoot.  He too was the master  of eight  deities.  Similarly,  there  were  two 
more Ganas - Bhatyakhya and Uthaga. Each of them was the master of eight deities. The presiding  deity  
of these  deities  was Indra  by the name  of Manojav.  The Sapta rishis  present  during  this Manavantar  were  
Sumedha,  Viraja,  Havishman,  Unnat,  Madhu,  Ati and Sahishnu.  Chakshush  had many  mighty  sons  like 
Uru, Kuru, Shatadryumna etc. Now I am going to tell you about the seventh Manu who was  called  
Vaivasvat."  
   
 
VAIVASVAT  MANVANTAR  
 
THE BIRTH OF ASHWINI KUMARS AND  REVANT  
 
Markandeya says - 'The Manu of Vaivasvat Manavantar was famously known as Vaivasvat as  he 
was the son of Vivasvan  (Surya).  Surya  was married  to Sangya - the daughter  of Vishwakarma. 
Although, she had borne two sons (Vaivasvat and Yama) and a daughter (Yami) from Surya,  yet 
the radiance of Surya was too much for her to bear. So, one day, she created a shadow identity  of 
herself  and requested  it to act as if she was the real Sangya.  She said to the shadow - 'As long as 
your identity remains unknown, I would not reveal  myself.'  
 
After  this Sangya  went  back  to her father's  home  and ultimately  to Uttarkuru  where  she started 
doing penance in the guise of a mare. Surya on the other hand was not aware of Sangya's  doings. 
In due course of time, the shadow of Sangya gave birth to many children. Though she loved  her 
own children,  she never  had the same  attitude  towards  the three  sons of Sangya.  Seeing  her 
discriminatory attitude, Yama tried to kick her with his leg. The s hadow of Sangya  became 
furious. She cursed Yama's leg to get severed from his body. Yama became very scared. He  went 
to his father Surya accompanied by Vaivasvat and  Yami.  
 
He told Surya - 'A mother  can never  curse  her own child.  So, this woman  is certainly  not our 
mother because she has cursed me.' Surya called the shadow of Sangya and asked about her  true 
identity but Sangya's shadow kept mum. Seeing her quiet, Surya became very angry and he  held 
her by her hair and was just about  to curse  her when,  out of fear, she revealed  the whole  story. 
Surya went to the place of his father -in-law, Vishwakarma and asked about  Sangya. 
Vishwakarma feigned ignorance. He said - 'She did come but she had returned to your place  after 
staying here for a while.' Vishwakarma kn ew the reason why Sangya had abandoned  her 
husband. So, he subdued the radiance of  Surya.  
   
 
THE SAGES OF SAVARNIK  MANVANTAR  
Kraustuki  says- 'O revered  sage!  You have  already  enlightened  me by revealing  the names  of 
seven  different  Manus  of each Manavantar.  You have  also told me about  the deities,  the kings 
and the sages who existed during each Manavantar. Now, I am curious to know about the  seven 
Manus, the deities and the sages of this  Kalpa.'  
 
Markandeya says - 'Savarni, the son of Sangya's shadow would be  the eighth Manu.  The 
Saptarishis of Savarni Manavantar would be Rama, Vyasa, Galav, Diptiman, Krip,  RishyaSring 
and Drauni (Ashwatthama). The three main categories of deities existing during this  Manavantar 
would be Sutapa, Amitabh and Mukhya. Each of the m is the master of 20 Ganas. Among  these, 
the Ganas - Prabhakar,  Prabhas,  Dathita,  Dharma,  Tejah,  Rashmi  and Vakratu  come  under  the 
authority  of the deity,  Sutapa.  Similarly,  the deity  Amitabh  is the master  of the Ganas  like 
Prabhu,  Vibhu  and Vibhas  etc. The deity  Mukhya  is the lord of Ganas  like Dama,  Dant,  Rit, 
Soma and Vint. All of them are the offspring of sage Kashyapa. They will become famous as  the 
deities of Savarni Manavantar. Bali, the son of Virochan would hold the post of Indra during  this 
Manava ntar. Virja, Arvaveera, Nirmoha, Satyavak, Kriti and Vishnu will be the sons of  Savarni 
Manu.'  
   
 
KILLING OF MADHU  KAITABHA  
Markandeya  says- 'King  Surath  was the descendant  of Chaitra.  He was defeated  in the battle 
against  King  Kolvidhvansi.  All his wealth  was deceitfully  taken  over by his cunning  ministers. 
King Surath fled to the forest to save his life where he met a sage named Medha. He stayed  with 
him at his hermitage but after a while, the thought of his lost kingdom began to torment him.  One 
day, while  he was roaming  near the hermitage,  he met a Vaishya  named  Samadhi.  Samadhi 
narrated  his woeful  story  as to how his sons had driven  him out of his home  after taking  all his 
wealth.  But inspite  of this, his love for them  remained  intact.  Both  Surath  and Samadhi went  to 
sage Medha  and told him that- 'Inspite  of our miserable  condition,  we are unable  to understand 
why we still have  affection  and love for our near and dear ones even  though  they have  cheated 
us.' Sage  Medha  replied - 'O king!  Due to the illusions  of this world,  human  beings  are deeply 
influenced by attachments. So, there is nothing to be amazed. Goddess Mahamaya influences  the 
mind  of each human  being.  She does not spare  even  the most  learned  one. When  she becomes 
pleased,  she bestows  liberation.'  The king asked - 'Who  is this Mahamaya?  Please  tell us about 
her.' 
 
Sage Medha then told them about Mahamaya - 'O king! Goddess Mahamaya is beyond the  reach 
of origin and destruction. When the whole earth was submerged in water at the end of the  Kalpa, 
Lord  Vishnu took refuge of Yoganidra. While He was sleeping, two demons, Madhu  and 
Kaitabh  manifested  from  the wax of his ears. The demons  wanted  to attack  Brahma.  Lord 
Brahma got scared and sought help from Goddess Nidra. She manifested from the body of  Lord  
Vishnu and appeared before Lord Brahma. Lord Vishnu woke up from his sleep. He saw that  the 
demons  were  trying  to kill Lord  Brahma.  He fought  with both the demons  for 5,000  years. 
Goddess  Mahamaya  influenced  the demons'  minds  as a result  of which,  they asked some  boons 
from Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu granted the boons to them and said - 'Both of you will get  killed 
by me.' The demons  said- 'We are ready  to get killed  on the condition  that you kill us only in 
such a place where there is no water.' As the whol e earth was submerged in water, so the  demons 
thought  that Lord  Vishnu  would  not be able to get a base to kill them.  But Lord  Vishnu  severed 
their heads after making them sit on His  thighs.  
   
 
THE DESTRUCTION OF MAHISHASURA'S  ARMY  
Markandeya says - 'During a ncient times, the deities and the demons fought a fierce battle  which 
lasted  for a hundred  years.  The deities  were  defeated  in this battle.  Mahishasura  drove  out the 
deities from heaven and ascended the throne of Indra. The defeated deities went to seek th e help 
of Lord  Brahma,  Vishnu  and Mahadeva.  They  narrated  their woeful  tale to all the three  deities. 
Brahma,  Vishnu  and Mahadeva  became  furious  at the demons'  cruelty.  A powerful  effulgence 
appeared  from  the mouth  of Brahma,  Vishnu  and Mahadeva.  Similar  effulgence  appeared  from 
the bodies  of all the deities.  The super  effulgence  was created  from  the unison  of all these 
effulgence and a Goddess manifested from it. The deities were very pleased. All the  deities 
presented  their weapons  to the Goddess.  After  this, they hailed  her name  in a loud voice  by 
chanting - 'Victory  be to her.' The Goddess  laughed  loudly.  Her laughter  shook  the whole  earth 
violently.  
 
When Mahishasura heard her laughter, he proceeded towards her accompanied by a huge  army. 
When  he reached  there,  he was amazed  at the appearance  of the goddess.  He attacked  her with 
his army, which boasted of mighty warriors like Chamar, Chikshur, Udagra, Asilom,  Mahahanu, 
Vashkal,  Parivarit,  Vidal  and Kal. These  demons  had dangerous  weapons  like Tomar,  Shakt i, 
axe, mace  etc. One by one, the Goddess  destroyed  all the demons'  weapons  and launched  an 
attack on them. The deep exhalations made during the battle resulted into the creation  of 
numerous Ganas. These Ganas joined the Goddess in the battle. Ultimately, the Goddess 
succeeded in killing all the  demons.  
 
The battlefield was covered by demons' corpses as well as carcasses of elephants and horses.  The 
deities were pleased by the outcome of this  battle.  
   
 
THE DEITIES EULOGISE GODDESS  BHAGVATI  
Markandeya  says- 'After  the killing  of Mahishasura,  all the deities  including  Indra  eulogised 
Goddess  Bhagvati  and said- 'We make  salutations  to her who has manifested  herself  as a result 
of the unison of the powers of all the deities, one who is revered by all the deities and the  sages. 
May she bless us. We make salutations to that Goddess whose powers are indescribable even  by 
Lord  Brahma,  Vishnu  and Mahesh.  O goddess!  Please  nurture  the whole  world  with your love 
and care. We find ourselves incapable of describing your gr andeur and  magnificence.'  
 
Goddess Bhagvati became very pleased with their devotion and asked them to demand any  boon. 
But  the  deities  replied -  'O  goddess!  By killing  Mahishasura,  you  have  already  fulfilled  our 
aspirations.  If you really  want  to bless  us, then please  appear  before  us at the time of our need. 
The goddess blessed them by saying - 'So be  it'. 
 
Markandeya  says- 'Now,  I am going  to tell you how Goddess  Bhagvati  protected  the deities  by 
killing the demons - Shumbh and  Nishumbh.'  
 
GODDES S PARVATI AND SHUMBH'S  MESSENGER  
Markandeya  says- 'During  ancient  times,  the demons - Shumbh  and Nishumbh  had captured  all 
the three  worlds  after defeating  the deities.  The deities  went  to Goddess  Parvati  and eulogised 
her by saying - 'O goddess! You had pro mised us that you would come to our help at the time  of 
our need. The time has  arrived.'  
 
As the deities  were  busy  eulogising  Goddess  Parvati,  she was preparing  to go for her bath.  She 
came  near the deities  and asked  them  as to who were  they eulogising.  Suddenly,  a divine  entity 
manifested  from  her body  and answered  on behalf  of the deities - 'These  deities  are eulogising 
me.' This divine  entity  was none  other  than Goddess  Shiva.  As Shiva  had manifested  from  the 
cell (Koshika)  of Parvati's  body,  she was also known  as Kaushiki.  Kaushiki  possessed  divine 
beauty. The demons, Chand and Mund happened to see  her. 
 
Both of them went to Shumbh and described to him about Kaushiki's beauty. Shumbh wanted  to 
marry  her. He sent a messenger  named  Sugreev  to Kaushiki  to inform  her about  his intentions. 
Sugreev  went  to Kaushiki  and said- 'You  are so beautiful.  You are fit to marry  a mighty  demon 
king like Shumbh who rules over all the three  worlds.'  
 
The goddess laughed and said - 'O messenger! I am ready to marry Shumbh or Nishumbh  because 
I know  they are very powerful  but there  is one problem.  As I have  taken  a vow that I would 
marry  only such a person  who defeats  me in a battle.'  The messenger  replied - 'O beautiful  lady! 
How can you fight the mighty Shumbh who has defeated  even the deities and who is the  master 
of all the three  worlds?'  Sugreev  made  persistent  requests  but the goddess  refused  to go along 
with him. She instructed him to inform Shumbh and Nishumbh about her  vow.  
   
 
KILLING OF  DHUMRALOCHAN  
Markandeya says - 'Sugr eev went back to Shumbh and narrated the whole story. Shumbh  became 
very furious and instructed Dhumralochan to bring her by force. Dhumralochan went to  Goddess 
Bhagvati accompanied by 60,000 demons. Initially, he requested her to come along with him.  He 
also threatened to take her forcibly if she did not accept her proposal. Goddess Bhagvati  refused 
to go along with him. Dhumralochan angrily ran towards her. The Goddess made a loud roar as  a 
result  of which,  Dhumralochan's  body  was reduced  to ashes.  After  his death,  Dhumralochan's 
army attacked Goddess Bhagvati. The mount of the Goddess - Simha killed all the demons.  When 
Shumbh got the news of Dhumralochan's death, his anger knew no bounds. He instructed  Chand 
and Mund to go and bring Goddess Bhagvati after  capturing  her. 
   
 
KILLING OF CHAND AND  MUND  
Chand  and Mund  proceeded  with a huge  army.  At that time,  Goddess  Bhagvati  had positioned 
herself  at the peak  of Himachal  Mountain.  She was mounted  on the back  of Simha  and was 
smiling sweetly. Chand and Mund trie d to enslave her but suddenly, Goddess Kali appeared  from 
her mouth and ferociously attacked the demons. She devoured some of them and killed the  rest. 
After seeing his huge army vanquished, Chand angrily ran towards Goddess Kali. Mund  attacked 
her with a range of arrows, which infuriated Goddess Kali and she pulled Chand by his hair  and 
severed his head by a sword. Seeing him fall to the ground, Mund ran towards Goddess Kali  but 
even he was killed. The rest of the army retreated. After killing Chand and Mu nd, Goddess  Kali 
told Goddess  Bhagvati - 'I have  done  my duty.  I have  killed  Chand  and Mund.  Now  you should 
do the same by killing Shumbh and Nishumbh.' Goddess Bhagvati replied - 'Since you have  killed 
the demons, Chand and Mund from now onwards, you will a lso become famous as  Chandika.'  
   
 
KILLING OF  RAKTABEEJ  
Markandeya  says- 'When  Shumbh  got the news  of Chand  and Mund'  s death,  he became  very 
furious. He proceeded to fight Goddess Bhagvati accompanied by numerous mighty warriors  like 
Udayudh, Kambu, Kotive erya, Dhumravanashajat, Kalak, Kalkeya etc. When Goddess  Chandika 
saw them  coming,  she made  a loud sound  by pulling  the bowstring.  The demons  came  near and 
surrounded  Goddess  Chandika  and Goddess  Bhagvati  from  all the sides.  Lord  Brahma,  Lord 
Shiva and Lor d Vishnu became anxious. They created divine entities with the help of  effulgence 
emanating from their bodies. These divine entities resembled Goddess Chandika. They  instructed 
these divine entities to kill all the demons. Goddess Chandika requested Lord S hiva to  approach 
Shumbh  and Nishumbh  as her messenger  and inform  him that they should  either  take refuge  in 
the Patal loka or be ready to die. Lord Mahadeva went to the place where Katyayani was  fighting 
the demons. The demons attacked her with different w eapons but Chandika gave them a  befitting 
reply.  Unable  to face the assault  of the goddesses,  the demons  started  fleeing.  Seeing  this, 
Raktabeej came forward to fight. Raktabeej was blessed with a boon that was if a single drop  of 
his blood fell on the gro und, this drop would create another form of his. This way, in a very  short 
time, thousands of Raktabeejas covered the battlefield. The deities became  afraid.  
 
Seeing  the frightened  deities,  Bhagvati  said to Kali- 'O Chamunda!  Open  your mouth  and drink 
each drop of blood  coming  out from  the injuries  of Raktabeej.'  After  saying  this, Goddess 
Bhagvati attacked Raktabeej with her trident. Goddess Kali drank all the blood coming out  from 
his wound. At last, Raktabeej was killed. The deities were pleased. Goddess  Kali started to  dance 
with ferocity due to the intoxication caused by drinking of the  blood.  
   
 
KILLING OF  NISHUMBH  
Markandeya says - 'When Shumbh and Nishumbh heard about Raktabeej's death, they  were 
infuriated.  Nishumbh  attacked  the goddess  with a huge  army. Shumbh  attacked  from  the other 
side. In the fierce  battle,  Goddess  Bhagvati  broke  the sword  as well as the shield  of Nishumbh. 
Nishumbh then attacked Goddess Bhagvati with his weapon - Shakti. Goddess Bhagvati broke  it 
with her Chakra. At last, she attac ked him with her arrows at him and as a result, Nishumbh  got 
injured and fell.  ' 
When Shumbh saw Nishumbh, injured and unconscious, he ran towards Goddess Bhagvati to  kill 
her. Goddess  Bhagvati  blew  her conch  and made  a thunderous  noise  by pulling  the bowstring. 
Shumbh released the dangerous weapon - Ugradipti in the direction of Goddess Bhagvati. But  her 
weapon Maholkanamni destroyed it. Shumbh thundered loudly and attacked Goddess  Bhagvati 
with a volley  of arrows  but none  could  cause  any harm  to her. Finally, Goddess  Bhagvati 
attacked Shumbh with her trident. Shumbh fell down unconscious. After sometime, he  regained 
his consciousness  and attacked  Goddess  Bhagvati  with his arrows.  But she destroyed  all the 
arrows.  In the meantime,  Nishumbh  had regained  his consciousness.  He got up and attacked 
Goddess  Bhagvati  with his trident.  In the end, Goddess  Bhagvati  killed  Nishumbh  by piercing 
her trident  in his heart.  As Nishumbh  was dying,  an another  demon  manifested  from  his body. 
Even he was killed by her. Her mou nt Simha devoured all the dead  demons.  
   
 
KILLING OF  SHUMBH  
Markandeya  says- 'Shumbh  became  angry  at the death  of his brother - Nishumbh.  He furiously 
told the goddess - 'O wicked lady! Do not be proud of your strength borrowed from  others.' 
Goddess  Bhagvati  replied - 'O wicked  demon!  I am the only power  of this whole  universe.  I am 
the origin of cause and effect. Look! All the divinities are entering into my  body.'  
 
The next moment, all the divine entities, which had earlier manifested from the bodies of  the 
deities  united  with the goddess.  Now,  the goddess  was alone.  A tremendous  battle  was fought 
between Goddess Bhagvati and Shumbh. Ambika attacked him with numerous divine  weapons. 
But, Shumbh neutralised her attack with his own  weapons.  
 
Shumbh covered the w hole body of Goddess Bhagvati with his arrows. She broke his bow.  After 
this, Shumbh  attacked  her with his weapon  named  Shakti,  which  was broken  into pieces  by her 
Chakra.  Now,  Shumbh  took out his sword  and attacked  her with it. She broke  his shield  and 
sword with her arrows. Shumbh then attacked her with his mace. Even his mace was broken  into 
pieces.  
 
Shumbh  had no more  weapons  left with him. He attacked  the goddess  on her breast  with his 
clenched fist. She slapped him on his face because of which he fell  down. The next moment,  he 
got up and manifested  himself  in the sky. Now,  a tremendous  duel was fought  between  them  in 
the sky. 
 
In the end, she dashed  him on the ground  and pierced  the trident  in his heart.  Shumbh  was 
instantly killed. After the killing o f Shumbh, all the deities became pleased. The Gandharvas  and 
the deities rejoiced. The Apsaras danced. The whole atmosphere echoed with the sound - 'Shanti 
Shanti' (Let there be  peace).  
   
 
DEVI  STOTRA  
Markandeya says - After goddess Bhagvati had killed Shumbh,  all the deities under the  leadership 
of Indra  and Agni  started  eulogising  her- 'O Goddess!  Be pleased  up on us! Protect  the whole 
world,  as you are the goddess  of this whole  universe.  You appear  in the form  of this earth - the 
base on which  everything  is situated.  Your  light illuminates  all the living  creatures.  You are the 
only power through which creation, nurturing and annihilation takes place. You are  the 
Brahmani, Maheshwari and the Kaumari. We salute you because you have protected us from  the 
terror of the demons. We need your protection from all the calamities of this  world.'  
 
Goddess  Bhagvati  was extremely  pleased  by their eulogy.  She asked  them  for any wish.  The 
deities  said- 'O Akhileshwari!  We need  your protection.  Clear  all the obstacles  from  our path. 
Eliminate our  enemies.'  
 
Goddess Bhagvati replied - 'During Vaivasvat Manavantar, I will take incarnation  from 
Yashoda's womb - the wife of Nand, to kill the demons Shumbh and Nishumbh. After that, I  will 
kill the demon - Vaiprachit in my most aggres sive form. One hundred years later, I will  manifest 
myself and would be known as Satakshi because of my hundred eyes. My next incarnation  would 
be known as Shakambhari because I would nurture the whole world during the period of  drought. 
I will kill the de mon Durgam during that drought period. I will kill the demon Arun - the 
tormentor of all the three worlds by appearing in the form of a bee. Due to this, I will be  known 
as Bhramari. I will take incarnations every time the demons torment the  world.  
   
 
GODDESS  BHAGVATI BLESSES THE  DEITIES  
Goddess  Bhagvati  says- I will clear  all the obstacles  from  the path of such a man who worships 
me. A devotee who listens to the great tales of how I killed Mahishasura, Shumbh  and 
Nishumbh,  on the eighth,  ninth  and fourteenth  days of any month,  would  be liberated  from  all 
sins and poverty.  He would  become  free from  fear. A devotee  must  listen  to my divine  tales 
during  all the religious  ceremonies  like making  sacrifice,  worship  and performing  Yagya.  By 
doing  this, all his enemi es will be eliminated.  A man who remembers  me when  faced  with 
dangerous situation remains protected by  me.' 
 
After blessing the deities, Goddess Bhagvati disappeared from their sight. All the demons,  which 
had survived  after the killings  of Shumbh  and Nish umbh,  went  to the nether  world  to save their 
lives.  
   
 
GODDESS BHAGVATI BLESSES SURATH AND  THE 
VAISHYA  
The sage says - 'O king! I have described in detail about the greatness of Goddess Bhagvati  who 
is the creator of this universe. She is the one who bestows the knowledge of self to us. She is  the 
Maya  (illusion)  by whom  the whole  world  is influenced.  You must  take her refuge.  You can 
achieve  all the pleasures  of this world,  heaven,  as well as liberation.'  King  Surath  and the 
Vaishya went to do their penance. While doing their penance, they chanted the mantras of  Devi 
Sukta. They made an earthen idol of Bhagvati and worshipped it by offering flowers, Dhup  etc. 
They  did an austere  penance  for three  years  implying  various  modes  of worship.  Sometimes, 
they observe d fast, the other  time,  they offered  their own blood  to please  Goddess  Bhagvati.  At 
last, the goddess  was pleased  and appeared  before  them.  She said- 'I am pleased  with both of 
you. I will fulfil whatever you wish.'  King Surath sought her blessings in reg aining his  kingdom  
from the clutches of his enemies. He also requested her to bless him with an undivided  kingdom 
in his next life. The Vaishya  requested  her to make  him free from  all kinds  of attachments. 
Goddess Bhagvati said - 'O king! Very soon, you w ill be able to regain your whole kingdom  from 
your enemies. In your next birth, you would be born as Savarni Manu, the son of Surya. You  will 
also attain self -knowledge and become free from all kinds of attachments.' After blessing both  of 
them, Goddess Bh agvati  disappeared.  
   
 
SAVARN  MANVANTAR  
Markandeya  says- 'O great  sage!  Now  I am going  to tell you about  the Manavantar  of Savarn, 
which  will be the ninth  Manavantar.  Savarn  was the son of Daksha.  During  this Manavantar, 
there  will be three  prominent  groups  of deities.  Each  group  would  comprise  of twelve  deities. 
During this Manavantar, Indra would be known as Adbhut. The names of the Saptarishis of  this 
Manavantar  would  be Medhatithi,  Vasu,  Satya,  Jyotishman,  Dyutiman,  Sabal  and Hatyavahan. 
Savarn will have eight sons - Dhrishtketu, Barhaketu, Panchahasta, Niramay,  Prithushravah, 
Achishman, Bhuridruymna and  Bhrihadmay.'  
 
The tenth  Manavantar  will be named  after the tenth  Manasputra  of Lord  Brahma.  During  this 
Manavantar,  the names  of two prominent  groups  of deities  will be Sukhasin  and Niruddha.  The 
total population during this Manavantar will be hundred people. The total number of  deities 
during  this Manavantar  will also be of the same  number.  The name  of Indra  during  this tenth 
Manavantar  would  be Shanti  and the names  of the Saptarishis  during  this tenth  Manavantar 
would be Apomurti, Havishman, Sukrit, Satya, Nabhag, Apratim and Vashishta. The tenth  Manu 
would have ten sons - Sukshetra, Uttamoja, Bhurishen, Veeryavan, Shatanik, Vrishabh,  Anmitra, 
Jayadrath, Bh uridruymna and  Suparva.  
 
The eleventh Manavantar will be named after Savarn, the son of Dharma. During  this 
Manavantar, there will be three prominent groups of deities - Vihangam, Kamag and  Nirmanpati. 
Each  group  would  comprise  of 30 deities.  Indra  would  be known  by the name  of Vrishakhya. 
The name of the Saptarishis of this Manavantar would be Havishman, Varishtha,  Nischar, 
Anagh,  Vishti,  Agnidev  etc. The eleventh  Manu  would  have  six sons- Sarvatrag,  Susharma, 
Devaneek, Purudwaha, Hemdhanva and  Dhridhayu.  
 
The twelfth  Manavantar  will be named  after Savarn,  the son of Rudra.  The names  of the five 
prominent  groups  of deities  of this Manavantar  will be Sudharma,  Sumana,  Harit,  Rohit  and 
Suvarn. Each group will comprise of ten deities. During this Manavantar, In dra would be  known 
by the name  of Kratadhama.  The names  of the Saptarishis  during  this Manavantar  would  be 
Dyuti, Tapasvi, Sutava, Tapomurti, Taponidhi, Taporati and Tapodhiti. The Manu of  this 
Manavantar would have six sons - Devavan, Upadev, Devashrestha,  Vidurath, Mitravan  and 
Mitravinda.  
 
Rauchya would be the Manu during the thirteen Manavantar. Three prominent groups of  deities 
would be Sudharma, Sukarma and Susharma. During this Manavantar, Indra would be known  by 
the name  of Divaspati.  The name  of the Saptarishis  of this Manavantar  will be Dhritiman, 
Avyay, Tatvadarshi, Nirutsuk, Nirmoha, Sutapa and Nishkamp. During this Manavantar,    Manu  
would have eight sons - Chitrasen, Vichitra, Niyati, Nirbhay, Dhridh, Sunetra, Kshatrabuddhi  and 
Suvrat.  
   
 
RAUCHYA  MANVANTAR  
 
RUCHI ADVISED TO GET  MARRIED  
Markandeya  says- 'As soon  as the ancestors  departed,  a beautiful  Apsara  came  near Ruchi.  Her 
name  was Pramalocha.  She said to him- 'O great  sage!  I have  a daughter  named  Malini.  The 
name  of my husband  is Pushkar.  I want  to get her betrothed  to you. Please  accept  her as your 
wife. In course of time, she would give birth to  Manu.  
 
Ruchi  accepted  her proposal.  Ruchi  married  Malini  in the presence  of sages.  In course  of time, 
Malini gave birth to a son who was named Rauc hya. Rauchya Manavantar was named after  him. 
 
Markandeya says - 'During ancient times, the ancestors of Ruchi were not pleased by  his 
unmarried status. He was a sage of high degree and used to have food once a day. The  ancestors 
asked him - 'O son! Why didn 't you get married? Grihastha ashrama holds a very important  place 
in the life of a man. It is only after paying his three debts (rina) that a man is entitled to become  a 
householder.  All your efforts  in paying  off your debts  towards  the deities  and ancest ors are 
useless unless you are married. Your aspirations of attaining the supreme abode would go in  vain 
unless you have become a  father.'  
 
Ruchi  replied - 'Getting  married  is the root cause  of all sorrows.  It also obstructs  the upward 
spiritual  movement  of a man.  That is why I am not having  any interest  in getting  married. 
Having self control helps a man to attain  salvation.'  
 
The ancestors  said- 'The path you have  chosen  would  never  lead you towards  salvation.  A man 
reaps  the fruits  of his Karmas  committed  in his previous  lives  in the form  of happiness  and 
sorrow.  An intelligent  man must  act in such a manner  that his soul remains  aloof  from  his 
Karmas.'  
 
Ruchi replied - 'The path of actions (Karma) has been described as an Avidya in the Vedas.  Why 
are you pu shing me towards that path?' The ancestors replied - 'It is true what you have said. But 
at the same time, it can be proved wrong by one's Karmas because Karmas are the means  by 
which  a man attains  self-knowledge.  Your  belief  that your actions  are purifying  your soul is 
based  on false  notions.  Actually,  by not doing  your Karma,  you are only torturing  your soul. 
Karma is very beneficial for a man's upliftment. So, you must get married to enjoy a blissful  life.' 
 
Ruchi replied - 'O great ancestors! Who will giv e his daughter to a poor and an old man like  me?' 
The ancestors  warned  Ruchi  that if he went  against  their wishes,  he would  face degradation  in 
every sphere of his life. After saying this, the ancestors  disappeared.  
   
 
RUCHI EULOGISES HIS ANCESTORS WHO  BLESS  
HIM 
Markandeya  says- 'After  the departure  of his ancestors,  Ruchi  started  wandering  here and there 
in his restlessness.  After  sometime,  when  he regained  his composure,  he decided  to do penance 
to please Lord Brahma. His penance continued for one hundred years. After the  accomplishment 
of his penance,  Lord  Brahma  appeared  before  him and asked  what  he desired.  Ruchi  expressed 
his desire of getting married as per the aspirations of his ancestors. Lord Brahma blessed him  and 
also instructed Ruchi to eulogise his ancestors so that his wishes could be  fulfilled.'  
 
Ruchi eulogised his ancestors by chanting Stotras - 'I make salutations to my ancestors  who 
preside  over the ceremony  of Shradha,  who are pacified  even  by the deities,  by the chanting  of 
Swaha, made dur ing the ceremony of Shradha. I make salutations to my ancestors who dwell  in 
the space  and in the heaven.  May my ancestors  accept  the offerings,  which  I am making  in the 
form of flowers, cereals, water, Dhup  etc.' 
 
Markandeya  says- 'Hardly  had Ruchi  accomp lished  his eulogy  of the ancestors,  a very bright 
effulgence  appeared  in front  of him, who were  in fact his ancestors.  They  said- 'Demand  any 
boon.'  Ruchi  replied - 'Lord  Brahma  has instructed  me to enhance  the process  of creation.  So I 
need  a wife for that purpose.  The ancestors  said- 'Here  at this very place,  you will find a very 
beautiful wife. She would give birth to Rauchya. You too would become very famous  as 
Prajapati because of your numerous sons and you will attain salvation in the end.' After  blessing 
Ruchi, the ancestors departed for  heaven.  
   
 
THE BEGINNING OF BHAUTYA  MANVANTAR  
Markandeya  says- 'Now  I am going  to tell you about  the origin  of Bhautya  Manavantar.  Sage 
Angira had a disciple named Bhuti. He was short tempered in nature and used to cur se anybody 
at the earliest opportunity. Everybody including the deities like Indra, Vayu, Surya etc.  were 
scared of him. Nobody went against his wishes and followed his  commands.'  
 
Bhuti had no children and commenced a rigorous penance to achieve one. But still, his  aspiration 
remained unfulfilled. He decided to quit doing penance. His brother named Suvarcha invited  him 
to the Yagya  he was performing.  Bhuti  left the hermitage  after entrusting  his disciple - Shanti  to 
look after its  affairs.  
 
Shanti tried his  best to perform his duties according to the instructions of his teacher - Bhuti.  Yet, 
one day, the sacrificial  fire got extinguished  somehow.  Shanti  became  scared  at the prospect  of 
facing  his preceptor's  wrath.  He was certain  of being  cursed  by Bhuti.  Finding no other  option, 
he went  to Agni  named  Jativeda  and sought  his help.  He tried to please  him by chanting  Agni 
Stotra. He eulogised Agni in many ways. He said - 'O Agni! The first of all creations, I need  your 
blessings. Without you, the Yagya cannot be performed. All the Vedas are full of praise for  you. 
The deities as well as the demons try to pacify you by making offerings to  you.'  
 
The deity Agni became extremely pleased by Shanti's eulogy and appeared before him. He  asked 
Shanti  to express  his desire . Shanti  requested  Agni  to re-ignite  the sacrificial  fire, which  had 
gone off, so that he does not have to face the wrath of his Guru. He then requested Agni to  bless 
his Guru  with a son having  all the good  qualities.  Agni  was very much  pleased  by Shanti's  
devotion  towards  his Guru.  He said- 'Your  Guru  Bhuti  would  have  a son named  Bhautya  after 
whom the Manavantar would be named.' After blessing him, Agni  disappeared.  
 
Shanti  returned  to his hermitage  and was very pleased  to see the sacrificial  fire burnin g. In the 
meantime,  his Guru  Bhuti  arrived.  His Guru  was very pleased  with the sincerity  of Shanti  with 
which  he performed  his duties  in his absence.  Bhuti  said- 'O son! I don't  understand  the reason 
why my heart  is overwhelmed  with love.  Love  is alien  to my nature.  If you are cognisant  of the 
reason,  please  tell me.' Then  Shanti  narrated  the whole  story.  Bhuti  was very pleased  by his 
devotion. He taught all the Vedas to  Shanti.  
 
In course  of time,  Bhautya  was born to him. He was the Manu  of the Bhautya  Manavantar. 
During this Manavantar, there would be five prominent groups of deities - Chakshush,  Kanishth, 
Pavitra,  Bhrajir  and Dharavrit.  During  this Manavantar,  Indra  would  be known  as Shuchi.  The 
names  of the Saptarishis  would  be Agnigh,  Agnibahu,  Suchi,  Mukt, Madhav,  Shukra  and Ajit. 
Bhautya Manu would have ten sons - Guh, Gambhir, Brahna, Bharata, Anugraha,  Srimani, 
Prateer, Vishnu, Sankraman and Subal. A man who listens to the tales of all the  fourteen 
Manvantaras is not only blessed but becomes liberated from all his  sins. 
   
 
BIRTH OF  MARTANDADEV  
Lord  Brahma  had created  Daksha  from  the thumb  of his right  hand.  Daksha's  wife was created 
from the thumb of Brahma's left hand. Daksha had a daughter named Aditi. Martandadev was  the 
son of Aditi and his father wa s Kashyapa.  
 
Kraustuki asked - 'O lord! Why did Vivasvan Surya took birth as the son of  Kashyapa.'  
 
Markandeya says - 'During the initial phase of creation, when nothing existed, except a large  egg. 
Lord Brahma manifested inside that egg. Subsequently, he ca me out from that egg. At that  time, 
a loud sound  of OM came  out from  his mouth.  From  this sound  of Omkar,  were  created  Bhur, 
Bhuvah and in the end Swah. These three mystic words are the forms of Surya. After that,  three 
more mystic words were created - Maha h, Jan and Tapah, each of the former word being  grosser 
than the latter  one. In the end, the word  Satya  was created,  which  was the grossest  of all. These 
seven mystic words related with the Omkar illustrate the gross and the subtle forms of  Vivasvan.  
   
MANI FESTATION OF THE SUN GOD ADITYA AND  THE 
VEDAS  
Markandeya  says- 'After  Brahma  came  out from  that egg, Rigveda  manifested  from  his first 
mouth.  From  the mouth  facing  south,  manifested  the Yajurveda.  After  that, Samaveda 
manifested from his mouth facing west.  In the end, Atharvaveda came out from the mouth  facing 
north. The Rigveda symbolises the Rajo Guna while the Yajurveda symbolises the Satva  Guna. 
Samaveda  comprises  of Tamo  Guna  whereas  Atharvaveda  is the mixture  of Satva  and Tamo 
Guna. The manifestation of the Vedas had illuminated the whole atmosphere. But  the 
manifestation of Omkar overlapped their radiance and covered all the Vedas. At last,  the 
radiance  of the Vedas  got united  with that of the Omkar.  The Rigveda  symbolises  the form  of 
Brahma during the period of creation while Yajurveda symbolises Lord Vishnu during the  whole 
period of nurturing. Samaveda is symbolical of Rudra at the time of  annihilation.  
 
Markandeya says - 'In the beginning of the creation, Surya shed unbearable amount of heat.  This 
made  the process  of creation  very difficult.  Lord  Brahma  became  worried.  He thought - 'Due to 
the extreme  heat of the Sun, all the water  on this earth  is getting  evaporated.  If this continues  to 
happen then how would the creatures  survive?'  
 
Lord  Brahma  eulogised  Surya  to please  him. He said- 'I make  salutations  to Surya  who is the 
object  of contemplation  of great  sages,  who is the source  of all energy.  O Surya!  It is only 
because  of you that I can create,  nurture  and annihilate.  You are the protector  of this universe 
created from the Panchatatvas. Please subdue your radiance so that I can commence my creation.' 
Vivasvan Surya became very pleased by Brahma's eulogy and subdued his radiance. Thus,  it 
became  possible  for Lord  Brahma  to begin  his creation.  He created  the deities,  demons,  human 
beings, animals, vegetation etc. in the same way as he had done in earlier  Kalpas.  
 
 
PROGENIES OF KASHYAPA AND ADITI'S EULOGY OF  DIWAKAR  
 
Markandeya says - 'Lord Brahma, after having created the universe divided the earth i nto various 
islands. He also created the oceans and the mountains. Marichi, the son of Brahma was the  father 
of Kashyapa. Kashyapa was married to the ten daughters of Daksha. He had numerous sons  from 
them  like the deities,  the demons  and many  creatures  like reptiles.  Aditi  was the mother  of the 
deities,  Diti of the demons,  Danu  of the Danavas  (monsters).  Vinata  gave  birth  to Garuda  and 
Arun. Ravasa was the mother of Yakshas and the Rakshasas, Kadru of the Nagas. Muni was  the 
mother of Gandharvas. Krodha wa s the mother of Kulyava Ganas, Rishta of Apsaras. Ira was  the 
mother of the elephants and Tamra was the mother of Shyeni. Ila gave birth to all the  vegetation 
while Pradha gave birth to the insects. The earth was inhabited with the progenies of Aditi's  sons. 
 
Lord Brahma had made the deities masters of all the three worlds. This decision of Brahma  had 
made the Daityas, Danavas and Rakshasas very angry. They got united and started  causing 
obstacles in the path of the deities. A great battle was fought betwee n the deities and the  demons 
in which  the deities  were  defeated.  Aditi,  the mother  of the deities  became  very sad. She did a 
rigorous  penance  to please  the Sun god. She observed  fasts and eulogised  the Sun god for most 
of her time.  At last, the Sun god appeared  before  her but she could  not bear his radiance  which 
was so powerful  that she could  not even  open  her eyes.  She requested  him to subdue  his power 
so that she could see  him. 
   
 
ADITI GIVES BIRTH TO  ADITYA  
Markandeya  says- 'After  being  pleased  by the eulogy of Aditi,  the Sun shed its radiance  and 
became sombre. Now, Aditi could see him. She said - 'O lord! Be pleased upon me. The  Daityas 
and the Danavas  have  captured  all the three  worlds  from  my sons.  I request  you to take birth  as 
my son and defeat the  demons.'  
 
The Sun god agreed  to take birth  as her son. In course  of time,  Aditi  became  pregnant.  She 
engaged  herself  in religious  activities  so that she could  become  a mother  of a virtuous  child.  
Seeing his pregnant wife observing fasts, Kashyapa became ver y angry. He said - 'It is not  proper 
for a pregnant  woman  to observe  fast as it may prove  to be harmful  to the foetus.  Why  are you 
trying  to destroy  it?' Aditi  replied - 'I am not trying  to destroy  my foetus.  After  taking  birth,  our 
child will destroy our  enemies.'  
 
In her anger,  Aditi  released  her foetus.  Kashyapa  started  chanting  the mantras  of Rigveda.  In a 
very short time, her child came out from that foetus. A heavenly voice was heard which said - 'O 
sage!  Since  you have  called  this foetus,  Marit,  therefo re your son would  be famously  known  as 
Martand.' After the birth of Martand, the morale of the deities was boosted up. Indra  challenged 
the demons.  A tremendous  battle  ensued  between  both the sides.  Martand  glanced  towards  the 
demons  as a result  of which  they were  charred  to death.  The deities  were  pleased  and eulogised 
Martand. At last, the deities regained their territories they had lost to the  demons.  
 
Markandeya  says- 'Vishwakarma  had married  his daughter  Sangya  to the Sun-god. But being 
unable  to face the unbearable  radiance  of the Sun, she went  to do penance  after instructing  her 
shadow to perform the duties of an ideal wife on her behalf. Ultimately, she returned back to  her 
husband  only after Vishwakarma  had subdued  the radiance  of the Sun god. Vishw akarma  then 
eulogised the Sun god by saying - I make salutations to the Sun god whose existence is  beneficial 
for the whole  universe.  I make  salutations  to one whose  own origin  remains  a mystery  and who 
enables  our eyes to see. I make  salutations  to the Sun god who destroys  darkness  and who 
lightens up the whole  world.'  
   
 
RAJYAVARDHAN'S SUBJECTS EULOGISE SUN GOD FOR HIS LONG  LIFE  
 
Kraustuki says - 'O lord! Enlighten us on the greatness of  Bhaskar.'  
 
Markandeya replied - 'There was a king named Rajyavardhan. Hi s subjects were very happy  and 
satisfied under his rule. They were free from all the diseases. Rajyavardhan ruled for 7,000  long 
years. His wife was Manini. One day, while Manini was applying oil on his head, she saw a  grey 
hair. She became very sad and st arted crying. A drop of tear fell on the king. He asked the  queen 
as to why she was crying.  The queen  told him about  the reason.  The king laughingly  said- 'I am 
fully  satisfied  by my rule of 7,000  years.  The grey hair on my head  is an indication  that I must 
now abandon my worldly life and become a recluse. This would be more appropriate for  me.' 
 
When  his subjects  came  to know  about  his decision,  they became  sad. But nothing  could  make 
the king change  his mind.  He decided  to become  a recluse  after appointin g his son as his 
successor.  The king called  the astrologers  for consultation.  The astrologers  advised  the king to 
change his mind. But Rajyavardhan did not listen to  them.  
 
At last, his subjects decided to eulogise the Sun god and demand a long life for th eir king. All  of 
them started worshipping the Sun god. A Gandharva whose name was Sudama appeared  before 
them and instructed them to go to a forest named Guha Vishal and continue their penance. All of 
them went to the forest as per the instruction of the G andharva. There was a beautiful temple  of 
Lord Bhaskar in the forest. They worshipped Surya and eulogised him. Their worship  continued 
for three months after which the Sun god became pleased and appeared before them.  Lord 
Bhaskar asked them to demand any b oon. He said - 'O Brahmin! Demand anything you wish.'  All 
of them said - 'O lord! If you are really pleased with us, then bless our King Rajyavardhan with  a 
long life. Please bless him with an eternal youth and a life free from all the deities. We want  our 
king to live for 10,000 years. The Sun god blessed them by saying - 'So be  it'. 
 
After receiving the boons, all of them came to the king's palace and narrated the whole story.  The 
queen was very pleased but the king was worried. The queen was surprised at the king's  sadness 
even  after getting  such good  news.  The king replied - 'What  is the use of remaining  alive  for 
10,000 years? You won't be alive then. Will I be able to enjoy my life in your absence? Will  not 
the deaths of my sons, my grandsons and my near  and dear ones make me sad? The boon  of 
myself enjoying life for 10,000 years will actually prove to be a  curse.'  
 
The queen sadly said - 'Whatever you have said is true. I could not understand this fact because  of 
my ignorance.  Now,  you must  do your duty,  as the boon  of the Sun god is not going  to go in 
vain.  The king decided  to go to the Mountain  Prabhriti  and do penance.  He wanted  to receive  a 
boon from Sun god, which enabled all his subjects and his relatives to remain alive as long as  he 
lived. The quee n also decided to move along with the king. Both of them did an austere  penance. 
The Sun god appeared before them and blessed them. Thus, Rajyavardhan lived for 10,000  years 
along with his  subjects.  
   
MARTANDADEV AND HIS DESCENDANTS  
Markandeya  says- 'Marta ndadev  had a son named  Manu.  The seventh  Manavantar  in which  we 
are living is named after him. Manu had many sons among whom Narishyant,  Nabhag, 
Prishadhna  and Drisht  were  the rulers  of different  kingdoms.  Manu  had performed  a special 
Yagya named Mitra -Varuna with the desire of having more sons. But after the Yagya, a  daughter 
was born to him and who was named  Ila. Manu  then requested  Mitra -Varuna  to transform  that 
girl into a boy, if he was really  pleased  with him. Both  the deities  blessed  Manu  and instant ly 
that girl was transformed into a boy. He was named Sudryumna. One day, Sudryumna had gone 
to the forest  for hunting.  Incidentally,  because  of the wrath  of Goddess  Parvati,  he again  got 
transformed  into a lady.  At that time,  he was married  to Buddh  and a son named  Pururava  was 
born to them. Later on, he regained his body of the male. This time, he became the father  of 
Utkal, Vinay and Gaya. All these three sons were very just rulers. Pururava was made the king  of 
Pratisthanpur.  
   
 
FAMOUS MYTHOLOGICAL  TALES  
KING  PRISHADHNA  
 
King Prishadhna was the son of Manu. One day, he had gone to the forest on a hunting spree.  He 
killed  a cow by mistake.  This cow belonged  to an Agnihotri  Brahmin  who was performing  a 
Yagya.  The Brahmin  became  very furious  and cursed  Prisha dhna  to become  a Shudra.  King 
Prishadhna too became angry and he wanted to retaliate. He took some water in his hand and  was 
just about to curse the Brahmin, just then the Brahmin's father Mauli arrived. He warned both  of 
them against cursing each other. H e said - 'Anger decreases the life span of a man. It also  destroys 
the knowledge and makes a man, a destitute. An angry person can neither be virtuous nor he  can 
accumulate wealth. Even if the king had killed the cow deliberately, he is worthy of being  show n 
compassion.  But if he has committed  this sin out of his ignorance,  then certainly,  he is not fit to 
be cursed.  Therefore,  O son! Don't  curse  the king.  The cow must  have  died because  of her own 
past Karmas.'  King  Prishadhna  made  salutations  to the Agniho tri Brahmin  and said in a loud 
voice - 'Be pleased  on me. I did not kill the cow deliberately.  It only happened  by mistake.  The 
Brahmin replied - 'O king! I have never spoken a lie in my life. Even my curse which I  have 
given  to you will not go in vain.'  Sage Mauli  took his son to his hermitage.  In course  of time, 
Prishadhna became a Shudra due to the  curse.  
   
 
PRINCE  NABHAG  
Markandeya says - 'Nabhag was the son of King Dishta. One day, he saw a beautiful woman  who 
was the daughter  of a Vaishya.  He was very enchanted  by her beauty  and wanted  to marry  her. 
He went  to the Vaishya  and expressed  his desire.  The Vaishya  was terrified  at the prospect  of 
facing  the wrath  of the king.  He said- 'You  belong  to a royal  family  whereas  I am a poor man. 
There is no match betw een both of us. Why do you insist on marrying my daughter?'  
 
Nabhag  was not amused  at the Vaishya's  reply.  He threatened  to give up his life if he was not 
married.  The Vaishya  went  to the king and narrated  the whole  story.  The king consulted  his 
ministers  and the Brahmins. The Brahmin said - 'Prince Nabhag should first marry a  woman 
within  his own caste,  only then he can marry  the Vaishya's  daughter  otherwise  he would  be 
committing a grave  sin. 
 
Nabhag was not satisfied by the Brahmins' decision. He decided  to forcibly abduct the  Vaishya's 
daughter. The Vaishya went to the king and sought his help. The king gave death punishment  to 
Nabhag. Hearing of this punishment, Nabhag went into hiding. The royal army went in search  of 
him and finally found him. Then a tough battle was fought and ultimately, Nabhag  was 
victorious. The king himself came forward to fight with Nabhag. As the battle was going  on, 
sage Narada appeared and requested the king to stop fighting. He said - 'O king! Please stop  this 
battle. Being a  Kshatriya, it is not proper for you to fight a battle with a Vaishya, which your  son 
has become after abducting a Vaishya girl. He is not entitled to fight with  you.'  
   
 
CURSE OF SAGE  PRAMATI  
Markandeya  says- 'The king stopped  fighting  at the request  of Narada. Nabhag  married  the 
Vaishya  girl. After  the marriage,  the king ordered  Nabhag  to follow  a Vaishya's  occupation. 
Nabhag got engaged in activities like animal husbandry and agriculture. With  the passage  of 
time,  a son was born and who was named  Bhalanda n. When  he grew  up, his mother  entrusted 
him the job of looking  after the cows.  Bhalandan  knew  nothing  about  the job he was entrusted 
with.  He went  to sage Neep  and told his problem.  Sage  Neep  understood  everything  and taught 
him the nuances of handling va rious weapons as a result of which, he became a master in this art. 
After  this, Bhalandan  went  to Vasurat,  the son of Pitravya  and demanded  his share  in the 
kingdom of his great -grandfather. Vasurat refused to give anything by saying - 'Being the son of  a 
Vaishya,  you are not entitled  to become  a king.'  Bhalandan  became  very angry  and attacked 
Vasurat with a huge army. In this battle, Vasurat was defeated. Now, Bhalandan had control  over 
the entire earth. He returned to his father, Nabhag in order to hand ov er the reign of the  kingdom,  
he had won in the battle. But Nabhag refused to take anything by saying - 'I have been cursed  by 
my father  to become  a Vaishya.  I cannot  go against  his wishes  by taking  over the responsibility 
of a king as this would disturb t he peace of my ancestors who are in heaven and even I would  not 
attain  liberation.  The second  thing  is that you have  won this kingdom  by your power  and 
strength. It will not be proper for me to rule over this  kingdom.'  
 
Suprabha,  the wife of Nabhag  was listening  to their conversation.  She could  not stop laughing. 
She said- 'You  are not a Vaishya,  because  I too belong  to a Kshatriya  family.  During  ancient 
times,  a king named  Sudev  had a friend,  Nala.  One day both of them  went  to the forest  to hunt. 
In the forest, Nala  saw sage Pramati's  wife and became  enchanted  by her immense  beauty.  He 
wanted to marry he and tried to forcibly abduct her. Being a chaste woman,  Pramati's  wife 
started  shouting  for help.  Sage  Pramati  heard  her screams  and arrived  at the site. He became 
enraged  when  he saw Nala  trying  to abduct  his wife and King  Sudev  doing  nothing  to protect 
her. Pramati requested King Sudev to protect his wife from Nala. King Sudev lied to  sage 
Pramati  about  his caste,  to help his friend - Nala.  He said- 'I cannot help you because  I am a 
Vaishya.  You must  go to any Kshatriya  to take help.  Sage  Pramati  was exasperated.  He fumed - 
'You will certainly become a Vaishya as you have lied to me about your  caste.'  
   
 
BHALANDAN AND  VATSAPRI  
Nabhag  told his wife- 'I would  never  accept  the kingdom  for the second  time,  which  I had 
relinquished  at the instruction  of my father.  He then instructed  his son to rule over the kingdom 
he had won. Following his father's instructions, Bhalandan started ruling over his kingdom.  Later 
on, he got married and begot a son named Vatsapri. Vatsapri was married to Saunanda when  he 
attained  youth -hood.  Vatsapri  married  her after killing  the demon  Kujrimbha.  There  was a king 
named Vidurath. He had two sons whose names were Suniti and Sumati. One day,  while 
Vidurath was having his usual walk, he saw a large pit. He became very curious. Just then, a  sage 
arrived  at the scene  whose  name  was Suvrat.  Pointing  his finger  towards  the pit, the king asked 
Suvrat as to what it was. The sage said - 'A demon by the name of Kujrimbha lives inside this  pit. 
He controls  all the events,  which  occur  on this earth  and in heaven.  He possesses  a mace  called 
Sunand  and which  was made  by Vishwakarma.  This large  pit which  you see is the result  of the 
assault,  he made  with his mace.  This demon  is very cruel  and wicked.  He torments  the deities 
and destroys the oblation sites of the sages. There is one very peculiar characteristic related  with 
his mace. The mace would become powerless if touched by a woman. But this is only  a 
temporary  change  because  it regains  its power  the next day. But this fact is unknown  to the 
demon. After saying this, sage Suvrat went on his  way.  
 
King  Vidurath  returned  to his palace  and consulted  his ministers.  His daughter,  Mudavati  was 
listening  to their conversation.  One day, the demon  abducted  Mudavati.  The king sent both his 
sons accompanied  by a huge  army  to bring  her back  but the demon  defeated  them.  The king 
made a declaration that he will marry his daughter to anybody who brings back his daugh ter and 
sons from the clutches of the  demon.  
 
Hearing  his declaration,  Vatsapri  came  to Vidurath  and said- 'Give  me your permission.  I will 
bring  back  your daughter  and your sons after releasing  them  from  the clutches  of the demon.' 
Vidurath  gave  the permi ssion.  Vatsapri  entered  into the nether  land through  that large  pit. A 
tremendous battle ensued between him and the demon. This battle continued for three days.  On 
the final day of the battle,  the demon  tried to take the help of his mace  and went  to grab hold of 
it. But sensing that the demon was going to pick up the mace, she immediately touched the  mace 
as a result  of which  it became  powerless.  Being  unaware  of this happening,  the demon  attacked 
Vatsapri  with that powerless  mace.  But he could  not harm  Vatsapri.  Ultimately,  Vatsapri  was 
successful in killing the  demon.  
 
Vatsapri released all three of them - Suniti, Sumati and Mudavati from the demon's captivity  and 
brought  them  back  to the king's  palace.  After  the death  of the demon,  Sheshnag  acquired  the 
mace. Mudavati's  name  was later changed  to Sunanda,  after that mace.  King  Vidurath  became 
very pleased and married Mudavati to  Vatsapri.  
   
 
THE KINGDOMS OF PRANSHU, PRAJATI AND  
KHANITRA  
Markandeya  says- 'Sunanda  gave  birth  to 12 sons.  Their  names  were  Pransh u, Praveer,  Shoor, 
Suchakra, Vikrama, Krama, Bala, Balak, Chand, Prachand, Suvikrama and Swarup.  After 
growing  up, Pranshu  became  the king.  Pranshu  had a son named  Prajati.  Prajati  had five sons 
among  whom  Khanitra  was one of them.  Khanitra  became  a mighty  king and was very famous 
for his religiousness and virtuosity. He distributed the kingdoms among his brothers. Shauri  was 
made the king of the eastern region, Udavasu of the southern region, Muni of the western  region 
while Maharathi was made the king of northern  region.  
 
One day, a minister of Shauri, Vishwavedi instigated him against his brother Khanitra by  saying - 
'O king!  You must  try to capture  your brother's  kingdom  as your kingdom  is too small  for your 
descendants  to rule over.  A time may come  when  your descendants  would  be forced  to choose 
agriculture as their occupation because the continuous distribution of your kingdom among  your 
progenies would leave almost nothing for  them.'  
 
Shauri  said- 'My brother  is so kind to me. Why  should  I cheat  him like that?'  The minister  said- 
'The duty of the king is only to look after the kingdom's interest. The relation should not come  in 
the way.'  At last, the minister  was successful  in convincing  him. After  sometime,  the wicked 
minister  also influenced  the rest of his brothers.  Ultimately,  King  Khanitra  was left all alone  as 
all of his ministers and even his sons were misguided by Vishwavedi. Vishwavedi appointed  four 
priests  of Khanitra  as the supervisor  of Yagyas.  One day, while  the priests  were  performing 
Yagya , four ogresses appeared from the sacrificial fire and tried to attack King Khanitra.  But 
they could not harm him because of his virtuous character. They then turned towards  Vishwavedi 
and the priests and killed all of them. Thus, Vishwavedi bore the fruit s of evil  deeds.  
   
 
KING KHANITRA  
Markandeya says - 'People present at the oblation site were shocked to see the dead bodies  of 
Vishwavedi and the four priests. When Khanitra got this news, he too was shocked.  Khanitra 
went  to Vashishta  and asked  him the reason about  the deaths  of his brother's  minister  and the 
four priests. Vashishta revealed the conspiracy hatched by Vishwavedi to kill him  (Khanitra).  
Khanitra in a sad tone, said - 'Shame on me as I have been the cause of the death of the  Brahmins. 
Had I not taken  birth  as a human  being,  my brother's  priests  won't  have  died.  I am the real 
culprit. What should I do now? Where should I go? The remorseful Khanitra decided  to 
relinquish his kingdom and go to the forest to do penance so that, he could get liberate d from  the 
grave  sins of causing  death  to the Brahmins.  He went  to the forest  accompanied  by his three 
queens after appointing his son Kshup as the king. He did a severe penance for 350 years.  After 
that, he died because  of his bad health.  All the three  queens died too and went  to heaven  along 
with him.  
   
 
KING  VIVINSHA  
Markandeya  says- 'King  Kshup  ruled  justly  in the same  way as his father  Khanitra  did. Kshup's 
wife was Pramatha.  They  had a son who was handsome  and mighty.  He had defeated  all the 
kings and a nnexed their kingdom. He was married to Nandini, the princess of Vidarbha.  Nandini 
gave birth to a son who was named Vivinsha. Vivinsha was a very mighty king. During his  reign, 
the earth had become very populated. The enemies of King Vivinsha were very af raid of him  but 
his subjects were satisfied by his just rule. King Vivinsha had performed numerous Yagyas  and 
after ruling for a long time, he attained martyrdom while fighting a  battle.  
   
 
KING  KHANINETRA  
Markandeya says - 'Khaninetra was the son of King Vi vinsha. He was very brave and valiant.  The 
Gandharvas had proclaimed that no one could match Khaninetra's benevolence, who had  donated 
the whole earth after accomplishing 10,000 Yagyas. Khaninetra had given so much wealth  as 
donations to the Brahmins that there was no need for them to take donations for the rest of  their 
lives.  
 
Khaninetra  was sonless.  One day, he went  to the forest  to hunt an animal  for sacrificial  purpose 
needed  during  Pitra  Yagya.  The performance  of this Yagya  was supposed  to bless  him with a 
son. In the forest,  he saw a deer that was cognisant  of his desire.  The deer requested  him by 
saying - 'O king!  You can get my flesh  by killing  me.' The king was very amazed.  He asked  the 
deer as to why it was willing  to get sacrificed.  The deer replied- 'O king!  I don't  have  any 
offspring.  For this reason,  I consider  my life as useless.'  While  the conversation  was going  on 
between  the king and the deer,  another  deer came  near them  and expressed  his desire  to get 
sacrificed  by saying - 'O king!  Please  kill me and get the flesh  because  the flesh  of this sonless 
deer would  be of no help to you.'  The king was astonished.  He asked  the second  deer as to why 
he was willing to die. The second deer replied - 'O king! I have numerous sons and daughters  and 
this wo rries me a lot. Whenever my children go out in search of food, I become very anxious  till 
they have returned to me safely. This way, I pass the whole day and night in  anxiety.  
 
The king was very confused.  He said- 'I don't  know  who is superior  between  a sonless  person 
and a person  who doesn't  have  any son. Although  I needed  the flesh  for the accomplishment  of 
Pitra Yagya but now after meeting both of you, I have become confused. It is true that a man  has 
to face all kinds  of sorrows  because  of their childre n but yet, a sonless  man is not complete  and 
remains  indebted.  So, I have  decided  to get a son by doing  a penance  just like my predecessors 
did in the  past.'  
   
 
KARANDHAM  
Markandeya  says- 'King  Khaninetra  went  at the bank  of the river  Gomti  and started  doing a 
severe  penance  to please  Indra.  After  being  pleased  by his devotion  and eulogy,  Indra  appeared 
before him. He said to Khaninetra - 'O king! I am very much pleased by your devotion.  Demand 
anything  you wish.'  The king replied - 'O lord!  If you are really  pleased  with me, then bless  me 
with a religious  and virtuous  son because  I am a sonless  person.'  Indra  blessed  him by saying - 
'So be it' and then  disappeared.  
 
Khaninetra  returned  to his palace.  In course  of time,  a son was born to him. He named  the child  
Balashva. When Balashva grew up, he became the king after the death of his father. He  annexed 
many  kingdoms  after defeating  his enemies  and imposed  taxes  on them.  After  sometime,  his 
enemies not only stopped paying him the taxes but also regrouped themsel ves and  recaptured 
their lost territories.  Balashva  had become  weak  due to the constant  battles.  He had only the 
capital city in his possession and had lost the other territories. One day, his enemies  surrounded 
his capital.  Balashva  became  restless  as he would  be no match  for his enemies.  In a sorrowful 
mood,  he heaved  deeply  covering  his face by both his hands.  The exhaled  air resulted  into the 
manifestation of numerous valiant fighters, chariots, elephants and horses. Very soon, this  huge 
army  covered  the whole  area.  This army  battled  under  the leadership  of Balashva.  Ultimately, 
the enemies  were  defeated.  Later  on, King  Balashva  became  famous  as Karandham  because  of 
the huge army, which had manifested from between both the trembling hands of  Balashva.  
   
 
KING AVIKSHEET  
BIRTH OF AVEEKSHIT AND ABDUCTION OF  VAISHALINI  
 
Markandeya says - 'Shubhvrata - the daughter of Veeryachandra had decided to  marry 
Karandham. A son was born to them who was named as Aveekshit. The astrologers  had 
predicted a very bright future  for him. Aveekshit learnt lessons in handling all kinds of  weapons 
from  the son of Kanva.  In a very short  time,  he attained  mastery  in the art of weaponry.  Vara, 
Gauri,  Subhadra,  Nibha,  Lilavati,  Manyavati  and Kumridwati  had chosen  Aveekshit  as their 
husb and in a Swayamvara. Aveekshit had also forcibly married numerous other  women.  
 
Once, a Swayamvara was conducted in the palace of the king of Vishal for his daughter - Sudati 
Vaishalini. Aveekshit was present in the Swayamvara. But Sudati due to her arrogan t nature  did 
not choose  Aveekshit  as her husband.  Hence,  he forcibly  abducted  her by defeating  the other 
kings.  The fact that a single  man had defeated  all of them  had made  the other  kings  ashamed  of 
themselves.  All of them  decided  to fight  Aveekshit  unite dly. They  picked  up their arms  and 
marched towards Aveekshit with a huge  army.  AVEEKSHIT DEFEATED, LIBERATION  AND 
DISENCHANTMENT  
Markandeya says - 'A ferocious battle ensued between Aveekshits army and the other kings.  Both 
sides fought bravely and Aveeksh it managed to kill many of the kings but was outnumbered  and 
got severely wounded. Aveekshit was finally made captive. Aveekshit and Sudati  Vaishalini 
were  brought  to the king of Vishal.  The king instructed  Sudati  Vaishalini  to choose  any king as 
her husba nd but she refused  this offer.  The king then requested  his astrologer  to choose  an 
auspicious day for her marriage. The astrologer said to the king - 'O king! The present time is  not 
auspicious for marriage but don't worry, very soon, the princess would get  married at the  advent 
of the most auspicious moment.' When king Karandham came to know about his son's defeat  and 
captivity,  he consulted  his friends.  All of them  decided  to attack  the kingdom  of Vishal  and 
release Aveekshit from captivity. Karandham marc hed towards the kingdom of Vishal  followed 
by a huge army. A tremendous battle was fought for three days. Karandham became victorious  in 
this battle. At last, Aveekshit was rescued from his  captivity.  
 
King Vishal decided to marry his daughter with Aveeksh it but Aveekshit was disillusioned  with 
life. He said to Vishal - 'I can never accept such a woman as my wife who has witnessed my 
defeat.  I have  decided  to renounce  life. So, it would  be better  if you marry  your daughter  with 
somebody  else.'  
 
King  Vishal  asked  his daughter  to choose  any other  king as her husband  as Aveekshit  was not 
willing to marry  her. 
 
But the princess  wanted  to marry  Aveekshit  and believed  that he still remained  an undefeated 
king because he had fought single -handedly with all the king s. He was defeated only because  of 
unfair means adopted by his jealous rivals in the  battle.  
 
'I shall accept only Aveekshit as my husband otherwise I shall remain unmarried', said  the 
princess.  King  Karandham  requested  his son to marry  the princess  but Aveekshit  turned  down 
even  his father's  request.  Seeing  the futility  of his advice,  Karandham  returned  to his kingdom. 
Aveekshit too went along with  him. 
 
Sudati  Vaishalini  went  in the forest  to do penance.  She observed  a fast for three  months.  She 
became ve ry weak but still continued with her  penance.  
 
The deities felt sorry at her condition. They sent an envoy to persuade her to discontinue with  her 
penance. The envoy requested her to stop torturing herself. 'You would be a mother of  a 
Chakravarti king who would be mighty and powerful', said the  envoy.  
 
Sudati  Vaishalini  said- 'How  can I become  a mother  without  a husband?  I have  decided  that 
nobody  except  Aveekshit  will be my husband.  But he has turned  down  my proposal.  So, I have 
vowed to remain unmarried i n this  life.' 
The envoy said - 'O great soul! I have been asked not to reveal much. You must take care of  your 
health. Due to the virtues of your penance, you will certainly become a mother.' Sudati  following 
her instructions and broke her  fast. 
   
 
AVEEKSHIT  PROMISES HIS FATHER TO  GET 
MARRIED  
Markandeya  says- 'Once,  Veera - the wife of King  Karandham  and mother  of Aveekshit  had 
taken  a vow to accomplish  a very arduous  penance.  But this could  only be accomplished  with 
Karandham's  and Aveekshits  assistance.  Kara ndham  had assured  her that he would  provide  all 
the wealth required for the accomplishment of that austerity while Aveekshit had assured her  of 
physical  help.  
 
Veera  commenced  her arduous  austerity  named  'Kimichhak  Vrata'.  This particular  Vrata  had a 
pecul iar characteristic  and that was- any demand  made  during  the course  of the Vrata,  ought  to 
be fulfilled at any cost failing which meant forfeiting all the virtues of this arduous  austerity.  
 
King  Karandham  was consulting  his minister  about  the means  that would change  Aveekshits 
decision regarding his marriage. The ministers said that as Karandham had become old,  there 
was an urgent  need  for his successor.  The question  was that who would  become  king after 
Aveekshit as he had decided to remain unmarried. Thi s thought was tormenting all of  them.  
 
Suddenly, King Karandham heard the priest who was assisting queen Veera in  the 
accomplishment  of the Kimichhak  Vrata,  telling  somebody - 'The queen  is busy  performing  the 
Kimichhak  Vrata.  What  is your demand?  I promise , it will be fulfilled  by the queen  no matter 
how extraordinary it may  be.' 
 
Aveekshit too arrived at the scene. He promised that their demands would be met without  delay 
as it was obligatory for the success of Kimichhak Vrata, which his mother was  perform ing. 
Seeing  the time as opportune,  King  Karandham  said before  the people  could  say anything - 'O 
son! I have a demand. Promise me that you will fulfil  it.' 
 
Aveekshit  gave  his word.  The king said that he aspired  for a grandson  but this was impossible 
unless  he (Aveekshit)  got married.  Initially,  Aveekshit  tried to convince  Karandham  that it was 
an impossible task as he had vowed to remain a celibate but ultimately he had to change his  mind 
to honor his  words.  
   
 
AVEEKSHIT RESCUES  VAISHALINI  
Markandeya says - 'Once, Aveekshit had gone for a hunt in the forest when suddenly, he heard  a 
female voice shouting for help. He proceeded in the direction of the  voice.  
 
After reaching there, he saw Danu's (a demon) son Dhridhakesha, holding a lady by her hair.  The 
woman wa s crying - 'I am the wife of Aveekshit. This wicked demon is trying to abduct  me.' 
Aveekshit  was surprised  as to how could  the lady claim  that she was his wife.  He apprehended 
that it must be the illusionary tactics of the demon to trap him. But despite hi s apprehensions,  he 
went  near the wailing  woman  to release  her from  the clutches  of that demon.  He warned  the 
demon  of dire consequences  if he did not release  her. The demon  left the woman  and attacked 
Aveekshit. A tremendous duel was fought. In the end, A veekshit severed the head of that  demon.  
 
The deities  were  very pleased  at Dhridhakesha's  death.  They  praised  Aveekshit  for his bravery. 
They asked him to demand any  boon.  
 
Aveekshit  demanded  a valiant  son for himself  as per the aspirations  of his father - Karandham. 
The deities  said- 'You  would  get your son from  this very woman,  you have  rescued.  The child 
would become a very mighty king after growing  up.' 
 
Being  unaware  of the real identity  of Vaishalini,  he told the deities - 'I had vowed  to remain  a 
bache lor but changed  my decision  only due to the word  I had given  to my father.  But I cannot 
marry this woman because by doing so, I would be breaching the trust of that woman  who 
wanted to marry me and who had rejected everybody for my  sake.'  
 
The deities  then revealed  to him that this lady was none  other  than Vaishalini  whom  he was 
talking  about.  'She had done  a severe  penance  to be your wife.'  After  saying  this, the deities 
disappeared.  
 
Vaishalini requested him to accept her as his wife. 'You have rescued m e from this demon.  I 
offer myself to you', said  Vaishalini.  
   
 
AVEEKSHIT MARRIES  VAISHALINI  
Markandeya says - 'After Vaishalini had finished her lines, Aveekshit told her that he was  forced 
to abandon  her in the past after getting  defeated  but once  again,  he had regained  her after 
defeating the demon. Both of them decided to get married in the forest  itself.'  
 
'Right  then,  a Gandharva,  Tanaya  arrived  there  accompanied  by many  Apsaras  and revealed  to 
Aveekshit  that Vaishalini  was his daughter  in her previous  birth. 'Because  of the curse  given  to 
her by sage Agastya, she was born to the king of Vishal. Now you must accept her as your  wife.'  
 
Aveekshit  married  Vaishalini  under  the supervision  of Tumbaru,  the priest  of the Gandharvas. 
Both  of them  then accompanied  the Gandharvas  to the Gandharva  loka.  There,  Vaishalini  gave 
birth  to a son. Knowing  about  the feats,  the child  would  accomplish  in future,  the Gandharvas 
celebrated  his birth  ceremony  with great  fanfare.  After  the birth  ceremony,  while  Tumbaru  was 
eulogi sing the child,  everybody  heard  a heavenly  voice,  which  said- 'This  child  will become 
famous  as Marut;  he will become  the ruler  of all the Mahipals.'  Everybody  was extremely 
satisfied by this  forecast.  
   
 
KING  MARUT  
MARUT ASCENDS THE  THRONE  
 
Markandeya says - 'After the birth of Marut, Aveekshit accompanied by Vaishalini returned to  his 
father's  palace.  After  making  salutations  to his father,  he kept the new born baby  in his lap and 
told him that he had kept his word. Karandham became very pleased after seein g his  grandson.'  
 
'In course  of time,  Marut  grew  up. He had mastered  all the scriptures.  He was also proficient  in 
handling all kinds of weapons. There was nobody like  him.'  
 
'Karandham had become old. He decided to go to the forest after making Aveekshit the king  but 
Aveekshit was not interested in becoming a king. He too wanted to go to the forest. He said - 'The 
shame  of the defeat  still remains  there.  How  can a person,  who was not able to protect  himself, 
protect his  subjects.'  
 
Karandham tried his best to convince him to become his successor but Aveekshit was firm in  his 
resolve Finding no other option, Marut was made the  king.  
 
Marut went to the forest and did penance for 1,000 years. His wife did the same and went to  live 
in sage Bhargava's  hermitage.  
   
 
A HERMIT ADVISES MARUT ON BEHALF OF  VEERA  
Kraustuki asks Markandeya - 'O lord! We want to know more about  Marut.'  
 
Markandeya says - 'After becoming the king, Marut started ruling in a just manner. He  performed 
many Yagyas under the supervision of numerous  'Yagyikas' and esteemed priests. Angira's  son- 
Samvart  and Brihaspati's  brother  were  his chief  priests  under  whose  supervision,  the Yagyas 
used to be performed.  Samvart  had brought  the peak  of Munjavan  Mountain  after uprooting  it, 
for Marut. King Marut's palace and the sacred oblation site were constructed on this  very 
mountain  peak.'  
 
One day, a hermit  said to Marut - 'Your  grandmother  Veera  is very tormented  by the nuisance, 
the serpents are creating around the sacred oblation site. She is very displeased  by your 
negligence. The serpents have bitten seven sons of a sage and have also polluted the water of  the 
sacred  pond.  The sages  have  started  making  offerings  to the serpents  to please  them,  instead  of 
paying attention on the performance of the Yagyas. Al though the sages are capable of  destroying 
the serpents,  yet they have  decided  against  doing  so as this is not their job. This is the job of a 
king.  A king should  be aware  of each and every  event  taking  place  in his kingdom.  You are not 
aware of the misdee ds of the serpents because you don't have any detective to keep you  informed 
of such events.  Being  a king,  it is your duty to protect  your subjects  by punishing  the wrong 
doers.  If you don't  do this then you will become  a sinner.  O king!  Your  grandmother  is very 
much concerned about your negligent attitude and wants you to act in a way befitting a  king.'  
 
THE SERPENTS TAKE THE REFUGE OF BHAMINI  (VAISHALINI)  
Markandeya says - 'Marut was ashamed after hearing the sage's words. He cursed himself for  his 
neglig ence.  He picked  up his bow and arrows  in anger  and went  to the oblation  site. When  he 
reached  there,  he saw the dead  bodies  of seven  hermits  lying  on the ground.  Being  enraged,  he 
picked  up his most  devastating  weapon  named  Samvartak.  The serpents  became  terrified  as the 
tremendous  amount  of heat generated  by this weapon  had started  to burn them.  Unable  to bear 
the tremendous heat caused by the weapon, the serpents took the refuge of Bhamini  (Vaishalini) - 
the mother of  Marut.'  
 
'Sometime in the past, Vaisha lini had promised to protect the serpents when in danger.  Vaishalini 
requested her husband - Aveekshit to persuade Marut against killing the serpents. Aveekshit  told 
her that the intensity  of Marut's  anger  was a result  of the grave  sins committed  by the serpents. 
'But for your sake,  I will request  him to pardon  the serpents - If he still does not agree  to stop 
killing the serpents then I will have no option but to destroy his weapon - Samvartak.'  After 
saying  this, Aveekshit  picked  up his bow and arrows  and went to the oblation  site accompanied 
by his  wife.  
   
 
THE HERMITS SONS BECOME  ALIVE  
Markandeya says - 'When Aveekshit reached the oblation site, he found that the  whole 
atmosphere  was ablaze  by the tremendous  heat generated  by Marut's  weapon,  Samvartak.  He 
requested  Marut  to drop his weapon  but Marut  refused  by saying - 'O father!  These  serpents  are 
the culprits. They have killed the hermits sons. They have also polluted the reservoir and  caused 
obstacles in the accomplishment of oblation -rituals. I am never goi ng to forgive  them.  
 
Aveekshit told Marut that the serpents had taken his refuge and hence he should forgive them  to 
protect  the honor  of his father's  promise.  When  Marut  did not listen,  Aveekshit  picked  up his 
weapon  'Kal' to kill him. Marut  enquired  from  him as to why he was trying  to kill his own son, 
who was just performing his duty of protecting the oblation site from the serpents.  Aveekshit 
replied that he too was duty bound to protect the serpents that had taken his  refuge.  
 
When  the sages  saw both father  and son were  bent on killing  each other,  they intervened  and 
advised them against killing each other. Right then, a sage came with the news that the  serpents 
had agreed  to make  all the dead  sons of the hermit,  alive.  Thus,  all the dead  sons of the hermits 
became  alive  and once  again,  the father  and son were  prevented  from  killing  each other.  From 
then onwards,  Marut  took proper  care while  ruling  his kingdom.  Later  on, he married  Sukesha - 
the daughter  of Kekaya,  Saindhavi - the daughter  of Sindhuraj,  Vayushmati - the daughter  of 
Chediraj etc. He had eighteen sons from his wives among whom, Narishyant was the  eldest.  
   
 
KING  NARISHYANT  
Markandeya  says- 'Among  the eighteen  sons of Marut,  Narishyant  was the eldest.  Marut  ruled 
over his kingdom for 70,015 years  after which Narishyant succeeded him as the king.  Marut 
went  to the forest  to do penance.  After  becoming  the king,  Narishyant  decided  to perform  a 
grand Yagya, the like of which had never been accomplished by his ancestors. Narishyant   made  
such huge d onations to the Brahmins that it was more than enough for their future generations to 
come.  
 
Once,  Narishyant  decided  to organise  another  Yagya  grander  than the earlier  one. But no priest 
was found  to supervise  it. At his repeated  requests,  some  Brahmins  agreed  to supervise  the 
Yagya. But this particular Yagya was unique of its kind because the Brahmins played the part  of 
host as well as that of priests. The Brahmins made donations to the Brahmins who were acting  as 
priests. In this grand Yagya, crores of Y agyas were performed in all the directions of the earth  at 
one time. This grand Yagya was possible only because of the wealth donated to the Brahmins  by 
King Narishyant. Narishyant was such a religious and virtuous  king.  
 
Narishyant  felt joyous  that due to his donations,  the Brahmins  had become  wealthy  and at the 
same time, he was also sad that his desire of performing a grand Yagya was not going to  be 
accomplished as the Brahmins no longer needed  donations.  
   
 
SUMANA CHOOSES DAMA AS HER  HUSBAND  
Markandeya  says- Dama  was the son of Narishyant.  His mother  was Indrasena - the daughter  of 
Babhru.  He became  the master  in archery  under  the tutelage  of Vrishparva.  He also learnt  the 
nuances  of handling  other  kinds  of weapons  under  the guidance  of Dundubhi.  He learnt  the 
scriptures from sage Shakti and the art of yoga from  Ashartishen.  
 
Sumana, the daughter of King Charusharma had chosen Dama as her husband in a  Swayamvara. 
But Mahanand,  Vayushman  and Mahadhanu  did not like her decision,  as they too wanted  to 
marry he r. All three of them decided to abduct her by force and marry who ever among them  she 
decided to marry with. Their evil intentions were corroborated by the friends of Dama. Thus,  all 
three  of them  abducted  Sumana.  Dama  became  angry.  He asked  all the kings  who were  present 
in the Swayamvara - 'Tell me whether Swayamvara is religious or  irreligious?'  
 
One of the kings  said that certainly  a Swayamvara  is religious  and only Dama  has the right  to 
marry Sumana as she had herself chosen him. But some other kings su pported  Dama's 
opponents.  They  said- 'Rakshas  Vivaha  is the norm  prevalent  among  people  possessing  arms. 
Only such a person has a right to marry Sumana who has defeated his  rivals.'  
 
Dama became furious with them. He knew that they were saying such things out of jealousy.  But 
still he decided  to accept  their proposal.  He threw  an open  challenge  by saying - 'Anybody  who 
wants to die may abduct my wife in front of my  eyes.'  
 
A tremendous battle was fought between Dama and his  opponents.  
 
At first, Mahanand cam e forward to fight him with a sword in his hand. Dama showered a  volley 
of arrows  at him. All the arrows  were  neutralised  by Mahanand.  After  that, Mahanand  jumped 
and climbed  on the chariot  of Dama.  Dama  severed  his head.  After  the killing  of Mahanand, 
Vayushman came forward to fight Dama but his sword was broken into two pieces by the  assault 
of Dama. Dama then killed his charioteer. After that, Vayushman picked up his spiked mace  but 
Dama  destroyed  even  this mace.  In the battle,  Vayushman  got injured  and fell on the ground. 
Vayushman quit the idea of fighting. Seeing him reluctant to fight, Dama spared his  life. 
 
At last, Charusharma  married  his daughter  Sumana  with Dama.  After  staying  for some  days at 
his father -in-law's place, Dama returned home accomp anied by his wife  Sumana.  
   
 
KILLING OF  NARISHYANT  
Markandeya  says- 'When  the newly  married  couple  Dama  and Sumana  returned  to the capital, 
King Narishyant was extremely pleased. King Narishyant after knowing about the brave deeds  of 
his son was very proud  of him. As he had become  old, he appointed  Dama  as his successor  and 
he went in the forest to do penance accompanied by his wife - Indrasena.  
 
Once, Vayushman came in the same forest where King Narishyant was doing his penance.  After 
seeing  Narishyant  and his wife,  he enquired  as to, who they were.  But King  Narishyant  did not 
give any reply as he was observing a Mauna Vrata. Somehow, Vayushman came to know  about 
his identity that he was none other than the father of his bitter enemy - Dama. He felt that this  was 
the most  opportune  moment  for him to take his revenge  and killed  Narishyant.  Indrasena  on 
seeing  her dead  husband,  started  to wail.  All the sages  and hermits  who were  doing  penance  in 
that forest  arrived  there  and started  cursing  Vayushman  for the grave sin he had committed. 
Indrasena  requested  one of the sages  to go and inform  Dama  about  his father's  death.  She said- 
'Go and tell him that his father  Narishyant  has been  killed  by Vayushman  while  he was doing 
penance. Now, it was his duty to avenge his f ather's death.' After saying this,  Indrasena 
committed Sati by jumping into the burning pyre of her  husband.  
   
 
KING DAMA KILLS  VAYUSHMAN  
Markandeya  says- 'When  Dama  came  to know  about  his father's  death,  he became  extremely 
furious. Although he was very pat ient by nature but still the news of his father's death made  him 
restless.  He thought - 'Shame  on me. Inspite  of myself  being  alive,  the wicked  Vayushman  had 
killed  my father.  I have  failed  in my duty.  Being  a king,  it is my duty to punish  the wicked 
people  and protect  the virtuous  ones.  But my enemy  is still alive  after committing  a heinous 
crime.  Now,  I will perform  my father's  Tarpan  only with the blood  of Vayushman.  If I fail in 
doing this, then I would give up my life by jumping into the fire. I will no t only kill  Vayushman 
but also his whole  family.  Whoever  tries to help him will be put to death.  Even  if the deities, 
Yama or Kubera try to help him, they will get  destroyed.'  
 
Markandeya says - 'After taking a vow to kill Vayushman, Dama consulted his prie sts and 
ministers on his future course of action. All of them unanimously decided that Vayushman  must 
be punished for his crime. At last, Dama marched along with a huge army towards  Vayushman's 
kingdom.  
 
When Vayushman came to know of Dama's arrival, he be came very angry. The  battle 
commenced. The chief commander of Vayushman's army attacked Dama but was killed  by 
Dama.  Seeing  his chief  commander  dead,  Vayushman  tried to flee from  the battlefield  with his 
army. Seeing him flee, Dama challenged Vayushman. V ayushman accepted Dama's  challenge 
and turned  back  to fight  again.  A ferocious  battle  was fought.  In a very short  time,  Dama  killed 
all the seven sons of Vayushman, his brothers, relatives and his friends. Vayushman  was 
extremely angry at the death of his near and dear ones and he attacked Dama with his sword.  But 
Dama  pulling  Vayushman  by his hair, felled  him on the ground  and put his feet on his neck 
saying - 'I am now going to pierce the heart of this wicked and mean man. All the deities,  human 
beings, sa ges etc. should witness this scene.' Saying this, Dama killed Vayushman. Blood  started 
to ooze  out from  the wound  inflicted  on Vayushman's  heart.  Dama  tried to drink  that blood  but 
was desisted from doing so by the deities. Then Dama performed the last rit es of his father  with 
that blood. In this way, he took his  revenge.  
   
 
THE BENEFITS OF READING MARKANDEYA  PURANA  
The birds  said- 'O Jaimini!  This was the way,  sage Markandeya  had narrated  the divine  tales to 
Kraustuki. A person who either studies this Purana  or listens to it achieves  great 
accomplishment. All his desires are fulfilled and he enjoys a long life. He becomes free from  all 
his sins. Markandeya Purana is the seventh among all the eighteen Puranas. Listening to it  helps 
a man to atone  for all the sins committed  during  the period  of one hundred  crore  Kalpas.  The 
virtues  attained  by listening  to Markandeya  Purana  are equivalent  to the virtues  attained  by 
making donations at Pushkar or by studying all the  Vedas.'  
 
Jaimini  replied - 'O birds!  You have  enlightened  my mind  by narrating  the tales of Markandeya 
Purana and have made it free from all sorts of confusion. May the almighty God bless you,  may 
you enjoy a long life free from all the  diseases.'  
 
Saying like this, Jaimini went back to his  hermitage . 
 
 
 