 
 
15. MATSYA  PURANA 
LOMAHARSHANA AND THE OTHER  SAGES  
There  was a forest  known  as Naimisharanya.  Many  years  ago, several  sages  organized  a yajna 
(sacrifice)  in the forest.  After  the sacrifice  was over,  the assembled  sages  told Lomaharshana.  
―You  have  recite d to us many  Puranas.  These  accounts  are so sacred  that we would  like to hear 
them once  more.  Please  satisfy  our thirst  for knowledge.‖  
 
―I will recount  for you the most  holy of all the Puranas,‖  replied  Lomaharshana.  ―This  is the 
great Matsya Purana, told  by Vishnu to Manu. Prepare your minds, for I am about  begin.‖  
   
 
 
VISHNU AND  MANU  
 
There  used to be a king named  Vaivasvata  Manu.  He was the son of the sun-god Vivasvana. 
When  it was time for Manu  to retire  to the forest,  he handed  over the kingdom  to his son 
Ikshvaku.  Manu  then went  to the foothills  of Mount  Malaya  and started  to perform  tapasya 
(meditation). Thousands and thousands of years passed. Such were the powers of  Manu‘s 
meditation that Brahma appeared before  him. 
 
―I am pleased with  your prayers,‖ said Brahma.  ―Ask for a boon.‖ 
 
―I have  only one boon  to ask for,‖ replied  Manu.  ―Sooner  or later there  will be a destruction  
(pralaya)  and the world  will no longer  exist.  Please  grant  me the boon  that it will be I who will 
save the world and its begin s at the time of the  destruction.‖  
 
Brahma readily granted this  boon.  
 
Days  passed.  On one particular  occasion,  Manu  was performing  ablutions  in a pond  near his 
hermitage. He immersed his hands in the water so that he might offer some water to  his 
ancestor s. When he raised his cupped hands, he found that there was a minnow  (shafari) 
swimming around in the water. Manu had no desire to kill the minnow. He placed it carefully  in 
his water -pot (kamandalu).  
 
But the minnow  started  to grow and within  a day,  it was  sixteen fingers  in length.  ―Save me, 
king.‖ said the  fish. ―This water-pot is too small for me.‖  
 
Manu then placed the fish in a vat. But the fish continued to grow and, within a day, it was  three 
hands  in length.  ―Save  me, king.‖  said the fish. ―This  vat is too small  for me.‖ 
 
Manu  put the fish in a well, but the well soon became too small for the fish. Manu transferred  the 
fish to a pond,  but the pond  was also too small  for the fish. Manu  now removed  the fish to the 
holy river  Ganga,  but even  this was too small  for the fish. Finall y, Manu  transferred  the fish to 
the ocean. There the fish grew so much that it soon occupied the entire  ocean.  
 
―Who  are you?‖  asked  Manu.  ―I have  never  seen or heard  of such wonders.  Are you a demon 
that is deluding  me with its illusions?  No, I do not think  that you are a demon.  You must  be the 
great Vishnu himself. Please tell me the truth and satisfy my curiosity .‖ 
 
Vishnu  then revealed  that it was indeed  he who had adopted  the form  of a fish. He told Manu 
that the earth would soon be flooded with water. Vishnu had got a boat built by the gods.  When 
the earth  was  flooded,  Manu was  to  place  all  living beings   in  the boat  and thus  save  them.  
Vishnu  would  himself  arrive  in his form  of the fish and Manu  was to tie the boat to the fish‘s 
horn.  Thus  the living  beings  would  be saved.  And when  the waters  of the flood  receded,  Manu 
could populate the world afresh  and rule over  it. 
 
 
 
 Vishnu  disappeared,  and for a hundred  years  there  was a terrible  drought  on earth.  The drough 
led to famine  and people  died of starvation.  Meanwhile,  the sun blazed  in fury and burnt  up the 
entire  world.  When  everything  had burnt  to ashes,  dark clouds  loomed  in the sky. These  are the 
clouds that appear at the time of destruction and there are seven classes of cush clouds, known  as 
samvarta, bhimananda, drona, chanda, valahaka, vidyutapataka and kona. From the clouds,  rain 
began to pou r and soon, water engulfed the entire earth. The land mass was flooded.  As 
instructed  by Vishnu,  Manu  gathered  together  living  beings  inside  the boat.  And when  the fish 
appeared,  he tied the boat to the fish‘s  horn.  What  do you think  Manu  used a rope?  He used a 
gigantic  snake.  
 
While  the boat was thus thethered  and dragged  around  by the fish, Manu  asked  Vishnu  several 
questions. The answers that Vishnu provided form the text of the Matsya  Purana.  
 
Let us start with the account of the  creation.  
 
CREATION  
 
In the beginning,  there  was nothing  in the universe.  There  was only darkness  and the divine 
essence (brahman). It is impossible to describe the brahman, it has no traits that can be  described.  
 
When  the time came  for creation  to start,  the brahman  removed  the darkness  and divided  itself 
into three.  These  three  parts  came  to be known  as Brahma,  Vishnu  and Shiva.  The first object 
that was created  was water  and Vishnu  slept  on this water.  Since  nara means  water  and ayana 
means resting -place, Vishnu is accordingl y also known as  Narayana.  
 
In this water  next appeared  a golden  (hiranya)  egg (anda).  The egg shone  with the radiance  of a 
thousand suns. Inside the egg, Brahma created himself. Since he effectively created  (bhuva) 
himself (svayam), Brahma is also known as  Svayambhuva. The egg, you will remember,  was 
golden. Garbha means womb, and since Brahma was born inside a golden egg, he is also  known 
as Hiranyagarbha.  
 
For a thousand years Brahma stayed inside the egg. He then split the shell into two and  emerged 
out. Heaven (svarga) was made from one half of the shell and the earth from the remaining  half. 
All the land masses, the oceans, the rivers and the mountains, had been inside the egg  in 
embryonic form. Brahma made them  manifest.  
 
The sun was also born. Since h e was the first (adi) being to be born, he is known as Aditya.  The 
word  mrita  means  dead.  Since  the sun was born when  the egg (anda)  died,  the sun was also 
known as  Martanda.  
 
Brahma‘s  first act was to meditate.  It was while  he was meditating  that the Veda s, the Puranas 
and the other shastr as (sacred texts) emerged from Brahma‘s  mouth.  
Ten sons were  also born to Brahma.  Created  from  Brahma‘s  mental  powers,  they all became 
sages.  Their  names  were  Marichi,  Atri, Angira,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Pracheta,  Vash ishtha, 
Bhrigu and Narada. There we re others too who were born. Daksha was born from Brahma‘s  right 
toe. And the god Dharma was born from his  chest.  
 
But for further  creation  to continue,  it was essential  that created  beings  should  have  proper 
mothers  and fathers.  Brahma  accordingly  created  two beings  from  his body,  one was male  and 
the other  was female.  The male  half was named  Svayambhuva  Manu  and the female  half was 
named  Shatarupa.   
Shatarupa is also referred to as Savitri, Gayatri, Sarasvati or Brahmani . Since she had been  born 
from  Brahm a‘s body,  she was like Brahma‘s  daughter.  In fact, Vashishtha  and the other  sages 
who were  Brahma‘s  sons welcomed  her as their sister.  But Shatarupa  was so beautiful  that 
Brahma fell in love with her and wished to marry  her. 
 
Shatarupa  circled  Brahma  and showed  her respects  to him. When  she stood  in front  of him. 
Brahma  gazed  upon  her with the face that he had. But when  she went  and stood  behind  him, 
Brahma  could  see her no longer.  Another  head  with another  face therefore  sprouted  behind 
Brahma‘s first head so that he might be able to see Shatarupa. In similar fashion, a head  sprouted 
to Brahma‘s  first head  so that he might  be able to see Shatarpa.  In similar  fashion,  a head 
sprouted  to Brahma‘s  right  an another  one to his left. And when  Shatarupa  rose above  him, a 
head sprouted towards the top as well. Thus it was that Brahma came to have five heads and  five 
faces.  
 
Brahma  married  Shatarupa  and they lived  together  as man and wife for a hundred  years.  Their 
son was named Sv ayambhuva  Manu.  
 
Hearing  the account,  Vaivasvata Manu exclaimed. ―But  what  you have just said is truly  amazing.  
How could Brahma have married his own daughter? Surely that is a  sin.‖ 
 
―Perhaps,‖  replied  Vishnu, ―but  it is not for humans to judge  the action s of the gods.  How  could  
creation procee d if Brahma did not marry  Shatarupa?‘  
 
To continue  with the account  of the creation,  Brahma  created  a sage named  Sanatakumara  and 
Shiva.  Brahma  asked  Shiva  to help him in the act of creation.  ―Why  don‘t  you create  some 
beings as well?‘ asked  Brahma.  
 
Shiva  complied  and started  to create.  But all the beings  that he created  were  just like him in 
appearance. That is , they were all  immortal.  
 
―What  are you doing?‖ asked  Brahma.  ―Don‘t create  immortal  beings.  Create  morta l ones 
instead.‖  
 
―That I refuse to do,‖ retorted Shiv a. ―If I am to create, I shall cr eate on ly immo rtals.‖  
 
―Please do not cr eate then,‖ requested Brahma.  ―I will take  care of creation myself.‖ 
Svayambhuva Manu performed very difficult tapsaya and obtain ed a wife named  Anati. 
Svayambhuva Manu and Ananti had two sons named Priyavrata and  Uttanapada.  
 
From Uttanapada was descended Prachinavarhi. Prachinavarahi married Savarna, the daugther  of 
the ocean,  and they had ten sons.  These  sons were  known  as the Prachetas.  The ten Prachetas 
married a woman named Marisha. That is, all of them had the same wife. Daksha was the son  of 
the Prachetas and  Marisha.  
   
 
DAKSHA’S  DESCENDANTS  
 
Daksha married Panchanjani. Daksha and Panchajani had one thousand sons. These were  known 
as the Haryakshas. Daksha asked his sons to create more living  beings.  
 
But the sage Narada  came  and told the Haryakshas,  ―You  can‘t  possibly  create  living  beings  
unless you know where they are going to live. Have you explored the universe that  your 
creations are going to populate? Why don‘t you start out on a voyage of  discovery?‖  
 
The Haryakshas did this and have never been heard of since. They did not  return.  
 
Daksha and Panchajani now had another thousand sons. These were name the Shavalas.  Narad a 
asked the Shavalas also to explore the universe and they too  disappeared.  
 
Sixty daughters were next born to Daksha and Panchajani. Ten of these daughers were married  to 
the god Dharma, twenty -seven were married to the moon -god Chandra, and thirteen  were  
married to the sage Kashyapa. The remaining daughters were married to various other  sages.  
 
The thirteen  daughters  who were  married  to Kashyapa  were  named  Aditi,  Diti, Danu,  Arishta, 
Surasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasha, Ira, Kadru, Vishva and  Muni . 
 
Aditi‘s sons were known as the adityas. There were twelve of them and they were named  Indra, 
Dhata, Bhaga, Tvashta, Mitra, Varuna, Yama, Vivasvana, Savita, Pusha, Amshumana  and 
Vishnu. These were the  gods.  
 
Diti‘s  sons were  the daityas  (demons).  There  were two of them,  named  Hiranyakshipu  and 
Hiranya ksha. Their sons also came to be known as the daityas. Hiranyaksha‘s sons were  Uluka. 
Shakuni, Bhutasantapana and Mahanabha. Hiranyakshipu‘s sons were Prahlada, Anuhlada, 
Samhlada  and Hlada.  Prahlada‘s  son was Virochana,  Virochana‘s  son was Vali,  and Vali‘ s son 
was Vanasura.  
 
Danu  had a hundred  sons.  These  and their descendants  were  known  as the danavas  (demons). 
Chief among the hundred sons was Viprachitti. Maya, the archietect of the demons,  was 
descended fr om this  line. 
 
Tamra had six daughters. These were the mothers of the birds and of goats, horse, sheep,  camels 
and donkeys.  Vinata  had two sons,  Aruna  and Garuda.  Aruna‘s  sons were  Sampati  and Jatayu. 
Both  Surasa  and Kadru  gave  birth  to snakes  (nagas  or sarpas).  Krodhavasha  was the mother  of 
rakshasas (demons); Surabhi of cows and buffaloes; Muni of apsaras (dancers of  heaven); 
Arishta of gandharvas (singers of heaven); Ira of trees and herbs; and Vishva of yakashas  (demi - 
gods).  
   
 
THE  MARUTS  
 
Although th e gods and the demons were cousins, they did not like each other and fought  amongst 
themselves all the time. Many daityas were killed by Vishnu and the other  gods.  
 
Diti was disconsolate to see her children suffer thus. She resolved that she would meditate  so as 
to obtain  a son who would  be so powerful  that he would  kill Indra,  the king of the gods.  There 
was a tirtha  (place  of pigrimage)  named  Syamantapanchaka  on the banks  of the sacred  river 
Sarasvati. Diti went there and started to pray to the sage Kashy apa. She lived on roots and  fruits 
and meditated for a hundred  years.  
 
These prayers pleased Kashyapa. ―Ask for a boon,‖ he said. 
 
―Please grant me  a son who will kill Indra,‖ replied Diti.  
 
―It shall  be as you wish,‖  said Kashyapa.  ―But  there  are some  conditions.  You will have  to live in 
this hermitage for a hundred years more. Throughout these hundred yea rs you will bear the  baby 
in your womb. But there are certain conditions of cleanliness that you must obeserved. You  must 
not eat in the evening, nor must you sleep under a tree at night. Excercise is not permitted in  any 
form.  Do not sleep  with your hair unbraided,  or without  having  had a bath.  If you can observed 
these rules for a hundred years, you will have the son you wish  for.‖ 
 
Kashyapa went away and Diti began to observe the rites that the sage had prescribed. But  Indra 
had got to know what was afoot and he was naturally in no mood to permit the birth of a son  who 
would be the cause of his own destruction. He hung around Diti‘s hermitage, pretending to  serve 
his aunt.  He brought  her firewood  and fruit and served  her in other  ways.  But in reality,  he was 
merely  waiting  for an opportunity.  He was waiting  for the moment  when  Diti would  fail to 
observed the norms of cleaniness  that had been laid down for  her. 
 
Ninety -nine years and three hundred and sixty -two days passed. That is, only three days were  left 
for the period  of one hundred  years  to be over.  Diti was tired on one particular  occasion.  Since 
the period of her ordeal w as soon to end, she had also become somewhat careless. She fell  asleep 
without  washing  her hair. What  was worse,  she went  to sleep  without  having  braided  her hair. 
This was an act of gross  uncleanliness.  
 
Indra seized his chance. Since Diti had committed a n unclean act, her defences had  been 
lowered. Indra entered Diti‘s womb in a trice. Indra h as a wonderful weapon named vajra.  With 
the vajra,  Indra  sliced  the baby  in Diti‘s  womb  into seven  parts.  These  parts  started  to cry. ―Ma 
ruda,‖  said Indra.  ―Don‘t  cry.‖  But the parts continued to cry. Indra  therefore chopped up each of 
the parts into seven more sections, so that there were forty -nine parts in all. Since Diti had  failed 
to observe  the prescribed  rites,  these  forty -nine sections  were  no longer  a threat  to Indra.  When 
they  were  born,  they  came  to  be  known  as  the  maruts  from  the  words  Indra  had  used  in 
addressing  them.  They  were  elevated  to the status  of gods  and became  Indra‘s  friends  and 
constant  companions . 
   
 
THE  MANVANTARAS  
 
Each  manvantara  is an era and is ruled  over by a Manu.  One of Brahma‘s  days is known  as a 
kalpa and there are fourteen manvantaras in every kalpa. At the end of every kalpa, the  universe 
is destroyed  and has to be created  afresh.  In the present  kalpa,  six manvantaras  have  already 
passed and the seventh manvantara is now current. There will be seven more manvantaras in  the 
future before the universe and its inmates are destroyed. The gods, the seven great  sages 
(saptarshis)  and the individual  who holds  the title of Indra,  change  from  one manvantara  to 
another. The fourteen eras of the present kalpa are as  follows.  
 
(1) The first Manu was Svayambhuva. The gods then were the  yamas.  
 
(2) Svarochisha  was the second  Manu.  The gods  were  the tushitas  and the names  of the seven 
great sages were Dattoli, Chyavana, Stambha, Prana, Kashyapa, Ourva and  Brihaspati.  
 
(3) The third Manu was Outtama. The gods were named the bhavanas and Koukurundi,  Dalbhya, 
Shankha, Pravahana, Shiva, Sita and Sasmita were the  sapta rshis.  
 
(4) Tamas  was the fourth  Manu.  The seven  great  sages  were  Kavi,  Prithu,  Agni,  Akapi,  Kapi, 
Jalpa and Dhimana and the gods were known as the  sadhyas.  
 
(5) The fifth manvantara was ruled over by a Manu named Raivata. The gods were  the 
abhutarajas and the sev en great sages were  
 
Devavahu, Suvahu, Parjanya, Somapa, Munti, Hiranyaroma and  Saptashva.  
 
(6) Chakshusha was the sixth Manu. The gods were known as the lekhas and the seven  great 
sages were Bhrigu, Sudhama, Viraja, Sahishnu, Nada, Vivasvana, and  Atinama.  
 
(7) The seventh manvantara is the one that is now current and the name of the Manu  is 
Vaivasvata. The saptarshis are Atri, Vashishtha, Kashyapa, Goutama, Bharadvaja,  Vishvamitra 
and Jamadagni. The gods are the sadhyas, the vishvadevas, the maruts, the vasus,  th e two 
ashvinis and the  adityas.  
 
(8) The eighth  Manu  will be Savarni  and the seven  great  sages  of this era will be Ashvatthama, 
Sharadvana, Koushika, Galava, Shatananda, Kashyapa and  Rama.  
 
(9) The ninth Manu wil be  Rouchya.  
 
(10) Bhoutya will be the tenth Manu.  
 
(11) The e leventh Manu will be named  Merusavarni.  
(12) Rita will be the twelfth  Manu.  
 
(13) Ritadhama will be the thirteenth  Manu.  
 
(14) The fourteenth and final Manu will be named  Vishvakasena.  
 PRITHU  
 
A king named  Anga  was descended  from  Svayuambhuva  Manu.  Anga  married  Sunitha,  the 
daughter  of Mrityu,  and they had a son named  Vena.  Mrityu  was an evil person.  From  his 
childhood,  Vena  associated  with this maternal  grandfather  of his and thus came  to acquire  evil 
ways. When Vena became king after Anga, he started to oppress the wor ld. He stopped all  yajnas 
and the prayers to the gods. He insisted that people should pray only to Vena. The sages did  their 
level best to persuade Vena to return to the righteous path, but Vena would not  listen.  
 
The sages then killed Vena. Vena had no so ns and a kingdom does not flourish in the absence  of 
a king.  Therefore,  when  Vena  was dead,  the sages  started  to knead  the dead  body  so that a son 
might be born. The first being that emerged as a result of this kneading was a dark and  dwarfish 
son. All the evil that was in Vena‘s  body  entered  the body  of this son so that there  was no more 
evil left in the dead  body.  
 
When  the kneading  continued,  a handsome  son was born from  Vena‘s  right  hand.  He was born 
fully grown and held bows, arrows and clubs in his ha nds when he emerged. His entire body  was 
clad in shining armour. The word prithu means great. Since the son was born after a great deal  of 
effort, he was given the name  Prithu.  
 
The sages  made  arrangements  for Prithu‘s  coronation.  Prithu  was a good  king who ruled  well. 
But Prithu‘s subjects still did not have the wherewithal to make a living. They asked their king  to 
do something about this. Prithu decided that since the earth was not providing any foodgrains,  he 
would kill the earth. The earth adopted the form of a cow and started to flee. Wherever the  earth 
went, the king followed in hot  pursuit.  
 
The earth  finally realized  that she could  not escape  by running away.  She told Prithu, ―Please  do 
not kill me. Then  your subjects  will not even  have  a place  to live in. Your  object  is to find a 
means of living for your subjects. How will that be accomplished if you kill me? Milk me  instead 
of killing me. The foodgrains that the milking will yield will provide the sustenance for  your 
subjects.‖  
 
Prithu accordingly milked the earth. It is because of this that the earth is known as prithivi.  Prithu 
also levelled  out the earth  with his bow so that his subjects  could  live in the plains  thus created. 
The earth prospered during Prithu‘s rule. Poverty, disease and sins wer e unknown. Everyone  was 
righteous.  
   
 
THE SOLAR  LINE  
 
The sages requested Lomaharshana. ―Please tell us the histo ry of the  solar line.‖ 
Lomaharshana  complied.  
 
Aditi  and the sage Kashyapa  had borne  the sun-god, Vivasvana  or Surya,  as a son. Surya  had 
three  wives,  Samjna,  Rajni  and Prabha.  Rajna  had a son named  Revata  and Prabha  had a son 
name d Prabhata (morning). Surya and Samjna had two sons and a daughter. The eldest son  was 
Vaivasvata Manu. And the remaining two offspring were twins named Yama and  Yamuna.  
 
The sun‘s radiance was however too much for Samjna to bear. After a while, she could not  bear 
it any longer.  She therefore  created  a woman  out of her own body.  The woman  looked  exactly 
like Samjna and was named Chhaya (shadow). There was no way of telling the two  apart.  
 
―Stay  here and pretend  to be me,‖ said Samjna.  ―Look  after my husband  and my children.  No 
one will know the truth unless you tell them. As for me, I am going  away.‖  
 
Surya did not realize that Samjna had left. He took Chhaya to be his wife, and Surya and  Chhaya 
had two sons and two daughters. The sons were Savarni Manu and Shani (Saturn) and  the 
daughters were Tapati and  Vishti.  
 
Chhaya  was clearly  fonder  of her own children  and neglected  Samjna‘s.  This did not bother 
Vaivasvata  Manu  too much.  He was the eldest and more  collected  and balanced.  But Yama 
resented  this favouritism  of Chhaya‘s.  In a fit of petulance,  he raised  his foot to kick Chhaya. 
Chhaya  cursed  Yama. ―I curse  you that your foot may be devoured  by worms,‖ she said. ―May  it 
be infected with pus and  blood.‖  
 
This alarmed  Yama  and he rushed  to his father.  ―My  mother  has cursed  me,‖ he told Surya.  ―I 
am only a child. Even if I did commit a sin, does a mothe r ever curse her children? I have  serious 
misgivings that she is not our mother at  all.‖ 
 
When  Surya  taxed  Chhaya  with this, she came  out with the truth  and Surya  learnt  that Samjna 
had left. Samjna‘s father was Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods. Sury a went to his  father -in- 
law to find out if he knew anything of Chhaya‘s  whereabouts.  
 
―Indeed,  I do,‖ replied  Vishvakarma.  ―When  Samjna left your house, she came to me in the form  
of a mare.  But I refused  to let her live in my house,  since  she had left her husband‘s  house 
without  seeking  his permission.  She is living  at the moment  in the desert.  But Samjna  did what 
she did because she could not bear to stand your energy and radiance. If you permit, I shall  shave 
off some of the excess energy, so that peopl e can look at  you.‖  
 
Vishvakarma  shaved  off some  of the sun‘s  energy.  With  the excess  energy  were  constructed 
many  of the weapons  of the gods  such as Vishnu‘s  chakra  (a bladed -discus),  Shiva‘s  trident 
(trishula)  and Indra‘s  vajra.  This made  the sun‘s  visage  much  more  pleasant  and bearable.  The 
only parts of Surya‘s body that were not thus modified were the feet. No one can bear to look  at 
Surya‘s  feet and it is forbidden  to visualise  the sun-god‘s  feet when  one is praying  to him. A 
person who does not follow this injucti on is a sinner and is made to suffer from  leprosy.  Surya  now went  to look for Samjna  and found  her in the form  of a mare.  He too adopted  the 
form of a horse and joined her. As horses, they had two sons. Since ashva means horse, the  sons 
were  known  as the Ashvinis.  They  became  the physicians  of the gods  and were  also known  as 
Nasatya  and Dasra.  After  the Ashvinis  were  born,  Surya  and Samjna  gave  up their forms  of 
horses and returned to their usual  forms.  
 
What  do you think  happened  to Savarni  Manu?  He went  away  to perform  tapasya  (meditation) 
on Mount  Sumeru.  He is destined  to be one of the future  Manus.  Shani  became  a planet  and 
Yamuna a river. As for Tapati, she too became a river  (Tapai).  
 
Yama  had been  cursed  by Chhaya  that his feet would  rot and be infected with worms.  To 
mitigate the effects of the curse, Surya gave Yama a bird which ate up all the worms.  Thereafter, 
Yama  went  to a tirtha  named  Gokarna  and started  to pray to Shiva.  For thousands  of years  he 
prayed and eventually managed to please Shiva.  Shiva granted Yama the boon that he would  be 
the god of death.  He would  mete  out punishments  to sinners  in accordance  with the sins (papa) 
that they had committed. He would also keep account of the store of merit (punya) that  righteous 
people  accumulated.  
 
Vaivasvata Manu ruled as Manu. He had ten sons. The eldest was named Ila. The other  sons 
were named Ikshvaku, Kushanabha, Arishta, Dhrishta, Narishyanata, Karusha,  Sharyati, 
Prishadhra  and Nabhaga.  The solar  line owes  its origin  to Ikshavaku.  In this line was born king 
Bhagiratha,  who brought  the sacred  river  Ganga  down  from  heaven.  Further  down  the line was 
Dasharatha and Dasharatha‘s son was Rama. You know about Rama from the  Ramayana.  
   
 
ILA AND THE LUNAR  LINE  
 
Vaisvasvata  Manu‘s  eldest  son was Ila. When Vaivasvata  Manu  became  old, he retired  to the 
forest.  Ila was appointed  the ruler  in his place.  Ila set out on a voyage  of conquest  and travelled 
throughout  the world.  There  was a forest  named  Sharavana,  frequented  by Shiva  and Parvati. 
Shiva had decre ed that any man who entered the forest would become a woman. King Ila did  not 
know about this rule and set foot in the forest inadvertently he immediaely got transformed into  a 
woman.  
 
―What  is going  to happen  to me now?‖  thought Ila. ―Where  will I live?‖  He even  forgot  all about  
his earlier life. The moon -god, Chandra, had a son named Budha. While Ila was wandering 
around.  Budha  came  upon  her and fell in love with her. The two had a son named  Pururava  and 
Pururava was the ancestor of the lunar  line. 
 
Meanwhile, Ikshvaku and the other brothers had started to look for Ila. When they could find  no 
trace of th eir brother, they asked the sage Vashishtha if he knew of Ila‘s  whereabouts. 
Vashi shtha used his mental powers to find out what had happened. He asked the princes to  pray 
to Shiva and Parvati. That was the only way to make Ila a man once  more.  
 
The prayers  pleased  Shiva and Parvati  and they found out what  the princes  wants.  ―But what  you 
desire  is quite  impossible,‖  they told Ikshvaku  and his brother.  ―Ila  can never  be made  a man 
once  again.  At best,  we will grant  you the following  boon.  Ila will alternate  between  being  a man 
for one month and a woman for one month.‖ The prin ces had to be content with this. As  a 
woman, Ila continued to be known as Ila. But as a man, he came to known as Sudyumna and  had 
three sons named Utkala, Gaya and  Haritashva.  
   
 
DAKSHA AND  SATI  
 
―I will now t ell you about Daksha and Sati,‖ Lomaharshana told the sa ges. 
 
Daksha had a daughter named Sati who was married to Shiva. Daksha did not like his  son-in-law 
at all. When he organized a yajna, he did not invite Shiva to attend the ceremony. But Sati  went 
to the ceremony,  although  Shiva  had not been  invited. ―Why  did you not invite  Shiva?‖  Sati 
asked her  father.  
 
―Because  your husband  is undeserving  of such honour,‖  replied  Daksha.  ―He  is not fit to be 
treated  on par with the other  gods.‖  These  words  angered  Sati. ―I am ashamed  that I am your 
daughter.‖  She said. ―Cursed  am I that I have  had to hear such abuses  of the great  Shiva.  I no 
longer wish to be your daughter. I will therefore give up this physical body that I owe to you,  by 
immolating  myself.  As for you, I curse  you that you will be born on earth  as the son of the ten 
Prachetas.  You will then try to perform  an ashvamdha  yajna  (horse  sacrifice).  But Shiva  will 
destroy the  ceremony.‖  
 
Daksha  tried to pacify  Sati. ―Please  have  mercy  on me,‖ he said. ―You  are the mother  of the 
entire universe. How will the universe survive if you die? It is only through your good grace  that 
you condescended to be born as my daughter. Please do not forsake  me.‖ 
 
―What  I have  said cannot  be negated,‖  replied  Sati. ―But  I will grant  you this much.  When  you 
are born on earth, yo u will continue to be devoted to  me.‖ 
 
―Where  will I pray to you?‖  asked  Daksha.  ―At what tirthas?  And what  are the names by which  I 
will address you in the course of my  prayers?‖  
 
Sati then told Daksha  one hundred  and eight  of her names.  She also told him the names  of one 
hundred  and eight  tirthas  at which  she was known  by these  respective  names.  These  names  and 
tirthas are as follows, witht he names being given first and the tirthas  second.  
 
(1) Vishalakshi at Varanasi (2) Lingadharini at Naimisha. (3) La litadevi at Prayaga.  (4) 
Kamakshi  at Gandhamadana.  (5) Kumuda  at Manasa.  (6) Vishvakaya  at Ambara.  (7) Gomati  at 
Gomanta.  (8) Kamacharini  at Mandara.  (9) Madotkata  at Chaitraratha.  (10) Jayanti  at 
Hastinapura. (11) Gouri at Kanyakuvja. (12) Rambha at Mala yachala. (13) Kirtimati at   Ekamra.  
(14) Vishva at Vishveshvara. (15) Puruhuta at Pushkara. (16) Margadayini at Kedara. (17)  Nanda 
at Himalaya. (18) Bhadrakarnika at Gokarna. (19) Bhavani at Sthaneshvara. (20) Vilvapatrikat  at 
Vilva. (21) Madhavi at Shris haila. (22) Bhadra at Bhadreshvara. (23) Jaya at Varahashaila.  (24) 
Kamala at Kamalalalya. (25) Rudrani at Rudrakoti. (26) Kali at Kalanjara. (27) Kapila  at 
Mahalinga. (28) Mukuteshvari at Markata. (29) Mahadevi at Shalagrama. (30) Janapriya  at 
Shivalinga.  (31) Kumari at Mayapuri. (32) Lalita at Santana. (33) Utpalakshi at Sahasraksha  (34) 
Mahotpala  at  Kamalaksha.  (35)  Mangala  at  Gangatira.  (36)  Vimala  at  Purushottama.   (37) 
Amoghakshi at Vipasha. (38) Patala at Pundravarddhana. (39) Narayani at Suparshva.  (40) 
Bhadrasundari  at Vikuta.  (41) Vipula  at Vipula.  (42) Kalyani  at Malalyachala.  (43) Kotavi  at 
Kotitirtha. (44) Sugandha at Madhavana. (45) Trisandhya at Godasharma. (46) Ratipriya  at 
Gangadvara. (47) Shivananda at Shivakunda (48) Nandini at Devikatata. (49) Rukmini  at 
Dvaravati. (50) Radha at Vrindavana. (51) Devaki at Mathura. (52) Parameshvari at Patala.  (53) 
Sita at Chitrakuta. (54) Vindyavasini at Vindhya. (55) Ekavira at Sahyadri. (56) Chandrika  at 
Harichandra. (57) Aroga at Vaidyanatha.  (58) Maheshvari at Mahakala.   (59) Abhaya at Ushnatirtha. (60) Amrita at Vindhyakandara. (61) Mandavi at Mandavya. (62) 
Svaha  at Maheshvarapura. (63) Prachanda at Chhagalanda. (64) Chandrika at Makaranda. (65)  
Vararoha at Someshvara. (66) Pushkaravati at  Prabhasa. (67) Devamata at Sarasvati. (68) Mata 
at   Sagara.(69) Mahabhaga at Mahalaya. (70) Pingaleshvari at Payoshni. (71) Simhika at 
Kritashoucha.  (72) Yashaskari at Kartikeya. (73) Lola at Utapalvarta. (74) Subhadra at 
Shonasangama.  (75) Lakshimata at  Siddhapura. (76) Angana at Bharatashrama. (77) 
Vishvamukhi at Jalandhara.  (78) Tara  at Kishkindhyachala.  (79) Pushti  at Devadaruvana.  (80) 
Medha  at Kashmiramandala.  (81) Bhimadevi at Himachala. (82) Pushti at Vishveshvara. (83) 
Shuddhi at Kapalamochana. ( 84) Sita at Mayavarohana. (85) Dhvani at Shankhoddhara. (86) 
Dhriti at Pendara. (87) Kala  at Chandrabhaga. (88) Shivakarini at Achchhodatira. (89) Amrita at 
Vena. (90) Urvashi  at Vadrivina (91) Oushadhi at Uttarakur. (92) Kushodaka at Kushavdvipa 
(93) Manm atha at Hemakuta.  (94) Satyavadini  at Mukuta.  (95) Vandaniy  at Ashvattha.  (96) 
Nidhi  at Kuberalaya.(97)  Gayatri  at Vedavadana.  (98) Parvati  at Shivasannidhana.  (99) 
Indrani  at Devaloka.  (100) Sarasvati  at Brahmamukha.  (101)  Prabha  at Suryabimba.  (102)  
Vaishnavi  at Matrigana.  (103) Arundhati at Satismukha. (104) Tilottama. (105) Brahmakala. 
(106)  Shakti.  
 
Having recited these names, Sati immolated herself. She was later reborn as Parvati or Uma,  the 
daughter of Menaka and Himalaya. She was remarried to Shiva . As for Daksha, he was born  on 
earth as the son of the ten  Prachetas.  
   
BRAHMADATTA  
 
There used to be a sage named Koushika. Koushika had seven sons named Svasripa,  Krodhana, 
Himsra,  Pishuna,  Kavi,  Vagadushta  and Pitrivarti.  These  sons all became  discipl es of the sage 
Garga. After Koushika died, there was a terrible drought on earth. Famine raged and people  went 
hungry.  Garga  had asked  his disciples  to tend to his cattle  and the seven  brothers  had taken  the 
cattle  to the forest  so that they might  browse  on the grass  that grew  there.  The brothers  suffered 
so much from hunger that they decided to slay one of the cows and eat  it. 
 
―Killing a cow would  be a sin,‖ remarked  the youngest.  ―If we have  to kill the cow,  let us at least 
perform  its funeral  ceremony.  Perhaps  that will reduce  the severity  of the sin that we are 
committing.‖  
 
The other  brothers  agreed  to this. The funeral  rites of the cow were  observed.  It was then killed 
and eaten.  The brothers  returned  to Garga  and told him. ―A cow has been  killed  and eaten  by a 
tiger.‖  
 
Garga  saw no reason  to disbelieve  them.  But the sin remained  a sin. And as a consequence  of 
having  committ ed a crime,  the brothers  were  born as hunters  in their next lies. But they were  
born as jatismaras. That is, they remembered the incidents of their earlier lives.  Since  the 
brothers  remembed  what  they had been  in their earlier  lives,  they saw no reason  to live as 
hunters. They therefore fasted until they died. They were next reborn as deer. But the  deer 
continued  to be jatismaras  and fasted  to death.  The brothers  were  reborn  as birds.  Four  of the 
brothers continued to be detached from material pursuits and  spent their time in meditation.  But 
the three remaining brothers were not so  lucky.  
 
The king of Panchala  had once  come  to the forest  with his retinue.  The king‘s  name  was 
Vibhraja.  One of the birds  was struck  by the king‘s  pomp  and glory  and wished  to be born as a 
king in his next life. King Vibhraja and two ministers with him and all the soldiers seemed to  be 
following  the instructions  of the ministers.  Accordingly,  two of the birds  desired  to be born as 
ministers in their next  lives.  
 
The one who wished  to be a king was born as Brahmadatta,  King  Vibhraja‘s  son. The two who 
desired  to be born as ministers  became  Pundarika  and Suvalaka,  the sons of the two ministers 
whom  they had seen.  The remaining  three  brothers  were  not attached  to material  pursuits  and 
were born as brahmanas (the first of the four  classes).  
 
Brahmadatta  married  Kalyani.  You will never  guess  who Kayanti  had been  in her earlier  life. 
She had been the cow whom the brothers had  killed.  
 
What was most remarkable was the fact that Brahmadatta  could understand the languages of  all 
living beings. Brahmadatta and Kalyani were once taking a walk in their garden.  Brahmadata 
heard two ants conversing. Since he could understand the languages of all living beings, he  could 
follow what the ants were  saying.  
 
―Why are you angry with m e?‘ asked the m ale ant. ―Why are you refusing to sp eak to m e?‖ 
 
―Go  away  and do not pester me,‖ replied  the female ant. ―You  say you love me very much.  And 
yet, when you got some grains of sugar yesterday, you gave them to another ant and not to me.  I 
refuse to speak to  you.‖   
―That  was my mistake,‖  said the male ant. ―I thought  that it was you to whom I was giving  the 
grains  of sugar.  I will never  make  such a mistake  in the future.  Please  pardon  me and smile.  I 
cannot bear to see y ou so angry.‖ The ants made  up. 
 
The conversation made Brahmadatta laugh. Kalyani naturally wanted to know why  Brahmadatta 
was laughing and the king reported the entire conversation to his  wife.  
 
But  Kalyani  refus ed  to  believe  her  husb and.  ―How  can  any  man  understand  the  language  of 
ants?‖ she wanted to kn ow. ―You are  lying. You  must h ave been laughing at me.‖ 
 
Brahmadatta tried to convince his wife, but Kalyani would not listen. The king did  not  know 
what to do. But while he was sleeping, he  dreamt that Vishnu appeared before him and told  him 
to wait till the next morning. Brahmadatta‘s mind would be set at rest  then.  
 
Four of the brothers had been born as brahmanas. They had been born as the sons of a  brahmana 
named Sudaridra and were named Dhritimana, Tattvadarshi, Vidyachanda and Tapotsuka.  Since 
they were born as jatismaras, they remembered their earlier lives and had no desire to tied  down 
by material pursuits. They wanted to retire to the forest and  meditate.  
 
But Sudaridra  tried to restrain his sons. ―How  can you do that?‖ he asked  ―How  can you retire  to 
the forest  to meditate?  Your  duty is to look after me in my old age. If you do not look after,  I 
shall starve to death. Please do no t commit that  sin.‖ 
 
―You  will not starve  to death,‖  replied  his sons.  ―Go  to King  Brahmadatta  and ask him for 
wealth.  He will give you gold and villages.  Tell him to remember  the sage Garga,  the hunters, 
the deer and the birds. The four sons went away to the foest. Sudarida came to meet the king.  He 
met the king on the day following Brahmadatta‘s dream. Sudaridra‘s words  reminded 
Brahmadatta of what he had been in his earlier lives. He was ashamed that he had forgotten  those 
incidents  and had become  addicted  to material  pursuits.  He decided  to join his brothe rs in the 
forest. He gave Sudaridra as much wealth as the brahmana wanted and handed over the  kingdom 
to the prince, Vishvaksena. The brothers Pundarika and Suvalaka also accompanied  Brahmadatta 
to the forest.  It was thus that Koushika‘s  seven  sons eventua lly attained  salvation. ―There  is one 
thing we do not understnad,‖ said the sages.  ―How  came  Brahmadatta  to understand  the 
languages  of all living beings?‖ ―That  is easily  explained.‖ Replied  Lomaharshana.  ―King  
Vibraja had prayed to Vishnu that he might o btain such a son and the boon was  granted.‖  
   
 
CHANDRA AND  BUDHA  
 
―You  forgot  to tell us how Budha was born,‖ remarked  the sages. ―Nor  did you tell us  anything  
about Chandra‘s birth.‖ Lomaharshana filled in the blanks. The sage Atri was Brahma‘s son.  Atri 
once  performed  very difficult  tapasya.  A tremendous  amount  of energy  was released  as a result 
of this meditation  and the moon -god, Chandra  or Soma,  was born from  this energy.  Brahma 
appointed  Chandra  ruler  over all stars,  planets  and herbs  (oshadhi).  Twen ty-seven  of Daksha‘s 
daughter were married to Chandra. These were the nakshatras (stars). Chandra performed  a 
rajasuya yajna (royal sacrifice) and the ceremony was an outstanding success. Bt all this  sucess. 
But all this success  and glory  went  to Chandra‘s  head.  The preceptor  of the gods  was the sage 
Brihaspati and Brihaspati‘s wife was Tara. Chandra‘s eyes fell upon Tara and he  forcibly 
abducted  her. On several  occasions  Brihaspati  asked  Chandra  to return  Tara,  but the moon -god 
would  not listen.  A terrible  war then raged  between  the gods  and demons  over Tara.  The gods 
fought  on Brihaspati‘s  side and the demons  aided  Chandra.  Shiva  also fought  on the side of the 
gods. As the war raged, Shiva let fly a terrible divine weapon named brahmashirsha at  Chandra. 
Chandra countered this with another terrible divine weapon named somastra. These two  weapons 
of destruction threatened to burn up the entire universe. Brahma decided that it was time for  him 
to intervene.  ―Stop  this nonsense  at once,‖  he told Chandra.  ―What  you have done  is most 
improper. Return Tara at once.‖ These words ashamed Chandra and he returned Tara . But 
Chandra and Tara had already had a handsome son named Budha. Budha became very skilled  in 
the handling of elephants. In fact, the knowledge of tackl ing and handling elephants goes back  to 
Budha. You already know that Budha married Ila and that they had a son named  Pururava.  
   
 
PURURAVA AND  URVASHI  
Pururava was a very strong king who ruled the earth well. He performed one  hundred 
ashvamedha yajnas. Th e three goals of human life are dharma (righteousness), artha  (wealth), 
and kama  (that which  is desired).  These  three  goals  wished  to see which  of them  Pururava 
revered  the most.  They  therefore  adopted  human  forms  and came  to visit Pururava.  Pururava 
treated them with utmost respect and gave them golden seats to sit on. He offered them all  sorts 
of offerings.  But in the process,  Dharma  received  more  of the offerings  than Artha  and Kama. 
This angered  Artha  and Kama.  ―You  will be destroyed,‖  Artha  cursed  Pururava.  ―You will go 
mad over Urvashi,‖  Kama  cursed  Pururava  But Dharma  blessed  Pururava.  ―You  will live for 
long and you will never  deviate  from  the righteous  path,‖  he said. ―Your  descendants  will rule 
for ever.‖  
 
Having thus cursed and blessed Pururava, D harma, Artha, and Kama disappeared. On  one 
particular occasion, Pururava was driving his chariot through a forest. He suddenly found that  a 
demon  named  Keshi  was abducting  an apsara  (dancer  of heaven).  This apsara  was none  other 
than Urvashi.  Pururava  defeated the demon  and rescued  Urvashi.  He restored  her to Indra,  the 
king of the gods. Indra was deligthed at this act and Indra and Pururava became friends. The  sage 
Bharata  taught  mankind  how to sing and dance.  To celebrate  Urvashi‘s  return,  Indra  asked 
Bharata to stage  a performance.  As artistes,  Bharata  chose  three  apsaras.  They  were  Menaka, 
Urvashi and Rambha. Menaka and Rambha danced as they should. But Urvashiw as attracted  by 
King Pururava and kept looking at him. The result was that Urvashi fell out o f step. This  angered 
Bharata  and he cursed  Urvashi  that she would  have  to spend  fifty-five years  on earth.  On earth, 
Urvashi  married  Pururava  and they had eight  sons named  Ayu,  Dridayau,  Ashvayu,  Dhanayu, 
Dhritamana, Vasu, Shuchividya and  Shatayu.  
   
 
YAYA TI 
 
In the lunar line there was a king named Nahusha and Nahusha‘s son was Yayati. Yayati had  two 
wives, Sharmishtha and Devayani. Sharmishtha was the daughter of Vrishaparva, the king of  the 
danavas (demons). And Devayani‘s father was Shukracharya, the pr eceptor of the  demons. 
Devayani gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu and Sharmishtha gave birth to Druhya, Anu and  Puru. 
Yayati ruled the world extremely well for many years. He performed many  yajnas.  
 
But eventually he grew old. The problem was that although Ya yati grew old, he was not yet  tired 
of sensual pleasures. He still desired to savour the joys that the world had to offer. Yayati told  his 
five sons.  ―Because  of Shukracharya‘s  curse,  an untimely  old age has come  upon  me and I am 
not content  with what  I have savoured  of life. I request  one of you to give me his youth  and 
accept  my old age in return.  When  I have  sated  myself  with worldly  pleasures,  I will take back 
my old age and return  the youth.‖  Except  for Puru,  the other  four sons flatly  refused  such an 
exchange.  They  had no desire  to part with their valued  youth.  They  were  thereupon  cursed  by 
their father.  
 
As for Puru,  he said, ―Please  accept  my youth  and be happy.  It is my duty to serve  and I will 
gladly  take upon  me your old age.‖  For a thousand  years  Yayati  savoured  the pleasures  of the 
world with Puru‘s youth. A thousand years were not than enough to s atisfy Yayati. He  accepted 
his old age and returned  Puru‘s  youth.  He blessed  Puru  for his obedience  and announced  to the 
word that Puru was his only tr ue son. 
Puru inherited the kingdom after Yayati. His descendants were known as the Pauravas. It was in 
this line that King  Bharata  was born.  It is after Bharata  that the land we live in is known  as 
Bharatavarsha.  
 
The sages  interrupted  Lomaharshana.  ―You  are going  too fast.‖  They  said. ―What  is this curse  of 
Shukracharya‘s  that Yayati referred  to? You have  forgotten  to tell us about  that.‖  ―I will,‖  replied  
Lomaharshana.  ―But first, let me tell you about  Kacha and Devayani.‖  
   KACHA  AND  DEVAYANI  
 
The gods and the demons fought with each other all the time. Brihaspati was the preceptor of  the 
gods and Shukracharya was the preceptor of the demons. Shukracharya knew a wonderful  art 
known as mritasanjivani. This was the knowledge of bringing back dead peo ple to  life. 
Since  Shukracharya  knew  this art, the gods  were  in a terrible  fix. Any demons  whom  the gods 
killed were promptly brought back to life by Shukracharya. But Brihaspati knew no such art.  So 
any gods that the demons killed, stayed dead. The gods pondered about this problem and  finally 
arrived  at a solution. Brihaspati  had a son named Kacha.  The go ds told Kacha.  ―Go  and become 
Shukracharya‘s  disciple.  Try to learn  the art of mritasanjivani  from  him. Shukracharya  has a 
beautiful  daughter  named  Devay ani. Try to curry  her favour  so that your task may become 
easier.‖  
Kacha  went  to Shukracharya.  ―Please  accept  me as your disciple,‖  he said. ―I am the great  
Brihaspati‘s son. I will serve you faithfully for a thousand years.‖ Since no mention was made  of 
mritasanjivani. Shukracharya gladly agreed to ths proposition. Kacha lived with  Shukracharya 
and served his guru (teacher). He became friendly with Devayani and Devayani started to fall  in 
love with Kacha. Five hundred years passed. The demons got to know that Kacha  was 
Brihaspati‘s  son. Since  they hated  Brihaspati,  they hated  Kacha  as well.  Kacha  was in the habit 
of taking  Shukracharya‘s  cattle  to the forest  to graze.  When  Kacha  was alone  in the forest,  the 
demons  seized  their chance.  They  slew Kacha  and fed his body  to the tigers.  In the evening,  the 
cattle returned home alone. Kacha was not with  them.  
Seeing this, Devayani  told her father,  ―The  cattle  have  returned  home  without  Kacha.  I am 
certain  that someone  has killed  him. I am in love with Kacha  and cannot  survive  without  him. 
Please  do something.‖  ―Do not worry,‖  Shukracharya  told Devayani.  ―I will bring Kacha  back  to 
life with the art of mritasanijivani.‖ As soon as Shukracharya recited the magical  mantra 
(incantation),  Kacha  appeared  before  them,  hale and hearty.  Days  passed.  Kacha  went  to the 
forest  once  more,  this time to pluckflowers.  The demons  killed  him again.  But this time they 
burnt  the dead  body  and mixed  the ashes  in a goblet  of wine.  They  then served  the wine  to 
Shukracharya  to drink. Whe n Kacha  did not return, Devayani  again  told her father.  ―I am certain  
that someone has killed Kacha. I cannot survive without him. Please do  something.‖  
Through  this powers,  Shukracharya  discovered  what  had happened.  He told his daughter,  ―We  
have a real problem on our hands. Kacha is inside my stomach. I can revive Kacha  by 
summoning him through mritasanjivani. But in the process, he will have to tear asunder my body 
and I shall die. Tell me, beloved daughter, which do you want ? Either Kacha or your fatehr  will 
live.‖  ―I  refuse  the choice.‖  replied  Devayani.  ―Both  you and Kacha  must live. I cannot  survive  
without  either.‖  Shukracharya  then decided  that there  was only one way out. He addressed 
Kacha,  who was inside  his stomach,  and taught  him the words  of the mrtasanjivani  mantra.  He 
then recited the words hi mself and out came Kacha. Shukracharya‘s body was torn apart and  the 
sage died.  
But Kacha had learnt the words of the mantra. He now recited them to bring Shukracharya  back 
to life. Kacha  thus learnt  what  he had set out to achieve.  After  spending  a thousa nd years  with 
Shukracharya,  he prepared  to return  to heaven.  ―Where  are you going?‖  asked  Devayani.  ―Do 
you not know  that I am in love with you?  Please  marry  me.‖ I am afraid  that I cannot  do that,‖  
replied  Kacha.  ―You  are my guru‘s  daughter.  Therefore,  you are my superior  just as my guru is 
my superior. I cannot ma rry you. Moreover, I have spent some time inside his body. And when  I 
came  out, it was as if a son had been  born from  him. You are therefore  my sister.  How  can I 
possibly marry you?‖  Thus spurned.  Devayani  became  very angry.  ―You are playing  with 
words,‖  she said. ―I curse  you that although  you have learnt  the art of mritasanjivani,  it will 
prove  to be of no use to you.‖  ―You  have  needlessly  cursed  me,‖ retorted  Kacha.  ―I too curse  you 
that no brahmana  will ever marry  you and that you will never  get whateve r it is that you wish 
for.‖  
SHARMISHTHA AND  DEVAYANI  
 
Sharmishtha was the daughter of Vrishaparva, the king of the danavas. Sharmishtha  and 
Devayani  were  great  friends,  until Indra  played  some  mischief.  The two friends  had gone  to 
bathe  in a pond  and had left their clothes  on the bank.  Indra  adopted  the form  of a breeze  and 
mixed  up the clothes.  When  Sharmishtha  donned  her clothes  after having  had her bath,  she put 
on Devayani‘s  clothes  by mistake.  Devayani  said, ―How  dare you wear my clothes  ? My father  is 
your father‘s  teacher  and you are my inferior  in every  respect.  You have  no business  to put on 
my clothes.‖ ―I am not your inferior.‖  Replied  Sharmishatha. ―It is you who are my inferior.  My 
father  is the king and your father  thrives  on my father‘s gene roisty.‖  The two friends  started  to 
quarrel. Sharmishtha flung Devayani into a well and left her there, taking her to be  dead.  
 
At that time, King Yayati came to the forest on a hunt. He was thirsty and looked for some  water. 
When he found the well, he dis covered Devayani inside it. He rescued Devayani. Yayati also  fell 
in love with her, so that the two got married.  Shukracharya  got to know  about  all this and was 
furious  at the treatment  that Sharmishtha  had meted  out to his daughter.  He threatened  to leave  
the demons. Vrishaparva did his best to persuade Shukracharya not to leave them,  but 
Shukracharya insisted that he would stay only if Devayani was pacified. Vrishaparva promised  to 
give Devayani  whatever it was that she wished  for. ―Sharmishtha  has insulted me,‖ said 
Devayani.  ―She  has called  me her inferior.  My mind will be set at rest only if Sharmishtha  serves  
as a servant. Vrishaparva agree to this conditon and Sharistha became Devayani‘s  servant, 
together with one thousand other  demon  women.  
 
After  Yayati  and Devayani  got married,  Shukracharya  told Yayati,  ―Sharmisha  is Devayani‘s  
servant and you are married to Devayani. Under no circumstances marry Sharmishtha,  otherwise 
I am going  to curse.  In due course,  Devayani  gave  birth  to Yadu  and Turvasu.  Sharmishtha  had 
secretly married  Yayati  and she too gave birth to Druhya,  Anu and Puru.  ―How came you to have 
sons?   Asked   Devayani.   ―Who    is  your  husband?   ―My    husband   is  a  brahmana,‖       replied  
Sharmishtha.  ―I do not know his name.‖  But when Devayani  asked Druhya,  Anu and Puru  about  
their father,  the truth  came  out. They  told her that they were  King  Yayati‘s  sons.  ―You  have 
insulted  me,‖ Devayani  told Yayati.  ―Will  remain  your wife no longer.  You have  married  my 
servant.‖  
 
Shukracharya was also furious. Yayati had gone against his wishes and had  married 
Sharmishtha. Shukracharya cursed Yayati that old age would set upon the king, although he  was 
still in the prime  of youth.  ―Please  do not curse  me,‖  said Yayati.  ―I am marri ed to your daughter.  
I wish to live with her as her husband.  Do you wish your son-in-law to be an old servant?‖  ―My  
curse  cannot be lifted,‖  replied  Shukracharya.  ―But  I will try and mitigate  the effects.  I grant  you 
the power  that you can pass on this old age to whomsoever  you wish.‖  It was this old age that 
Puru  accepted.  
                                                            MRITASANJIVANI  
 
―But  what  about  mritasanyjivani?‖  asked  the sages.  ―You  haven‘t  told us how Shukracharya  
came  to acquire  this wonderful  knowledge.‖  Lomaharshana  told them  the following  story.  The 
gods  and the demons  fought  all the time and the demons  were  sometimes  worsted  in these 
encounters.  Shukracharya  consoled  the demons. ―Do not worry,‖  he said. ―I will try and acquire  
powers  that will make  the demons  invincible.  I am going  off to pray.  While  I am gone,  do not 
fight  with the gods.  Give  up arms  and lead the lives  of hermits.  Wait  till my return.‖  
Shukracharya‘s  father  was the sage Brhrigu.  The demons  were  instructed  to wait in Bhrigu‘s 
hermitage for Shukracharya‘s return. The precep tor of the demons began to pray to S hiva.  When 
Shiva appeared, Shukracharya told him that he wished to be taught a mantra that would make  the 
demons  invincible.  ―I will grant  your request,‖  said Shiva.  ―But  you will have to observed  a 
difficult vrata (reli gious rite). For a thousand years you will have to meditate. And you will  have 
to live only on smoke.‖ Shukracharya agreed to observe the  vrata.  
 
Meanwhile, the gods got to know what Shukracharya was up to. They realized that,  once 
Shukracharya  returned,  they would  be in no position  to tackle  the demons.  The best thing  to do 
was to attack the demons immediately, when they had given up arms and were living as  hermits. 
The demons  tried to tell the gods  that this was not fair. They  should  not be attacked  when  they 
had forsaken  arms.  But the gods  would  not listen.  They  started  to kill the demons.  The demons 
fled to Shukracharya‘s  mother,  Bhrigu‘s  wife,  for protecion.  ―Do  not despair,‖  she assured  the 
demons.  ―I will protect  you.‖  When  the gods  attacked,  the lady used her powers  to make  Indra  
completely immobile. Indra could not move at all. He stood there like a statue. This strange  sight 
unverved  the gods  so much  that they started  to run away.  Vishnu  came  to help Indra.  He told 
Indra  to enter  his body,  so that Vishnu  might  be able to save him. ―I will burn both of you up 
through  my powers,‖ said Shukracharya‘s  mother. ―What  are you waiting for?‖ Indra  asked  
Vishnu. ―Ca n‖t you see that this woman  will destroy us both? Kill her at once.‖  Vishnu 
summoned up his sudarshana chakra and with this, he neat ly severed the lady‘s  head.  
 
The sage Bhrigu was not present at that time. When he returned and found out what  had 
happened,  he was greatly angered. Vishnu had committed the crime of killing a woman.  Bhrigu 
therefore cursed Vishnu that he would have to be born several times on earth. These are  Vishnu‘s 
avataras  (incarnations).  As for his own wife,  Bhrigu  resurrected  her through  his powers.  Indra  
had a daughter  named  Jayanti.  Having  failed  in his attempt  to kill the demons,  Indra  reasoned 
that he ought to tr y and disturb Shukracharya‘s meditation. He therefore sent Jayanti to the  place 
where  Shukracharya  was praying.  Her instruc tions  were  to try and distract  the sage.  Jayanti 
served  Shukracharya  faithfully  throughout  the appointed  period  of a thousand  years.  When  the 
vrata was over, Shiva appeared before Shukracharva and taught him the art of  mritasanjivani.  
 
It was then that Shukracharya  noticed  Jayanti.  ―Who  are you?‖  he asked.  ―And  why have  you 
been serving me thus? I am exceedingly pleased with what you have done. Tell me what I can  do 
for you.‖  ―If you wish  to grant  me a boon,  marry  me and live as my husband  for ten years,‖  
replied Jayanti. Shukrachary a was lured away by Jayanti. Indra was bent upon ensuring  the 
destruction  of the demons  and he now hit upon  a plan.  He asked  Brihaspati  to adopt 
Shukracharya‘s form and go to the demons. The demons were expecting their guru back after  the 
thousand years we re over and took Brihaspati to be Shukracharya. They honoured him  and 
served  him faithfully.  When  the ten years  with Jayanti  were  over,  Shukracharya  returned  and 
discovered  Brihaspati  among  the demons.  ―Who  is this upstart?‘  he demanded  to know.  ―Give  
him up and seek refuge  with me. I am the real Shukracharya.‖  ―Not  at all,‖ replied  Brihaspati.  ―I 
am the real Shukracharya.‖ The demons were  bemused.  
 Brihaspati  and Shukracharya  were  as alike  as two peas in a pod; there  was no way of telling  the 
apart. They finally reasoned that the person who had been living with them for the last ten  years 
must  be their real guru.  They  therefore  accepted  Brihaspati  and shooed  Shukracharya  away. 
Shukracharya cursed the de mons that they were bound to be destroyed. As soon as  Shukracharya 
cursed  the demons,  Brihaspati  adopted  his own form.  The demons  realized  that they had been 
tricked, but the harm had been  done.  
   
 
THE  PURANAS  
 
Lomaharshana  now gave  the sages  a list of the eighteen  mahapuranas.  In the beginning,  there 
was only one Purana. The sage Vedavyasa divided this original Purana into  eighteen 
mahapuranas.  The mahapuranas  have  four lakh shlokas  all together  and their names  are as 
follows. (i) The Brahma Purana: This was  originally recited by Brahma to the sage Marichi  and 
has thirteen thousand shlokas. This text should be donated on a full moon night (purnima) in the 
month  of Vaishakha.  Such  a donation  brings  undying  punya.  (ii) The Padma  Purana:  This has 
fifty-five thousand shlokas  and should  be donated  in the month  of Jyaishtha.  (iii) The Vishnu 
Purana: This was first recited by the sage Parashara and has twenty -three thousand shlokas. It is 
auspicious  to donate  this text in the month  of Ashada.  (iv) The Vayu  Purana:  This has twenty - 
four thousand  shlokas  and was first recited  by the wind -god Vayu.  It should  be donated  in the 
month  of Shravana.  (v) The Bhagavata  Purana:  This has eighteen  thousand  shlokas  and should 
be donated  in the month  of Bhadra,  on the night  of the full moon.  (vi) The Narada  Purana:  this 
was first recited  by the sage Narada  and has twenty -five thousand  shokas.  It should  be donated 
on the night  of the new moon  (amavasya)  in the month  of Ashvina.  (vii) The Markandeya 
Purana: This has nine thousand shlok as. A person desirous of obtaining punya should donate  this 
text in month of Margashirsa. (viii) The Agni Purana: This was first recited by the fire -god Agni 
to the sage Vashishtha.  It has sixteen  thousand  shlokas  and should  be donated  in the month  of 
Marg ashirsha. (ix) The Bhavishya Purana: Brahma himself was the first reciter of this  Purana 
and it has fourteen thousand and five hundred shlokas. It is primarily concerned with what is  due 
to happen  in the future.  The text should  be donated  on the occasion  of purnima,  in the month  of 
Pousha.  (x) The Brahmavaivarta  Purana:  This was first recited  by Savarni  Manu  to the sage 
Narada.  It has eighteen  thousand  shlokas  and should  be donated  on purnima  in the month  of 
Magha.  (xi) The Linga  Purana:  Brahma  recited  this first and it has eleven  thousand  sholkas. 
Punya  is acquired  if this text is donated  in the month  of Falguna.  (xii) The Varaha  Purana:  The 
great  Vishnu  first recited  this to the earth.  It has twenty -four thousand  shlokas  and is to be 
donated  in the month  of Chaitra.  (xiii)  The Skanda  Purana:  This was composed  by the god 
Skanda  or Kartikeya.  It has eighty -one thousand  shlokas  and one desirous  of punya  donates  the 
text in the month  of Chaitra.  (xiv)  The Vamana  Purana:  Brahma  was the first person  to recite 
this. It has ten thousand shlokas and the text should be donated in early autumn (sharat). (xv)  The 
Kurma  Purana:  Vishnu  recited  this in his form  of a turtle.  It has eighteen  thousand  shlokas  and 
should be donated at the time of the equinoxes. (xvi) The Mat sya Purana: Vishnu recited this  in 
his form of a fish to Manu. It has fourteen thousand shlokas and should be donated at the time  of 
the equinoxes.  (xvii)  The Garuda  Purana:  Krishna  was the first person  to recite  this and it has 
eighteen thousand shlokas. (xviii) The Brahmanda Purana: Brahma recited this and it has  twelve 
thousand and two hundred shlokas. But these Puranas, as stated, are merely for  human 
consumption.  Much  longer  versions  are read by the gods.  The total number  of shlokas  in the 
Puranas that  the gods read is one hundred  crores.  
   
 
TRIPURA  
 
There was a danava named Maya. Just as Vishvakarma was the architect of the gods, Maya  was 
the architect  of the demons.  When  the demons  were  defeated  by the gods,  Maya  started  to 
perfrom  very difficult  tapas ya so that the gods  might  be defeated.  Maya‘s  meditation  inspired 
two other  demons  to also meditate.  Their  names  were  Vidyunmali  and Taraka.  The meditation 
was so difficult that the world marvelled at the sight of what the demons were  doing.  
 
Finally,  Brah ma was pleased  at all this effort  and appeared  before  the demons.  ― I am pleased 
with what  you have  done,‖ said Brahma.  ―What  boon do you want?‖ ―We  have  been defeated  by 
the gods,‖  replied  Maya.  ―We  wish  to build  a fort that the gods  will not be able to destroy.  The 
fort will be named Tripura and we will live in it and become immortal.‖  ―Immortality  is a boon 
that cannot  be granted.‖  Said Brahma.  ―If you want,  set fairly difficult  conditions  for your 
deaths.‖  ―Very well then,‖ replied  Maya.  ―We  will be killed only if Shiva himself  destroys  
Tripura  with a single  arrow.  Let that be the appoined  method  of our deaths.‖  This boon  Brahma 
granted and Maya began the task of constructing the  fort. 
 
In fact, he built three  (tri) fortresses  (pura).  One was made  of iron, the second  of silver  and the 
third  of gold.  Normally,  the fortresses  were  distinct.  But once  every  thousand  years,  when  the 
nakshatra  Pushya  was in the sky, the three  cities  came  together  in the sky and were  called 
Tripura. Each of the fortresses was stocked with diverse weapons as protections against raids  by 
the god s. Taraka lived in the fort made of iron, Vidyunmali in the one make o f silver, and  Maya 
himself  lived  in the one that was made  of gold.  The other  demons  got to know  that three 
invincible  forts had been  built.  They  came  and populated  the three  cities.  But the demons  were 
not evil at all. They observed all sorts of religious rites. In particular, they were devoted to  Shiva 
and prayed to him all the time. They did not want Shiva to be angry witht them. It was, after  all, 
Shiva alone who could be the instrume nt for their  destruction.  
But eventually, the demons became intoxicated with their own power and came upon evil  ways. 
They warred upon other living beings and started to oppress the universe. Maya did try  to 
persuade them to mend their ways, but the demon s would not listen to Maya‘s good advice.  All 
the living beings  in the universe  went  to Brahma  to complain.  ―Please  save us from  this 
oppression,‖  They said, ―It is because  of your boon that the demons  have become so powerful.  ―I 
cannot  help you,‖  replied  Brahma.  ―The  boon  is such that Shiva  alone  can destroy  Tripura.  Let 
us all pray to Shiva.‖  The gods,  the sages  and the humans  started  to pray to Shiva.  Pleased  with 
these prayers, Shiva promised to destroy  Tripura.  
 
A special chariot was built for Shiva to  ride in. Brahma himself agreed to be the charioteer.  The 
army of the gods got ready to help Shiva in his war against Tripura. A terrible war raged  between 
the gods  and the demons.  Nandi  is one of Shiva‘s  companions.  Nandi  fought  with Vidyunmali 
and slew the demon  after a fierce  battle.  But Maya  knew  all sorts  of magical  tricks.  He was 
particularly well -versed in the use of herbs. Maya gave Vidyunmali a bath in the juice of  magical 
herbs  and Vidyunmali  immediately  revived.  This act greatly  boosted  the demon s‘ morale  and 
they began to fight with renewed vigour. Any demons,who were killed, were instantly revived  by 
Maya.  But when  Shiva  himself  entered  the fray, the demons  were  put to flight.  Even  the herbs 
that resurrected  dead  demons  proved  to be of no avail.  Nandi  killed  Tarakasura  after a fierce 
duel.  
 
 
 The  demons  were  disheartened,  but  Maya  reassured  them.  ―Don‘t  forget  the  boon,‖   he  said, 
―There  are only some  special  conditions  under  which  Tripura  can be destroyed.  Otherwise  it is 
indestructible. Pushya nakshatra is in the sky now and soon the three cities will come together  as 
one. The only person wh o can destroy it then is Shiva. And he must do it with a single arrow.  All 
we have  to do is ensure  that Shiva  cannot  shoot  the arrow  and we are safe.‖  But this was easier 
said than done.  It was no mean  task to repel  Shiva  and his cohorts.  Nandi  killed  Vidy unmali  a 
second  time.  As soon  as the three  cities  came  together,  Shiva  shot a flaming  arrow  which 
completely burnt up Tripura and all the demons who were within. The only one who was  saved 
was Maya. He did not die because he was extremely devoted to Shiva.  Ever since that day,  Maya 
has lived under the  water.  
   
 
THE MEASUREMENT OF  TIME  
 
The smallest unit of time is a nimesha; this is the amount of time it takes to blink.  Fifteen 
nimeshas make one kashtha and thirty kashthas are one kala. Thirty kalas one muhur ta and  there 
are thirty  muhurtas  in one divaratra  (one day).  Fifteen  muhurtas  constitute  the day and fifteen 
muhurtas make up the night. One month for humans is one day for the ancestors  (pitri). 
Shuklapaksha is the lunar fortnight during which the moon wa xes and krishnapaksha is the  lunar 
fortnight during which the moon wanes. Shuklapaksha corresponds to night for the ancestors  and 
krishnapaksha  corresponds  to day. Thus,  thirty  human  months  are merely  one month  for the 
ancestors. Three hundred and sixty hu man months are one year for the ancesotrs. One  human 
year is one divaratara  for the gods.  The human  year is divided  into two ayanas,  each consisting 
of six months. These are known as uttarayana and dakshinayana. Uttarayana is day for the  gods 
and dakshinay ana is night. Thirty human years are one month for the gods and three hundred  and 
sixty human years are one year for the  gods.  
Time is divided into four yugas (eras). These are known as satya yuga or krita yuga, treta  yuga, 
dvapara yuga and kali yuga. The  lengths of these yugas are defined in terms of years of the  gods. 
Satya yuga has four thousand years of the gods, treta yuga three thousand, dvapara yuga  two 
thousand  and kali yuga  one thousand.  A cycle  of satya  yuga,  treta yuga,  dvapara  yuga  and kali 
yuga is known as a mahayuga. Thus, a mahayuga would seem to consist of ten thousand years  of 
the gods. But this is not quite correct. In between any two yugas are intervening periods,  known 
as sandhyamshas.  For example,  the sandhyamsha  for satya  yuga  is four hundred  years,  for teta 
yuga  three  hundred  years,  for dvapara  yuga  two hundred  years  and for kali yuga  one hundred 
years.  Once  one adds the sandhyamshas,  a mahayuga  adds up to twelve  thousand  years  of the 
gods. A little over seventy -one yugas constitute on e manvantara. Fourteen such manvantaras  are 
one kalpa.  A kalpa  is merely  one day for Brahma.  At the end of Brahma‘s  day, the universe  is 
destroyed. It is then created afresh when a new day dawns for  Brahma.  
   
 
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE  YUGAS  
 
As one progre ssively moves down the scale from satya yuga to kali yuga, the power of  righteous 
diminishes and evil starts to triumph. In treta yuga people were righteous. The system  of 
varnashrama  dharma  goes back  to treta yuga.  This is typified  in the principle  of four varnas 
(classes) and four ashramas (stages of life). The four varnas are brhamanas, kshatriyas,  vaishyas 
and shudras.  Each  class  has its proper  place,  each its assigned  occupations  as determined  by the 
principles  of division  of labour.  The four ashramas  are brhamacharya  (celibate  studenthood). 
Garhasthya (householder stage), vanaprastha (forest -dwelling stage), and sannyasa  (hermithood). 
Everyone  followed  the tenets  of varnashrama  aharma  in treta yuga.  Individuals  were  equally 
handsome  and equally  wealthy . Poverty  and disease  were  unknown.  The weather  was clement 
and, initialy, there was no need to build houses. Cities and villages were not known. People  lived 
freely  in the mountains  and on the shores  of the oceans.  But as people  became  evil, the weather 
turned  inclement.  Houses  had to built so the people  might  be protected  from  the heat and the 
cold.  Cities  and villages  were  planned  and constructed.  Evil became  even  more  prevalent  in 
dvapara yuga. In some cases, individuals began to practise that which was  against the dictates  of 
varnashrama  dharma.  To bring  men back  to the righteous  path,  the knowledge  of the sacred 
Vedas  had to be disseminated  amongst  humans.  To this end, the great  Vedavyasa  divided  the 
Vedas  into four.  Various  other  shastras  (sacred  texts) were  also composed  in dvapara  yuga. 
These include ayurveda (medicine), jyotisha (astronomy) and arthashastra (economics).  Hatred, 
jealousy,  warfare  and other  evils  first originated  in dvapara  yuga.  Individuals  did not stick  to 
their own classes  while  marrying,  and cross -breeds  started  to be born.  But some  remnants  of 
righteousness  could  still be found,  so that average  life expectancies  amounted  to two thousand 
years.  Kali yuga  is the worst  of the four eras. Theft,  hatred,  falsehood,  fraudulence  and egoti sm 
become the norm. As a natural corollary to such evils, drought and famine recur again and  again. 
Event the brahmans are led astray. They do not study the Vedas, nor do they perform yajnas.  The 
brahmanas  degenerate  so much  that they mix with shudras.  As for the shudras,  they become 
kings.  Can anything  more  ridiculous  be imagined?  Shudras  even  start to study  the Vedas.  Evil 
always has its effect. Disease becomes rampant and life expectancies go  down.  
   
 
VAJRANAGA  
Indra had killed many of D iti‘s children, th e daityas. Diti had wished to obtain a son who  would 
kill Indra.  But because  she had not been  able to adhere  to the stipulated  religious  rites,  the sons 
who had been born had become friends and companions of Indra. But Indra continued to  attack 
and kill the demons.  Diti therefore  prayed  to her husband  Kashyapa  yet again  that she might 
have  a son who would defeat  Indra.  ―Your  wish will be granted,‖  said Kashyapa.  ―But you will 
have to meditate hard for ten thousand years. Indra‘s weapon is the vajra and the son who will  be 
born will have  a body  (anga)  that is as tough  as the vajra  will be able to do him no harm.  Diti 
medi tated  for ten thousand  years  and in due course,  gave  birth  to this powerful  son. Vajranga 
was invincible.  When Vajranga  grew up, Didti told her son, ―Indra  has killed  many of my sons.  I 
am thirsting for revenge. Go and kill  Indra.‖  
 
Vajranga  set for heaven . He defeated  Indra  very easily  and tied him up. He then brought  Indra 
home  to his mother  and prepared  to kill the king of the gods.  Indra‘s  death  would  have  been  a 
great  calamity  and Brahma  and Kashyapa  rushed  there.  ―Vajranga,‖  they said. ―Please  do not kill 
Indra.  Let him go. If someone  who deserves  respect  is insulted,  that is like death  for him. Indra 
has been  defeated  by you. He has therefore  been  insulted  and is as good  as dead.  There  is no 
need  to physically  kill him. Moreover,  the very fact that you are letting  Indra  go at our request 
will be known  to all. Even  if he lives,  everyone  is going  to regard  him as dead.  Listen  to our 
request and let him  go.‖ 
 
―I am not averse to that suggestion  at all,‖ replied  Vajranga.  ―I have no intention  of killing  Indra.  
I was merely  obeying  my mother‘s  instructions.  How  can I refuse  two such revered  individuals 
like you?  One of you is the creator  of the whole  unive rse and the other  one is my own father.  I 
will let Indra go. But please grant me a boon. Grant me the boon that I may be able to perform  a 
lot of tapasya.‖  This boon  was readily  granted.  In addition,  Brahma  created  a beautiful  woman 
named Varangi and marri ed her off to  Vajranga.  
 
Vajranga  went  to the forest  to meditate.  For a thousand  years,  he stood  with his arms  raised  up 
towards  the sky. And in this posture,  he meditated.  He then stood  on his head  for a thousand 
years  more  and meditated.  As a final part of the tapasya,  he wished  to meditate  under  the water 
for a thousand  years  more.  When  Vajranga  entered  the water,  his wife Varangi  patiently  waited 
for her husband  to return.  And all the while,  she too meditated.  But Indra  was not going  to let 
sleeping  dogs lie. He adopted  the form  of a monkey  and uprooted  all the trees  in Varangi‘s 
hermitage. He next adopted the form of a sheep and ate up all the grass that was there. As  a 
snake,  he tried to bite the lady.  Finally,  he adopted  the form  of a cloud  and drench ed the 
hermitage in torrents of rain. Since Varangi was meditating, she was in no position to retaliate  or 
protect herself. She had to bear all these  depredations.  
 
When  the thousand  years  were  over,  Vajranga  returned.  He was shocked  to learn  of the tortur es 
that his wife had been subjected to by Indra. He began to meditae again. This time, he wished  for 
a son who would kill Indra.  Brahma  appeared  and granted  Vajranga the desired  boon. ―You  will 
have  a son who will be the scour ge of the gods,‖  said Brahma.  ―He will be called  Taraka.‖  For a 
thousand  years  Varangi  bore the baby  in her womb.  When  Taraka  was born,  the earth  trembled 
and tidal waves  were  created  in the ocean.  Fierce  storms  started  to rage.  Wild  animals  rejoiced 
and the sages shuddered. In due cou rse, Taraka was crowned the king of the  demons.  TARAKA’S  TAPASYA  
 
Tarka  was hell bent upon  defeating  the gods.  But he realize  that, prior  to waging  war on the 
gods,  he would  have  to become  powerful.  Such  powers  could  not be attained  through  tapasya. 
Tarak a went  to the Pariparta  mountains  and selected  a cave there  for his meditation.  For some 
days Taraka ate nothing, for some more days he survived only on water, and on other days he  ate 
only leaves, Every day he sliced off some flesh from his body and offer ed it to the fire as a  token 
of his devotion.  All this hardship  pleased  Brahma  and he appeared  before  Taraka.  ―Enough  is 
enough,‖  said Brahma.  ―I am pleased  at your devotion. What boon can I grant  you?‖  ―I want  to 
fight with the gods,‖  replied  Taraka.  ―The  gods  have  been giving  the demons  a hard time and I 
intended  to reverse  the tide. Please  grant  me the boon  that I may be invincible  and immortal.‖  
―Immortality  is not a boon  that can be granted  to any living  being.‖  Said Brahma.  ―All  living 
beings  must  die. But if you want,  set fairly  difficult  conditions  for your death.‖  ―In that case,  
please  grant  me the boon  that I can only be killed  by a seven  year old child,‖  requested  Taraka. 
Brahma gladly granted this  boon.  
   
 
THE WAR BETWEEN THE GODS AND THE  DEMONS  
 
Fortified  with Brahma‘s  boon,  Taraka  started  to rule the demons.  After  some  years  had passed 
and after Taraka had raised a strong army, he decided to attack heaven. A huge army of  demons 
was accordingly  raised.  There  were  thousands  of elephants,  horses  and chariots  in the army. 
Apart from Taraka, the major generals in the army were Jambha, Kujambha, Mahisha,  Kunjara, 
Megha, Kalanemi, Nimi, Mathana, Jambhaka, and Shumbha. Diverse were the weapons that  the 
demons  armed  themselves  with.  The gods  also prepared  themselves  for the war, having  first 
appointed  Yama  as their general.  Yama  rode into battle  on a bufflao.  Indra  had his chariot, 
driven  by his charioteer  Matali.  The fire-god Agni  rode on a goat and Varuna,  the lord of the 
oceans,  rode a snake.  Amongst  the other  gods  who were  in the army  were  Chandra,  Surya  and 
Kubera,  the god of prosperity  and wealth.  The war was terrible  to behold.  The trumpeting  of 
elephants,  the neighing  of horses  and the beating  of drums  made  a terrible  racket  Above  all this 
there  was the noise  of weapons  clanging  and bows  twanging.  Chariots  fought  with Chariots, 
elephants  with elephants,  horses  with horses  and foot-soldiers  with foot-soldiers.  The sky was 
thick with spears, maces, axes, swords, tridents, clubs and arrows flying around.  Dead  bodies 
littered the battlefield and rivers of blood began to flow. Yama fought a fierce duel with a  demon 
named  Grasana  and Kubera  fought  with Jambha.  Kujambha  also fought  with Kubera  and put 
Kubera  to flight.  Kalanemi  fought  with both Chandra  and Surya. The two Ashvinis  received  a 
sound thrashing at Kalanemi‘s hands. The news that the gods were being slaughtered  reached 
Vishnu and Vishnu joined the  fight.  
 
The demons  immediately  attacked  Vishnu,  but were  no match  for him. One of Vishnu‘s  maces 
knocke d Kalanemi unconscious. Vishnu‘s cakra sliced off Grasana‘s head. Jambha did  manage 
to knock Vishnu unconscious with a club. But Indra slew Jambha with a divine weapon.  The 
trouble  however  was with Taraka.  When  he came  to fight,  the gods  had no option  but to flee. 
Those who did not, were captured and imprisoned. The demon won a resounding  victory.  
   
 
BRAHMA’S  ADVICE  
Those  of the gods  who had survived  the battle  and were  still free started  to pray to Brahma.  
―What  can I do for you?‖  asked Brahma.  Why  are all of you looking so despondent?‖ ―You  are 
the one who is responsible  for our misfortune,‖  replied  the gods.  ―You  have  granted  Taraka  a 
boon that has made him virtally invincible. Armed with this boon, he is oppressing the  universe 
and has soundly thrashed  us. What are we to do now?‖ ―There  is no cause  for such 
despondency,‖  said Brahma. ―Taraka  is not immortal.  He will be slain by a seven  year old child.  
Unfortunately  that child  has not yet been  born.  He will be the son of Shiva.  The problem  is that 
Shiva  is unmarried.  He was earlier  married  to Sati, but Sati immolated  herself  at the time of a 
yajna. She has now been reborn as Parvati. The task at hand is to get Shiva and Parvati  married. 
Their son will kill  Taraka.‖  
 
It was necessary  to make  Shiva  fall in love with Parvati.  Madana,  the god of love,  was sent by 
Indra  to Shiva‘s  hermitage  so that this might  be achieved.  But because  this disturbed  Shiva‘s 
meditation,  Shiva  burnt  Madana  up. Meanwhile,  Parvati  had begun  to perform  tapasya  so that 
she might  have  Shiva for a husband.  For one hundred  years  more,  she ate only one leaf a day. 
And for the final hundred  years,  she meditated  fasting.  The seven  great  sages  went  and told 
Shiva about Parvati‘s tapasya and Shiva agreed to marry Parvati. The marriage took place  amidst 
a great deal of fanfare. All the rivers and the mountains came to attend the ceremony. So did  the 
sages, the gods, the gandharvas, the apsaras and the yakshas. Brahma himself acted as the  priest 
for the marriage  ceremony.  
   
 
KALI BECOMES  GOURI  
 
On one particular  occasion,  Shiva  addressed  Parvati  as ―Kali.‖  The word  kali means  dark and 
Parvati  thought  that Shiva  referring  to her dark complexion.  She did not realize  that Shiva  was 
merely trying to tease her a bit. Greatly incensed at the imagined slight, Parvarti decided that  she 
would meditate so that  she might become fair. She wore clothing made of barks of trees  and 
performed  tapasya.  In the summer  she prayed  inside  a raging  fire and in the winter  she prayed 
under  the water.  Sometimes,  she ate only roots  and fruits.  At other  times,  she fasted.  Prior  to 
leaving for her tapasaya, Parvati had instructed Nandi that he was to stand guard at Shiva‘s  door 
and permit no other woman to  enter.  
 
There  was a demon  named  Adi. This fellow  had performed  a lot of tapasya  and had manage  to 
please Brahma. When Brahma a greed to grant him a boon. Adi asked for the boon  of 
immortality.  Brahma  naturally  refused  this boon.  He however  granted  Adi the boon  that the 
demon would die only when he changd his form twice, not otherwise. Adi happened to come  to 
Shiva  and Parvati‘s  house and discovered  Nandi  standing  guard  at the door.  Wondering  what 
there was to be guarded, he adopted the form of a snake and slithered in. Nandi did not notice  the 
snake,  but this was Adi‘s  first transformation.  Inside  the house,  Adi encountered  Shiva  and 
thought that he would play a trick on Shiva. He adopted Parvati‘s form. This was his  second 
transformation. In the form of Parvati, Adi went up to Shiva and greeted him. Initially, Shiva  did 
not realize  that this was not Parvati.  He greeted  the demon  and said, ―Darling,  I am delighted  tht 
you have returned. I can see that your rage has cooled down.‖ But in a little while Shiva  realized 
that this was not Parvati.  He slew the demon.  Meanwhile,  Parvati  was continuing  with her 
tapsaya  and pleased  Brahma  with her prayers.  Brahma  granted  her the boon  that she would 
become fair. Since the word gouri means fair, Parvati was thereafter known as Gouri. A  goddess  
named Koushiki emerged out of Parvati‘s cells, thus named because the word kosha means  cell. 
The darkness  of Parvti‘s  complexion  entered  Koushiki‘s  body.  Brahma  requested  the goddess 
Koushiki  to go and live in the Vindhya  mountains.  She is therefore  also known  as 
Vindhyavasini.  
   
 
KARTIKEYA AND  TARAKA  
 
Kartikeya  or Skanda  was born after some  days.  The boys  shone  with the radiance  of a thousand 
suns and had six (shada)  faces  (anana).  He was therefore  also known  as Shadanana.  The gods 
armed  Kartikeya  with diverse  weapons  and appointed  him their general.  They  requested  him to 
kill the demon  Taraka  and arrangements  were  made  for the battle.  When  Taraka  saw Kartikeya 
he said, ―What  is a boy like you doing in a battlefield?  Go and play with a ball instead.‖  
 
A battlefield  is not th e place  for idle talk,‖ replied  Kartikeya.  ―Show  me your prowess  instead.‖  
At these  words,  Taraka  flung  a club at Kartikeya.  But Kartikeya  easily  repelled the club with a 
vajra. The demon next hurled an axe, but Kartikeya effortless caught the axe in his hand. He  then 
struck the demon with a club of his own. This angered Taraka so much that the demon  showered 
all sorts  of weapons  on Kartikeya.  But the boy repelled  all of these  and started  to kill demons 
with his own weapons.  Many  demons  fled in dismay.  As for Taraka  himself,  Kartikeya‘s  spear 
pierced him in the chest and killed him. Thus it was that Brahma‘s boon became  true. 
   
 
HIRANYAKASHIPU  
 
Diti had a son named  Hiranyakashipu.  This demon  meditated  for eleven  thousand  years  under 
the water.  Throught  this period,  he did not eat or talk at all. These  meditations  pleased  Brahma 
and Brahma  offered  to grant  Hiranyakasipu  a boon. ―What  boon do you wish for?‖ he asked.  ―If 
you are pleased,  grant  me the following boon,‖ replied  the demon.  ―I will not be killed by gods , 
demons, gandharvas, yakshas, rakshasas or snakes. I will not be killed by humans or ghosts.  The 
sages  will not be able to curse  me. I will not killed by a weapon,  a mountain  or a tree. I will not 
be killed during the day or at night. I will not be killed by something that is dry or by  something 
that is wet.‖ This rather strange boon Brahma granted. But the sages, the gods, the gandarvas  and 
the snakes went  and complained to Brahma.  ―What  have you done?‖ they asked.  ―This  demon  is 
now going  to oppress  the entire  universe.‖  ―Don‘t worry,‖  replied  Brahma. ―When  the time 
comes, Vishnu himself will kill  Hiranyakashipu.‖  
 
But true to expectations, the dem on started to oppress the world. He destroyed the hermitages  of 
the sages  and drove  the gods  out of heaven.  All yajnas  were  stopped.  The gods  and the sages 
started  praying  to Vishnu.  Stirred  by these  prayers,  Vishnu  adopted  the form  of a strange  being 
who was half-man and half-lion. Since  nara means  man and simha  means  lion, this being  was 
called  Narasimha.  Narasimha  went  on a visit to Hiranyakashipu‘s  court.  Hiranyakashipu  had a 
son named  Prahlada  and at the sight  of Narasimha.  Prahlada  exclaimed. ―I have a  strong 
suspicion that this being is none other than Vishnu and that we demons will su ffer at his  hands.‖  
Hiranyakashipu asked his soldiers to capture the creature. Or, if that proved to be impossible,  to 
kill it.  
But the soldiers  could  do no such thing;  Narasimha  killed  them  all. Hiranyakasipu  then himself 
hurled all sorts of weapons at Narasimha. But great was his bewilderment at finding that all  these 
weapons  could  do the strange  creature  no harm.  Any weapons  could  do the strange  creature  no 
harm. Any weapon that was hurled was simply swallowed up by Narasimha. The rocks that  were 
flung  at him could  not even  reach  him. Narasimha  grasped  Hiranyakashipu  and placed  him 
across his thighs. He then tore apart the demon‘s chest with his claws. Thus, Hi ranyakashipu  was 
not killed by a weapon, a mountain or a tree, or by something that was either wet or dry.  Vishnu 
in his Narasimha  form  was not a god, a demon,  a gandharva,  a yaksha,  a rakshasa,  a snake,  a 
human  or a ghost.  Since  the slaying  took place  in the evening,  it was neither  night  nor day. All 
the conditions of Brahma‘s boon were met. The en tire world rejoiced at the demon -king‘s  death.  
   
SAVITRI  
 
There used to be a king named Ashvapati who ruled in the kingdom of Madra. Ashvapati had  no 
sons. He the refore began to pray to the goddess Savitri so that he might have a son.  He 
performed thousands and thousands of yajnas. Eventually the goddess appeared before the  king 
and said, ―You  will not have  a son. But I am going  to grant  you a daughter.‘  The daught er was 
named  Malati.  But since  she was born as a result  of a boon  received  from  the goddess  Savitri, 
she was more popularly known as Savitri. When Savitri grew up, she was married to  Satyavana, 
the  son  of  King  Dyumatsena.  The  sage  Narada  once  came   to  visit  them  and  told     them.  
―Satyavana  is going  to die within  a year.‖  Hearing  this, Savitri  and Satyavana  went  off to the 
forest to prepare themselves for the impending  death.  
 
When only four days of the appointed life span were left, Savitri observed a religious rite that  has 
now b ecome famous savitri rata. Amongst other things, this involved fasting for a period of  three 
days On the fourth  and final day, Satyavana  went  to collect  fodder,  roots  and fruits  in the dense 
part of the forest  and Savitri  also accompanied  her husband.  When  they were  tired,  Savitri  sat 
down  beside  a pond  to rest. Satyavana  continued  to collect  fodder  and firewood  near the pond. 
While he was thus engaged,  he started  to suffer  from  a splitting headache.  ―Savitri,‖  he said, ―I 
cannot  bear this pain any longer.  Let me rest for a while  with my head  in your lap.‖ While 
Satyavana was resting with his head on Savitri‘s lap, Yama arrived to claim Satyavana.  Yama‘s 
complexion  was dark and he was dressed  entirely  in yellow.  His crown  was golden.  Armlets 
graced his arms and necklaces hung around his  neck.  
 
In each human body there is an entity that is only the size of a finger in length. This is the part  of 
the body that is claimed by Yama and taken to his abode. Wh en this is done, only the dead  body 
is left. Yama  tied up Satyavana‘s  minute  body in a noose  and prepared  to take it to his abode. 
But when  Yama  left, Savitri followd him. ―Where  do you think you are going?‖ asked  yama.  ―I 
am following my husband,‖ replied  Savitri.  ―There  is no greater  duty for a wife than serving  her 
husband.  Since my husband is leaving,  I have  to leave  with him.‖ ―I am pleased  at your 
devotion,‖  said Yama.  ―Ask  for a boon and I shall grant  it to you. The only thing that you cannot  
ask for is that Satyavana  be brought  back  to life.‖  ―My  father -in-law has become  blind, ‖ replied  
Saviti.  ―He  can therefore  no longer  be the king.  Please  grant  me the boon  that his eyesight  is 
restored  so that he can become the king again.‖  ―I grant  you that.‖ Said Yama.  
―Now  please  return. You will unnecessarily  get tired if you follow me.‖ ―How  I can get tired if I 
follow  you?‖  asked  Savitri.  ―You  are the chief  of all the gods.  Is it possible  to get tired if one 
follows  you?‖  ―That  pleases  me even  more,‖  said Yama.  ―Ask  for another  boon.  But under  no 
circumstances  are you allowed to ask that Satyavana  be brought  back to life.‖ ―My father has  no 
sons,‖ replied  Savitri.  ―Please  grant me the boon that he may have a hundred sons.‖ ―I grant  you 
that,‖ said Yama. ―Now return.  Go and perform your husband‘s  funeral  rites. Serve  your parents  
and parents -in-law well. You are unnecessarily tiring yourself by following me  around.‖  
 
―I thank you for your advice.‖  Replied  Savitri. ―But  I have already told you that I  cannot  
possibly  get tired.  You are the lord of dharma,  the lord of righteousness.  Can one possibly  tire 
oneself  by following such a person?‖ ―Your  devotion  is truly amazing,‖  ―Ask for another  boon. 
But do not ask for Satyavana‘s  life.‖  ―Please  grant  me the boon that Satyavana  and I may have  a 
hundred sons,‖ requested Savitri. Yama granted the bo on without thinking and Savitri  then 
pointed out that what Yama had agreed to would be impos sible if Satyavana died. Yama had  no 
option  but to restore  Satyavana  to life. Yama  blessed  Savitri  and went  away.  In due course, 
Satyavana  and Savitri  had a hundred  sons named  that Malvas.  Savitri  is a model  for all devoted 
wives to  follow.   
VALI  
 
There w as a demon named Vali who was descended from Hiranyakashipu. Extemely strong,  he 
defeated the gods and drove them out of heaven. The mother of all the gods was Aditi and  Aditi 
was despondent  that her sons should  suffer  so at the hands  of demons.  She theref ore began  to 
pray to Vishnu  so that she might  have  a powerful  son who would  provide  a fitting  reply  tot he 
demons, particularily to Vali. For a thousand years, Aditi meditated. Vishnu was pleased at  these 
prayers  and appeared  before  Aditi.  ―What  boon  do you wish  for?‖  he asked.  ―The  demons  are 
oppressing  my children,‖  replied  Aditi.  ―Please  grant  me a son who will defeat  the demons.‖  ―Do 
not despair,‖  said Vishnu.  ―I myself  will be born as your son. I will take care of the demons.‖  
You will remember that Ad iti‘s husband was the sage Kashyapa. Kashyapa and  Aditi 
accordingly had a son. This son was a dwarf  (vamana).  
 
Vali happened  to organize  a yajna  and the dwarf  came  to attend  the ceremony.  On the occasion 
of the yajna. Vali had decided that he would not re fuse anyone what he asked for.  Shukracharya 
was the preceptor  of the demons  and naturally,  he was Vali‘  guru as well.  Shukracharya  saw 
through  the trickery  that was involved  and realized  that the dwarf  was none  other  than Vishnu. 
He tried to put Vali on hi s guard and warned Vali that he should not grant what the dwarf  asked 
for. 
 
But Vali would not listen. ―Vishnu  is the lord of everything.‖  He said. ―I am indeed  fortun ate if 
Vishnu  has come  to grace  my ceremony  in the disguise  of a dwarf.  How  can I refuse  what  he 
asks for?‖ Vali welcomed  the dwarf  with offerings.  ―What  is your desire?‖ he asked.  ―I am duty 
bound to give you what  you ask for.‖ ―I desire nothing much,‖ replied the dwarf.  ―I do not  want  
gold or riches  or elephants  or horses.  All that I ask for is as much  of land as can be covered  in 
three  of my footsteps.‖  ―Granted,‖  said Vali.  
No sooner  were  the words  uttered  that he dwarf  assumed  a gigantic  form.  His head  rose way up 
into the sky. With  each one of his footsteps,  Vishnu  covered  one of the three worlds.  Thus  Vali 
ended up by donating all of the three worlds to Vishnu and there was nowhere for the demons  to 
live in. But Vishnu  was pleased  at Vali‘s  generosit y. He therefore  decreed  that, henceforth,  the 
demons would live in the underworld. As for  heaven, it was returned to Indra. This was the  story 
of Vishnu‘s dwarf  incarnation.  
   
 
THE BOAR  INCARNATION  
 
At the end of the last kalpa,  there  was a general  destruction  and the universe  was flooded  with 
water. Vishnu alone slept on this water in his form of Narayana. When it was time for creation  to 
begin, Brahma appeared inside an egg. All the worlds that would be there in the universe and  all 
the beings who would populate these worlds were inside the egg. But before creation could  start, 
the earth had to  be created so that living beings might have a place to live in. When the earth  was 
first created,  it was full of mountain  ranges  and these  mountains  were  exceedingly  heavy.  The 
upshot  of this was that the earth  could  not bear the weight  of these  mountains  and started  to get 
immersed in the water. She went all the way down to the underworld. The earth started to pray  to 
Vishnu  so that she might  be saved.  Vishnu  adopted  the form  of a gigantic  boar (varaha).  He 
entered  the water  and raised  the earth  up on his tusks.  He laid her to rest on the water,  having 
first levelled out the mountains. This was the story of Vishnu‘s boar  incarnation.  
   
 
THE CHURNING OF THE  OCEAN  
 
The gods  and the demons  always  fought  with one another.  In the process,  many  demons  and 
gods  were killed.  This was no problem  for the demons.  Their  teacher,  Shukracharya,  knew  the 
art of mritasanjivani  and immediately  brought  the dead  demons  back  to life. But the gods  who 
were  killed  stayed  dead.  The gods  went  to Brahma  for his advice.  ―Having  a temporaty  truce 
with the demons,‖  said Brahma.  ―Unite  with them and churn  the ocean.  This churning  will make 
you immortal  and you will have  no reason  to fear the demons.‖  The gods  went  to meet  Vali,  the 
king of the demons, with the proposal and Vali agreed to  the temporary truce. Preparations  were 
made  for the churning  of the ocean.  Mount  Mandara  was used as the rod for churning  and the 
great snake Vasuki agreed to be the churning -rope. The problem however was the  Mount 
Mandara  had no base to rest on. And without a base,  the peak  would  move  and the churning 
could not proceed. The great Vishnu adopted the form of a huge turtle (kurma). The back of  the 
turtle provided the base on which Mount Mandara could rest. The churning started. The  gods 
held Vasuki‘s  tail and the demons  the head.  The churning  went  on for a thousand  years  of the 
gods.  The first object  to emerge  as a result  of the churning  was the moon,  Chandra.  Shiva 
accepted Chandra as an adornment for his  forehead.  
 
Lakshmi,  the goddess  of wealth  and prosper ity, merged  next and was united  with Vishnu,  Sura, 
the goddess of wine and drinking, came out next. She was followed by the divine  horse 
Uchchaishrava.  This was appropriated  by Indra.  A beautiful  jewel  named  koustubha  came  out 
next and was accepted by Vish nu as his adornment. After these wonderous objects had come  out, 
smoke  started  to billow  out and clouded  the atmosphere.  The cloud  was followed  by tongues  of 
fire which threatened to burn up the gods and the demons. From the fire there came out all  sorts 
of poisonous  snakes  and venomous  insects.  This was followed  by a terrible  poison  known  as 
kalakuta.  No one knew  what  to do with the poison,  it would  have  killed  them  all. The gods  and 
the demons began to pray to Shiva for deliverance. Shiva appeared and sw allowed up the  poison. 
It suck in his throat and made his throat blue in colour. Since nila means blue and kantha  means 
throat, Shiva came to be known as  Nilakantha.  
 
With  the danger  removed,  the churning  continued  and Dhanvantari  came  out of the ocean.  He 
was the physician  of the gods  and the originator  of medicine  (ayurveda).  Dhanvantari  held the 
pot of amrita  in his hands.  The demons  immediately  started  to fight  over the possession  of the 
amrita. But Vishnu adopted the form of a beautiful woman (known as  mohini). This woman  was 
so pretty that all the demons fell in love with her and gladly handed over the pot of amrita to  her. 
But they continued  to fight  with the gods.  While  the fighting  went  on, Vishnu  secretly  fed the 
gods  the amrita.  The gods  became  immortal.  The demons  received  no amrita,  not a single  drop. 
That was not quite  true. There  was a demon  named  Rahu.  He adopted  the form  of a god and 
managed  to get a little bit of the amrita.  But Surya  and Chandra  spotted  the deception  and 
pointed  it out to Vishnu.  Vishnu  promptly  severed  Rahu‘s  head  with his chakra.  The amrita 
never  percolated  down  beyond  Rahu‘s  throat.  But the demon‘s  head  had had its share  of the 
amrita and became immortal. Rahu never forgave Surya and Chandra for telling on him.  Rahu‘s 
head tries to swallow up the sun and the moon, given a chance. You can see this happening at  the 
time of the solar and lunar eclipses. This was the story of Vishnu‘s turtle  incarnation.  
  ARCHITECTURE  
 
The science of architecture owes its origin to eighteen g reat sages. Their names are Bhrigu,  Atri, 
Vashishtha, Vishvakarma, Maya, Narada, Nagnajita, Vishalaksha, Puranadara,  Brahma, 
Kartikeya,  Nandishvara,  Shounaka,  Garga,  Vasudeva,  Aniruddha,  Shukra,  and Brihaspati  The 
building  of a house  should  never  be begun  in the month  of Chaitra.  A person  who does this is 
sure to contract a disease. The month of Vaishakha is a good time to begin. One who does this  is 
bound to own many cows. The months of Agrahayana, Magha and Falguna are also  auspicious. 
An individual who b egins the task in Agrahayana has full granaires, one who begins it in  Magha 
attains all sorts of riches and one who begins it in Falguna obtains gold and sons. Ashada is  also 
a good  month  to start.  Servants  and animals  are owed  by a person  who starts  the building  in 
Ashada. But the months of Jyaishtha, Shravana, Bhadra, Ashvina and Pousha are inauspicious.  If 
you start in Jyaishta,  you will die soon;  you will also die if you begin  in Shravana;  begin  in 
Bhadra  and you will suffer  from  all manner  of lesses;  your wife will die if you start the task in 
the month of Ashvina; and all your goods will be stolen if you start in the month of Pousha. It is 
best to begin the building of a house when the nakshatras Ashvini, Rohini,  Mula, 
Uttarabhadrapada,  Uttarashada,  Uttarafalguni  or Mrigashira  are in the sky. Any day is 
permissible with the exception of Sunday and  Tuesday.  
 
The ground on which the house is to be build has to be tested. A pit should be dug and a  sapling 
planted. If the sapling thrives and growns into a b ig tree, the ground has been well -chosen. But  if 
the tree withers away or does not grow into a strong tree, one ought to move somewhere else.  A 
diagram  is then drawn  on the ground,  in the form  of a square  with eighty -one smaller  squares 
inside  it. That is the larger  square  will be subdivided  into nine squares  along  very side. Nine 
multiplied by nine gives the eighty -one smaller squares. In each of these eighty -one smaller 
squares,  a specific  god has to be worshipped.  There  are different  types  of houses.  A house that 
has doors  on all four sides  is known  as a sarvatobhadra.  Such  a configuration  is recommended 
for palaces or temples. A house that does not have a door to the west is known as a  nandyavarta; 
a house that does not have a door to the south is known  as a varddhamana; a house that does  not 
have a door to the east is known as a svastika; and a house that does not have a door to the  north 
is known as ruchaka. A palace should be one hundred and eight cubits (hand -lengths) in  length. 
If a prince, and not a king, is to live in the palace, sixty -six cubits are the recommmended  length. 
Other  recommended  lengths  are sixty -four cubits  for generals,  forty -eight  cubits  for ministers, 
twenty -eight cubits for artisans and twelve cubits for messengers and guards. Pr iests and 
physicians are entitled to twenty -four cubits. An ordinary householder should build a house  that 
is thirty -two cubits  in length.  The sole exception  is an outcast,  he is entitled  to only sixteen 
cubits.  
 
There  should  not be any trees  in the front  of the house.  But trees  have  to be planted  towards  the 
back. The wood with which the house has to be built must be carefully chosen. One must not  cut 
down a tree that birds have built nests on. Certain trees must never be chosen. These  include 
those  that have  been  gashed  by an elephant  or struck  by lightning.  They  also include  trees  that 
grow  near temples  or at the of rivers  and trees  from  cremation  grounds.  Neem  trees  and mango 
trees  must  never  be used for building  houses.  The height  of the tree should  be multiplied  by its 
circumference. This product should now be divided by eight. If the remainder that is left is  one, 
the timber can be used in building any part of the house. Such timber is known as dhvaja.  When 
the remainder  is two the timber  is known  vrisha and should  be used in constructing  the western 
door. When the remainder is three the timber is called simha and should be used for the  northern 
door.  The name  is vrishabha  if the remainder  is four and such wood  should  be used for the 
eastern  door.  When  the remainder  is five the timber  is given  the name  of hasti  and should  be 
used for the southern  door.   
IDOLS  
 
Idols  have  to be instated  in temples.  Vishnu‘s  image  should  have  either  eight  hands  or four.  If 
there are eight hands, the arms to the right shou ld hold a shankha (concha -shell), a gada  (mace), 
a shara  (arrow)  and a padma  (lotus).  The arms  to the left should  hold dhanu  (bow),  a padma,  a 
shankha and a chakra (bladed -discus). If there are four hands, the mace and the lotus should be  to 
the right  and the chakra  and the conch -shell  to the left. Vishnu  will be shown  standing  on the 
world.  Garuda,  the king of the birds,  bears  him around  Garuda  will therefore  be shown  at 
Vishnu‘s feet, towards the right. Lakshmi‘s image must always be to the left of Vishn u‘s image 
and Lakshmi  will hold a lotus  in her hand.  The best idols  are made  out of gold,  silver,  copper, 
jewels,  stone,  wood,  from  alloys.  The proportions  of the various  parts  of the body  must  be 
exactly  right.  Shiva‘s  image  must  have  matted  hair and he must wear  a crescent  moon  on his 
forehead.  The idol must  convey  the impression  that Shiva  is sixteen  years  old. Shiva  must  be 
dressed in tigerskin and must be garlanded with snakes. A peacock feather should adorn on  ear. 
If a spear,  a rod or a trident  are shown,  they must  be to the right.  And if a skull,  a snake  or a 
sword  are shown,  they must  be to the left. When  Shiva  is show  riding  a bull, his image  has two 
hands. But when he is shown in a dancing posture, the image has ten hands. If the intention is to 
show him destroying Tripura, the image must have sixteen hands. There is one particular  image 
that deserves  special  mention.  This is known  as arddhanarishvara,  half-male  and half-female. 
The Shiva  part of the image  will be to the right  and the Parvati  part of the image  will be to the 
left. The right hand of the image will hold a skull or a trident and the left hand of the image  will 
hold a lotus or a mirror. There is another type of image known as Uma -Maheshvara. In this  case, 
there  are two separate  images,  one of Shiva  and the other  of Parvati.  The idols  of various  other 
gods and goddesses are also  described.  
   
 
PAVILIONS  (MANDAPA)  
 
These are classified in terms of the number of pillars that are used in their construction, and  there 
are twenty -seven  main  types of pavilions.  (i) A pushpaka  pavilion  has sixty -four pillars.  (ii) A 
pushpabhadra pavilion has sixty -two pillars. (iii) A suvrata pavilion has sixty pillars. (iv)  An 
amritanandana pavilion has fifty -eight pillars. (v) A doushalya pavilion has fifty -six p illars.  (vi) 
A buddhisamkirna pavilion has fifty -four pillars. (vii) A gajabhadra pavilion has fifty -two pillars.  
(viii) A jayavaha pavilion has fifty pillars. (ix) A shrivatsa pavilion has forty -eight pillars. (x)  A 
vijaya  pavilion  has forty -six pillars.  (xi) A vastukirti  pavilion  has forty -four pillars.  (xii) A 
shrutinjaya pavilion has forty -two pillars. (xiii) A yajnabhadra pavilion has forty pillars. (xiv)  A 
vishala  pavilion  has thirty -eight  pillars.  (xv) A sushlishta  pavilion  has thirty -six pillars.  (xvi) A 
shatrumardana pavilion has thrity -four pillars. (xvii) A bhagapancha pavilion has  thrity -two 
pillars.  (xviii)  A nandana  pavilion  has thirty  pillars.  (xix)  A manava  pavilion  has twenty -eight 
pillars. (xx) A manabhadraka pavilion has twenty -six pillar s. (xxi) A sugriva pavilion  has 
twenty -four pillars.  (xxii)  A hairta  pavilion  has twenty -two pillars.  (xxiii)  A karnikara  pavilion 
has twenty  pillars.  (xxiv)  A shatarddhika  pavilion  has eighteen  pillars.  (xxv)  A simha  pavilion 
has sixteen  pillars.  (xxvi)  A shyamabhadra  pavilion  has fourteen  pillars.  (xxvii)  A samudra 
pavilion has twelve pillars. Pavilions should be triangular, semi -circular or  rectangular.  
   
 
DONATIONS  
 
There  are different  methods  of donating  alms.  One of the most  sacred  is known  as tulapurus ha. 
In this, a pair of scales  is used.  The person  who is donating  the alms  ascends  on one side of the 
scales  and gold is placed  on the other  side until the scales  are exactly  balanced.  This is the 
amount  of gold that has to be donated  if punya  is to be acquired.  A second  sort of donation  is 
known as hiranyagarbha. In this, a pot full of gold is donated. In a third form of donation a  model 
of the universe (brahmanda) is fashioned out of gold and donated. This form of donation  is 
therfore known as brahmanda. The fourth form of donation is known as kalpadapa. In this, a  tree 
is made out of gold and donated. The fifth form of donation is known as gosahasra and  involves 
the donation of a thousand cows. The sixth form of donation is known as kamadhenu. The  object 
of donation in this case is a cow and calf, both made out of gold. The seventh form of donation  is 
similar  and is known  as hiranyashva.  A horse  made  out of gold is donated.  The eighth  form  of 
donation  is called  ashvaratha.  A horse  (ashva)  and four chariots  (ratha)  have  to be donated  and 
both have  to be made  out of gold.  Hemahastiratha  is the ninth  form  of donation.  The objects  or 
donation in this case are an elephant and a chariot made out of  gold.  
 
The tenth  form  of donation  is known  as panchalngalaka.  In this case,  ten ploughs  are donated. 
Five of them  have  to be made  of wood  and the remaining  five have  to be made  of gold.  The 
eleven form of donation is dhara. Int his case,a golden model of the earth is donated. The  twelfth 
form of donation is known as vis hvachakra. The object that is donated is again a model made  out 
of gold.  The model  is that of the universe  in the shape  of a wheel.  The thirteenth  form  of 
donation  is mahakalapalaka.  Ten creepers  made  out of god are donated.  The fourteenth  form  of 
donatio n is saptasagara. Pits are made in the ground, there being seven of them. Each pit  stands 
for one of the seven  oceans.  In the first pit is put salt, in the second  milk,  in the third  clarified 
butter, in the fourth molasses, in the fifth curds, in the sixth  sugar and in the seventh holy  water. 
An image  of a god or goddess  is then placed  in each pit- Brahma  in the first, Vishnu  in the 
second,  Shiva  in the third,  Surya  in the fourth,  Yama  in the fifth.  Lakshmi  in the sixth  and 
Parvati  in the seventh.  The image s must  be made  out of gold.  The pits are then filed to the brim 
with jewels and the entire contents  donated.  
 
The fifteenth  form  of donation  is called  ratnadhenu.  In this case,  a cow made  out of gold is 
donated. The nose, the eyes, the brows and various ot her parts of the cow should be made out  of 
jewels. The sixteen form of donation is called mahabhutaghata. A pot is made out of gold, filled 
with jewels  and donated.  These  different  forms  of donation  are superior  to all other  forms  of 
donation, and bring un dying  punya.  
   
 
EPILOGUE  
 
Lomaharshana completed his recital of the Matsya Purana. This text is exceedingly sacred.  A 
person  who reads  even  one chapter  of the text goes to heaven  and all his sins are forgiven.  The 
sages thanked Lomaharshana and  departed.  
 
 
 