 
 
 
 
 
SRISHTI -KHAND  2. PADMA  PURANA  
 
Having revealed the contents of all the Puranas to his son Ugrashrava, Sage  Lomaharshan 
instructed him to go to 'Naimisharanya' and spread it among the sages doing penance over  there.  
 
Ther e is an interesting tale how this sacrosanct forest of Naimish derived its name  -- 
 
Once, the sages sought Lord Vishnu's help in finding a suitable place, where they could  perform 
their religious  activities  unhindered.  Lord  Vishnu  released  his chakra  and instructed  them  to 
follow  it. 'This  chakra  had many  circumferences  (Nemi)  and all of you can commence  your 
penance at the place where one of them gets detached from the chakra' ---said Lord  Vishnu.  
 
The Sages followed the chakra as per the instruction of Lo rd Vishnu. Once of the  circumferences 
of chakra  got detached  and fell at a place  called  Gangavarta.  In course  of time this particular 
place was famous as 'Naimish' because the term 'Nemi' in Sanskrit means circumference.   When  
Ugrashrava who was popularly  known as  'Suta' reached  'Naimisharnya'  all the sages    received  
him with enlighten all the sages on the divine tales of Padma  Purana.  
 
Suta replied --- Padma Purana consists of five sections and fifty -five  thousand  shlokas.  The 
names of these section s are Srishti -Khand, Bhumi -Khand, Swarg Khand, Patal Khand  and 
Uttam -Khand.  The tales of Padma  Purana  praise  the glory  of Lord  Vishnu.  These  tales were 
narrated  to Lord  Brahma  by Lord  Vishnu  himself,  who in turn propagated  them  in this world 
through variou s sages.   
THE BEGINNING OF  CREATION  
The Sages  requested  Suta to narrate  about  the incident  when  sage Pulastya  had met Bhishma. 
Suta replied --- Bhishma  was doing  penance  at a place  called  Gangadwar.  Being  pleased  by his 
austere penance, Lord Brahma instruc ted Pulastya to go to Gangadwar and bless  Bhishma.  
 
After reaching there, Pulastya told Bhishma that Lord Brahma was pleased by his penance.  'Ask 
any boon  you wish  for' said Pulastya.  Bhishma  thanked  his good  fortune  of getting  a chance  to 
meet Sage Pulast ya. He requested Pulastya to reveal how Lord Brahma had created the  world.  
 
Pulastya replied --- During the initial phase of his creation, Lord Brahma created the  Mahattatva 
first of all. After  that he created  the three  types  of Ego from  the Mahattatva ---Satva, Rajas  and 
Tamas. These three types of Ego are the origins of all the five sense -organs, organs of action  and 
all the five basic elements --space, water, fire, air and  earth.  
 
An enormous egg came into existence with the permutation and combination of t hese five  basic 
elements. Within this egg exists the whole universe including the mountains, islands,  oceans, 
planets, deities, demons and the human beings. The layers of water, fire, air, space and  darkness 
envelop this enormous egg. These elements are on ce again covered by the 'Mahattatva', which  in 
turn is enveloped by the 'Prakriti' (nature). Lord Vishnu himself does creation in the form of  Lord 
Brahma and also takes various incarnations to protect the mankind. At the end of the Kalpa, it  is 
only He, wh o annihilates in the form of Rudra. After the end of Kalpa, he takes rest on the  back 
of Sheshnag for the full period of  deluge.  
   
 
BRAHMA'S LIFESPAN AND  CHRONOLOGICAL 
ORDER OF THE  'ERAS'  
Pulastya  says---Lord  Brahma,  the embodiment  of Lord  Vishnu  has a lifespan  of one hundred 
years. His lifespan is also called 'Par', and half of its period is known as 'Parardha'. One  'Kashtha' 
consists  of 15 Nimesha  while  a Kala  consists  of 30 'Kashthas'.  A muhurta  consists  of 30 Kalas. 
The periods of 30 muhurtas are equal  to one day and Night of the human beings. A month of  this 
world is equivalent to 30 days and nights. Six months make an 'Ayan' and a year consists of  two 
'Ayans'.  These  two 'Ayans'  are also known  by two other  names ---Dakshainayan  and Uttarayan. 
Dakshainay an is the night of the deities where as Uttarayan is their  day. 
Four yugas are equivalent to twelve thousand years of the deities, which occur in a cyclic  order -- 
-Satya  Yuga,  Treta  Yuga,  Dwapar  Yuga  and Kali Yuga.  The periods  of these  yugas  are as 
follows --- 
 
Satya  Yuga - 4000  years.  Treta  Yuga  - 3000  years.  Dwapar  Yuga - 2000  years.  Kali Yuga - 1000 
years. Total - 10,000  years.  
 
Each  yuga  is followed  by the hibernation  periods  of Sandhya  and Sandhyansh,  which  are as 
follows—Sandhya,  Sandhyansh  
 
Satya  Yuga  400, 400. Treta  Yuga  300, 300. Dwapar  Yuga  200, 200. Kali Yuga  100, 100. Total  
1000 years 1000  years.  
 
Four yuga are collectively known as 'Chaturyuga'. A Brahma's day consists of one -thousand  such 
'Chaturyugas'. Altogether, fourteen Manu appear during this whole period of 1000 Chaturgas  or 
in other words a day of Lord Brahma. Each 'Manvantar' is named after a Manu and is  equivalent 
to little more  than 71 Chaturyugas.  It also has its own Indra,  Saptarishis  and other  deities.  This 
way, a manvantar is also equi valent to 8,52,000 years of the deities or divine years. Going by  the 
standard of the years of this world a manvantar is equivalent to 30,67,20,000 years. On the  basis 
of the years  of this world,  a Brahma's  day is equivalent  to 30,67,20,000  x 14 = 4,29,40, 80,000 
years. This is the period after which a Brahma's day is over and a deluge takes place when all  the 
three worlds becomes devoid of life due to unbearable heat. Lord Brahma then takes rest for  the 
same period (4,29,40,80,000 years) which is his  night.  
 
After  the night  is over,  Lord  Brahma  again  commences  his creation.  So, this process  continues 
for the whole  period  of Brahma's  life span,  i.e. 100 years."  Bhisma  requested  Sage  Pulastya  to 
describe how Lord Brahma created life in the beginning of the pre sent Kalpa.  
 
Pulastya replied --- At the end of the previous kalpa when Lord Brahma awakened from his  sleep, 
he found  the whole  earth  submerged  in water.  He meditated  on Lord  Vishnu,  who took the 
incarnation  of Varaha  and retrieved  the earth  and established  it in its original  position.  Lord 
Brahma then created all the four worlds --Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka, Swargloka and Maharloka  and 
divided the earth into seven  islands.  
 
First of all, Lord Brahma created the 'Mahattatva'. After that he created the 'Tanmatras',  Indriyas 
(sense -organs),  the immovable  things  like mountains,  rivers,  animals,  deities,  demons,  human 
beings  etc. 
 THE FOUR PROMINENT  CASTES  
On being asked by Bhishma about the origin of the four prominent castes, Sage Pulastya  said--- 
Lord  Brahma  created  the Brahmins  and the Kshatriyas  from  his mouth  and chest  respectively. 
Similarly, Vaishyas and Shudras manifested from Lord Brahma's thigh and  feet 
respectively.Lord  Brahma  had created  his 'manasputras'  with the objective  of increasing  the 
population and their names were Bhrigu, Pulah, Kratu, Angira, Marichi, Daksha, Atri  and 
Vashishtha.  But all of them  were  free from  worldly  desires  and extremely  virtuous.  Seeing  his 
effort  go in vain,  Lord  Brahma  became  furious,  as a result  of which  Rudra  manifested  from  his 
forehead.  Half of Rudra's  body  resembled  like a male  while  the remaining  half appeared  like a 
female. Lord Brahma instructed Rudra to detach the female form from his body and  commence 
copulative  creation.  Following  his advice,  Rudra  detached  the femal e part of his body  and 
created eleven male entities. Similarly he created various female entities from the female part  of 
his body.  
 
This way, the first human pair - Manu and Shatarupa came into existence. In course of time  four 
children  were  born to them ---Priyavrata,  Uttanpad,  Prasuti  and Akuti.  Prasuti  was married  to 
Daksha Prajpati, while Akuti became the wife of Ruchi Prajapati. Prasuti gave birth to  24 
daughters -- Shradha, Lakshmi, Dhriti, Pushti, Tushti, Medha, Kriya, Buddhi, Lajja,  Vapu, 
Shanti, Kee rti, Khyati, Sati, Sambhuti, Smriti, Preeti, Kshama, Santati, Ansuya, Urja, Swaha  and 
Swadha. Out of them, the former thirteen were the wives of Dharma and the rest were married  to 
various sages like Bhrigu, Shiva, Marichi, Angira, myself (Pulastya), Pulah a, Kratu,  Atri, 
Vashishtha,  Agni,  etc. Shradha  gave birth  to 'Kam',  Lakshmi  to 'Darpa,  Dhriti  to Niyam,  Tushti 
to Santosh,  Pushti  to Lobha,  Medha  to Shrut,  Kriya  to Dand,  Nay and Vinay,  Buddhi  to Bodh, 
Lajja  to Vinay,  Vapu  to Vyavasay,  Shanti  to Kshama,  Siddhi to Sukh  and Keerti  gave  birth  to 
Yash. All of them were the sons of  Dharma.  
 
Kam had a son named Harsh from his wife Nandi, Bhrigu's wife Khyati gave birth to a  daughter 
named Lakshmi --the consort of Lord Vishnu. Lord Rudra accepted Sati --the daughter  of Daksha 
Prajapati  as his wife.  Hinsa  was the wife of Adharm  and gave  birth  to Anrit  and Nikriti.  Anrit 
had two sons---Maya  and Narak,  while  Nikriti  had two daughters --Maya  and Vedana.  Maya 
married Maya while Vedana became the wife of Narak. Maya had a s on named Mrityu --the lord 
of death and Vedana gave birth to Dukh. Five children were born to Mrityu --Vyadhi, Jara,  Shok, 
Trishna and Krodha. All of them were celibates and had no  progeny.  
   
 
THE MANIFESTATION OF GODDESS  LAKSHMI  
Bhisma expressed his desire  to know about the manifestation of goddess  Lakshmi.  
 
Pulastya replied -- Once, after being defeated by the demons, the deities went to Lord Vishnu  and 
sought  his help.  Lord  Vishnu  instructed  them  to collect  all the medicinal  herbs,  and put them  in 
the Kshe ersagar, so that after the churning of the ocean ambrosia could be retrieved.Lord  Vishnu 
also advised them to use the Mandar mountain as a Churner and the serpent --Sheshnag as a  rope 
for churning the ocean.The deities then reached an agreement with the dem ons according  to 
which  both the groups  were  supposed  to unitedly  churn  the ocean.  The great  Mandar  mountain 
was uprooted and placed on the back of the tortoise --the embodiment of Lord Vishnu.  Sheshnag 
coiled around that mountain and both the ends were held  by the demons and the  deities 
respectively. The deities intelligently chose the tail -end, while the demons in their  foolishness 
chose  the mouth -end. The venom  spilled  by Sheshnag  destroyed  the power  and strength  off the 
demons.  When  the process  of Churnin g began,  the first thing  to emerge  from  the sea-bed was 
Kamdhenu --the holy cow.  The deities  claimed  the ownership  of this divine  cow.  Subsequently, 
Varuni (intoxicating drink) emerged from the sea -bed, which was claimed by the  ignorant 
demons.  During  the process  of ocean -churning,  various  kinds  of things  emerged  out from  the 
ocean --Parijat, sixty crore apsaras, the moon and Kalkut (poison), which were distributed  among  
the demons  and the deities.  Lord  Mahadeva  drank  the Kalkut  when  he saw that there  was no 
taker for  it. 
 
The churning of ocean also resulted into the manifestation of ambrosia -pot, Uchchaishrava 
(horse)  and Airavat  (elephant).  Ultimately,  goddess  Lakshmi  manifested  herself,  seated  on a 
lotus.  The deities  eulogised  her by chanting  the mantras  of Sri Sukta.  The deities  were  desirous 
of having  goddess  Lakshmi  on their side, so were  the demons,  but Lord  Brahma  instructed 
Vishnu  to accept  her as his consort.  The demons  became  furious  and snatched  the ambrosia -pot 
from the hands of Sage Dhanvantari. L ord Vishnu then disguised himself as the most  enchanting 
woman  and fooled  the demons  into giving  back  the ambrosia -pot. Lord  Vishnu  gave  the pot to 
the deities who became immortal after drinking ambrosia. A tremendous battle was  fought 
between the demons a nd the deities. But, the demons were defeated in this battle and fled to  the 
netherworld to protect their lives. The deities eulogised Lord Vishnu and returned to  heaven.  
   
 
SATI GIVES UP HER  LIFE  
On being enquired by Bhisma about the reason why Sati gave  up her life, Sage Pulastya  narrated 
the following tale  --- 
 
Once,  Daksha  Prajapati  had organised  a grand  yagya  in which  he had invited  everybody  except 
Lord Shiva. This Yagya was presided over by four prominent sages ---Vashishtha,  Angika, 
Brihaspati and N arada. Sati went to attend the yagya despite Lord Shiva's reluctance to send  her. 
After reaching there she asked Daksha about the reason why he had not invited Lord  Shiva.  
 
Daksha  said---"Your  husband  is unworthy  of being  in the company  of other  deities,  because  of 
his abhorrent appearance. He smears ashes on his body and wanders through the  cremation 
grounds.  In the name  of clothes,  your husband  puts on tiger's  skin.  A garland  of skulls  keep  on 
hanging down his neck. All species of serpents coil around his  body. Do you think he is  eligible 
to sit in the company of the deities? Your husband had brought great shame on me and this is  the 
reason why I did not invite  him."  
 
Sati could no more listen to her husband's criticism and gave up her life by jumping into  the 
oblation -fire.When the news of Sati's death reached Lord Shiva, he became extremely  furious 
and sent his ganas  to avenge  her death.  The Ganas  went  and created  havoc  at the oblation - 
site.After the death of Sati, Lord Shiva became a recluse and lost a ll interest in his life. His  mind 
was preoccupied by nothing else but the thoughts of her beloved.One day, Sage Narada  informed 
Lord Shiva about Sati's rebirth as the daughter of Himvan and Mena. Lord Shiva  became 
extremely pleased by this good news. Event ually, he reunited with her eternal consort  Parvati.  
   
 
THE ORIGIN OF DEITIES, DEMONS and  SERPENTS  
Bhisma  requested  Sage  Pulastya  to explain  how different  entities  like the deities,  demons  and 
serpents came into  being.  
Pulastya replied ---Having failed in his repeated attempts of increasing population by the  means 
of 'sankalpa' Daksha Prajapati was left with no option but to take the help of copulative  creation. 
He begot sixty daughters from his wife named Virini. In course of time ten of them were  married 
to Dharma  whose  names  were ---Arundhati,  Vasu,  Jami,  Lamba,  Bhanu,  Marutvati,  Sankalpa, 
Muhurta,  Sadhya  and Vishwa.Vishwa  gave  birth  to Vishwadeva,  while  Sadhya  was the mother 
of Sadhya.  Marutvati  gave  birth  to Marutvan.  Vasu  had eight  sons who became  famou s as the 
Vasus ---yourself (Bhisma), Dhruva, Soma, Dhar, Anil, Anal, Pratyush and Prabhas. Bhanu had  a 
son by the same  name  i.e. Bhanu.  Mahurta  begot  deities,  who were  the lords  of auspicious 
moments.  Lamba  gave  birth  to Ghosh  while  Jami  had a daughter  name d Nagvithi.  Arundhati 
became  the mother  of all the creatures  of this world.  As far as the offspring  of eight  Vasus  are 
concerned, 'you' (Bhisma) have four sons --Shant, Vaitand, Samb and Munibabhru. Dhruva had  a 
son named Kal. While Soma was the father of V archa. Dhar had two sons --Dravin  and 
Havyavah.  Anil had three  sons--- Pran,  Raman  and Shishir.  Anal  also had three  sons---Shakh, 
Upshakh and Naigameya. Pratyush had a son named Deval, who later on became a famous  sage. 
Prabhas was the father of Prajapati Vishwakarma --the architect of the  deities.  
 
The names of the eleven Rudras are ---Ajaikpad, Ahirbudhnya, Virupaksh, Raivat,  Har, 
Bahuroop,  Trayambak,  Savitra,  Jayant,  Pinaki  and Aparajit.  All of them  are said to be the lords 
of the Ganas and have all togeth er 84 crore progenies known as the  Rudraganas.  
 
Sage  Kashyapa  had thirteen  wives ---Aditi,  Diti, Danu,  Arishta,  Sursa,  Surabhi,  Vinta,  Tamra, 
Krodhvasha,  Ira, Kadru,  Khasa  and Muni.  Kashyapa  had two sons from  Diti---Hiranyakashipu 
and Hiranyaksha. Hiranyaka shipu had four sons ---Prahlada, Anuhlad, Sanhlad and  Hlad. 
Prahlada  also had four sons---One of them  was Virochan.  Virochan  was the father  of Bali. 
Banasur, who had one thousand arms, was the eldest son of Bali.Hiranyaksha had four sons,  who 
themselves  had 27 crore  sons and grandsons  in all. Kashyapa  had begotten  one hundred  sons 
from Danu, among whom Viprachitti was the most powerful.Viprachitti had fourteen sons  from 
Sinhika ---Sainhikeya (Rahu), Kansa, Shankh, Nala, Vatapi, Ilwal, Namuchi, Khasrima,  Anjan , 
Narak, Kalnabh, Parmanu, Kalpavirya and  Dhanuvanshavivardhan.  
 
Kashyapa also had six daughters from Tamra --Shuki, Shyeni, Bhasi, Gridhi, Sugridhi  and 
Shuchi.  All six of them  gave  birth  to various  species  of birds.  Shuki  was the mother  of Parrots 
and Owl s. Shyeni gave birth to hawks while Bhasi was the mother of ospreys (a large fish  eating 
birds.)  Gridhi  gave  birth  to Vultures  and Sugridhi  was the mother  of pigeons.  Shuchi  was the 
mother  of cranes,  Swans  and other  similar  aquatic  birds.  Vinita  was the mother of Garuda  and 
Arun ---Supreme among birds. Arun was the father of Sampati and Jatayu. Sursa was the  mother 
of the serpents  and had given  birth  to one thousand  snakes.  Similarly,  Kadru  gave  birth  to one 
thousand cobras.Surabhi, one of the thirteen wives  of Kashyapa had given birth to  cows, 
buffaloes  as well as beautiful  women.  Muni  was the mother  of the celestial  damsels  --apsaras. 
Arishta gave birth to Kinnars and Gandharvas. Ira was the mother of various vegetation  like 
grass, trees, creepers and bushe s. Khasa gave birth to crore of Rakshashas (monsters)  and 
Yakshas.Kashyapa had also begotten forty -nine Marudganas from  Diti. 
   
 
THE ORIGIN OF  MARUDGANAS  
Bhisma requested Sage Pulastya to describe how all the Marudganas came into  existence.  
Pulastya  replied--- All the sons and grandsons  of Diti had perished  in the battle  fought  between 
the deities and demons. Diti ---the mother of daityas (demons) wanted to take revenge, so  she 
started doing a penance at the bank of river Saraswati, which lasted for 100 yea rs.Being  pleased 
by her austere penance Sage Kashyapa arrived and expressed his desire to bless her with a  boon. 
Diti wanted  a mighty  son who could  kill Indra.  Sage  Kashyapa  then implanted  his sperms  in 
Diti's  womb  and instructed  her to remain  there  (where  she had been  doing  penance)  for 100 
years.  He also instructed  her on various  do's and don'ts  which  a pregnant  woman  is expected  to 
observe. Diti agreed to follow his instructions.Mean while, Indra got wind of her pregnancy  and 
became scared. He wanted to destroy the foetus at any cost, so he arrived at the place where  Diti 
was staying. He had disguised himself to avoid being recognized by Diti. He engaged himself  in 
her servitude, waiting for an opportune moment to destroy the  foetus.  
 
This way, ninety -nine years had passed and only three days were remaining after which Diti  was 
expected to give birth to a son. As the inevitable day approached nearer, Indra started  becoming 
restless. One day, Diti was very tired and fell down asleep. Her hair was untied and  her head had 
stooped  down  while  she was sleeping,  just opposite  to the instructions  Kashyapa  had given  to 
her. Finding the moment opportune, Indra entered into Diti's womb and cut the foetus into  seven 
pieces with his Vajra. The seven fragments of foetus instantaneously got transformed into  seven 
infants and started wailing. Indra became furious and once again he attacked them with his  vajra 
and severed them into seven pieces each. But to Indra's sheer amazement, there were 49  infants, 
all wailing  loudly.  He tried to stop them  from  crying  by shouting  'Marud'  (don't  cry), but to no 
avail.  
 
Indra  realized  that the infants  had attained  immortality  on account  of the 'Pournamasi  Vrata', 
which  Diti had devoutly  observed  during  the course  of her penance.  Indra  named the infants  as 
Marudganas and blessed them. He then begged for Diti's forgiveness and took her along with  the 
Marudganas to heaven. The Marudganas, despite being born in the clans of demons,  never 
associated with them and hence were revered even by the deities.Bhisma expressed his  curiosity 
to know about the detailed description of all the fourteen manvantars. Pulastya said --The first 
manvantar was called Swayambhuva, named after Swayambhuva - Manu. Yamya was  the 
prominent deity of this manvantar. Marichi  and other six prominent sages were the Saptarishis  of 
this manvantar. Swayambhuva Manu had ten sons ---Aghnigha, Agnibahu, Vibhu,  Savan, 
Jyotishman, Dyutiman, Havya, Medha, Medhatithi and  Vasu.  
 
The second  manvantar  was named  after Swarochish  Manu.  Swaroch ish Manu  had four sons-- 
Nabh, Nabhasya, Prasriti and Bhavan. Tushit was the prominent deity of this second  manvantar. 
Dattatreya,  Atri, Chyavan,  Stanba,  Pran,  Kashyapa  and Brihaspati  were  the saptarishis  of this 
manvantar.  
 
The third  manvantar  was called  Autam  and derived  its name  from  Autami  Manu,  who had ten 
sons--Isha, Urj, Tanuj, Shuchi, Shukra, Madhu, Madhav, Nabhasya, Nabh and  Saha, 
Bhanusangyak was the prominent deity of this manvantar. Sage Urj and other six sages were  the 
saptarishis  then.  
 
 The fourth  manvantar  was called  Tamas --named  after Tamas  Manu,  who also had ten sons like 
his predecessor.  The names  of his sons were --Akalmash,  Tapodhanva,  Tapomool,  Tapodhan,  
Taporashi,  Tapasya,  Sutapasya,  Parantap,  Tapobhagi  and Tapoyogi.  Kavi,  Prithu,  Agni,  Akapi, 
Kapi, Janya and Dhama were the Saptarishis of this manvantar, while Sadhyagana was  the 
prominent  deity.  
 
The fifth manvantar  was called  Raivat --named  after Raivat  Manu,  who had ten sons as well-- 
Varuna, Tatvadarshi, chitiman, Havyap, Kavi, Mukt, N irutsuk, Satva, Vimoh and  Prakashak, 
Bhutraja  and Prakriti  were  the two prominent  deities  of this manvantar  and the names  of the 
saptarishis were --Devabahu, Subahu, Parjanya, Somap, Muni, Hiranyaroma and  Saptashva.  
 
Next arrived the sixth manvantar ---Chaks hush. This Manvantar derived its  name from 
Chakshush Manu, who had ten sons and among whom Ruru was the most prominent one.  Lekh, 
Ribhu,  Prithagbhoot,  Varimool  and Divau  were  the prominent  deities  of this manvantar.  The 
names of Saptarishis were --Bhrigu, Sudhama, Viraj, Vishnu, Narada, Vivaswan and  Abhimani.  
 
The present manvantar, which is the seventh in order, is called Vaivaswat. The Saptarishis of  this 
manvantar are ---Atri, Vashishtha, Kashyapa, Gautam yogi, Bhardwaj, Vishwamitra  and 
Jamdagni.  
 
The eighth manvantar  will be called  Savarnya  and will be named  after Savarni  Manu,  Savarni 
Manu will have ten sons ---Dhriti, Variyan, Yavasu, Suvarna, Dhrishti, Charishnu, Adya,  Sumati, 
Vasu and Shukra. The Saptarishis of this manvantar will be --Ashwatthama,  RishyaSringa, 
Kaushikya, Galav, Shatanand, Kashyap and  Parashurama.  
 
The ninth  manvantar  will be named  after Ruchi --Manu  and will be called  Rauchya  manvantar. 
Ruchi Manu will have a son named  Rauchya.  
 
The tenth manvantar will be called Bhautya and will derive  its name from Bhautya Manu --son of 
Bhuti.  
 
The eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth manvantars will be named after  Merusavarni, 
Ribhu,  Veetdhama  and Vishkvasen  Manus  respectively.  All these  fourteen  Manus  successively 
rule this world for the total  period of 1000 Chaturyugas. At the end of Kalpa each of them  unite 
with Lord  Brahma.  
   
 
KING PRITHU AND THE SURYA  DYNASTY  
Bhisma  enquired  Sage  Pulastya  about  the mighty  King  Prithu  upon  whom  the earth  was named 
as Prithvi.  
 
Sage Pulastya replied ---Anga -Prajapati was the descendant of Swayambhuva Manu and  Sunitha 
was his wife. In course of time, Sunitha gave birth to a son, who was named Vena. After  growing 
up, Vena turned out to be an extremely irreligious person and used to spend his time  committing 
all sorts of immoral deeds. The sages tried to bring him to the virtuous path but to no avail.  They 
became furious and cursed Vena as the result of which he died. The sages then churned his  dead 
body, which resulted into the manifestation of a mean caste calle d Mlechchha. They kept  on 
churning  his body  and in the process,  an extremely  virtuous  entity  manifested  from  the right  
hand  of Vena.  He held various  weapons  like mace,  bow and arrows  in his hands.  He was none 
other than Prithu, the embodiment of Lord  Vishn u. 
 
After being crowned as a king, Prithu was saddened to see the prevalence of  immorality 
throughout  the length  and breadth  of earth.  The lack of virtuosity  and religiousness  among  the 
inhabitants of earth made him extremely furious. He decided to destroy  the earth. The  earth 
became  scared  and fled in the guise  of a cow.  Prithu  chased  her wherever  she went.  At last, the 
cow halted at a place as she had got tired. To save her life, the cow agreed to fulfill all the  desires 
of Prithu.  Prithu  then milked  the cow,  which  later on got transformed  into cereals.  Similarly  all 
the deities, ancestors and other human -beings milked the cow and received numerous  invaluable 
things.  
 
Prithu was a just king. Peace and prosperity prevailed during his reign. People were reli gious  and 
free from any kind of sorrow. The earth is named after him as Prithvi.Sage Pulastya then went  on 
to give a detailed  description  of Surya  dynasty ---Vivaswan  (Surya)  had three  queens ---Sangya, 
Ragyi and Prabha. Ragyi had a son named Raivat while So mgya was the mother of  Vaivaswat -- 
Manu,  Yama  and Yamuna.  Once,  Sangya  being  unable  to bear the extreme  radiance  of Surya 
created a superficial entity from her body and instructed her to act as Surya's wife in her  absence. 
The name  of this superficial  woma n was chhaya,  who had two sons and two daughters  from 
Surya.  The names  of her sons were  Savarna --Manu  and Shanaishchar,  while  the names  of her 
daughters were Tapti and  Vishti.  
 
Shanaishchar  became  immortal  as a planet  while  Yamuna  and Tapti  became  rivers.  Vaivaswat 
Manu  had ten sons among  whom  'Ila' was the eldest.  After  appointing  Ila as his successor, 
Vaivaswat,  manu  went  to do penance.Once,  Ila transformed  into a woman  after tresspassing  a 
forest  where  Lord  Shiva  and Parvati  were  enjoying  privacy.  It was Lord  Shiva's  curse  that any 
male who ventured in to that forbidden forest would become a woman. Later on, Buddh  became 
enchanted by Ila's beauty and married  her. 
 
Meanwhile, when Ila did not return to his kingdom, his brother Ikshvaku went in search of  him. 
Ikshvaku reached the outskirts of the same forest but did not enter it. He managed to  please 
Shiva  by his devotion.  When  Lord  Shiva  appeared,  Ikshvaku  requested  him to make  Ila a man 
once  again.  Shiva  told him that it was impossible  but assured  him by saying  "If you perform  an 
Ashwamedha Yagya and donate all the virtue thus acquired to me, then your brother will be  able 
to live as a man for one month.  But, after one month  he will again  become  a woman.  Thus,  his 
form will keep on changing every alternate  months."   
Meanwhile Ila gave birth to four sons among whom Utkal, Gaya and Haritashwa  were 
prominent. This way, Ila became the source from which the lineage of chandra  sprouted. 
Ikshvaku  ruled  over Madhya -desh.  He had one hundred  sons,  all of whom  ruled  the territories 
situated  north  of Meru  Mountain.  Ikshvaku  also had one hundred  and fourteen  more  sons,  who 
ruled over the areas situated south of Meru. Kakusttha was Ikshvaku's grand -son. Kakusttha  had 
a son named  Suyodhan.  Some  other  prominent  kings  coming  from  this lineage  were --Prithu, 
Vrihadashwa, Kuwalashva, Purukutsu, Dharmasetu, Muchukund, Tridhanva,  Traidharun, 
Satyavrat and  Satyarath.  
The most truthful king Harishchandra was Satyarath's son and Rohit was his son. Famous  kings 
like Raghu, Dilip Aja, Dirghabahu and Prajapati Dasharath were the descendants of  Ikshvaku. 
Dasharath  had four sons among  whom  Sri Rama  was the eldest  and who had killed  the demon 
king Ravana. Rama had two sons --Lav and  Kush.  
   
 
BASHKALI --THE DEMON  KING  
Bhisma requested Sage Pu lastya to reveal Why Lord Vishnu had to take incarnation as  Vamana. 
Sage  Pulastya  replied --- Once,  during  Satya  Yuga,  the demons  had defeated  the deities  and 
driven them out from their abode --heaven. The mighty demon, Bashkali was their leader. He  had 
beco me immortal an account of a boon received from Lord Brahma. Indra went to Lord  Brahma 
and narrated  the aweful  tale of the deities.  Lord  Brahma  assured  him that Lord  Vishnu  would 
certainly help in this matter. Lord Brahma contemplated on Lord Vishnu who app eared in a  very 
short time.  
 
When  Lord  Vishnu  came  to know  about  the deities's  pitiable  condition,  he promised  them  that 
very soon Bashkali's wings would be  clipped.  
 
Lord Vishnu said ---"Very soon, I will take incarnation as Vamana. Indra will have to come  along 
with me and demand  a piece  of land measured  by my three  steps.  I shall  then reveal  my giant 
form  and send him to the Patal  loka after making  him bereft  of his kingdom.  In course  of time 
Lord  Vishnu  manifested  as Vamana  from  Aditi's  womb.  His manifes tation  was simultaneously 
marked by various auspicious signs --the air became full of fragrance, the deities  started 
rejoicing, the trees started shedding flowers on their own and all the desires of living beings  were 
fulfilled.  
 
Lord  Vamana  then went  to Bashkali's  palace  accompanied  by Indra.  Both  of them  marvelled  at 
the grandness of Bashkali's city, which was surrounded by a high boundary -wall.Bashkali was  a 
very virtuous  and benevolent  king.  He was truthful  and well versed  in all the scripture.  His 
subject lived  in prosperity  and enjoyed  a long life. When  the demons  saw Indra  coming  with a 
dwarf they informed Bashkali. Bashkali instructed the demons to bring both the guests with  due 
respect.  
 
Bashkali treated his guests with all honor and asked Indra abo ut the reason for his sudden  arrival. 
Indra praised Bashkali's benevolence and said ---"The short brahmin accompanying me  is 
desirous of a piece of land measured by his three steps." Bashkali was amused at this  ridiculous 
demand  and requested  Vamana  to ask for anything  he wished.  But, Vamana  wanted  nothing 
more than a small piece of land measured by his three  steps.  
 
Shukracharya (Bashkali's guru) smelled something fishy and warned him, but he was not  to 
listen. Bashkali then requested Vamana to go ahead an d measure the land by his  three 
steps.Suddenly,  Lord  Vamana  transformed  his physique  into a giant  size. His first step reached 
the Surya -loka and his second step touched the Dhruva -loka. He hit the top of the universe  with 
his third  step as a result  of which water  poured  down.  The water  got collected  and came  to be 
known  as Vaishnavi  river.  But, the land had still not been  measured  and hence  Lord  Vamana  
reminded  Bashkali  of his vow and ultimately  the helpless  Bashkali  surrendered  to the will of 
Lord Vamana and sought his refuge. Lord Vamana blessed him and sent him to  Patalloka.  
   
 
SRI RAMA KILLS  SHAMBUK  
After  killing  the demons  king Ravana,  Sri Rama  returned  to Ayodhya.  Many  sages  had arrived 
there  to bless  him on the occasion  of his crowning  ceremony.  Sage Vashishtha  was one of 
them.As Sri Rama was conversing with the sages a brahmin arrived there with the corpse of his 
son and wailed ---"O son! Your  death  is certainly  due to some  flaw of Sri Rama.  Now,  your 
mother and I have decided to give up our lives as  there is no point in  living."  
 
Sri Rama's heart was filled with grief and he asked Sage Vashishtha as to how the brahmin  could 
be helped.  Sage  Vashishtha  revealed  to Sri Rama  that the brahmin's  son had died a premature 
death  because  of Shambuk.  Vashishtha  said--"Shambuk  is a Shudra  by birth,  but he is doing  an 
austere  penance.  Shudras  are not entitled  to do penance  in all the three  yugas,  except  the Kali 
Yuga. So, only his death can bring back the brahmin's son  alive."  
 
Sri Rama  instructed  both his younger  brothers --Lakshman  and Bharata,  to look after the state's 
affairs in his absence and went in search of Shambuk boarded on his Pushpak Vimana. Sri  Rama 
saw a man doing  penance  at the shore  of a reservoir.  He landed  his Pushpak  Vimana  and went 
near that man. He introduced  himself  and enquired  about  the man's  identity.  Sri Rama  asked -- 
Why are you doing such an austere penance. Who are  you?  
 
Without moving the man replied that he was a shudra named Shambuk. He said --- I am desirous 
of attaining  to devaloka  and hence  I am doing  this penance.  Sri Rama  took out his sword  and 
severed  Shambuk's  head.  All the deities  hailed  Sri Rama  and the brahmin's  child  became  alive 
once  again.  
   
 
MANIFESTATION OF GANESH AND  KARTIKEYA  
Once, before taking her bath, goddess Parvat i anointed unguent on her body and while  removing 
it created a human form from the accumulated dross. The head of this human form resembled  an 
elephant. Parvati then playfully immersed the human -form into river Ganga. But, to her  sheer 
amazement the human form became alive and of enormous size. She accepted him as her son  and 
he was none other than elephant -headed deity  Ganesh.  
 
Once,  Lord  Shiva  became  so deeply  fascinated  by her consort.  Parvati  hat he did not come  out 
from his palace for 1000 years. The d eities became worried and sent Agni to find out the  reason. 
Agni disguised himself as a parrot and entered the palace where Shiva was enjoying privacy  with 
Parvati.  
 
Meanwhile, Parvati went at the bank of a reservoir to quench her thirst. After reaching th ere she 
saw six divine  women  (matrikas)  carrying  water  in the leaves  of lotus  flowers.  As Parvati  was 
thirsty,  she requested  them  to give some  water.  The matrikas  agreed  on the condition  that a son 
born to her (Parvati) should also have to be accepted as t heir son. Parvati gave her conscent.  The 
matrikas gave Parvati water to  drink.  
 
Hardly had Parvati finished drinking water than a divine child emerged out from her womb.  The 
child possessed various weapons like, trident, shakti and a noose in his hands. He  was none  other 
than Kartikeya.The deities appointed Kartikeya as the commander of their army. During  that 
time, a mighty demon named Tarakasur used to torment the deities. Kartikeya killed that  demon 
on the request of  deities.  
   
 
AN IDEAL BRAHMIN AND THE SIGNIFICANCE  OF 
GAYATRI  MANTRA  
Describing about the qualities of an ideal brahmin, Sage Pulastya said --- Once, Narada had  asked 
Lord  Brahma  as to who was worthy  of receiving  Vishnu's  blessings.  Lord  Brahma  had told 
Narada that Lord Vishnu showered his ble ssings on those who engaged themselves in the  service 
of brahmins. A brahmin should be virtuous and well versed in all the scriptures. A brahmin  who 
does not observe the rituals as mentioned in the Vedas, brings disgrace to his ancestors. An  ideal 
brahmin is respectful towards his parents, teachers and treats his guests with due honor. He  never 
aspires for women other than his wife and chants the sacred Gayatri mantra  everyday.  
 
Goddess Gayatri is said to have manifested in the lineage of Sankhyayan. She is  of fair 
complexion  and fire is the symbolical  expression  of her mouth.  Lord  Brahma  dwells  on her 
forehead,  Lord  Vishnu  in her heart  and Lord  Rudra  has his abode  in her braided  hair. The 
Gayatri mantra consists of 24 letters and each of them is related wit h a specific deity. There is  a 
mention  of Gayatri  mantra,  which  consists  of 18 letters.  It begins  with the word  'agni'  and ends 
with 'swaha'. The mantra is as  follows --- 
 
OM AGNERVAKPUNSI YAJURDEDIN JUSHTA SOMAM PIBA  SWAHA.  
 
A person,  who chants  the mantra  for 100 times,  becomes  liberated  from  gravest  of sin. The 
various deities related with the twenty -four letters of Gayatri Mantra are as  follows -- 
 
1st letter --- Agni  2nd letter --- Vayu  3rd letter --- Surya  4th letter --- Akash  
 
5th letter --- Yamraj 6th letter --- Varuna 7th letter --- Brihaspati 8th letter --- Parjanya 
9th letter --- Indra 10th letter --- Gandharva 11th letter --- Poosha 12th letter --- Mitra 
13th letter --- Twashta 14th letter --- Vasu 15th letter --- Marudganas 16th letter --- Soma  
17th letter --Angira 18th letter --Vishwadeva 19th letter --Ashwins 20th letter  --Prajapati 
21st letter ---All deities 22nd letter --- Rudra 23rd letter --- Brahma 24th letter --- Vishnu  
A devotee should then perform the ritual of 'nyas' by mentally estab lishing different words of  the 
Gayatri mantra in the various parts of his body as given below  -- 
 
OM BHUH  ---in the heart,  OM BHUVAH  --- in the head,  OM SWAH  ---in the top-knot,  OM 
TATSAVITURVARENYAM --in the whole body, OM BHARGODEVASYA DHIMAHI    ---in 
both eyes, OM DHIYO YO NAH PRACHODAYAT ---in both  hands.  
 
Regular chanting of Gayatri mantra bestowes similar virtues attained by the study of all the  four 
vedas.  A brahmin  who does not know  Gayatri  mantra  is considered  to be worse  than a shudra. 
Anybody who  chants Gayatri mantra attains  salvation.  
 
 BRAHMIN'S  LIVELIHOOD  
Describing how a brahmin should earn his livelihood, Lord Brahma said to Narada --Alms,  which 
a brahmin  gets without  making  any demand  for it, is called  Vritta.  'Unchhavritti'  is even  better 
than Vritti  and it means  collecting  foodgrain  which  are scattered  in places  like fields,  granary, 
market -place  etc. A brahmin  should  accept  the Dakshaina  that his host gives  him after the 
completion of yagya ceremony. He should engage himself in educational  activities. He can  also 
earn his livelihood by engaging himself in other auspicious  activities.  
 
If the circumstances do not permit a brahmin to earn his livelihood by any of the  above 
mentioned  means,  then he may opt for the occupation  of a kshatriya.  In such a case,  he should 
endeavor  to have  mastery  both over the vedas  as well as different  weaponary.  Battle  should  be 
his last option. When the very existence of religiousness is at stake, he should wage a war  against 
irreligious people and to protect the  religion.  
 
In an emergency  situation,  a brahmin  can also choose  the occupation  of a Vaishya  and earn his 
livelihood by doing business or agriculture. But, while earning his livelihood by  doing 
agriculture,  he should  in no circumstances  abandon  his own duties (duties  of a brahmin).  He 
should be honest while doing business and never try to exploit the  customers.  
   
 
NAROTTAM ---THE BRAHMIN  
Describing  about  the importance  of five virtuous  deeds,  Pulastya  said to Bhisma ---"The  five 
supreme virtuous deeds are --obedience to parents, faithfulness towards husband, equanimity,  not 
having enmity towards friends and devotion towards Lord Vishnu. By pleasing his father,  one 
pleases all the deities. Mother is superior even to all the places of pilgrimage combined  together . 
 
Pulastya then narrated the same tale to Bhisma, which lord Brahma had once told  some 
prominent sages  --- 
 
Once, there lived a famous Brahmin called Narottam. He had acquired divine powers on  account 
of his austere  penance  but unfortunately  he never  treated his parents  with respect.  After  taking 
his daily  bath,  Narottam  hanged  his wet clothes  in the open  sky without  any support  and they 
used  to  dry  without  falling  down  on  the  earth.  This  special  power  had  made  him      very 
arrogant.One  day, a crane  flying  in the sky passed  dung  on his face,  which  made  him very 
furious. Narottam cursed the crane as the result of which it was burnt to death. His special  power 
vanished due to the sin acquired by killing an innocent bird. Now, no longer his clot hes remained 
in suspended position in the  sky. 
 
Narottam became very sad. Suddenly he heard a heavenly voice instructing him to see  a 
'chandala' named Mook. "His discourses would be beneficial for you." - Said the heavenly  voice. 
Narottam went in search of Mook --the chandal and found him in the servitude of his  parents. 
Mook  was a great  devotee  of his parents  and his total devotion  towards  his parents  had blessed 
him with an extraordinary power -his house used to hang in the air without any support.  Narottam 
was deeply  amazed  at this wonderful  sight.  He wanted  to know  how Mook  had acquired  such 
divine powers. But, Mook requested him to wait, which made Narottam very angry. Mook  then 
told Narottam ---"I can talk to you only after attending  to my parents.  I am not that crane  which 
was charred  to death  by your curse.  If you don't  have  time then go and meet  that 'faithful -wife. 
She will answer your  questions."  
 
Narottam  did not know  where  that faithful  wife lived,  so he stood  there  wondering  what  to do 
next. Suddenl y Lord Vishnu emerged from Mook's house disguised as a brahmin. He  took 
Narottam to the 'faithful -wife's house. All along the way Lord Vishnu preached Narottam on  the 
qualities  of a chaste  woman.  As both of them  were  about  to reach  that chaste  woman's  hous e, 
lord Vishnu disappeared, leaving Narottam all  alone.  
 
Narottam requested the woman to enlighten him on the finer points of virtuosity. But, the  woman 
was busy attending her husband and requested him to wait. Narottam threatened to curse her,  to 
which  the woman  replied ---I am not that crane  whom  you had cursed.  If you are in a hurry  then 
you can go and meet 'Dharm --Tuladhar'. He is an honest businessman and is capable  of 
answering your  queries."  
 
Lord  Vishnu  once  again  appeared  from  that woman's  house  disguised  as a brahmin.  Narottam 
asked him as to how were both Mook and faithful wife aware of the incident in which the  crane 
was charred to death. Lord Vishnu told him that both of them had acquired this special power  by 
the virtue of their respective  religiousness.  
 
 Lord  Vishnu  and Narottam  proceeded  towards  the place  where  Dharmtuladhar  did his business 
transactions. As they were about to reach the place, Lord Vishnu disappeared once again,  leaving 
Narottam  all alone.Narottam  saw Dharmtuladhar  busy  in his dealings  with total honesty.  He 
requested  him to reveal  as to what  made  the wet clothes  to hang  in the air without  any support. 
Dharmtuladhar requested him to wait but Narottam was in a hurry to get answer to his  questions. 
Dharmtuladhar told Narottam --Please wait for sometime, as I am busy doing my business 
transactions.  If you don't  have  time then you can go and meet  Adrohak,  who is fully capable  of 
giving answer to your questions. Lord Vishnu once again accompanied him disguised as  a 
brahmin.  
 
When  both of them  were  about  to reach  the place  where  Adrohak  used to live, lord Vishnu 
disappeared  and Narottam  was left all by himself,  once  again.  Narottam  requested  Adrohak  to 
preach  on the essence  of religiousness.  Adrohak  was a man of impeccable  conduct  and had full 
control  over the sensual  urges.  He advised  Narottam  to meet  the supreme  devotee  of Lord 
Vishnu, who lived nearby. Adrohak said -- You would get answers to all your questions. He  will 
reveal to you the reason that made wet clothes to hang in air with out any support. Narottam  then 
proceeded towards the place where the supreme devotee of Lord Vishnu lived. Lord Vishnu  once 
again  accompanied  him in the guise  of a brahmin.  After  reaching  there,  Narottam  expressed  his 
desire  of seeing  Lord  Vishnu.  The supreme devotee  took him to a temple  situated  inside  the 
house -premise.  
 
Narottam  was amazed  to see the same  brahmin,  who had been  accompanying  him all along  the 
way, siting on a lotus flower. He realized that the brahmin was lord Vishnu himself. Lord  Vishnu 
blessed  him and said---Be respectful  towards  your parents,  if you want  to attain  to my abode.  I 
dwell in the houses of people who are virtuous, truthful, possessed equanimity and who have  full 
control  over their passion.  This is why you found  me present  at the homes  of chandal,  Tuladhar 
and Adrohak. Narottam realized his mistake and decided to be in the servitude of his parents  for 
the rest of his  life. 
   
 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RUDRAKSHA, AMLA  AND  
TULSI  
Once, while describing about the importance of Rudraksha  to the sages, Vyasa said --- One who 
wears  a Rudraksha  rosary  is supreme  among  all human  beings.  The mere  sight  of such a holy 
man absolves  people  of their sin. A Rudraksha  bead  bears  features  of a Linga  and yoni on its 
surface. One should not wear a rudra ksha on which above mentioned features are  absent. 
Similarly two joint beads should never be worn. All the mantras become doubly powerful  when 
chanted  with the help of rudraksha -rosary.During  Satya  Yuga,  there  lived  a mighty  demon 
named  Tripurasur.  He had conquered  the deities  and was capable  of moving  in the space.  The 
deities  sought  help of Lord  Shiva,  who killed  Tripurasur  by the sight  of his third -eye. In the 
process,  few drops  of sweat,  emanating  from  Shiva's  body  fell down  on the earth.  These  sweat 
drops got transformed into a large  Rudraksha -tree. 
 
Amla is a very nutritious fruit and great religious significance has been attached to it. Amla  fruit 
is very dear to Lord  Vishnu  and its use on the auspicious  day of Ekadashi  brings  unmatched 
virtue. A pers on who regularly eats amla enjoys a long life.The following tale  adequately 
describes the religious importance of amla  -- 
 
Once  upon  a time,  a chandala  went  into the forest  for hunting.  He hunted  many  deer and birds. 
Feeling hungry, he saw an amla tree and  climbed up the tree. This way he satiated his hunger  by 
eating  sweet  amla  fruits.  Unfortumately  while  he was climbing  down  the tree, he fell down  and 
died.When  the attendants  of Yamaraj  arrived  to take back  his soul,  they could  not do so even 
after repeat ed attempts. The attendants of Yamaraj became very surprised and went to the  sages 
for clarification.  The sages  revealed  to the attendants  that they could  not go near the chandala's 
dead body, because he had eaten amla just before his death. Such is the gl ory of  amla!  
 
Once Kartikeya asked Lord Shiva about the holiest tree, which was capable of giving  salvation. 
Lord  Shiva  replied ---The Tulsi  plant  is supreme  among  all the vegetations.  She is very dear to 
lord Vishnu and fulfills all the desires of a man. L ord Krishna dwells near the place where  there 
is a Tulsi plant. Spirits and ghosts never dare to venture near the Tulsi plant. If a man attaches  a 
Tulsi leaf to his Shikha at the time of his death, he is liberated from all his sins. One  who 
worships Lord V ishnu by offering Tulsi -leaves attains  salvation.  
   
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF SURYA'S  WORSHIP  
Once,  while  describing  about  the importance  of Surya's  worship  to Vaishampayan,  Sage  Vyasa 
narrated the following tale  --- 
 
There  lived  a king named  Bhadreshwar.  He ruled over Madhyadesh.  Once  his left hand  was 
infected  with leprosy.  Bhadreshwar,  fearing  the prospect  of dreadful  leprosy  spreading  to his 
whole  body,  decided  to end his life. He expressed  his desire  to the head -priest.  The head -priest 
cautioned  Bhadreshwar  that if he went  ahead  with his decision,  then the whole  kingdom  would 
be destroyed. He said --- 'You will be cured of leprosy, if you worship Lord  Surya.'  
 
The head -priest then told the king about the appropriate rituals of Surya --worship.  King 
Bhadreshwar  began his austerities and worshipped Lord Surya by chanting mantras and  offering 
articles  like Naivedya,  fruits,  Ardhya,  Akshat  etc to the deity.  King  Bhadreshwar  was cured  of 
his leprosy within a year by the virtue of his deep devotion towards Lord  Surya . 
   
 
BHUMI  KHAND  
 
DIFFERENT TYPES OF SIN AND  VIRTUE  
Once,  Yayati  requested  Matali  to describe  the various  sinful  and virtuous  deeds,  which  a man 
normally commits in his  life. 
 
Matali replied ---'One who criticizes the vedas and follows the religion of othe r's  after 
abandoning his own or torments virtuous people is a grave sinner. Similarly, not respecting  one's 
parents, not giving 'Dakshaina' to a brahmin after the completion of a shradha  ceremony, 
studying the scriptures in an impure physical state are so me other sinful  deeds.  
 
'One who obstructs  a hungry  man from  having  his food or thirsty  person  from  quenching  his 
thirst commits a sin similar to that of killing a  brahmin.  
 
Matali described some other types of sins  --- 
 
Back biting, seeing faults with oth ers and demeaning their efforts, acquiring other's  land  by 
unfair  means,  killing  innocent  animals,  having  illicit  relationship  with women  other  than one's 
wife, telling lies, showing disrespect to the guests etc, are considered to be sinful  deeds.  
 
Descri bing about the various types of virtuous deeds, Matali said  --- 
Non-violence, forgiveness, truthfulness, devotion towards god, benevolence, abstinence,  oblation 
and meditation are some of the virtuous deeds. Donating food -grains, domesticated animals  like 
horse, cow etc., giving water to a thirsty person are some other types of virtuous deeds. A  person 
who donates wooden sandals a needy brahmin attains to the heaven. Worshipping Lord Shiva  or 
Lord Vishnu enables a man to attain to the Shivaloka or Vishnulok a respectively.  
   
 
KING YAYATI PROPAGATES  VAISHNAVA --DHARMA  
King Yayati was the son of Nahush and a descendant of Soma --dynasty. He was a great  devotee 
of Lord  Vishnu  and had contributed  a lot in the propagation  of Vaishnava --dharma.  Yayati  had 
sent many emissaries in all directions to propagate Vaishnava --dharma. During Yayati's reign  his 
subject were prosperous and were free from any kind of sorrow. Peace prevailed everywhere  and 
people did not experience any natural calamity like draught or  famine.  
 
King Yayati enjoyed an unbelievably long life of one lakh years. He was blessed with  eternal 
youth and his appearance was enough to give an inferiority complex to a young man. All this,  he 
had attained  by the virtue  of his supreme  devotion  towards  Lord  Vishnu . Indra  was very scared 
of Yayati's increasing popularity and feared that if his virtuosity remained intact, he would  very 
soon become the ruler of heaven. Indra instructed Kamadeva and Rati to find some means so  that 
king Yayati could be enticed by human weaknesses like lust and  infatuation.  
 
Kamadeva, accompanied by other Gandharvas went to Yayati's palace and sought his  permission 
to stage a play. Yayati gave his permission and the play commenced. Rati appeared on the  stage 
as a beautiful woman and was s uccessful in corrupting the thoughts of Yayati. Yayati became  so 
enchanted  by Rati's  beauty  that he lost his senses  and fell down  unconscious.  Finding  the time 
opportune 'Vriddhavastha' (deity of old age) and 'Kamadeva' entered Yayati's body. This way  the 
deities were successful in their designs and now the signs of old -age started to become evident  in 
Yayati.  
   
 
YAYATI MARRIES  ASHRUBINDUMATI  
Once, king Yayati went into a forest for hunting. He saw a stag, which had four horns and  chased 
it. The deer led him deep  into the forest  and then disappeared.  Yayati  was tired and thirsty.  He 
saw a lake and decided  to quench  his thirst.  First of all he took his bath and then drank  sweet 
water  from  the lake.  As Yayati  was relaxing  at the bank  of that lake,  he heard  a sweet  voice 
singing  a song.  Yayati  proceeded  towards  the direction  from  which  the sound  was coming.  He 
saw a beautiful  woman  singing  a song.  Her companion  accompanied  the beautiful  woman. 
Yayati became enchanted by the divine beauty of that woman and wante d to marry her.  The 
beautiful woman's companion told Yayati that her friend could marry him only after he shed  the 
signs of his old  age. 
 
The beautiful woman was Ashrubindumati --the daughter of Rati. Vishala -her companion was  the 
daughter of Varuna. Yayati  returned to his palace and requested his two sons --Taru and Yadu  to 
exchange their youth in lieu of his old age, but both of them refused to oblige him. Yayati  cursed 
both of  them.  
 Yayati  had a son---Puru  from  his wife named  Sharmishtha.  When  he made  the same  request           
to Puru,  he agreed  without  any hesitation.  Yayati  became  pleased  with Puru  and appointed  him 
as his  successor.  
 
Now, Yayati became young once again and went to meet Ashrubindumati.  But, 
Ashrubindumati's  friend  Vishala  was still not convinced  and expressed  apprehension  that her 
friend would never play second fiddle to his two wives --Sharmishtha and Devayani.King  Yayati, 
being blinded by his lust, assured Vishala that Ashrubindumati would enjoy the  supreme 
authority  and she had nothing  to fear. He said--"I promise  that you will be my only wife and I 
will have nothing to do with my  wives."  
 
This way Yayati married Ashrubindumati and enjoyed a blissful married life for  twenty -thousand 
years.  Once,  Ashrubindumati  expressed  her desire  of visiting all the divine  places --Indraloka, 
Brahmaloka, Shivaloka and Vishnuloka. Yayati took back his old age from Puru and returned  his 
youth.  He appointed  Puru  as his successor  and instructed  his subject  to live peacefully.  But, the 
people  wanted  to be with Yayati,  so all of them  accompanied  him to the heaven.  Yayati  visited 
all the divine places and ultimately attained to  Vishnuloka.  
   
 
KUNJAL --THE ENLIGHTENED  PARROT  
Once, while describing about the importance of a teacher, Lord Vishnu had narrated  the 
following tale to king Vena --- Sage Chyavan came from the lineage of  Bhargav.  Once,  he 
arrived  at Omkareshwar  with the objective  of acquiring  knowledge.  Since  he was tired,  he 
decided  to take rest under  the shade  of a Banyan  tree. A parrot  named  Kunjal  lived on that tree. 
The parrot  had four young  ones--Ujjawal,  Samujjwal,  Vijjwal  and Kapinjal.  Kunjal  was a very 
learned  parrot  and had mastery  over all the scriptures.  Once,  Ujjawal  requested  Kunjal  to give 
discourse on various aspects of religiousness. Kunjal  said---The whole world is full of sorrow.  A 
man can be liberated  from  his sorrow  by the means  of salvation  because  salvation  is free from 
sorrow.  Salvation  can be attained  with the help of abstinence,  self-control  and having  deep 
devotion in lord Vishnu. The soul being enlightened is also called 'Paramatma'. But, covered  by 
the darkness of ignorance it becomes difficult for the soul to attain salvation. A devotee  can 
meditate on both the forms of Lord Vishnu --Sakar (with form) and Nirakar (formless).  But, 
meditating  on the Sakar  form  is easy for anybody.  On the other  hand  only an enlightened  soul 
can meditate on the 'nirakar' form of Lord Vishnu. There are various austerities related with  Lord 
Vishnu and which if observed by a devotee, pleases him --Jaya, Vi jaya, Jayanti,  Vanjuli, 
Tilgandha, Trihsprisha, Akshanda and Manoraksha. All these austerities are similar to  different 
types  of Ekadashi  or Dwadashi  Vrata.  Similarly,  two other  austerities  namely  Ashunyashayan 
and Janmashtami  are capable  of freeing  a man from  all his sin. A devotee  who chants  Shatnam 
stotra attains  salvation.  
   
 
KUNJAL PREACHES  VIJJWAL  
Describing the virtue of benevolence to Vijjwal. Kunjal --the learned parrot narrated  the 
following tale  --- 
Once,  there  lived  a king named  Subahu  who ruled  over chola  desha.  A learned  brahmin  named 
Jaimini used to counsel him on religious and spiritual matters. One day, while Jaimini was  giving 
a discourse  on the virtue  of benevolence,  Subahu  requested  him to describe  about  those  deeds 
that enables a man eit her to attain to the heaven or to  hell. 
 
Jaimini replied --- One who earns his livelihood by improper means definitely goes to  hell. 
Similarly,  atheists,  licentious  people,  proudy,  backbiters  and ungrateful  people  go to hell too. 
One who gobbles up other's wealth by illegal means or shows disrespect to his guest goes to  hell. 
One who is a habitual  liar or one who kills innocent  animals  or one who has abandoned  the 
religious path is certain to go to hell.One who is truthful and engages himself in various  virtuous 
deeds like penance, meditation, study of the scriptures, goes to the heaven. One who is  respectful 
towards  his elders  and leads  a virtuous  life goes to the heaven.  In the same  manner,  he who is 
benevolent  and free from  vices  like jealousy  hatred  etc. goes to the heaven.  Similarly,  one who 
leads  his life as per the instructions  given  in the scriptures  or has full control  over his sensual 
desires goes to the  heaven.  
 
King Subahu was so impressed by Jaimini's preaching that he decided to spend rest of his  life in 
the service  of lord Madhusudan.  He performed  countless  oblations  as long as he was alive  and 
attained to Vishnuloka after his  death.  
   
 
KUNJAL NARRATES ABOUT HIS PREVIOUS  BIRTH  
Sage  Chyavan,  who had been  listening  to the narration  of Kunjal,  was amazed  by his profound 
knowledge. He asked Kunjal ---O great soul! Who are you? From where did you acquire  such 
divine  knowledge.'  
 
Kunjal, who remembered everything about his previous birth  said-- 
 
In my previous  birth,  I was the youngest  son of a brahmin  named  Vidyadhar.  My name  was 
Dharma Sharma. Seeing my dislike for study, my father became worried about my future. I  used 
to waste my time loitering here and there. People used to make fun of my stupidity, which  made 
me extremely sad. I decided to acquire knowledge but did not find anybody willing to teach  me. 
 
In due course  of time I became  old but was still an idiot.  One day, I was sitting  in a temple 
cursing my fate. Suddenly, a sage arrived there and asked me as to what made me so sad.  I 
narrated my woe ful tale. The sage felt pity on my condition and blessed me with  divine 
knowledge that made me capable of having advance knowledge of all the future incidents of  the 
world.  Sage  Chyavan  was curious  to know  about  the reason  that made  Dharma  Sharma  to be 
born as a  parrot.  
 
Kunjal  replied --- O Brahmin!  A man is influenced  by the company  he keeps.  The reason  why I 
took birth  as a parrot  is related  with an incident,  which  occurred  in my previous  birth.  Once,  a 
wicked fowler sold a parrot to a brahmin who in turn  presented it to me. With the passage of  time 
I became very attached with the parrot and gradually deviated from my virtuous path. As a  result 
all my divine knowledge vanished and I became an idiot once  again.  
One day, a cat arrived and killed that parrot in my absence. I became very sad and used to  spend 
my time crying  over the dead  parrot.  Ultimately  I died but even  at the time of death,  my mind 
was preoccupied  with the thoughts  of my beloved  parrot.  As a result,  I was born as a parrot  but 
fortunately  I remembered  my previous  birth  even  while  I was still in my mother's  womb.  I was 
full of remorse  and used to curse  myself  for having  wasted  my life. Sage  Chyavan  was amazed 
by the narration of Kunjal --the learned  parrot.  
   
 
SWARGA --KHANDA  
 
SOME PROMINENT HOL Y PLACES OF  BHARATAVARSHA  
 
Once, sages requested Suta to describe about the most prominent places of pilgrimage situated  in 
Bharatavarsha.  Suta commenced  his narration  by describing  the origin  of creation  and then switched  over 
to the geographical  characte ristics  of Bharatavarsha.  Suta said---'There  are seven  prominent  mountain  
ranges  in Bharatavarsha --Mahendra,  Malay,  Sahya,  Shaktiman,  Rikshavan,  Vindhya  and Pariyatra.  Some  
prominent rivers supplying potable water to the inhabitants of Bharatavarsha are ---Ganga,  Sindhu,  
Saraswati,  Godwari,  Narmada,  Shatadru,  Yamuna,  Vipasha,  Mahanadi,  Vidisham,  Varuna  etc. The names  
of the main Janapadas situated in the northern part of Bharatavarsha are Kuru, Panchal,  Shalva,  
Matreya,  Jangal,  Shoorsen,  Pulind,  Baudh,  Chedi , Matsya,  Bhoj,  Sindhu,  Utkal,  Koshal,  Madra,  Kalinga,  
Kashi, Malav, Magadh, Videh, Anga, Banga, Surashtra, Kekay, Kashmir and Gandhar.  Similarly,  
Janpadas  like Dravid,  Keral.  Prachya,  Karnatak,  Kuntal,  Chol,  Sauhrid,  Kona,  Korak,  Kalad,  Mushal  and 
Sutap  are situated  in the southern  part of Bharatavarsha.  
 
Suta then described  about  the greatness  of Pushkar  tirth by recounting  an incident  related  with 
the Pandavas --- 
 
"One day, Sage Narada visited the Pandavas who were living in exile. The Pandavas had  visited 
many places during the course of their exile period and wanted to know about the fruits they  had 
acquired due to their  pilgrimage.  
 
"Sage  Narada  then recounted  an incident  when  king Dilip  had once  posed  the same  question  to 
Sage Vashishtha. Sage Vashish tha while describing about the greatness of Pushkar  said--- 
Pushkar  tirth is the holiest  place  where  lord Brahma  has his abode.  Deities  consider  themselves 
fortunate to be at Pushkar. A person who takes a holy dip at Pushkar and worships lord  Brahma 
acquir es virtues equivalent to the accomplishment of the Ashwamedha  Yagya."  
 
Sage  Vashishtha  continued  with the description  of some  other  prominent  places  of pilgrimage 
like Jambumarg, Narmada Amarkantak  etc. 
   
 
JAMBUMARG, RIVER NARMADA  AMARKANTAK  
Continuing wi th his narration, Sage Vashishtha said --- A man desirous of going on a  pilgrimage 
should  first of all visit Jambumarg,  because  it is revered  even  by the deities  and the sages.  By 
visiting this holy place a man acquires virtue equivalent to the accomplishme nt of  an 
Ashwamedha  Yagya  and attains  to Vishnuloka.  A man should  then visit Tundulik  Ashrama, 
Agastya Ashrama and Kanya Ashrama, which are situated near Jambumarg. Taking a dip in  the 
holy water of Kotitirth, situated near Mahakal temple is believed to be stow undiminished  virtue.  
Bhadravat is a famous place of pilgrimage related with Lord Shiva and paying a visit here  gives 
virtue equivalent to donation of 1000  cows.  
 
A man who takes holy dip in river Narmada and performs 'tarpan' in the name of manes  acquires 
fruits similar to the accomplishment of Agnishtom yagya. Narmada is the holiest of all the  rivers. 
A man becomes liberated from his sins by taking bath for three weeks in river  Saraswati. 
Similarly it takes one week of regular bath in river yamuna fo r a man to become absolved of  all 
his sins. The mere touch of Ganga water liberates a man from all his sins, but mere sight of  river 
Narmada is enough to liberate a man from all his  sins. 
 
Kotirudras  are believed  to dwell  in the vicinity  of Amarkantak  moun tain. All together  sixty 
crores and sixty thousand places of pilgrimage are situated all around this holy  mountain. 
Anybody  present  in the vicinity  of this mountain  must  refrain  from  any kind of sinful  deeds. 
Visiting  Amarkantak  mountain  during  solar  and lunar eclipses  is considered  to be extremely 
auspicious. Similarly the confluence site of Narmada and Kaveri is considered to be  sacrosanct. 
Anybody who takes a holy dip in the confluence of Narmada and Kaveri becomes liberated  from 
his sins.  
   
 
'DHARMA TI RTH' AND  YAMUNA -SNAN  
Sage  Narada  continued  with the description  of various  holy places  and said--- "A pilgrim  must 
visit Dharma Tirth, which is named after the lord of death --Dharma. Once upon a  time 
Dharmaraj had performed an austere penance at that plac e this is the reason why it  became 
famous as Dharma Tirth. By visiting Dharma Tirth, a man liberated all his ancestors up  to 
seventh generation. After that a pilgrim should go to Kalap -forest, Saugandhik -forest,  Suvarna - 
Dhumavanti respectively. All the a bove mentioned holy places are capable of giving  salvation."  
 
Describing about the virtues of taking a holy dip in river Kalini (Yamuna) sage Narada said  -- 
 
A person  who takes  a holy dip in Yamuna  becomes  liberated  from  all his sorrows.  The virtue 
acquire d by taking  a bath in Yamuna  is greater  than paying  visits  to various  holy places  like 
Pushkar, Kurukshetra, Brahmavarta and Kashi.Taking a dip in Yamuna also helps in  the 
fulfillment of all the desires of a man. Although, different rituals have been attri buted to  various 
yugas like Satya Yuga --penance, Treta Yuga --knowledge, Dwapar Yuga --yagya and Kali  Yuga -- 
donation, yet virtue of taking a holy dip in Yamuna transcends even  time."  
 
"Although  the whole  stretch  of river  Yamuna  is believed  to be holy,  yet Yamuna  flowing  near 
Mathura holds special importance because of her deep association with lord  Krishna."Narada 
narrated a tale to prove the significance of taking a bath in  Yamuna.  
 
"During  Satya  Yuga  there  lived  a Vaishya  named  Hemakundal.  He had earned  lot of wealth  by 
dint of hard work. Although he was very rich yet happiness deluded him, as he had no  progeny. 
He was worried as to who would inherit his property after his  death.  
"In course  of time,  Hemakundal  attained  old age and after realizing  about  the impermanence  of 
the world indulged himself in virtuous deeds. He was blessed with two sons --Srikundal  and 
Vikundal. When both his sons grew up, Hemakundal went into the forest to do  penance."  
 
"Sri Kundal  and Hemakundal  squandered  the whole  wealth  which  their father  had earned  so 
painstakingly. Both of them were of loose moral character and had illicit relationship with  many 
prostitutes.  In a very short  time they became  poor and both of them  starved  to death.  When  the 
yamdoots  reached  yamloka  after taking  their souls,  Yamraj  ordered --'Put Sri Kundal  in Raurav 
hell but send Vikundal  to the heaven.'  While  Vikundal  was being  taken  to the heaven  he asked 
one of the yamdoots --'The sins committed by my brother and me were almost identitical  then 
why is my brother being sent to hell while I am being sent to  heaven.'  
 
The yamdoot replied -You are being metted out this special treatment on account of your  virtues 
acquired by bathing twice in river Yamuna.There was a brahmin friend of your's  named 
Swamitra.You  had accom panied  him to Mathura  and twice  taken  bath in the holy Yamuna.  By 
the virtue of the first bath you became liberated from all your sins, while the second bath  helped 
you in attaining to the heaven. Vikundal requested the yamdoot to allow his brother  to 
accompany him to heaven. Yamdoot replied that his brother could accompany him to the  heaven 
provided he donated all his virtues to  him. 
 
Vikundal agreed to donate his virtues to his elder brother for the sake of his liberation. This  way, 
both Srikundal and Vik undal attained to the  heaven.  
 KASHIPURI, KAPARDISHWAR AND  GAYA  
On being asked by Yudhisthira about the grandeur of holy places like Kashipuri,  Kapardishwar 
and Gaya. Narada said  --- 
 
Just as Lord  Mahadeva  is supreme  among  all the deities,  in the same  mann er Kashipuri  holds  a 
significant status among all the places of pilgrimage. Hence an individual should make it a  point 
to visit Kashi  once  in his life time.  The famous  Shivalinga  Kopardishwar  is installed  at Kashi 
and is said to fulfill  all the desires  of a man.  Performance  of various  rituals  at Kashi  liberates  a 
man from all his sins -all his flaws are eliminated automatically just by residing in  Kashi.  
 
A devotee who regularly practices meditation in the temple of Lord Kapordishwar  attains 
Yogasiddhi withi n six months. Worshipping Lord Kapardishwar after taking a holy dip  in 
Pishach -mochan kunda liberates a man from gravest of sin like Brahmahatya, etc. Gaya  is 
considered  to be a sacrosanct  place  of pilgrimage  and various  rituals  for the pacification  of the 
souls  of dead  ancestors  are performed  here.  Anybody  who offers  Pindadan  and tarpan  at Gaya 
not only liberates  his ancestors  but also himself.  There  is a very famous  Banyan  tree named 
Akshayvat at Gaya. Gaya is situated at the bank of river  Falgu.  
   
 
PURA NAS --THE EMBODIMENT OF SRI  HARI  
According to Suta, all the Puranas are nothing but the mediums through which Sri Hari  manifests 
himself ---Brahma  Purana  is said to be the forhead  of Sri Hari,  Padma  Purana  is said to be the 
'heart' of Sri Hari, Vishnu Purana  is said to be the 'right arm' of Sri Hari. Shiva Purana is said  to 
be the 'left arm' of Sri Hari. Srimad Bhagawat is said to be his 'thigh', Narada Purana is said to  be 
his 'navel',  Markendeya  Purana  is said to be his 'right -foot'.  Agni  Purana  is said to be his 'left 
foot', Bhavish Purana is said to be his 'right -knee', Brahma Vaivrata Purana is said to be his  'left- 
knee'.  Linga  Purana  is said to be his 'right  ankle',  Varaha  Purana  is said to be his 'left ankle', 
Skanda  Purana  is said to be the hair on the body  of 'Sri Hari.  Vamana  Purana  is said to be his 
skin.  Kurma  Purana  is said to be his back.  Matsya  Purana  is said to be his stomach.  Garuda 
Purana is said to be his bone -marrow. Brahmanda Purana is said to be his  bone.  
 
So, all the Puranas  being  manife station  of different  parts  of Sri Hari's  body  are very sacred  and 
capable of bestowing  salvation.  
   
 
PATAL  -KHAND  
SHESHNAG NARRATES TALES OF SRI RAMA'S RETURN FROM  LANKA  
 
Once,  Sages  requested  Suta to describe  about  Sri Rama's  return  from  Lanka.  Suta narrated the 
same tale, which Sheshnag had once told Vatsyayan. Sheshnag said --After the killing of  demon 
king Ravana,  Sri Rama  appointed  Vibhishan  as the king of Lanka.  He then decided  to return  to 
Ayodhya on Pushpak -Vimana, which Vibhishan had presented to h im. He along with  Sita, 
Lakshman,  Sugreev  and Hanuman  boarded  the aircraft  and flew towards  Ayodhya.The  earth 
looked  beautiful  from  such a high altitude  and Sri Rama  was continuously  describing  about  the 
importance  of various  places  over which  the aircraft  flew.  As the aircraft  was about  to enter  the 
airspace  of Ayodhya,  Sri Rama  recognized  Bharata,  who was living  at Nandigram  at that time. 
Bharata had vowed not to enter Ayodhya till the return of Sri Rama, hence he stayed  at 
Nandigram situated at the outsk irts of Ayodhya awaiting Sri Rama's return. He led an austere  life 
as the result of which he had become weak and  feeble.  
 
On seeing Bharata, Sri Rama instructed Hanuman to inform him about his (Rama's)  arrival. 
Hanuman went to the hermitage of Bharata and informed him about Sri Rama's arrival.  Bharata's 
joy knew no bound and he expressed his desire to reward Hanuman for bringing such  auspicious 
news.  Bharata  then accompanied  Hanuman  and went  to meet  Sri Rama.  Sri Rama's  heart  was 
filled with grief when he s aw Bharata, who looked like a hermit in his 'Valkal' and 'Kaupin'.  On 
the other hand Bharata cursed himself for being the cause of Sri Rama's miseries. Bharata  asked 
for Sri Rama's forgiveness and said ---'O Lord! You had to go into exile only because of me . I can 
never be absolved of my  sin.' 
 
Sri Rama consoled him and after taking Bharata into his embrace enquired about his welfare.  He 
told Bharata  that he had to undergo  the sufferings  of exile  because  of his own destiny.  'You  are 
not at fault. Don't curse  yourself for my misery.' said Sri Rama. At last all of them  including 
Bharata  boarded  Pushpak  Vimana  and the aircraft  took- off for Ayodhya.Continuing  with Sri 
Rama's tale, Sheshnag said --When Sumanth brought the news of Sri Rama's arrival at  Ayodhya, 
people danced in joy, Preparations started being made for Sri Rama's grand reception. The  whole 
city of Ayodhya was decorated with rows of lighted  lamps.  
Sri Rama  and Sita alighted  from  the Pushpak  Vimana  and both of them  were  carried  in a 
palanquin  to the palace. People  stood  in queues  on both sides  of the road with folded  hands.  Sri 
Rama blessed them by raising his hand. First of all Rama went to meet Kaikayi who was full  of 
remorse and guilt. Sri Rama consoled her and then went to meet Sumitra to pay his ob eisance  to 
her. At last, he went to meet his own mother --Kaushalya, who was dying to see him.  Kaushalya 
blessed  Sri Rama,  Sita and Lakshman.  Bharata  then instructed  the royal  astrologers  to decide 
upon  an auspicious  moment  for Sri Rama's  coronation.  Thus  Sri Rama  became  the king of 
Ayodhya. During his reign peace and prosperity prevailed everywhere. People were virtuous  and 
there was no sign of  sin. 
   
 
RAVANA -- THE MIGHTY  DEMON  
People of Ayodhya lived peacefully during Sri Rama's reign until one fateful da y when  they 
were  struck  by a bad news --Sri Rama  had abandoned  Sita after a Washerman  leveled  an unfair 
charge against her character. Such was the greatness of Sri Rama that opinion of each and  every 
individual  was given  due respect  irrespective  of his position and status.  One day, Sage  Agastya 
arrived  in the royal  court  of Sri Rama.  After  the formal  Salutations  were  over.  Sage  Agastya 
complimented Sri Rama for killing  Ravana.  
 
Sri Rama  asked  Agastya --'Who  was Ravana -- the tormentor  of deities?  I am anxious  to know 
about the origin of his whole  clan."  
 
Sage Agastya replied --Vishrava was the grandson of Lord Brahma. His father was sage  Pulastya. 
Vishrava had two wives --Mandakini and Kaikasi. Mandakani's son was Kubera while  Kaikasi 
was the mother  of Ravana,  Kumbhakarna  and Vibhishan.  Kubera  ruled  over Lanka.  One day, 
Kubera,  came  to see his parents  boarded  on his aircraft --Pushpak  Vimana.  After  he returned  to 
Lanka,  Ravana,  who was very much  impressed  by Kubera's  royal  appearances  asked  Kaikasi -- 
"Who was this  fellow? From where did he acquire such an amazing  aircraft."  
 
Kaikasi revealed to Ravana that the guest was none other than his step -brother Kubera. She  said- 
-"Kubera is the son of your step mother --Mandakini. He has made his mother proud by  his 
conduct  but I am ashamed  of you, because  of your inconsequential  existence.  You are no better 
than a  worm."  
 
Ravana decided to prove his mother wrong by acquiring insurmountable power and  authority. 
Ravana  went  to the forest  and performed  an austere  penance  for ten thousand  years  by standing 
on one foot. He fixed his gaze at the sun and never for a moment did he remove his gaze from  it. 
Kumbhakarna and Vibhishan also engaged themselves in austere penance. At last, Lord  Brahma 
became  pleased  and blessed  Ravana  with a vast kingdom.  Ravana  then started  tormenting  his 
step-brother Kumbhakarna. He snatched Kubera's Pushpak Vimana and drove him out of  Lanka. 
Ravana  then turned  his attention  towards  the deities  and drove  them  out of heaven.  The deities 
went  to seek the help of Lord  Brahma  who in turn took them  to Lord  Shiva.  Even  Lord  Shiva 
was clueless about the means by which the indomitable Ravana could be subdued. Ultimately  all 
of them including Lord Shiva went to Lord Vishnu and sought his  help.  
 
Lord Vishnu assured t hem by saying  --- 
"I shall  take incarnation  as Rama  at a place  called  Ayodhya.  Presently,  Ayodhya  is being  ruled 
by Dashrath, who inspite of having three queens, does not have any son. I shall manifest  myself 
as Rama.  Don't  worry!  I shall  eliminate  the menace called  Ravana."  Sage  Agastya  also told Sri 
Rama  that Ravana  belonged  to the caste  called  'Brahmrakshas'.  This way,  Sage  Agastya  after 
having finished his narration looked at Sri Rama anticipating further  queries.  
   
 
AGASTYA ADVISES SRI RAMA TO  PERFORM  
ASHWAMEDHA  YAGYA  
Sri Rama  requested  sage Agastya  to tell about  the means  by which  he could  become  liberated 
from the sins of killing brahmins. Sage Agastya advised him to perform Ashwamedha Yagya.  He 
also described the rituals of performing Ashwamedha Yag ya--- "Get a horse of white colour  and 
after worshipping  it on Vaishakh  Purnima  leave  it to wander  freely.  Tie a piece  of paper  on its 
forehead on which your name and other details are mentioned. Soldiers should follow that  horse 
wherever  it goes.  You shou ld fight  a battle  against  any king who dares  to stop the horse.  You 
should lead a celibate life till the horse returns back to the same place from where it had been  let 
loose. It is customary for the performer of Ashwamedha Yagya to indulge himself in  bene volent 
deeds  till the completion  of Ashwamedha  Yagya."  Sri Rama  agreed  to perform  Ashwamedha 
Yagya.  He went  to the seashore  accompanied  by numerous  sages.  He then cultivated  a vast 
expanse of land with the help of a golden plough. A large oblation site was  constructed and  thus 
began Ashwamedha Yagya under the supervision of  Vashishtha.  
   
 
THE HORSE IS LET  LOOSE  
As per the advice of Sage Vashishtha, Sri Rama instructed his soldiers to bring a white -horse.  A 
white parasol was fixed on its back and the horse was decorated with colourful clothes.  The 
horse  was then let loose  and the faithful  soldiers  of Sri Rama  followed  it wherever  the horse 
went.A  gold-sheet  was hanged  in the horse's  neck  and upon  which  was inscribed --This horse 
belongs  to Sri Rama,  the son of Dasharath.  Anybody  who dares  to stop this horse  will meet 
ruthless  punishment.  
 
Shatrughan followed the horse as per the instruction of his elder brother, Sri Rama. Bharata  and 
Pushkal also accompanied him. A huge army led by Kalnemi was marching behind  the horse.  
   
 
LAV FASTENS THE  HORSE  
Some  of the kings  tried to stop the horse,  but were  defeated  by Shatrughan.  This way the horse 
continued  to move  ahead  without  any problem  till it reached  the bank  of river  Ganga.  It was 
early  morning  and Lav after noticing  the presence  of horse  become  curious.  He went  near the 
horse  and tried to read the inscription  hanging  down  its neck.  He made  fun of the might  of Sri 
Rama  and fastened  the horse.  The soldiers  tried to release  the horse  but Lav severed  their arms. 
They returned to Shatrughan and narrated the whole incident to  him. 
   
 
LAV VANQUISHES THE WHOLE  ARMY  
Shatrughan became extremely furious after seeing the condition of his injured soldiers.  He 
instructed Kalnemi to teach Lav a lesson. Kalnemi confronted Lav w ith a huge army and  a 
ferocious  battle  took place.  Lav managed  to kill Kalnemi,  which  created  havoc  in the rival's 
army.  The surviving  soldiers  tried to hold their ground  but were  forced  to flee on account  of a 
fierce assault from  Lav. 
 
Shatrughan then ord ered Pushkal to fight Lav but he became unconscious after being hit by  Lav's 
arrow. Now, Shatrughan's anger crossed all limits and he ordered Hanuman to kill  Lav. 
Hanuman uprooted a large tree and tried to hit Lav, but Lav cut that tree into hundred piece s with 
a volley of arrows. Lav then released many arrows in the direction of Hanuman.  Hanuman 
fought valiantly but ultimately he fell down  unconscious.  
   
 
LAV BECOMES  UNCONSCIOUS  
When  Shatrughan  learnt  about  Hanuman's  fate he was infuriated  and went  to fight Lav. But 
when he saw a tender looking child in front of him he was surprised. Shatrughan asked  -- 
 
'O brave child! Who are you! Who is your  father?'  
 
But Lav was not interested  in his irrelevant  queries  and challenged  him for a duel.  Shatrughan 
was le ft with no other option but to fight. A tremendous battle was fought between  them. 
Shatrughan released volleys of arrow towards Lav but all of them were neutralized by him. For  a 
brief  time Shatrughan  lost his consciousness.  After  regaining  his consciousne ss, he aimed  his 
most lethal weapon towards Lav. The arrow hit Lav and he fell down unconscious.  Lav's 
companions  went  and informed  Sita about  the whole  incident.  Kush  came  forward  to fight 
against  Sri Rama's  army.  When  he reached  the battlefield  he saw Lav who was held captive  by 
the enemy's  army's.  By that time,  Lav had regained  his consciousness  and after seeing  Kush  he 
somehow managed to free himself from the clutches of his  captors.  
 
Now, both the brothers launched a fierce attack on the enemy. The who le army of Sri  Rama 
started  running  helter  and shelter.  It did not take much  time for Lav and Kush  to vanquish  the 
whole army. All the great warriors like Hanuman, Sugriva, Pushkal, Angad Veermani and  even 
Shatrughan were either held captive or injured in the battle. Both the brothers fastened  Hanuman 
and Sugriva with ropes and took them to Sita. Sita immediately recognized Hanuman  and 
Sugriva.  She instructed  both her sons to set them  free as well as the horse.  Lav and Kush 
followed the instruction of Sita and released everybody from their captivity. Sita then  whispered - 
--'May all the dead soldiers become alive.' Her words came true and all the dead soldiers  became 
alive once again. Shatrughan regained his consciousness  too. 
   
 
THE ARMY RETURNS TO  AYODHYA  
Shatrughan decided to return to Ayodhya. He instructed Sumati to make all the  necessary 
arrangements  for the safe return  of the caravan,  which  comprised  not only of Sri Rama's  army 
but also of all the defeated  kings  and their vanquished  armies.  When  Sri Rama came  to know 
about  their arrival,  he sent Lakshman  to receive  them.  Lakshman  received  the victorious  army  
with all the honor and the all of them came to the palace. Sri Rama curiously asked Sumati  about 
everything that had  happened.  
 
Sumati paraded all the vanquished kings who had made the mistake of stopping the  horse -- 
Sumad,  Sabahu,  Daman,  Satyavan,  Surath,  etc. He then narrated  the brave  deed  of Lav and 
Kush.He  also revealed  how mighty  warriors  like Hanuman,  Sugriva,  Shatrughan  etc. had been 
defeated  by both of  them.  
   
 
SRI RAMA SENDS LAKSHMAN TO BRING  SITA  
Sage  Valmiki  was present  in Ayodhya  to attend  the Ashwamedha  Yagya.  Sri Rama  asked  him 
about  the identity  of the two children --Lav and Kush.  Valmiki  said --- Sita was pregnant  at the 
time you had abandoned  her. I gave  her refuge  in my hermitage  where  she gave  birth  to twins -- 
Lav and Kush.  Both  the children  were  brought  up in my hermitage  with love and care.  I taught 
them  all the sacred  texts  and scriptures  and made  them  masters  of various  weaponri es. So, Lav 
and Kush  are your sons.  You must  bring  Sita back  to Ayodhya  with due honor,  because  she is 
pure and chaste. Moreover your whole army owe its life to  her."  
 
Sri Rama's heart was filled with grief. He instructed Lakshman to bring Sita along with Lav and 
Kush.  Lakshman  went  to Valmiki's  hermitage  and requested  Sita to return  to Ayodhya.  Sita 
refused  to return  but sent Lav and Kush  along  with Lakshman.  When  Sri Rama  found  that only 
Lav and Kush had come, he once again sent Lakshman to bring Sita. La kshman followed  his 
instruction and went to Valmiki's hermitage for the second time. Meanwhile, Valmiki  instructed 
Lav and Kush to sing the praise of Sri Rama in their melodious voice. Everybody was moved  by 
their soulful rendition. Sri Rama took Lav and K ush in his embrace.  
   
 
SITA RETURNS TO  AYODHYA  
Sri Rama  eulogised  all the revered  sages who  had arrived  to attend  the Ashwamedha  Yagya.  The holy 
water of Saryu was brought and sprinkled in the yagya kund where Ashwamedha Yagya was  being  
performed,  amidst  the chanting  of vedic  mantras.  Hardly  had Sri Rama  touched  the horse  with his hands  
then it transformed  into a human  being.  Everybody  was amazed  by this incident.  Sri Rama  asked  that 
man as to how he had attained  the form of a horse.  The man revealed  to the assembled  people  that he 
had become  a horse  due to Durvasa's  curse.  'Later  on Sage  Durvasa  had mercy  on me and assured  that 
I would  regain  my human  form by the divine  touch  of Sri  Rama.'  
 
Having said this the man attained to the heaven. In course of time  Sri Rama organised two  more 
Ashwamedha Yagyas and his glory reverberated through all the three  worlds.  
   
 
UTTAR - KHAND 
BADRIKASHRAMA  
Once, on being asked by the sages about the greatness of Badrikasharama,  Suta  narrated  the 
same tale, which Lord Shiva  had once told sage Narada  --- 
Lord  Mahadeva  had told Narada  that altogether  there  were  one lakh and twenty -five thousand 
mountains and Badrikashrama was supreme among them. Lord Mahadeva  said--- 
Badrikasharama is the abode of Lord Nara -Narayan. Narayan --the origin of all creations has  four 
arms  and his complexion  is dark.  Narayan  manifests  himself  in both forms --Sakar  as well as 
Nirakar. He is the eternal Purusha and is worshipped by people during the full period  of 
Uttarayan. Since Badrikashrama is covere d with snow during the period of  Dakshainayan, 
Narayan is not worshipper during these six months. All the deities dwell at Badrikasharama.  The 
sages  live in their hermitages  at Badrikasharama.  River  Alaknanda  flows  at Badrikasharama. 
Anybody taking a dip i n the holy water of Alaknanda becomes liberated from his  sins. 
   
 
THE DESCENT OF RIVER GANGA  
Describing  about  the reason  why river  Ganga  was brought  down  on the earth,  Lord  Mahadeva 
told Narada --- King  Bhagirath  was the architect  of Ganga's  arrival  on the earth.  He wanted  to 
liberate his dead ancestorss from the curse of Sage Kapila. King Sagar came from the lineage  of 
the famous king --Harishchandra. Sagar had two queens. The elder queen had sixty thousand  sons 
while the younger queen had just one --Panchaj an. Panchajan's son was Anshuman, who  himself 
was the father of Dilip. Dilip was the father of  Bhagirath.  
 
Bhagirath  did an austere  penance  on the Himalayas  for ten thousand  years.  As a result,  river 
Ganga descended on the earth. I (Shiva) held her in the locks of my hair and she remained  there 
for ten thousand more years. Bhagirath requested me to release Ganga so that his ancestors  could 
be liberated. I agreed to release Ganga and Bhagirath took her to the Patalloka where  his 
ancestor's  had been  charred  to death  due to Kapila's  curse.  Bhagirath  sprinkled  the water  of 
Ganga  on the ashes  of his ancestors  and each of them  attained  salvation  as a result.  Eventually, 
Ganga resurfaced at Haridwar --the most sacred place of  pilgrimage.  
   
 
DASHARATH PACIFIES  SHANI  
Sage Narada curiously asked Lord Mahadeva as to what made Shani such a volatile  planet.Lord 
Mahadeva replied --- Shani is extremely violent by nature and everybody is scarred of this  planet. 
Once,  the royal  astrologer  of Dasharath  was petrified  at the prospect of Shani  entering  the 
constellation  of Rohini  and warned  him of its dire consequences.  'If the Shani  is not prevented 
from entering Rohini, then famine would occur lasting for more than twelve years.' said the  royal 
astrologers.  
 
Dasharath  went  above  the sky to subdue  the might  of Shani  well armed  with divine  weapons. 
Shani became terrified on seeing Dasharath in such a menacing mood and expressed  his 
willingness to fulfill his  desires.  
   
 
QUALITIES OF A  VAISHNAV  
Giving a detailed description of the q ualities of a Vaishnava, Lord Shiva told Narada  --- 
A person  who has total devotion  in Lord  Vishnu  is called  a Vaishnava.  He is truthful,  kind and 
forgiving by nature. He engages himself in austere penance and refrains from any kind  of 
violence. He wears a  Tulsi bead in his neck and puts on tilak. He is well versed in sacred text  like 
the Vedas, Puranas etc. The mere sight of a Vaishnava is enough to liberate a sinner from all  his 
sins. Feeding a Vaishnava bestowes virtue equivalent to feeding thousand of o rdinary  brahmins.  
   
 
INDRAPRASTHA  
The sages enquired from Suta about the holiest city situated on the banks of river  Yamuna.  
 
Suta narrated the tale which Sage Saubhari had once told Yudhisthira ---Once, Narada and  Parvat 
were  travelling  through  an aerial  route,  while  they were  flying  over Khandav  forest,  they were 
lured by the beautiful sight of river Yamuna. They decided to take rest for a while. Both of  them 
descended down and entered river Yamuna to take their bath. Meanwhile, King Shibi who  ruled 
over Ushinar  saw them.  He eagerly  waited  at the bank  of Yamuna.  When  Narada  and Parvat 
emerged  out of the Yamuna,  they found  king Shibi  eagerly  waiting  for them.  Meanwhile  king 
Shibi had noticed the remains of numerous 'havan -kundas' (oblation -altars) spread in  a  large 
area.  
 
After  the formal  exchanges  of pleasantaries  were  over,  King  Shibi  asked  Narada  about  those 
havan - kundas.  
 
Narada  replied --During  ancient  times  Indra  had performed  numerous  Yagyas  at this place  to 
express his gratitude to Lord Vishnu, with  whose blessings he had regained the heaven from  the 
clutches  of Hiranyakashipu.  In course  of time,  this place  became  famous  as Indraprastha.  This 
sacrosanct place is holier than all the holy places combined together. Indraprastha is spread in  the 
area of one yojan from east to west and four yojans from north to  south.  
   
 
VAIKUNTH --THE ABODE OF LORD  VISHNU  
Describing about the grandeur of Vaikunth, Lord Shiva told Parvati --A person who has  total 
devotion  in Vishnu  attains  to Vaikunth  after his death.  Vaiku ntha is the abode  of Vishnu  and 
constitutes  of numerous  Janapadas.  The magnificence  of Vaikunth  is beyond  description  and it 
houses many grand palaces fully decorated with jewels and diamonds. The central part  of 
Vaikuntha is called Ayodhya and is well pro tected by dwarpals named Chanda,  Prachanda, 
Bhadra,  Subhadra,  Jaya,  Vijay,  Dhata  and Vidhata.Vaikunth  is inhabited  by countless  divine 
people who live in well illuminated  houses.  
 
In the central  part of Ayodhya  is situated  the 'antahpuri'  of Lord  Vishnu.  It is inhabited  by 
celestial beauties --apsaras. There is a divine canopy situated just at the center of antahpuri,  where 
Lord  Vishnu  has his divine  throne.  The divine  throne  is surrounded  by deities  as well as by the 
embodiments  of all the four Vedas --- Rigveda,  Yajurveda,  Samaveda  and Atharvaveda.  The 
deities ---Agni, Surya and Chandrama have their dwellings at the center of Vishnu's  throne.There 
is a grand pedestal called yogapeeth established on the throne. A beautiful lotus flower  is 
established  on the yogapeeth  on which  is seated  Lord  Vishnu  along  with his consort  Lakshmi.  
Lord Vishnu appears divine in his complexion of a blue lotus, whose radiance is enough  to 
subdue  crores  of sun. He has radiant  ear-rings  hangings  down  his earlobes.  His forehead  is 
cove red with curly hair. He has the famous 'Kaustubh mani' in his neck. He holds a conch and  a 
chakra in each of his two hands and the remaining two hands are in the posture of  giving 
blessings.  
   
 
THE INCARNATIONS OF MATSYA AND  KURMA  
Once,  goddess  Parvati  expressed  her desire  to know  about  all the incarnations  of Lord  Vishnu. 
Lord  Mahadeva  replied -- Lord  Brahma  had created  numerous  Prajapatis  like Bhrigu,  Marichi, 
Atri, Daksha, Kardam, Pulastya, Pulaha, Angira and Kratu. Marichi was the father of  Kashyapa. 
Sage Kashyapa  had four wives --Aditi,  Diti, Kadru  and Vinta.Aditi  was the mother  of Deities 
while Diti gave birth to demons like --Makar, Hayagreeva, Mahabali,  Hiranyaksha, 
Hiranyakashipu Jambha, Maya etc. Makar was a mighty demon, who after deceitfully  acquir ing 
the Vedas from Lord Brahma had hidden himself inside an ocean. Lord  Brahma  requested 
Vishnu to liberate the sacred Vedas from the possession of  Makar.  
 
Lord Vishnu then took the incarnation of Matsya and after killing Makar gave back the vedas  to 
Lord  Brahma. Durvasa was the son of Sage Atri. Once, he went to Indraloka to see Indra. At  that 
time, Indra was planning to go out somewhere. Durvasa presented a garland of Parijat flowers  to 
Indra.  Indra,  after receiving  the garland  from  Durvasa  kept it carel essly  on the forehead  of his 
elephant -Airavat. This garland was trampled under its feet by the elephant, which  infuriated 
Durvasa. He cursed Indra by saying ---Immense prosperity has made you arrogant. But you  will 
become a pauper within a very short  time.  
 
Durvasa's words came to be true and Indra found that not only the heaven but all the three  worlds 
had become bereft of goddess Lakshmi. Prosperity vanished and poverty prevailed  everywhere. 
The deities  became  worried  and went  to take the help of Brahma.  Brahma  took the deities  to 
Lord Vishnu. Vishnu became pleased with their eulogy and said  -- 
 
I will take incarnation as Kurma. If the ocean were churned with the help of  Mandarachal 
mountain and Vasuki, then goddess Lakshmi would manifest herself. I shall h old the 
Mandarachal mountain on my back. This way the churning of ocean commenced.  The 
Mandarachal  mountain  was uprooted  and placed  inside  the 'Ksheer -Sagar'  and which  rested  on 
the back of Lord Kurma. The serpent --Vasuki, was held by deities and demons on  both the  ends. 
First of all the most  venomous  poison --Kalkut  emerged  from  the ocean.  Seeing  both the deities 
and demons unwilling to accept it. (Lord Shiva) drank  it. 
 
After the emergence of Kalkut, goddess Daridra and Varunai manifested themselves.  Simil arly, 
Airavat - elephant, Uchchaishrava -horse, Dhanvantari, Surabhi --cow and Parijat - tree emerged 
from the ocean. Ultimately, goddess Lakshmi manifested herself. The deities requested her  to 
dwell in the heart of Lord Vishnu and bless all the three worlds by her presence.  Goddess 
Lakshmi agreed and blessed  them.  
   
 
NRISIMHA --INCARNATION  
Continuing with the various incarnations of Lord Vishnu, Lord Mahadeva told Parvati  --- 
 
Sage Kashyapa had two mighty sons from Diti --Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha.  Hirany aksha 
had once carried the earth to Rasatala. The deities requested Lord Vishnu to rescue the  earth. 
Lord  Vishnu  took the incarnation  of a boar and killed  Hiranyaksha  with his sharp  horn.  When 
Hiranyakshipu  learnt  about  his brother's  death  he went  to Merug iri mountain  and started  doing 
penance to please me (Lord Shiva). I blessed him with immortality, Later on,  Hiranyakashipu 
married Uttanpad's daughter --Kalyani and had a son named Prahlada from her. In spite of  being 
born in the clan of a demon, Prahlada p roved to be an extremely religious child and was  a 
supreme devotee of Lord  Vishnu.  
 
When Hiranyakshipu came to know about Prahlada's religious tendency, he tried his best to  stop 
him from worshipping Vishnu. But, all his efforts went in vain and Prahlada  continued  to 
worship  Lord  Vishnu.Hiranyakashipu  instructed  his subordinates  to kill Prahlada  but each time 
he came  out unharmed.  One day, Hiranyakashipu  pulled  out his sword  and said---'You  say that 
Vishnu  is omnipresent.  Is he present  in this pillar?'  Having said like this he assaulted  the pillar 
with his sword.  Suddenly  to his sheer  amazement,  Lord  Vishnu  manifested  himself  from  that 
pillar in the form of  Nrisimha.  
 
Hiranyakashipu  had been  blessed  by Lord  Shiva  that he could  be killed  neither  by a man nor a 
beast. No weapon could harm him. He could be killed neither during the day nor during  the 
night.  Hiranyakashiu  had taken  into consideration  all the possible  threat  perceptions  to his life 
and tried to become immortal. But, Lord Vishnu takes incarnation  to protect the  humanity 
whenever  religiousness  is under  threat.  This time,  Lord  Vishnu  took incarnation  as Nrisimha 
(partly  lion and partly  human)  and tore apart  his belly  with his sharp  nails.  After  the death  of 
Hiranyakashipu,  Prahlada  was coronated  as his successor.  Prahlada  ruled  justly  and his subject 
were happy and  satisfied.  
   
 
VAMANA --INCARNATION  
Continuing with the various incarnations of Lord Vishnu, Lord Mahadeva told Parvati  --- 
 
Prahlada had a son named Virochan.The most benevolent king --'Mah abahu -Bali' was  Virochan's 
son. Bali had defeated the deities and ruled over all the three worlds. Sage Kashyapa  commenced 
the most austere penance --Payovrata to help the deities regain their lost kingdom (heaven)  once 
again.  He was accompanied  by his wife--Aditi  in his penance  which  lasted  for one thousand 
years. At last, Lord Vishnu became pleased by their penance and appeared before them.  Sage 
Kashyapa narrated the woeful tales of the deities and requested him to make Indra the Lord of  all 
the three worl ds. Lord Vishnu promised that he would take incarnation as Vamana. In course  of 
time, Aditi became pregnant and ultimately gave birth to Lord Vamana. Lord Vamana  appeared 
in the form  of a 'Brahmchari'.  He wore  a deer--Skin and carried  a stick  and a 'mekhal a' in both 
his hands. Lord Vishnu enquired the deities about the future course of action. The  deities 
informed  him that Bali was busy  performing  a yagya  and he would  not turn down  any demand 
made  to him because  if he did so there  was a fear of loosing  all his virtues  attained  by the 
performance of the  yagya.  
Lord  Vamana  went  to the oblation  site where  Bali was performing  a yagya  and demanded  a 
small piece of land measured by his three steps. Bali agreed to meet the demand of his  guest 
inspite  of Shukrachary a's warning.  Bali resolved  to donate  land by holding  holy water  in his 
palm. Now, Lord Vamana abandoned his dwarfish form and appeared in a giant form.  He 
measured  the whole  earth  by his first step. Lord  Vishnu  then measured  the whole  sky by his 
second ste p. The helpless Bali agreed to donate all the three worlds to protect his  vow. 
Ultimately, Lord Vishnu sent Bali to the Rasatala and thus Indra became the ruler of heaven  once 
again.  
   
 
SRI RAMA'S  BIRTH  
Describing about Sri Rama's incarnation Lord Mahadev a told Parvati --'Once,  Swayambhuva 
Manu had expressed his desire of having Lord Vishnu as his son to which Lord Vishnu  had 
agreed. During Treta Yuga Manu manifested himself as Dasharath and Vishnu kept his  promise 
by taking birth as his son --Sri Rama. Simi larly, during Dwapar Yuga Manu was born as  Vasudev 
and Lord  Vishnu  kept his word  by taking  birth  as his son--Krishna.  After  the completion  of one 
thousand divine years, Manu will be born in the village of Sambhal as Harigupta and Vishnu  will 
take birth as his son--'Kalki'.  
 
Lord  Shiva  then continued  with the incarnation  of Sri Rama  and said--'Sage  Vishrava  was the 
son of Pulasya and was married to Kekashi. Ravana and Kumbhakarna were born to the  couple. 
Sage Vishrava also had a daughter named Shurpanakha an d a virtuous son  named 
Vibhishan.Ravana  and Kumbhakarna  did austere  penance  to please  me (Lord  Shiva).  When  I 
appeared before Ravana he requested the boon of immortality from me. After receiving the  boon, 
Ravana became very arrogant and started tormenting the inhabitants of all the three worlds.  The 
deities  became  scarred  and took the refuge  of Lord  Vishnu.  Lord  Vishnu  assured  them  that he 
would solve their problem by taking incarnation as Sri  Rama.  
 
Dasharath came from the lineage of Surya. He had three qu eens---Kaushalya, Sumitra  and 
Kaikeyi. Once, Dasharath performed a Vaishnav Yagya with the objective of acquiring a  son. 
Lord  Vishnu  appeared  and assured  him that he would  take incarnation  as Sri Rama  in a short 
time.  Lord  Vishnu  gave  a bowl  of divine  khee r to Dasharath,  which  he distributed  amongst  his 
three  queens.  In course  of time,  Kaushalya  gave  birth  to Sri Rama  on the auspicious  day of 
Chaitra -Navami. The deities and the sages rejoiced at his  birth.  
   
 
SRI RAMA GROWS  UP 
Continuing with the tale of S ri Rama, Lord Mahadeva told Parvati --Dasharath  requested 
Vashishtha to perform the Jatkarm Sanskar of Sri Rama. In course of time Kaikeyi gave birth  to 
Bharata --an incarnation of Panchajanya conch. Similarly, Sumitra gave birth to two  sons-- 
Lakshman  and Shatrughan.  Lakshman  was the incarnation  of Sheshnag  while  Shatrughan  was 
the incarnation  of Sudershan  chakra.  Sri Rama  and his brothers  received  education  under  the 
guidance of Sage Vashishtha. In a very short time they became proficient in all the scriptu res and 
mastered various weaponaries. Although all the four brothers were very close to each other,   yet 
Lakshman could not bear to live in Rama's separation even for a moment and was specially  close 
to him.  
 
Sita manifested  herself  from  the field while  Janaka  was ploughing  it. King  Janaka  brought  up 
Sita with great  love and care.  At that time,  Vishwamitra  was busy  performing  a grand  yagya  at 
Siddha Ashrama. But the demons created numerous problems and made it impossible for him to 
accomplish the yagya. V ishwamitra went to Ayodhya and requested Dasharath to send Sri  Rama 
and Lakshman  along  with him so that the yagya  could  be accomplished  without  any problems. 
Dasharath agreed to send Sri Rama and Lakshman along with Vishwamitra.This  way, 
Vishwamitra return ed to his hermitage acompanied by both the brothers. Garuda presented a  pair 
of bow and imperishable set of arrows to both the  brothers.  
 
While  staying  at the hermitage  Sri Rama  and Lakshman  killed  many  demons  like Taraka  and 
Subahu. When Marich tried to d isrupt the yagya, Sri Rama attacked him with Pavan -astra,  which 
sent Marich  flying  across  the sea-shore.  Meanwhile,  on learning  that Janaka  was performing 
Vajapeya yagya at Janakapur, Vishwamitra took Sri Rama and Lakshman to attend it. On  the 
way Sri Rama  liberated  Ahalya  who had turned  into a rock after being  cursed  by her husband. 
After reaching Janakapur, Sri Rama broke Lord Shiva's bow and married Sita.  Lakshman 
married Urmila. Dasharath had come to attend the marriage ceremony accompanied by  Bharata 
and Shatrughan. Bharata was married to Mandavi while Shatrughan married  Shrutkeerti.  
 
Meanwhile,  on learning  that Sri Rama  had broken  Shiva's  bow,  Parshurama  arrived  there  and 
challenged him, but ultimately Parashurama realized about the divinity of Sri Ra ma and  accepted 
his superiority. At last, Sri Rama, Lakshman, Bharata and Shatrughan returned to Ayodhya  along 
with their respective  consorts.  
   
SRI RAMA'S  EXILE  
Lord  Mahadeva  continued  with the tale of Sri Rama  and told Parvati  --Dasharath  wanted  to 
appoin t Sri Rama  as his successor  but Kaikeyi  did not like this idea.  She wanted  Bharata  to be 
made  the king of Ayodhya  and Sri Rama  to be sent into exile  for 14 years.  Once,  Kaikeyi  had 
saved Dasharath's life while he was fighting a battle against the demons. T o show his  gratitude, 
Dasharath  had promised  two boons  to her. At that time,  Kaikeyi  had told Dasharath  that she 
would make her demand at the appropriate  time.  
 
This way, Dasharath was compelled by Kaikeyi to accept the two demands. As a result,  Sri 
Rama was sent into exile. Bharata refused to become the king of Ayodhya and vowed to wait  till 
Sri Rama  returned.  Dasharath  could  not bear the sorrow  of Rama's  separation  and died in his 
sorrow.  Bharata  tried his best to convince  Sri Rama  to change  his mind  and accept  the throne, 
but Sri Rama  did not listen  to his request.  Bharata  then brought  Sri Rama's  wooden -sandal  and 
kept it on the throne. He vowed to spend rest of his life in austerities till Sri Rama  returned.  
 
While  Sri Rama  was still in exile,  he went  to the hermitage  of Sage  Atri and received  his 
blessings.  Atri's  wife- Anasuya  preached  Sita on the virtues  of chastity.  Sri Rama  also visited 
hermitages of some other prominent sages like Sharbhanga, Suteeksha, Agastya etc. Once,  while 
Sri Rama was living in Panchavati, Shurpanakha arrived there. Shurpanakha was Ravana's  sister  
and wanted  to marry  Sri Rama,  But Lakshman  severed  her nose and ears. She went  to a mighty 
demon named Khar and narrated her woeful tale. Khar attacked Rama with a huge army,  which  
comprised of brave warriors like Trishira Dushan etc. Rama was Victorious in this battle  and 
Khar, Trishira and Dushan were  killed.  
 
Shurpanakha went to Ravana and informed him about the misdeeds of Rama. Ravana  was 
infuriated  and wanted  to take revenge.  He abducted  Sita with the help of Marich.When  Jatayu 
saw Ravana carrying Sita to Lanka, he fought with valiance but was injured in the ensuing  battle. 
Sri Rama  went  in search  of Sita and met Jatayu,  who was injured  and who informed  Rama  that 
Sita had been  abducted  by the demon  king Ravana.  Sri Rama  met Hanuman  at the Rishyamook 
mountain. Later on he befriended Sugriva on the advice of Hanuman. Sugriva had enemity  with 
his brother -Bali. Sri Rama killed Bali and made Sugriva the  king.  
 
Sri Rama  requested  Hanu man to find out the whereabouts  of Sita. Hanuman  went  to Lanka  and 
found Sita at Ashoka Vatika. He destroyed the garden and killed many demons  including 
Ravana's son --Akshay Kumar. Ultimately, he was captured by Meghnath and taken to  Ravana's 
court.  Ravana  ordered  Hanuman's  tail to be ignited.  Hanuman  then burnt  the city of Lanka  and 
returned to Sri Rama. When Sri Rama came to know about the exact location of Sita, he  decided 
to attack  Lanka  with a huge  army,  which  comprised  of monkeys.  The army  camped  at the sea- 
shore where Vibhishan came to meet  him. 
 
A bridge  was built across  the ocean  and the army  reached  Lanka.  A fierce  battle  took place  in 
which many demons were killed. At last, Ravana came forward to fight against Sri Rama but  was 
killed. Sri Rama ap pointed Vibhishan as the king of Lanka and blessed him. Vibhishan  presented 
his pushpak  Vimana  to Sri Rama.  All of them  boarded  the Pushpak  Vimana  and flew towards 
Ayodhya. On the way Sri Rama met Bharata who was still awaiting his arrival at Nandigram.  Sri 
Rama was very pleased to meet Bharata. Ultimately all of them returned to  Ayodhya.  
   
 
SRI RAMA'S  CORONATION  
Describing the coronation of Sri Rama Lord Mahadeva told Parvati --People of Ayodhya  rejoiced 
at the return of Sri Rama. An auspicious day was chosen  for his coronation and Sri Rama  became 
the king of Ayodhya  amidst  the chantings  of Vedic  mantras.  Sri Rama  ruled  over Ayodhya  for 
one thousand years without any problem. Meanwhile, some ignorant people started pointing  out 
fingers at the character of Sita . Sri Rama decided to abandon Sita in the forest to quell  the 
rumour.  Sita was pregnant  at that time.  Feeling  pity on her condition,  Valmiki  took her to his 
hermitage where Sita gave birth to Lav and  Kush.  
 
Meanwhile Sri Rama decided to perform Ashwamedha Yagya at the bank of river Gomati.  But, 
since  the yagya  could  not have  been  accomplished  without  Sita, therefore  he performed  the 
rituals seated beside a golden idol of Sita. In the mean time Valmiki arrived there,  accompanied 
by Sita. He requested Sri Ram a to accept Sita, vouching for her chastity. Sri Rama told  Valmiki -- 
'I am confident  of Sita's  chastity  but she will have  to prove  her chastity  for the satisfaction  of 
common  people.'  
Sita was deeply hurt by Sri Rama's unkind remarks. She said --'May mothe r earth swallow me if  I 
ever had thought about any man other than my lord Sri Rama.' Hardly had Sita finished her  lines 
than the earth  cracked  and Sita vanished  into that crevice.  Sri Rama's  heart  was filled  with 
remorse but thinking that it was perhaps in  his destiny to live in separation with Sita, returned  to 
Ayodhya accompanied by Lav and Kush. In course of time, Kaushalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi  left 
for heavenly abode. Sri Rama continued to rule Ayodhya for 10,000 more  years.  
 
One day, Kala (death) arriv ed and reminded Sri Rama that the time had arrived for him to  leave 
his mortal  body.  Meanwhile  Lakshman  became  aware  of Sri Rama's  decision  of leaving  his 
mortal  body.  He gave  up his life by taking  samadhi  in river  Saryu.  Sri Rama  could  not bear the 
sorrow  caused by Lakshman's bereavment. He appointed Lav and Kush as the kings  of 
Dwarawati and Kushawati respectively and decided to leave for heavenly abode. Sri  Rama 
entered the water of river Saryu, flowing at the distance of three yojans from  Ayodhya.  
   
 
SRI KRISHNA  
Parvati requested Lord Mahadeva to narrate the divine tales of Vasudeva Krishna.  Lord 
Mahadeva  replied --Vasudev  was the descendant  of yadu.  His father  was Devameedha.  He was 
married  to Devaki --the daughter  of Ugrasena.Ugrasena  also had a mighty  son named  Kansa. 
Kansa  was extremely  affectionate  towards  his sister  Devaki.  After  her marriage,  while  Devaki 
was going to her husband's house on a chariot being driven by Kansa, suddenly a heavenly  voice 
was heard.  
 
'Kansa, you would meet death at the hands of Devaki's eighth  son.' 
 
Kansa  became  very scarred  and wanted  to kill his sister  then and there.  But, Vasudev  requested 
Kansa  to spare  Devaki's  life and promised  to hand  over any child  that she gave birth  to. Thus 
Kansa  imprisoned  both Vasudev  and Devaki. In course  of time,  Devaki  gave  birth  to seven  sons 
and Kansa killed each of them. Lord Sri Hari manifested himself when Devaki conceived for  the 
eighth time. It was the month of Shravana and the day was 'Krishna -ashtami' when Sri Hari  took 
his incarnation  at midnight.  Soon  after taking  his incarnation  he gave  a glimpse  of his divine 
form  to Vasudev  and Devaki.  On the instruction  of Sri Hari,  Vasudeva  carried  the infant  to 
Nand's house. He had no problem in moving out of the prison as all the guards had fall en asleep 
due to the illusion of Sri  Hari.  
 
On seeing the swift currents of overflooded yamuna, Vasudev became worried. But the level  of 
river Yamuna receded as soon as Sri Krishna touched the river with his feet. Sheshnag  protected 
Sri Krishna  from  heavy  rain with his thousand  hoods.  When  Vasudev  reached  Nand's  house  he 
found  that Nand's  wife-- Yashoda  had given  birth  to a baby  girl. Yashoda  was sleeping  at that 
time and Vasudev  had no problem  in exchanging  Sri Krishna  with that baby  girl. Vasudev  then 
returned to the prison and laid down the baby girl beside  Devaki.  
 
The baby -girl started  crying  and the guards  immediately  woke  up. They  informed  Kansa  about 
the birth of Devaki's eighth child. Kansa tried to kill that baby girl by smashing her head, but  she 
escaped  from  his hands  and flew up in the sky. She thundered ---'Your  death  is certain  as your 
assasin has already taken birth.' Kansa was terrified at the prospect of his death. He instructed  his 
soldiers  to kill all the infants'  whereever  they were  to be found  in his kingdom.  He also ordered 
the release of Vasudev and Devaki, as there was no point keeping them in captivity.  Meanwhile, 
Sri Krishna grew up under the guardianship of Nand and  Yashoda.  
 
One day Kansa sent a wicked ogress named Putna to kill Sr i Krishna. Putma had applied  poison 
on her breasts and tried to kill Krishna by breast -feeding him. Sri Krishna sucked her breast  with 
such ferocity that she died. Thus, Sri Krishna gave the first glimpse of his divinity to  the 
inhabitants of Vajra. Sri Kr ishna accomplished many such divine deeds during his childhood.  He 
grew  up to be a mischieveous  child  and used to play numerous  pranks  on the fellow  Gopis.  He 
used to steal their butter  and curd.  One day, all the Gopis  complained  to Yashoda  about  Sri 
Krish na's misdeeds. Yashoda became angry and tied him with a wooden -mortar in order  to 
prevent  him from  troubling  the Gopis.  She then placed  that mortar  between  two trees  so that 
Krishna could not move. But, Sri Krishna toddled away uprooting both the huge  trees. 
 
 
 Once,  a demon  named  Bakasur  disguised  himself  as a huge  heron  and tried to kill Sri Krishna. 
But, Sri Krishna  hit him with a stone  with such force  that he met an instant  death.  This way Sri 
Krishna  had killed  many  ferocious  demons  while  he was still a small  child.  Some  of them  well 
Kaliya --the serpent etc, Dhenukasur, Arisht, Keshi etc. A significant incident had  occurred 
during Krishna's childhood. People of Vraja were devotees of Indra and used to worship him.  Sri 
Krishna  stopped  this tradition  and encouraged  people  to worship  Govardhan  mountain.  Indra 
became  extremely  furious  and caused  incessant  rain for one week.  Sri Krishna  protected  the 
people  by lifting  Govardhan  mountain  and shielding  them  from  the continuous  downpour.  At 
last, Indra accepted de feat and eulogized Sri  Krishna.  
   
KILLING OF KANSA  
Continuing with the divine tales of Sri Krishna, Lord Mahadeva told Parvati --When Kansa  failed 
in his repeated  attempts  to kill Sri Krishna,  he instructed  'Akrura'  to invite  both Krishna  and 
Balarama  to Mathura on the pretext  of attending  a ceremony  called  Dhanush -yagya.  Kansa  had 
planned  to kill Sri Krishna  by deceitful  means.  Akrura  was a great  devotee  of Sri Krishna  and 
was aware  of Kansa's  evil intentions.  But, he had no other  option  but to follow  the command  of 
his master Kansa. So, Akrura went to Vraja where Sri Krishna and Balarama used to  live. 
 
Sri Krishna and Balarama were delighted to meet Akrura. After the formal exchange  of 
pleasantaries,  Krishna  took Akrura  to his home.  Akrura  conveyed  the instructions  of Kansa  to 
Nanda  and requested  him to send both Sri Krishna  and Balarama  to Mathura.  Akrura  said--'Sri 
Krishna is the incarnation of Lord Vishnu and Kansa will be killed by him.'Nanda and  Yashoda 
were  reluctant  to send Sri Krishna  to Mathura  but Sri Krishna  convinced  them,  Ultimately. 
Akrura returned to Mathura accompanied by Krishna and Balarama. The people of Vraja  became 
sad when the time for Krishna's departure to Mathura  arrived.  
 
When Akrura reached Mathura accompanied by Sri Krishna and Bala rama it was  already 
evening. Sri Krishna saw a dyer with colourful apparels going towards Kansa's palace.  Sri 
Krishna playfully demanded some set of clothes from that dyer which he refused to give.  Sri 
Krishna  was infuriated  and slapped  him so hard that he started  vomiting  blood.  In a short  time 
the dyer was dead. Sri Krishna and Balarama chose some beautiful set of clothes for  themselves  
and proceeded towards the palace of Kansa. After sometime they met a crooked woman  carrying 
'sandal -wood -paste'.  Sri Krishna  demanded  some  sandal  wood  paste  from  her, which  she gave 
without  any hesitation.  Sri Krishna  blessed  that crooked  woman  as a result  of which  she was 
cured of her  physical --deformity.  
 
At last, both Sri Krishna  and Balarama  reached  the oblation --site where  'Dhanush -yagya'  was 
suppossed  to be performed.  Sri Krishna  lifted  the divine  bow kept there  and broke  it into two 
pieces.  When  Kansa  learnt  that the divine  bow had been  broken,  he ordered  Chanur  to kill 
Krishna  in a wrestling -bout.  Kansa  also fortif ied his palace  by positioning  wild elephants  and 
mighty  warriors  at all the entrance -points.  Sri Krishna  and Balarama  spent  the night  at the 
oblation -site. In the morning  both of them  proceeded  towards  the palace.  Sri Krishna  found  an 
elephant named Kuvaly apeeda standing at the main entrance of the palace. He killed  that 
ferocious elephant without much  difficulty.  
 
Sri Krishna and Balarama then entered the gymnasium where wrestling -bouts were supposed  to 
take place.  All the demons  those  who had witnessed  Sri Krishna  killing  that huge  elephant 
without  any problem,  became  terrified  and fled away  from  the gymnasium.  Sri Krishna  and 
Balarama entered the chamber of Kansa. Kansa became terrified and ordered his  trusted 
lientenants --Chanur  and Mushtik  to kill Krish na.Chanur  confronted  Sri Krishna  while  Mushtik 
fought  a duel with Balarama.  Ultimately,  both the demons  were  killed  after a fierce  duel.  Now, 
Kansa  was left all alone,  Sri Krishna  pulled  Kansa  from  the throne  where  he was sitting  and 
slapped him so hard th at he fell down on the ground. The injury proved to be fatal and as a  result 
Kansa died. Balarama also killed Kansa's younger brother whose named was  Sunama.  
 
After  killing  Kansa,  Krishna  and Balarama  went  to meet  their parents --Vasudev  and Devaki. 
They  also freed  their maternal  grandfather - Ugrasena  who had been  imprisioned  by Kansa.  At 
last they appointed Ugrasena as the king of  Mathura.   
JARASANDH  
Jarasandh  was the father -in-law of Kansa.  When  he learnt  about  Kansa'  death  he surrounded 
Mathura  with a huge army.  Sri Krishna  was well aware  of Jarasandh's  might  and bravery.  He 
was also convinced that it would not be easy to defeat Jarasandh. So, he remembered  Daruk --his 
eternal charioteer and sought his help. Daruk appeared with a divine chariot named  Sugriv a-- 
pushpak. The chariot was well armed with all the divine weapons of lord  Vishnu.  
 
Sri Krishna  and Balarama  then entered  the battlefied  mounted  on that divine  chariot.  A fierce 
battle was fought between Sri Krishna and Jarasandh's army. Jarasandh covered  Krishna  chariot 
with his various  weapons  but Sri Krishna  destroyed  them  with his 'Chakra'.  Sri Krishna  then 
destroyed Jarasandh's army by showering volley of arrows from his famous  bow--Sharang. 
Seeing the death and destruction in his army, Jarasandh came  forward to fight  Balarama.  
 
Balarama attacked Jarasandh with his dangerous weapon --Hala (plough) and destroyed  his 
chariot.  Jarasandh  fell down  on the ground  and as Balarama  was about  to kill him Sri Krishna 
requested  Balarama  not to kill Jarasandh.  After  being  defeated,  Jarasandh  sought  the help of 
Kalyan, who had a large army. Kalyavan agreed to help Jarasandh and surrounded Mathura  with 
his army.  
 
Realizing that Mathura was no longer a safe place to live, Sri Krishna shifted the  whole 
population  of Mathura to Dwarka  and went  to fight  Kalyavan.  The battle  continued  for a long 
period  and after realizing  that it was not easy to defeat  his enemy,  Sri Krishna,  ran towards  the 
cave where  'Muchkund'  had been  sleeping  since  many  past eras. Muchkund  was blessed  with a 
boon  according  to which  any person  upon  whom  he put his glance  after waking  from  his sleep 
would die. Krishna hid himself behind Muchkund. Kalyavan, who was chasing Krishna,  entered 
the cave and kicked  Muchkund.  Muchkund  opened  his eyes and saw Kaly avan.  Kalyavan  was 
burnt to ashes. This way, Sri Krishna was able to defeat his powerful enemy by his  cleverness.  
   
 
ABDUCTION OF  RUKMINI  
Lord Mahadeva told Parvati --- When Jarasandh learnt about Kalyavan's death, he  attacked 
Balarama to avenge his friend's death. But, very soon he realized that it was beyond his  capacity 
to defeat  Balarama,  so he retreated  alongwith  his army.  Sri Krishna  and Balarama  returned  to 
Dwarka.In  course  of time,  Balarama  married  Revati --the daugher  of Raivat.  At that time,  there 
ruled a king named Bhismak. He ruled over Vidarbha. He had a beautiful daughter  named 
Rukmini. He also had many sons among whom Rukmi was  prominent.  
 
Rukmi  wanted  Rumini  to get married  to Shishupal  much  against  her wishes.  Rukmini  being  an 
incarnation of godd ess Lakshmi rightly wanted o have Sri Krishna as her husband. Rukmini  sent 
a message  to Sri Krishna  about  her brother's  intention.  Sri Krishna  went  to help her, 
accompanied by Balarama. Sri Krishna reached Vidarbha on the same day, Rukmini  was 
supposed to marry Shishupal and abducted her to Dwarka. Jarasandh and Rukmi  chased 
Krishna's  chariot  but Balarama  defeated  Jarasandh  while  Sri Krishna  fastened  Rukmi  with the 
chariot.  Sri Krishna  also shaved  off Rukmi's  hair, which  filled  him with so much  of shame  that 
he decided not to return to Vidarbha.After reaching Dwarka, Sri Krishna married Rukmini on  an 
auspicious  day. 
   
 
SRI KRISHNA'S  QUEENS  
Continuing with the divine tales of Sri Krishna, Lord Mahadeva told Parvati --Sri Krishna had  16 
thousand queens among who m Satyabhama, Kalindi, Mitravinda, etc. were prominent.  King 
Sattajit  had a priceless  diamond  named --Syamantak,  which  he had presented  to his younger 
brother --Prasena.  Sri Krishna  was fascinated  by that diamond  and demanded  it from  Prasena, 
which he refuse d to part  with.  
 
One day, Sri Krishna  alongwith  Prasena  and other  Yadavas  went  into the forest  for hunting. 
While chasing a deer, Prasena seceded from his group and was killed by a lion. The lion took  the 
diamond and started playing with it. Incidentally, Jambavan --who had once fought along with  Sri 
Rama  against  Ravana,  saw the lion playing  with the diamond.  He killed  that lion and took the 
diamond in his  possession.  
When  Sri Krishna  returned  to Dwarka,  he was surprised  by a strange  rumour,  which  pervaded 
the whole  city. Some  people  suspected  that Sri Krishna  had killed  Prasena  for the diamond.  Sri 
Krishna was very much distributed by this baseless rumour. To clear the doubts, he went into  the 
forest accompanied by all the residents of Dwarka and showed the  dead body of Prasena,  which 
was still lying there. When people saw the mutilated corpse of Prasena, which bore marks of  the 
lion's claws and canines, they became convinced of Sri Krishna's  innocense.  
 
While  returning  back  to Dwarka,  Sri Krishna  saw an effulgent  cave.  Sri Krishna  was very 
surprised  and wanted  to find out the source  of light.  He entered  the cave and saw Prasena's 
diamond  hanging  on top of a cradle,  in which  a child  was lying.  A woman  was singing  a lulaby 
so that the child falls asleep ---'The lion killed Prasena while Jambavan killed the lion  and 
acquired this diamond from its possession. O child! Don't cry as this priceless diamond  belongs 
to your father.'Sri  Krishna  furiously  blew  his conch.  Jambavan  came  out from  the cave after 
listening t o the sound of the conch. A fierce duel took place between them, which continued  for 
ten days. At last, Jambavan realized that the person against whom he was fighting was  none 
other than Sri Rama himself. Jambhavan then gave his daughter --Jambavati to Kri shna in 
marriage  and gave  lot of wealth  as dowry  including  that 'Syamantak'  diamond.  Bhadraraj  had 
three daughters --Sulakshamana, Nagnajiti and Susheela. Sri Krishna had married all three  of 
them in a 'Swayamwara'. This way, Sri Krishna had altogether eigh t prominent queen  consorts -- 
Rukmini, Satyabhama, Kalindi, Mitravinda, Jambavati, Nagnajiti, Sulakshamana and  Susheela.  
 
There lived a mighty demon named Narakasur. He had defeated the deities and snatched  the 
divine  earrings  of Aditi --the mother  of deitie s. He had created  an aerial  city in which  he lived 
alongwith other demons. The deities went to Sri Krishna and sought his help. Sri Krishna flew  up 
in the sky mounted on the back of Garuda. Satyabhama was also accompanying him. Sri  Krishna 
was amazed to se e the well fortified palace of Narakasur. When the demons saw Srikrishna,  they 
attacked  him but Sri Krishna  challenged  them  by blowin  his conch.  Narakasur  came  forward  to 
fight Sri Krishna. A fierce battle took place in which Sri Krishna broke Narakasur's bow with  his 
arrows. Ultimately, Sri Krishna was successful in killing  Narakasur.  
 
Sri Krishna then returned the whole wealth to the deities, which Narakasur had looted  from 
them.  He also liberated  sixteen  thousand  women  whom  Narakasur  had imprisoned.  After being 
liberated all the women accepted Sri Krishna as their  husband.  
 
 ANIRUDHA MARRIES  USHA  
Lord Mahadeva continued with the divine tales of Sri Krishna --O Parvati! Sri Krishna had a  son 
from Rukmini whose name was 'Aniruddha'. Aniruddha was very brave and had killed a  demon 
named Shambasur. There is an interesting tale how Aniruddha married  Usha.  
 
Once, Usha --the daughter of Banasur, saw a very handsome young man in her dreams. She  was 
so infatuated by his handsome personality that she developed a deep desire of marrying  him. 
When she woke up next morning, she expressed her desire to her  companion --Chitralekha. 
Chitralekha was an accomplished painter. She drew a sketch of a handsome man as per  the 
descriptions of Usha. When the painting was ready, Chitra lekha revealed to Usha that the  preson 
who she had seen in her dream was none other than  Aniruddha.  
Chitralekha  had divine  powers.  She went  to Dwarka  and abducted  Aniruddha  while  he was 
asleep.  She then carried  Aniruddha  and laid him on the bed of Usha.  When Usha  woke  up, she 
was thrilled  to see the man of her dreams.  Aniruddha  remained  there  for many  days without 
Banasur being aware of his presence. One day, Banasur came to know about  Aniruddhas' 
presence.  He became  furious  and imprisoned  Aniruddha.  Sage  Narada  informed  Sri Krishna 
about  Aniruddha's  imprisonment.  Sri Krishna  went  to fight  a battle  against  Banasur  and release 
Aniruddha  from  his imprisonment.  Although  Sri Krishna  was leading  a large  army  and was 
accompanied  by mighty  warriors  like Baldeva  and Pradyumna  yet he was aware  that it was not 
easy to fight Banasur who had one thousand arms and whom Lord Shiva had vowed to  protect.  
 
A fierce battle commenced between the armies of Sri Krishna and Lord Shiva. The  battle 
remained  indecisive  for a long time. Meanwhile,  Banasur  came  forward  to fight  against  Sri 
Krishna. Very soon Sri Krishna severed all the thousand hands of Banasur with his 'chakra'.  Lord 
Shiva then requested Sri Krishna to spare Banasur's life and said -'Banasur has received the  boon 
of immortality  from  me. Now,  only you can protect  the dignity  of my boon  given  to him.'  Sri 
Krishna spared Banasur's life. Banasur then agreed to marry his daughter to Aniruddha. This  way 
Aniruddha married Usha with great  fanfare.  
   
 
THE DECLINE OF YADU  DYNASTY  
Parvati  was listening  to the divine  tales of Sri Krishna  with rapt attention.  Lord  Mahadeva  told 
Parvati -- 'Paundrak  was the king of Kashi.  He did an austere  penance  for twelve  years  to please 
me. When I appeared before him, he requested me to make his app earance look like Sri  Krishna. 
I blessed  him with an appearance  similar  to that of Sri Krishna.  People  became  confused  as to 
who the real Krishna  was. 
 
One day, Narada arrived at Kashi and castigated Paundrak by saying that his intention  of 
befooling  peopl e would  not meet  success  as long as real Krishna  was alive.  Paundrak  went  to 
Dwarka with a large army and challenged Sri Krishna for a duel. Sri Krishna severed  the 
impersonator's head with his chakra. Meanwhile, Jarasandh continued to torment the yadavas.  Sri 
Krishna  decided  to settle  the matter  for once  and all. He advised  Bhima  to challenge  Jarasandh 
for a wrestling -bout.  
 
Jarasandh and Bhima fought valiantly for 27 days. While both of them were fighting, Sri  Krishna 
signalled  Bhima  to tear apart  Jarasan dh's thighs.  After  the killing  of Jarasandh,  Sri Krishna 
released all the kings who had been imprisoned by him. After the great war of Mahabharata  had 
ended, Yudhisthira decided to perform a Rajasuya -yagya at Indraprashth. Sri Krishna also  went 
there  to bless the Pandavas.  Shishupal  was also present  at the ceremony.  He had an old grudge 
against Sri Krishna and started abusing him. Initially Krishna tried to overlook his abuses  but 
when situation went beyond repair Sri Krishna severed his head with his  chakr a. 
 
Dantavaktra attacked Mathura to avenge the death of Shishupal. A long battle was fought at  the 
bank of river yamuna, which continued for many days. Ultimately, Sri Krishna was successful  in 
killing Dantavaktra with his mace. There was a childhood frien d of Sri Krishna whose name  was 
Sudama.  He was a poor brahmin.  Once,  he went  to meet  Sri Krishna.  Sri Krishna,  being  an 
incarnation of the almighty immediately understood the precarious situation his poor friend   was 
living in. He blessed Sudama as a res ult of which he got rid of his poverty and  became 
prosperous.  Sri Krishna  had one crore  sons from  his sixteen  thousand  queens.  Pradyumna  was 
his eldest  son. The Yadavas  dominated  the whole  earth  and had become  arrogant  after being 
intoxicated  by their powe r. There  is an interesting  tale how this powerful  Yadava  dynasty  met 
their downfall  -- 
 
Once,  some  young  Yadavas  played  a prank  with Sage  Kanva,  which  caused  the downfall  of the 
Yadavas.  One day, some  Yadva  children  went  at the bank  of river  Narmada  where  sage Kanva 
was doing penance. Samba was one of those Yadava children. He disguised himself as  a 
pregnant  woman  by keeping  a pestle  under  his clothes.  All the Yadava  children  then went  near 
Sage Kanva and asked him as to when was the pregnant woman suppose d to deliver a child.  Sage 
Kanva furiously cursed them that the whole clan of Yadavas would be liquidated because of  that 
very pestle. All the children were scarred and told Sri Krishna about the mistake they had  made. 
Sri Krishna  ordered  that the iron pestle be crushed  to powder  and be thrown  into a pond.  But, 
that was not the end of the matter,  as long reeds  grew  all around  the pond.  The reeds  had very 
sharp  edges.  A fish swallowed  a small  part of that iron pestle  and was subsequently  caught  by a 
fowler, who retrieved that iron -piece from the fish and fixed it on the top of his  arrow.  
 
 
 In course of time all the Yadavas developed enemity among themselves and killed each  other 
with those sharp -edged reeds. Once, Sri Krishna was taking rest under the shade of  'Kalpa'  tree. 
The fowler  mistook  his pink foot to be that of a deer and pierced  it with his arrow.  When  the 
fowler  arrived  at the spot he found  Sri Krishna  in an injured  condition.  The fowler  regretted  his 
action  and begged  for Sri Krishna's  pardon.  Sri Krishna  consoled  the fowler  by saying  that he 
had committed  no crime.  Meanwhile,  Daruk  arrived  there  on his chariot.  Sri Krishna  instructed 
Daruk  to call Arjuna  as soon  as possible.  Arjuna  arrived  at the site within  a short  time.  Sri 
Krishna told Arjuna --'The time for my final departure has arrived. Please call all my eight  queen 
consorts.'  
 
Arjuna  rushed  towards  Dwarka  to summon  the queens  but Sri Krishna  had already  left for his 
heavenly  abode  before  he could  come  back  with the queens.  Arjuna  informed  the queens  about 
Sri Krishna's  injury.  In a short  time the news  spread  like a wild fire and all the residents  of 
Dwarka rushed towards the site of incident. After reaching there, the eight queens of  Krishna 
found that their beloved husband had already departed . All of them gave up their lives and  united 
with Sri Krishna. The great Yadavas like Vasudev, Ugrasena and Akrura followed suit.  Balarama 
could  not bear the sorrow  caused  by Sri Krishna's  separation  and he gave  up his life. His wife-- 
Revati  entered  the burning  pyre with her husband's  body  in her lap. Similarly  all the rest of Sri 
Krishna's family members like Rukmi's daughter, Pradyumna, Usha and Aniruddha left  for 
heavenly  abode.  
 
Arjuna performed the last rite of all the dead Yadavas. Eventually, Dwarak a got submerged  into 
the ocean.  Thus,  Sri Krishna  after having  liberated  the earth  from  all the sinners  left his mortal 
body. After completing his story Lord Mahadeva told Parvati that Sri Krishna takes  incarnation 
whenever there is predominance of sin or sinners. He also revealed to her that Sri Krishna  would 
incarnate as Kalki at the fag end of Kali Yuga to liquidate the  'mlechchhas'.  
   
 
RITUALS OF VISHNU  WORSHIP  
Describing  about  the rituals  connected  with the worship  of lord Vishnu,  lord Mahadeva  told 
Parvati-- A devotee can worship Lord Vishnu by making his idol. This mode of worship  is 
known  as 'Sthapita'  (installation  of an idol).  There  are also some  sacred  places  related  with lord 
Vishnu which are called 'Swayam -Vyakata' (self manifested) like Indradyu mna Sarovar,  (Kurma 
sthan), Kashi, Prayag, Dwarka, Naimisharanya, Mathura etc. In all these holy places,  Lord 
Vishnu  had manifested  himself.  A devotee  should  get up early  in the morning  and perform 
'achaman'.  He should  then chant  the holy name  of Lord  Vish nu. He should  take his bath and sit 
down to worship Lord  Vishnu.  
 
A devotee  should  install  idols  of Lakshmi -Narayana  on a beautiful  pedestal  and adorn  it with 
flowers. He should then make offerings of various articles like akshat, fruits, flowers, etc. to  the 
deity. While worshipping, it is most necessary that a devotee followes the rituals as mentioned  in 
the ancient  scriptures  like Shruti,  Smriti,  Vedas  etc. He should  chant  the shlokas  of Purusha - 
Sukta as well as the cryptic mantra for the accomplishment  of 'Shodashopachar'. He should  light 
a ghee lamp and make offerings of articles like camphor and betel leaves to Lord Vishnu.  While 
making offerings in the sacrificial -fire, chanting of a shloka either from Purushasukta or  Srisukta 
is mandatory.  
 
There ar e some specific days which are considered to be specially auspicious for the worship  of 
lord Vishnu --Amavasya, Saturday, solar eclipse, lunar eclipse  etc. 
   
 
LORD VISHNU --THE ALMIGHTY GOD  
Describing about the superiority of Lord Vishnu among the trinity Gods ' Sage  Vashishtha 
narrated the following tale --During ancient times, Swayambhuva manu had once gone  to 
Mandarachal  mountain  to perform  a yagya.  Many  scholars  and learned  men had come  to attend 
that yagya.  Very  soon,  they got into a debate  as to who was the supreme  among  all the deities. 
Some  of them  eulogised  the greatness  of Brahma,  while  some  said that lord Shiva  was the 
greatest of all the deities. Failing to come to any conclusion all of them requested Sage Bhrigu  to 
find out as to who was the greatest among the trinity  Gods.  
 
Sage Bhrigu went to meet Lord Shiva at Kailash mountain. He saw Nandi standing guard at  the 
main entrance. Sage Bhrigu arrogantly ordered Nandi to inform Lord Shiva of his arrival.  Nandi 
refused  to comply  with Bhrigu's  command.  Sage Bhrigu  cursed  Lord  Shiva  by saying --Your 
master - Shiva,  would  bear the consequences  of showing  disrespect  to me. From  today  onwards 
people would make offerings of forbidden articles to  him.'  
 
Sage Bhrigu then went to meet Lord Brahma. After reaching Brah maloka, he made salutations  to 
lord Brahma.Lord Brahma also did not give any respect to Sage Bhrigu and neglected him.  Sage 
Bhrigu  became  furious  and cursed  Lord  Brahma ---'Being  intoxicated  by your Rajoguna,  you 
have  shown  disrespect  to me. From  today  onwa rds people  will not worhsip  you.'  Sage  Bhrigu 
then went to meet Lord Vishnu at his abode - Ksheersagar. He did not have any problem  in 
reaching the place where Lord Vishnu was taking rest on Sheshnag, engrossed in his  yoganidra. 
Goddess Lakshmi was pressing  Vishnu's legs with total devotion. Sage Bhrigu kicked  Lord 
Vishnu on his  chest.  Lord Vishnu woke up  and  seeing sage  Bhrigu  said ---'O  Great  Brahmin!  
Your tender foot must have got hurt because of my chest, which is as hard as Vajra. How  blessed 
I am to have been touched by a brahmin's  foot.'  
 
Lord Vishnu got up and eulogised Sage Bhrigu. This gesture of Lord Vishnu made Sage  Bhrigu 
cry in joy. Now,  he was convinced  as to who was the supreme  among  all the three  deities.  Sage 
Bhrigu  returned  to Mandar achal  mountain  where  all the sages  were  anxiously  waiting  for him. 
He declared -- 
 
'Lord  Brahma  is the possesser  of Rajoguna,  while  Lord  Shiva  possesses  tamoguna.  Only  Lord 
Vishnu  is the proud  possessor  of Satvaguna  and hence  He is the supreme  among  all three of 
them.'  After  finishing  his tale, Sage  Vashishtha  told the sages  that anybody  who worships  Lord 
Vishnu  with complete  faith and total devotion  become  liberated  from  all his sins. A devotee  of 
Lord Vishnu attains to Vishnu Loka after his  death.  
   
 
PARSHUR AMA  
Describing Lord Vishnu's incarnation as Parshurama, Lord Mahadeva told  Parvati --Sage 
Jamadagni  came  from  the lineage  of Bhrigu.  He had pleased  Indra  by his tremendous  penance 
and received  Surabhi  cow in return.  In course  of time he married  the daughter  of king Renuk 
whose  name  was Renuka.  A child  was born to them,  who was named  'Rama'  by Sage  Bhrigu. 
The child was also known as 'Jamadganya' because of  Jamdagni.  
 
After growing up, Rama became proficient in all the scriptures. He also mastered various 
weaponaries. One day, the king of Haihaya named Arjuna arrived at the hermitage of  Jamadagni. 
Sage  Jamdagni  treated  the king with due honor  and respect.  He presented  numerous  gifts to the 
king.  Arjuna  wanted  nothing  else but the Surabhi --cow from  Sage  Jamdagn i which  he was 
unwilling to part away with. Ultimately, Arjuna forcibly took away the divine cow. The cow  was 
unwilling  to go alongwith  Arjuna  and she attacked  his army  with her sharp  horns.  As a result, 
Arjuna's whole army was liquidated within no time. T he revengeful Arjuna killed Jamadagni.  At 
the time of this incident. Rama was not present in the  hermitage.  
 
Rama wanted to avenge his father's death and did a tremendous penance to please Lord  Vishnu. 
Lord  Vishnu  became  pleased  by his devotion  and present ed many  divine  weapons  to him. The 
weapons included the famous axe --Parshu and Vaishnav -bow. After acquiring Parshu from  Lord 
Vishnu, Rama became famous as Parshurama. He had vowed to kill all the Kshatriyas, which  he 
did only, the clan of Ikshavaku was sp ared by him as he had promised his mother that he  would 
not harm Ikshavaku and his  clan.  
 
After  freeing  the earth  from the terror  of Kshatriyas,  Parshurama  performed  an Ashwamedha  Yagya  and 
donated  his whole  kingdom,  to the brahmins.  He then went  to do penance at  the hermitage  of Nar- arayan.  
 
 
 