Prasanthi Vahini

Many people are not aware of even the meaning of the phrase supreme peace ( prasanthi ). It is the backbone 
of an individual and, for, the spiritual aspirant ( sadhaka ), the very breath. The word is taken by each to 
mean something different. Many feel they have peace when some worldly desire that was vexing them is satisfied! 
But that is not real peace; it is only a temporary short-lived interval between one worry and another. The syllable 
pra in prasanthi  means expanding, enlarging ( vikasa ), so prasanthi  means that type of peace ( santhi ), that is to 
say, the absence of desire, anger, greed, and hatred.
Supreme peace means success in the elimination of the qualities grouped under desire ( kama ) and anger 
(krodha ). This process of elimination, called “developing equanimity ( sama )”, is very essential for all. The spiri -
tual aspirant must be constantly engaged in practising it. What does the aspirant strive for? Fulfilment, is it not? 
In other words, the aspirant strives for peace.
Now, this peace is the innate nature of humanity. It is the force that comes to the aid of those who try to de -
velop discrimination ( viveka ), renunciation or detachment ( vairagya ), and keenness of intellect ( vichakshana ). It 
is but a phase of the Atma  itself. Just like the Atma , it has no beginning or end; no blemish can mar it; it is equaled 
only by itself; it cannot be compared with any other.
Peace must be manifested in feeling, word, posture, and deed ( manas , vaak , kaya , karma ) in the same uni -
form, equal, measure. Then, peace ( santhi ) becomes the real peace ( prasanthi ). Bereft of such peace, one cannot 
hope to get either worldly, other worldly, or trans-worldly bliss. Peace is the nursery of all happiness and all joy. 
Thyagaraja knew this, for he sang, “No peace, no happiness”. All men need it, whoever they are, be they self-
restrained men or vedanthins , ascetics or scholars, pious men or philosophers.
But people are unable to stand still even for a moment! Absence of mere anger cannot be taken as peace. The 
winning of a desired object and the satisfaction one then gets should not be confused with peace. The peace that 
has pervaded the heart must not be shaken subsequently for any reason; only that type of peace ( santhi ) deserves 
to be called supreme peace ( prasanthi ). Supreme peace has no ups and downs; it cannot be partial in adversity and 
complete in prosperity. It cannot be one thing today and another tomorrow. Always maintaining the same even 
flow of bliss ( ananda ), that is supreme peace.
This “Stream of Supreme Peace” ( Prasanthi Vahini ) tells you what supreme peace is and makes you under -
stand how to earn it, how it can be utilized, and what its attributes are. Every single aspirant has the legitimate 
right to earn this supreme peace but must learn the path by which it can be earned.10
Prasanthi Vahini Peace, love, and the AtmaPeace, love, and the Atma
The world today is suffering from selfish politics, nihilistic religion, and heartless competition. This is indeed 
a disgraceful state of affairs. People have completely forgotten their fundamental, divine nature. At such a 
crisis, what is most urgently needed is peace and divine love; they are the drugs that will cure this dreaded disease. 
No other specific can ameliorate the illness. Love is the only means to get peace. The fuel of love yields the divine 
flame of peace. Love brings about unity of all mankind, and this unity, combined with spiritual knowledge, will 
bring about world peace.
The discipline of the self is the basic foundation for successful living. Through that alone can one attain real 
and lasting peace. And, without peace, there can be no happiness. Peace is the very nature of the Atma . It coexists 
only with a pure heart; it is never associated with a greedy heart full of desires. Peace is the distinguishing mark 
of yogis , sages ( rishis ), and wise men. It doesn’t depend on external conditions. It will flee away from the self -
ish and the sensual. It hates the company of such persons. It is the characteristic of the inner Atma  —wonderful, 
unshakeable, and permanent.
Peace is full of spiritual uplift and the wisdom that is the natural accompaniment of bliss. Genuine peace 
is won only by control of the senses. Then, it can be called supreme peace. The experience of that stage is the 
“Stream of Supreme Peace”. Calming the mental agitatation that surges like waves, leveling the swirls and whirls 
of likes, dislikes, love, hate, sorrow, joy, hope, and despair, peace is earned and maintained without disturbance.
Peace is of the nature of the Atma . The Atma  is imperishable. It doesn’t die, like the body and mind. It is 
universal, subtle; its very nature is knowledge. So, peace also partakes of these characteristics. Knowledge of the 
Atma  destroys illusion, doubt, and sorrow. Hence, knowledge of the Atma  confers the steadiest peace and, with 
it, holiness and happiness.
The Atma  is not the object of knowledge; it is the very source and spring of knowledge. Spiritual wisdom 
(jnana ) is that which shows the way to the ripening, the fruition, the freedom, the immortality, the eternal happi -
ness, the eternal peace. Those who are carried away by the vagaries of the senses cannot attain the Atma . Brahman  
is the one Unchanging in this changing world. The Atma  is untarnished by external transformations, changes, or 
modifications. The glory of the body is not the Atma ; the Atma  is, really speaking, indescribable and inexpress -
ible. It is neither this nor that. It can be said to be only It, the Atma , Brahman . Brahman  itself has become truth 
(sathya ), love, light, peace, wisdom, and highest bliss ( Paramananda ). You can attain Brahman  through any of 
these paths. Have no doubt about that; it is the truth.
The Atma  is not the five senses, the intellect ( buddhi ), the vital airs ( pranas ), or the life force. It can only be 
described by what it isn’t, not by what it is. No one can say it is thus, etc. If anyone says it is this or that, we can 
take it that they don’t know the least thing about it. Much can be said about something unknown; anything, any 
name can be ascribed to it. In short, the Atma  cannot be communicated by words. It is impossible to describe, 
whoever may try.11
Prasanthi Vahini Shaping the mindShaping the mind
Bliss ( ananda ) is the innate nature of all. But the pity is that people are searching for it everywhere except 
where it is available. Bliss is not something lifeless and inactive. It is another name for purposeful living. 
Peace is the authority under which the rule of bliss prevails. It lays down the limits and laws for all activities. It 
must be made so stable that it is unaffected by the ever-wandering mind or the outward-bound senses. It can be 
experienced, personally, only through the natural state of wisdom. It is the most precious treasure. The one who 
grasps that which is deathless, that which cannot be destroyed, that which is not modified —that one is the enjoyer 
of peace and has no death.
Peace is a shoreless ocean; it is the light that illumines the world. Having it is having all. It confers knowl -
edge of both this world and that. It leads to the understanding of Brahman , the very fulfilment of human life, 
which Vedanta  tries to teach.
Pure love can emanate only from a heart immersed in peace, for it is an atmosphere that pervades and puri -
fies. Peace is not a conviction arrived at by means of logic. It is the discipline of all disciplined lives. When one 
is born, the mind is like a blank sheet of white paper. As soon as thinking, feeling, and acting starts, the process 
of tarnishing the mind also starts. The body depends on the life breath ( prana ); it depends on the mind and the 
desires that agitate the mind. Right and truth are befogged by the needs of manners, fashion, convention, custom, 
etc., and the individual is thrown into a crowd. The solitude is invaded and taken away.
Therefore, the mind must first be calmed and quieted. Only then can the body be healthy and the intellect 
sharp. The mind is projected at one time only on a single object, not on many. But it is still a conglomeration of 
thoughts, desires, fancies, imaginings, and the rest. In fact, the mind has inside it, in a nutshell, the entire history 
of creation. That is the delusion ( maya ) mould of humanity. The mind is the battle field ( kurukshetra ) where good 
and bad, right and wrong contest for supremacy. Iron has to be beaten flat by iron alone. So too, the inferior, low 
mind has to be shaped better by the superior mind. One has to make one’s mind superior and stronger for the task 
of personal uplift.
That is the purpose of this “Stream of Supreme Peace” ( Prasanthi Vahini ). Drink deep from the waters of this 
Stream, the waters of discipline indicated therein. Immerse yourself in it and become cleansed; may its coolness 
refresh your sorrows and pains and quench the fires of sin.12
Prasanthi Vahini Overcoming the disease of words devoid of experienceOvercoming the disease of words devoid of experience
Another disease has now begun to spread in the world to weaken and lessen peace. There are plenty who, par -
rot-like, purvey wholesome advice on morals, religion, and discipline but who do not practise even a single 
bit of it themselves. The so-called elders know only how to speak, not how to act. How do those who teach how to 
act know enough to speak about it? Words devoid of experience —that is the illness that afflicts the world today.
This disease must first be treated and removed, for peace is warped thereby for mankind. To speak is easy 
for all. The real spiritual aspirant, however, acts and then speaks from experience. People who merely speak but 
do not act bring about disaster. Such dangerous aspirants and seekers have multiplied, and they have confused 
the true path. Innocent and simple-minded devotees who attach themselves to such are also being led astray and 
duped. Let the readers and the aspirants first watch the conduct and then choose. If there is no observance of the 
advice given, treat them with the respect due to a phonograph record; nothing more. The record is to be treated as 
a record only, not as Godhead, until you reach the stage when the truth of “Everything is God” becomes patent to 
you. It is a greater mistake and sin to say “All is God” in mere words only and, while doing so, to treat some as 
unholy in actual practice.
Many take sweet diction and elocution as important. Of course they are, to some extent, but the sweetness 
of the words must be there whenever the speech is recalled from memory. It should not turn bitter with the pas -
sage of time. Only then are those words nectar ( amritha ). Today, the sweetness does not persist; it soon turns bit -
ter, because there is no coordination between the speaker, the subject, and conduct. Therefore, instead of nectar 
(amritha ), the words now become false ( anritha ). The impression will be changeless and permanent when a good 
subject is clothed in a fitting style and presented with appropriate feeling on the basis of actual experience.
What spiritual aspirants have to do now is this. First, develop wisdom with discrimination ( viveka ) —that 
is to say, the capacity to distinguish the eternal from the transitory and to decide which is worthy. Second, make 
a sincere attempt to experience what is chosen as worthy and true. Third, don’t give up the discipline, whatever 
comes in the way. These three can be called genuine spiritual austerity ( tapas ). From this austerity alone is born 
real peace and joy.
Now, everything from ant to almighty is undergoing some change or other, every minute. No object, no 
living thing is an exception to this law. Creation is ever changing. But this change is of two kinds: external and 
internal.  The external change can be easily cognized; the internal is not so patent, not so easy to understand. That 
is why it is necessary first to train oneself to understand the external changes, which are clearer, and then gradually 
to approach the problem of controlling the changing interior. Of these two, whichever you are at, do it with a full 
heart, to the satisfaction of your own conscience. Don’t do it to earn the esteem of others, to please them, or to get 
praised by them as a great devotee; such an attitude is treason to the Self ( Atma-droha ).
The Lord loves the inner, not the outer, but you should not neglect the outer. Even in outward behavior and 
act, you should manifest the inner feeling; that gives a chance for experiencing the feeling of quietude and peace 
in fuller measure, for the taste of that peace must be enjoyed through thought, word, gesture, and deed. It is only 
when peace is enjoyed in all these four that it becomes complete; then, in other words, the mind ( manas ) fades 
away and the stage designated as genuine peace or union ( yoga ) is reached.
Philosophy that cannot be understood, scriptures that are not practised —the present world is full of such. 
It is a waste to talk of these. Real change must be made in daily conduct and behavior, for these are within the 13
Prasanthi Vahini Overcoming the disease of words devoid of experienceexperience of all, they can be easily practised, and their purpose can be clearly grasped. It is only when these are 
transformed that the inner Atma , deeper, more mysterious, and more essential, can be understood. In every little 
act, activity, and word, one should discriminate and adopt the best; that is the sign of the genuine spiritual aspirant.14
Prasanthi Vahini Spiritual exercise wins His graceSpiritual exercise wins His grace
Neither peace nor the devotion that gives it can be obtained through another; each one has to create and de -
velop them for themself. Still, one should also have the grace of the Lord, which is fundamental. As said in 
the Upanishads , “He whom He chooses gets it ( Yameva vrunuthe thena labhyah )”. But the spiritual aspirant may 
doubt, “What then is the need for spiritual exercises?” Those who think of the Lord with devotion can overcome 
any type of inherited or accumulated karma . With His grace, they can experience even unattainable bliss. Do not 
doubt the usefulness of spiritual discipline; it can never be fruitless, no, not for anyone. Hold firm to that convic -
tion. Unshaken devotion will win the grace of the Lord. Gajendra is an example of this.
Each is born for some task, but all can exist only on the self-same food and drink: peace. For without peace, 
there is no bliss. Peace embellishes every act; it softens the hardest core of humanity; it takes you to the footstool 
of the Lord and wins for you the vision of God. It knows no distinction; it is a force that establishes equality. It 
is the honey of love in the enchanting flower of life. It is a prime need for yogis  and spiritual aspirants. Having 
acquired it, they can realize the reality tomorrow, if not today. They should put up with all the obstacles in the way, 
and peace will give them the strength needed for it.
Through peace alone can devotion expand and spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) strike root. Wisdom born of peace is 
the one and only means of living a full life or a life that knows no death. The inquiry “Who am I?” clears the path 
for realization. So, one must wait patiently and quietly, placing faith on the grace and wisdom of the Lord. Such 
an inquirer will be ever earnest and penitent. The inquirer becomes fearless and therefore full of peace through 
another conviction also: the Lord is everywhere, visibly present.
To earn peace, its inveterate enemy, anger, must be laid low. Anger is the harvest of the tantalizing mind; it 
enslaves you and fogs your understanding. Understanding becomes easy when you are full of devotion and your 
devotion is deep rooted. The form of devotion called peaceful devotion ( santha-bhakthi ) is the best path for at -
taining eternal, everlasting bliss. Become the messenger of the peace that has no beginning or end. Hold forth the 
light of peace for humanity. Live the ideal life, ever contented, ever joyous, ever happy.
The spiritual aspirants and devotees of old reached their goal only through peace. Peace gave Ramdas, Tu -
karam, Kabir, Thyagaraja, Nandanar, etc. the fortitude needed to bear all the calumny, torture, and travail that was 
their lot. An aspirant who bases efforts on these examples will be free of anger, despair, and doubt. The accounts 
of their struggles and successes, if contemplated upon, are more useful to the aspirant than contemplation of the 
powers and accomplishments of the Lord. They will help the aspirant to try out in their own experience the meth -
ods developed by these others. One can attain peace by recalling how they overcame handicaps, how they bore 
troubles, and what paths they trod to cross over to the other bank.
It will be found that peace was the main instrument that saved them from the coils of anger, pain, conceit, 
doubt, and despair. Therefore listen, oh aspirants! Acquire the instrument, peace, by the grace of the Lord. Direct 
all efforts to that end.
Whatever the trouble, however great the travail, persist and win by means of remembering the name ( namas -
marana ). Remember Bhishma! Though prostrate on a bed of arrows, he bore the pain patiently, awaiting the dawn 
of the auspicious moment. He never called out to God in his agony to ask Him to put an end to his suffering. “I 
shall bear everything, whatever the pain, however long the agony. I shall be silent until the moment comes. Take 
me when it dawns,” he said. Bhishma was chief among the tranquil devotees. He lay firm and unshakeable.15
Prasanthi Vahini Spiritual exercise wins His gracePeace is essential for everyone. Having it is having all, and not having it takes away the joy of everything. 
Although peace is the very nature of every person, anger and greed succeed in suppressing it. When they are re -
moved, peace shines in its own effulgence.16
Prasanthi Vahini The need for an unruffled mindThe need for an unruffled mind
One must always have calm thoughts. Only then can one’s mind have equanimity. It is just a question of the 
discipline of the mind —difficult in the beginning, but once mastered, capable of conquering all troubles and 
worries. An unruffled mind is very necessary for every aspirant who is marching forward; it is one of the benefi -
cial qualities. Such a mind gives real strength and happiness. Strive to gain it. Though you may fail even in seven 
attempts, you are sure to succeed in the eighth if you refuse to be dispirited.
The story of Bruce, who drew inspiration from a spider and won the honours of victory at the eighth attempt, 
is worth remembering. What gave him victory? Peace, the unruffled mind. He did not yield to despair, cowardice, 
or helplessness; he was calm throughout, and he secured success. Even if calamity befalls, the aspirant should not 
lose heart. The mind must ever be pure, untarnished, and calm, full of courage. No weeping for the past, no falter -
ing in the performance of the task at hand, that is the mark of an aspirant. Be prepared to face gladly any obstacle 
in the path. Only such can realize the goal. 
Elation at profit, joy, and cheer; dejection at loss and misery —these are natural characteristics common to 
all mortals. What, then, is the excellence of aspirants? They should not forget the principle: Be vigilant and suffer 
the inevitable gladly. When difficulties and losses overwhelm you, do not lose heart and precipitate some action, 
but meditate calmly on how they came to be. Try to discover some simple means of overcoming or avoiding them, 
in an atmosphere of peace.
When the blow is directed to the head, see that the turban alone gets it —this is the mark of keen intelligence. 
Peace is essential for this sharpness of intellect. Haste and worry confuse the intelligence. Peace develops all the 
beneficial characteristics. Even farsightedness grows through peace, and, through that, obstacles and dangers can 
be anticipated and averted. Aspirants have to pay attention to some subtle points here. They have special prob -
lems, viz. their failings, mistakes, drawbacks, etc. The will power can be so purified and strengthened that these 
failings will never more be recollected. If thoughts run after the failings and begin to dwell on how they came 
about, when they came about, etc., the aspirants are prone to commit a few more.
Once they have been recognized as failings, why worry about their birth and ancestry? Instead, allow the 
mind to dwell on good things. Of what profit is it to spend time on things that are no longer necessary? Do not 
think of them any more. The aspirant will find this attitude useful.
If aspirants are unsuccessful in following one discipline, they have to seek and know the cause of their de -
feat. This analysis is necessary. They must then see that, in the second stage, the trait is not repeated. They should 
try their best to guard themselves against it. In such matters, one must be quick and active, like the squirrel. Agil -
ity and vigilance must be combined with sharpness of intelligence, too. All this can be earned only through peace.
Steady and undeviating earnestness is very important for avoiding and overcoming conflicts in the mind. 
One has to be calm and unruffled. Courage, wise counsel, and steadiness —these make the will power ( iccha-
sakthi ) strong and sturdy. Lustre in the face, splendour in the eye, a determined look, a noble voice, large-hearted 
charity of feeling, unwavering goodness —these are the signposts of a developing and progressing will-force. A 
mind without agitations, a joyous and unblemished outlook —these are the marks of a person in whom peace has 
taken root.17
Prasanthi Vahini PrayerPrayer
The devotee can well pray for and ask from the Lord the gift of such a peace, as well as the virtues ( sat-gunas ) 
necessary for their growth. Why, the aspirant has only this one thing as capital for earning any goal: prayer.
Some people may have some doubts related to this. Of what avail is prayer? Will the Lord gratify all that 
we ask for in our prayers? He gives us only what, according to Him, we need or deserve, is it not? Will the Lord 
like to give us all that we ask for in our prayers to Him? Under such circumstances, what is the use of prayer? Of 
course, all these doubts can be resolved.
If the devotee has dedicated everything —body, mind, and existence— to the Lord, He will Himself look 
after everything, for He will always be with the devotee. Under such conditions, there is no need for prayer. But 
have you so dedicated yourself and surrendered everything to the Lord? No. When losses occur, calamities come, 
or plans go awry, the devotee blames the Lord. Some, on the other hand, pray to Him to save them. If you avoid 
both of these, as well as reliance on others, if you place complete faith on the Lord at all times, why should He 
deny you His grace? Why should He desist from helping you? Men do not rely fully and unswervingly on the 
Lord.
Therefore, though you have to be the agent and the instrument doing everything, keep on praying with devo -
tion and faith. Faith is the product of peace, not of haste and hurry. For the acquisition of the grace of the Lord and 
the resulting awareness of the reality, the quality of peace is the prime need.
Every aspirant is aware of how Droupadi, through her dharma  and peace, deserved the grace of the Lord. 
Though her husbands were mighty heroes and far-famed monarchs, she sought refuge in Lord Krishna, feeling 
that all others were of no use. But Prahlada did not seek refuge under similar circumstances. At birth, he had sur -
rendered all to the Lord. He knew that the Lord was ever by his side and that he was ever by the side of the Lord, 
so he had no need to call out to Him for protection. Prahlada was unaware of anything except the Lord; he could 
not distinguish between one function of the Lord and another. So, how could he pray for protection, when he did 
not know that He was being punished? For all such God-intoxicated and dedicated souls, prayer is unnecessary.
But until that stage is reached, prayer in an attitude of peace is essential for aspirants. Prayer with this attitude 
will promote equanimity in enjoyment ( sama-rasa ). The Lord can be prayed to by means of recital of the name 
of God, continual repetition of the name of the Lord, meditation, or devotional singing. In every one of these, the 
chief item is the divine name. That is why Krishna spoke in the Gita of recitation of the name.
When repetition of the name is done, it is better to recite aloud and make it devotional singing. This will 
inspire the gathering. If devotional songs are sung in a sweet voice, people will be drawn toward the Lord. Gradu -
ally, it will develop into love for God, and His grace will follow in due course. One should patiently wait for that 
grace.
Even for being blessed by the Lord’s grace, one must have peace and await patiently. Only serenity succeeds 
in bringing about the result of spiritual practice. Add this lesson to the practices you are engaged in, night and day, 
and to the following mantra  for peace:
From untruth, lead us to truth
From darkness, lead us to light
From death, to immortality18
Prasanthi Vahini PrayerAsatho maa sadgamaya
Thamaso maa jyothir gamaya
Mrityor maa amritham gamaya
The meaning of this mantra  is given variously by different people, some elaborately, some succinctly. Here 
is the real meaning of the mantra . The first prayer is: “Oh Lord, when I am deriving happiness through the ob -
jects of this world, make me forget the unreal objects and show me the way to permanent happiness.” The second 
prayer is: “Oh Lord, when the objects of the world attract me, remove the darkness that hides the all-pervading 
Atma , which every such object really is.” The third prayer is: “Oh Lord, bless me through Your grace with the 
immortality ( Paramananda ) that results from the awareness of the effulgence of the Atma  that is immanent in 
every object.”19
Prasanthi Vahini Dwelling in GodDwelling in God
The true devotee will always be dwelling in God. The true devotee has no time to know or feel welfare or wor -
ries. Attaining the Lord is the one and only idea in the mind. It is hard to understand this nature, except by 
examples. A small child runs about in fear shouting, “mommy, mommy!”, searching for its missing mother. The 
mother takes the child in her arms and places it on her lap. The child stops crying and is free from all fear. But 
can the child calculate and find out the difference between its previous state and its present relief? No. Nor is it 
necessary to do so.
Also, the one who seeks always to serve the Lord will immerse themself in God when the glorious chance 
comes. In that Presence, no anxiety or trouble can disturb a person. Anxiety and trouble pester only until the mo -
ment of attainment; then, all attention is diverted to the experience. The past struggle and travail are forgotten.
Therefore, aspirants and devotees must ignore and forget all the thousand troubles that have gone before and 
be engaged only in thoughts of the Lord. Immerse yourselves in them and derive joy therefrom. Devotion has no 
other reward. It is the cause, and it is also the effect; there are no two. Devotion is itself the realization. Through 
the path of wisdom also, when the veil of ignorance ( a-jnana ) is removed, the self-same realization occurs. In the 
path of devotion, one derives not one jot of joy from any source except the Lord. Every obstacle in this path can 
be overcome by the power of universal consciousness ( chith-sakthi ). This power is weakened by the feelings “I 
am the enjoyer and these are mine ( ahamkara  and mamakara )”. As long as one has this consciousness, one has no 
real contentment. One will be driven to seek for things that will give even more joy.
Every devotee hopes ultimately to experience the joy of supreme bliss as a result of their spiritual discipline. 
But that bliss is not something newly earned or acquired; it is not some new experience to be won by spiritual 
discipline. It is always with one, within one;  but it can’t be tasted because of the obstacle of the ego, which acts 
as a screen hiding it from view. One has to rend that veil asunder. Spiritual discipline is all the aspirant has to do. 
Then, the ever-existing bliss can be cognized. It does not arise anew; it is always there. What does come and go 
is the screen of “I” and “mine”, which covers the bliss.
While trying to remove the screen of “I am the enjoyer” and “these things are mine”, the aspirant should not 
hasten frantically and worry too much if the expected bliss is not discovered. At such times, peace is an unfailing 
help. If peace is cultivated well at first, then one can succeed in any task, however difficult.
Everyone is entitled to acquire and benefit by peace such as this. All are children of peace. However many 
the progeny, peace is “mother” to each of them. For every one of them, old or young, great or small, she is “moth -
er” in an equal measure; when they call her, each has to address her as “mother”. Children brought up by peace 
avoid all pain and sorrow, bear all varieties of happiness, and, at last, lay their heads on the lap of the “mother” 
in perfect security.20
Prasanthi Vahini The Path of devotionThe Path of devotion
Winning such perfect security requires following the path of full devotion, dedicating oneself to the Lord. It 
cannot be obtained by other means. The path of spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) is possible only for one in a mil -
lion; it is beyond the reach of all. Is it possible to negate the body and the objective world, so patent to the senses, 
by repeating “Not this, not this ( nethi , nethi )”? Unless this is possible, how can the “Not this, not this” argument 
be applied? Under present conditions, the path of wisdom is indeed very difficult. The path of selfless activity is 
also not quite so feasible. It is also full of difficulties. To work in the proper spirit, love and devotion are essential 
for success. The path of yoga  or communion also bristles with obstacles. Thus, the path of devotion is the smooth -
est, the most conducive to success, and the most bliss-yielding. 
Even this path of devotion cannot be defined and demarcated as such and such. Since it has many forms, 
roads, and types of experience, it is impossible for anyone to describe it accurately and fully. Each devotee gets 
bliss only through their individual experience —through the experience of other devotees, at best they can get 
only encouragement and guidance. The experience changes from one person to another, so it eludes comparison 
and even description. If anyone describes it by examples and limits, be sure that their experience is not real.
The limited soul is immersed in the limitless love of the Lord, and how can words describe that experience 
called by the Upanishads  as the unbroken uniflow of sweetness? One cannot express that state of unbounded de -
votion in human language. By outward signs that can be cognized by the senses, one can feel that the devotee is in 
a high state of bliss, but who can gauge the depth of that joy? It has no relation with the senses at all. Devotion has 
to be realized in your own experience, though great souls can illumine the path a little for you by their examples. 
With their help, you can grasp something of the path, but always remember that words fail when they approach 
the Beyond. They are useful only for purposes of the objective world. They are instruments of no value in regions 
of experience where comparisons are impossible.
Still, consider a few illustrations. Maitreyi, one of the foremost devotees among women, compared the mind 
of a devotee to a still lake, that is to say, all agitation is stopped, the mind becomes inactive, ineffective, so to say, 
worn out into nothing. Kapilamaharshi, speaking of the same devotion, compares it to a flowing stream. Streams 
and rivers like the Ganga and the Godavari flow uninterruptedly, without rest or any other thought, toward the sea; 
so too, from the very moment of birth, the devotee yearns to reach the sea of the grace of the Lord. Devotion is 
that unbroken relationship. Whatever the task on hand, whatever road is trod, the mind dwells on the goal alone, 
the goal of attaining the Lord. Again, in the Devi Bhagavatham , it is said that devotion is like the flow of oil from 
one vessel to another. This is more or less like the image of the river. Sankara characterizes devotion differently 
in the Sivanandalahari. Like the piece of iron that is drawn toward the magnet, the individual soul ( jivi) is drawn 
toward and attaches itself firmly to the Lord. All modifications of the mind get merged in the feet of the Lord. 
Also, Ramanuja explained that devotion as well as meditation done through love are essentially the same.
Though each interprets it differently, all interpretations are correct, for they are all based on actual experi -
ence, which cannot be negated. These statements do not exhaust the types; there are many more, for devotion has 
a thousand forms; it flows along a thousand streams to reach the ocean of the Lord’s grace. The goal of all the 
forms is the merger of the individual soul with Brahman , an absorption in total bliss.21
Prasanthi Vahini Faith in oneself and in the scripturesFaith in oneself and in the scriptures
Many people are disheartened by the fear that such merger is beyond their reach in this Kali age (the era 
we are now in), however much they may try. But this is a kind of weakness, and nothing more. It is not a 
question of the path of communion ( yoga ) adopted; whatever the path, if one has faith in oneself and faith in the 
scriptures, the goal is bound to be won. Some pretend to have faith in both, all the while doubting them in the heart 
of hearts. Each one can discover for themself the measure of their faith by the results. If the experience of merger 
is absent, it is due to the absence of these two kinds of faith. They must be in one, as the very breath of existence. 
Only then can one succeed in spiritual practice and attain union ( aikya ).
Of course, those without faith are without anything. They cannot benefit by advice. The present state of af -
fairs is due to men losing faith in themselves and in the scriptures. Even those who claim to have faith do not con -
duct themselves according to the scriptures and nourish them. Consequently, goodness and purity ( sathwic  qual -
ity) have gone out of the world, and wicked habits and degradation have gained the upper hand. If this atmosphere 
is to be transformed, and if the world is to enjoy security and peace, every pious God-fearing person ( asthika ) 
must cultivate faith in themself and in the scriptures and practise in their own life the disciplines enjoined in the 
scriptures.
Naturally, some modifications may have to be made out of consideration for the place, the time, and the in -
dividual, but the fundamental outlook and significant meaning should not be changed. The means by which those 
ideals are to be reached may be changed, but not the ideals themselves.
Suppose a child refuses to swallow a pill when it is in bed suffering from fever and clamours for a banana 
instead. Do you know what to do? Don’t omit the pill; instead, insert the pill inside the banana and offer it to the 
child to be swallowed. Its desire is satisfied, and also the fever comes down. The fundamental has not been dis -
carded; it has remained unchanged. Only the method of administering it has been modified.
So too, in the midst of the crazy habits and behaviors of today, there is no use presenting the scriptures in a 
language that is unfamiliar to most people. The scriptures can be explained in easy, understandable language, and 
the fundamentals will not be affected by this. Then, the scriptures can be practised, understood, experienced, and 
enjoyed. Consequently, faith in the scriptures will also be strengthened, and peace will also be stabilized upon 
faith. So, every believer ( asthika ) must practise the important directions of the scriptures and demonstrate in their 
life the sweetness of such a dedicated life, so that all others might appreciate the truth and value of the ideals and 
disciplines.
Big personages, claiming to be great, declaim about the Vedas , the scriptures, and the Atma . They freely 
quote the similes and metaphors contained in the books, but, by their conduct, they diminish their lustre. When the 
eyes are closed, of what use is it to fill the rest of the body with vital consciousness? Not even a single step can be 
taken forward. Similarly, with the eye of faith in the scriptures closed, what can one practise if asked to carry on?
Therefore, from today on, readers who are aspirants in the spiritual plane should try to grasp the basic mean -
ing of the scriptures. They are a sacred guide along the road. If the scriptures are not believed, the reality will 
elude them. To understand the meaning, one must have peace and fortitude. Peace is of great assistance in this. If 
only the great personages would explain the scriptures in simple, easily understandable language to the ignorant, 
then discontent and disquiet would disappear and belief in God would increase. Harmony would grow between 
people. Nourishing the scriptures will promote the nourishment of the welfare of the world.22
Prasanthi Vahini Faith in oneself and in the scripturesTo nourish the scriptures, speak the truth ( sathyam vada ); to nourish the world, speak pleasantly ( priyam 
vada ). If these two maxims are kept in view and practised, no greater discipline is needed. It is only in an atmo -
sphere of peace that such sacred maxims can be put into action.
To earn that calmness, steady effort and harmony are essential, in the same manner as for nourishing the 
scripture and the world. When peace is acquired, then all is equanimity ( sama-rasa ). Equanimity is the very na -
ture of peace. Everyone should be endowed with that peace and that equanimity and should establish an age of 
belief devoid of non-scriptural behaviour, attitude, conduct, habits, and character.
For this purpose, an army of spiritual aspirants has to be trained in ashrams and centres of piety. This is the 
responsibility mainly of those who run the ashrams, for they must have faith in themselves in order to train the 
army along sound lines. Otherwise, things will get more confounded. The elders and the ``great’’, the so-called 
big personages, are responsible by their practices for the evident loss of faith in scriptures and oneself and the 
consequent discord and disquiet. Hence, they must all gird up their loins to reestablish and restore peace.
Devotion is the very fountainhead of this peace, so if everyone plants it in their heart and nourishes it with 
care and constant attention, a harvest of goodness and harmony can be reaped. The path of devotion is the best, 
under present conditions.
That is why the Bhagavatha  is saturated with devotion. Without devotion, the Lord cannot be understood. 
Divine power ( sakthi ), however high and mighty, has to assume the human form itself if it intends to protect and 
foster the world. That form alone will be suitable for all to listen to, learn from, honour, and serve. Those without 
devotion will take that form as merely human, for they cannot grasp the absolute or Supreme reality principle 
(Para-thathwa ). This is why it is said in the Gita:
The foolish disregard me when I assume human form, not understanding my higher 
nature as the great Lord of beings.
Avajaananthi maam muudha maanusheemthanumaasritham, Param bhaavam ajaanantho 
mama bhuthamaheswaram.
Men are failing to keep steady faith in such invaluable declarations; this is the worst sacrilege.23
Prasanthi Vahini The spirituality of IndiaThe spirituality of India
Judged properly, India ( Bharatha-desa ) is the holiest of all countries. The meaningful Vedic  sacrificial rites ( ya-
jna) and devotional practices ( yoga ) that originated in India, as well as the way of life followed by its people, 
are not found in any other country or in the history of any other people. Such intensive cultivation of the spirit, 
such supremely useful spiritual literature, arose out of the experiences of the people of this country! It holds the 
very first place in this field.
The four Vedas , the six principal systems of philosophical vision ( darsanas ), the eighteen epics ( Puranas ), 
and the commentaries ( bhashyas ) of the great adepts of theory and practice all arose in India. Also, the disciplines 
and methods of spiritual practice expounded by the great souls ( mahatmas ), who have answered questions like 
the following. What is meant by life? What is the meaning of God? What transformations in the individual soul 
(jivi) take place on death?
No other place is so congenial for sages ( rishis ) and great souls as this country. Here, people have tasted 
the entire gamut of spiritual bliss. This country played the chief role in spreading the doctrine of nonviolence 
(ahimsa ) taught in Buddhism —the land that gave birth to Buddha is India. When the spiritual experience, the 
essence of the scriptures of the eternal religion ( sanathana dharma ) of this sacred land is being treasured by other 
countries, what about the fate of those who do not realize its worth but are engaged in squeezing the essence out 
and making it dry?
So arise, all ye who aspire to take up the spiritual discipline. Immerse yourselves in actual practice! Strength -
en your faith! Cultivate it! Make peace your secure possession! Saturate your lives with bliss! Enjoy the vision of 
the supreme bliss of the Self ( Atma-rama )! Arise and delay not!24
Prasanthi Vahini Spiritual steps toward peaceSpiritual steps toward peace
The mind should not be permitted to wander as it fancies. It must be controlled without the least tenderness 
or mercy. If possible, one should aim even at its destruction, that is to say, at making the mind keep away 
from contact with worldly objects. Why? It is only when that is done that one can grasp one’s real identity. The 
realization of that reality is the state called liberation ( mukthi ). Then, all varieties of troubles and travails, doubts 
and dilemmas come to an end; one overcomes sorrow, delusion, and anxiety and is established in the holy calm -
ness of peace.
First, give up all impure impulses and cultivate the pure ones. Then, try step by step to give up even these and 
render the mind objectless ( nir-vishaya ). Peace thus attained is effulgent, blissful, and associated with wisdom; it 
is indeed the experience of the Godhead, God Himself.
The aspirant who wants to attain this peace has constantly to practise a virtuous life, overcoming all initial 
obstacles. Peace is a mountain of rock. It can stand up against the continuous floods of temptations from evil. This 
supreme peace ( prasanthi ) need not be sought anywhere outside: it emanates in the inner consciousness ( anthah-
karana ) itself. It is the very basis of the urge toward liberation; it is the root of deep-grounded meditation; it is 
the prerequisite for the state of superconsciousness ( nir-vikalpa-samadhi ). Established in peace, the reality can be 
known and experienced, and impulses and mental waves can be stilled. The bliss of realization of the Self ( Atma-
ananda ) is proportional to the decline of I-ness and identification with the physical body .
Do not shape your conduct with an eye on the opinion of others. Instead, follow the sweet and pleasant 
promptings of your own awakened conscience, your own inner Self, bravely, gladly, and steadily. Associate your -
self with those who are richly endowed with truth. Spend every second of your life usefully and well. If you pos -
sibly can, render service to others. Engage yourself in nursing the sick, but when engaged in service, do not worry 
about the result, the act of service, or the person to whom it is rendered. The service is made holy and pure if you 
ignore both the good and the bad and keep on silently repeating in your heart of hearts the mantra  that appeals to 
you. Do not enter upon a task through momentary compulsion of some impulse; the impulse might appear very 
respectable, but you should not let yourself be dragged by it. You have to be always vigilant in this matter, always 
steadfast and strong.
A joyful outlook will help peace grow, so aspirants should cultivate such an outlook. Their nature should be 
free from pomp and show. They should understand the secret of character and strengthen their will for betterment. 
If they move in the world intelligently and with care, they can demonstrate the truth of the statement, “Humans 
are truly of the nature of peace.” For example, valuable time should not be wasted in worthless talk. Conversation 
must be pleasant and to the point. Then, it can be kept polite and simple, and peace will become firm.
If everything is dedicated to the Lord, there will be no room for worry, sorrow, or even joy. If you rid your -
self thus of attachment, peace can never be disturbed. I, my, mine, my own, your, yours —when these ideas take 
hold of the mind, peace suffers a setback. To get the attitude of sincerely offering all to Him, love is essential, 
love combined with faith in oneself. That is what is called devotion. Cultivate it steadily every day, and derive joy 
therefrom. Also, have a mind filled with a vision of equality ( samarasa ), the conviction that fundamentally all are 
the same. Spiritual life is not a matter of meaningless talk; it is really life lived in the Atma ; it is the experience of 
pure bliss; it is just another name for the full life.
For a life of peace, you should keep your promises and never forget them; you should be courteous, well 25
Prasanthi Vahini Spiritual steps toward peacemannered, and impartial in your dealings. You should be immersed in the ocean of devotion and as immovable as 
the Himalayas. Remove from the garden of your heart the thorny bushes of greed and anger, jealousy and selfish -
ness, the evil breed of “I” and “mine”. Uproot them even when they emerge as seedlings. All this discipline is 
truly discipline for earning peace.
Be convinced that you are the universal, immortal Atma . That will make every subsequent spiritual discipline 
easy. Instead, if you fondle the illusion that you are the body, the senses, or only this individual self ( jivi), any 
spiritual discipline you do is just tender rot-ridden fruit; it will never grow and become ripe, and the sweet fruit of 
peace cannot be won even at the end of many lives. To experience yourself as the embodiment of peace, you must 
proceed from the faith that you are such an embodiment. Give up the theory that you are the body and the senses. 
This will also lead to the receding of mental impressions ( vasanas ). When they recede, you acquire mastery and 
gain peace.
Peace can also be defined as true love toward the Lord, Truth itself, and true dharma . Hence, it makes real -
ization of the Lord possible. Therefore, have the Lord as your sole aim, hold fast to the desire to realize Him in 
this very birth, and remain unaffected by lust or greed and by joy and pain, praise and abuse, or any such pair of 
opposites. Only such fortitude such leads to realization.
Resolve that the purpose of human birth is to reach the Lord through worship. All experience, all knowledge, 
all actions are toward that end. All that is eaten and all that is heard must be dedicated toward that goal. The Lord’s 
name is like a mountain of sugar. Approach that mountain, have faith in it, taste it everywhere, and experience 
bliss. The highest devotee is the one who ever revels in that bliss.
Others live beside the mountain, enjoying for some time the bliss of the constant remembrance of the Lord 
and at other times experiencing the objects of the world. Such devotees are of the middle class. Some among 
the rest devote a quarter of their time to the Lord and three quarters to the world. These are of the lower class of 
devotees. Others take shelter at the foot of the mountain (the Lord’s name) when calamity hits them but move far 
away from it when the crisis is over. Of these four grades, the highest type of devotee steadily clings to the path 
and enjoys bliss throughout life. To persist on that path, peace is the best comrade; with its help, you can render 
your life holy and fulfil its purpose.
But one point has to be carefully noted here. When the body suffers from fever or the mind is otherwise 
distracted, you don’t feel the taste of things you eat. So too, if the heart is tainted by ignorance and sloth ( thamo -
guna ) or the mind is otherwise distracted when the Lord’s name is uttered, you are not aware of the sweetness of 
the name.
As long as sugar is on the tongue, you feel the sweetness in the taste. Similarly, as long as the heart has devo -
tion, peace, and love, you feel bliss.
Instead, if the bitter qualities of lust, anger, and envy germinate in the heart, then fear, anxiety, and sloth will 
be the fruits thereof. You must have noticed the crane walking silently or standing motionless in order to catch 
fish. If it plunges headlong or runs about helter skelter, can it catch fish? Similarly, the Lord, in the fish-forms of 
truth, righteousness, peace, and love, can never be won when the hullabaloo of lust, anger, greed, egotism, and 
envy is rampant in the heart.
The bliss that transcends all bliss can be achieved if a single discipline, the constant remembrance of the 
Lord’s name is practised and if, as a consequence, peace is attained. By this, the evil tendencies of the lower nature 26
Prasanthi Vahini Spiritual steps toward peacecan also be conquered. Know that the supreme Atma  (Paramatma ) is your goal, direct all attention to that goal, 
and control the mind that wanders away from it. That is the essence of the teaching of all the scriptures. Practise 
this one discipline, and you have practised all the scriptures.
Note this: the Kauravas enjoyed the benefits of the good deeds that they did in previous births, but while so 
engaged, they reveled in evil deeds. The Pandavas, on the other hand, while suffering from the evil deeds of their 
past births, engaged in good deeds. This is the difference between the wise and the unwise.
When hardships overwhelm you, know that they are the consequence of your own past deeds. Do not lay the 
blame on the Lord and develop a grouse against Him; do not pay heed to trouble or take it as such; but engage 
yourself in the service of others and in deeds of merit. Continue relying on the name of the Lord as support; that 
is the sign of the wise; that is acting Pandava-like. To strengthen this attitude, peace is a great source of help. 
Basking in the happiness born of good deeds, you should not be tempted to commit evil ones. You should strive to 
perform even more meritorious deeds. Then, you can make your lives holier and purer and reach the divine Pres -
ence. Such striving is the sign of the highest character. Establishing oneself in peace through this type of character 
and attaining liberation ( moksha ) —this is the secret of a successful life, the duty of every individual.27
Prasanthi Vahini Detachment and renunciationDetachment and renunciation
What exactly is liberation? It is samadhi  or peace attained through the spiritual discipline of the cleansing of 
the inner person —the spiritual discipline of negating the impressions that one gets through seeing, hear -
ing, reading, learning, doing, and getting done. People suffering unbearable physical agony don’t take any interest 
in entertainment, do they? Similarly, a sincere seeker and devotee can have no interest in the world’s theatre of 
objective pleasure and petty passion. These inferior desires have first to be renounced and checked. They lie at the 
root of all misery. Passion is the product of delusion; it dwells in the mansion of activity ( rajas ). Renunciation or 
detachment ( vairagya ) is resident in the pure quality ( sathwic  guna ). Passion is demonic ( a-suric ) in nature. Pas -
sion, ignorance, and egotism are all born of delusion. Passion brings about death, while detachment brings about 
liberation; it is wisdom.
Stabilizing oneself in detachment is itself the highest austerity ( tapas ), the most exacting vow. One has to be 
ever alert in that austerity and strive again and again. Like a child endeavoring to walk, you might toddle a few 
steps, falter, and fall, but like the child, you must lift yourself up with a smile and start again. Peace is essential 
for such persistence. Failures are not boulders that block your way, remember, they are stepping stones to victory.
Be bound to the Atma  in you; take rest and refuge in That and meditate on That without interruption. Then, 
all bonds will loosen of themselves, for the bond with which you attach yourself to the Lord or the Atma  has the 
power of unbinding all other bonds.
The “unattached” have real love toward all. Their love is not only pure, it is divine as well. It is the embodi -
ment of peace. Without a doubt, one can attain the Lord if one becomes devoid of all passion or attachment ( raga ) 
and engages in the actions detailed above.
Renunciation or detachment ( vairagya ), of course, does not mean the giving up of hearth and home, or of 
high estate and even kingdoms. It is the understanding of the divinity immanent in everything, the fading away of 
all the distinct names and forms, the bliss of experiencing in everything and every place the Divine, which is its 
reality. That is the true meaning of the maxim “detachment ( raga -lessness)”. As long as one cognizes the world 
of name and form, one is burdened with attachment. How can one be desireless when the mind is immersed in 
thoughts, feelings, and experience of the objective world? One might have given up all, and yet be full of these. 
Such cannot be said to have detachment. Surely, even for the acquisition of this pure spirit of detachment, peace 
is very necessary.28
Prasanthi Vahini Happiness through unityHappiness through unity
The ocean is one and indivisible, but here it is called the North Sea and there the South Sea! So too, the Lord, 
the ocean of grace, is one, but He is assigned various names according to the age or era of time. The holy 
rivers seeking to reach the ocean flow from all directions; so too, people seek the Lord through various spiritual 
disciplines and finally merge themselves, all of them, in Krishna.
Mankind can win happiness only through unity, and not through diversity. If thoughts and feelings run along 
the routes of distinction and division, happiness is beyond reach and peace cannot be experienced. Without peace, 
you have no chance to be joyful. Consider the one indivisible ocean as the goal. What does the direction of flow 
matter? What does the name matter? The rivers merge in the self-same sea, don’t they? Spiritual aspirants and 
devotees who adopt the path of yoga , the path of devotion, or the path of peace, dharma , truth, and love reach the 
ocean of grace at last, and name and form fade away; distinctions disappear. They are blessed with merger in the 
sea of peace.
So, unity must always be kept before the eye. Never nourish ideas of difference, of distinct names and forms 
of the Lord, of divergent paths. Such ideas are obstacles for the attainment of bliss. Avoid these obstacles; develop 
equal vision. Remember, peace is the royal road to strengthen that vision and reach the ocean of grace.29
Prasanthi Vahini Peace through truth, dharma, love, patiencePeace through truth, dharma, love, patience
To enjoy peace, mankind must be controlled and directed by ideals of dharma ; this depends on mutual tolera -
tion in the family, which again is based on individual conduct that is pure ( sathwic ) and that aims at pleasing 
everyone. Such conduct has a charm all its own. Avoid in your behavior, actions, and speech all trace of the desire 
to pain others, to insult others, or to cause loss or misery to others. Find out the best means of reforming yourself 
thus, practise this type of living, desist from injury to yourself and your own good, and always walk in the path of 
truth. That is verily the path of beauty; that is conduct that is really charming.
For this, large heartedness is essential. People can acquire it only if they have (1) an inborn desire ( samskara ) 
for it and (2) devotion in every act. Through devotion to the Lord, one gets humility, fear of sin, and faith in scrip -
ture. Through these qualities, littleness of mind is wiped out and people become large-hearted. Therefore, Oh ye 
seekers! First direct your efforts toward acquiring faith in God and fear of sin. These two will promote meekness; 
and, remember, meekness is peace.
Some people, the sort that have no experience and that do not put their words into practice, go about declar -
ing that the way to peace is to keep the world at a distance. That is no peace; it is just the opposite. If the seed is 
taken far away from the tree, won’t it grow into a tree again? If you do not want that, you have to boil the seed or 
fry it over a fire. So too, the impulses and desires that germinate have to be fried over the fire of discrimination 
(vichara ); then, real peace can emerge.
 Instead, if one escapes only from the responsibilities of life in society, peace cannot be enjoyed; it will never 
come. But, if desires ( vasanas ) are controlled and eliminated, there is no need at all to run away. Content with 
what one has, refusing to be worried by the absence of things that one hasn’t, trying as far as possible to reduce 
and eliminate desires and passions and hatreds, one should strive to cultivate truth, dharma , love, and patience 
(sahana ). Cultivate them and, at the same time, practise them systematically.
This is the real duty of humanity, the real purpose of human birth. If the above-mentioned four qualities are 
cultivated and practised by each, there will be no envy between people; selfish grabbing will cease; the interests 
of others will be respected; and world peace can be stabilized. Instead, if you yourself have no peace, how can 
you ensure world peace? Those enthusiastic about world peace must first learn how to experience and enjoy peace 
themselves; later, they can spread that peace to the world outside themselves and help to promote it.30
Prasanthi Vahini World peace and individual peaceWorld peace and individual peace
Everywhere now, one can hear the cry “world peace”, “world peace”, but the number of people who can tell 
how it can be attained is very small! No one can even picture correctly what exactly peace means. For, if 
one has acquired true peace and experienced it, the turmoils and confusions of the world will not be cognized at 
all. You cannot be aware of its absence if you have it. Peace ( santhi ) means, “the giving up of the activities of the 
senses”. How can such peace be spread and “promoted” by anyone who has gained it? It can be experienced, but it 
is incapable of being exchanged from person to person. The best that can be done is to show the way to others, to 
inform others of its sweetness. How can another’s hunger be appeased by your eating your food? The diner alone 
derives satisfaction from the dinner. Peace is also of such a nature. Each has to earn and experience it for themself, 
so that all may have it. Love and fortitude are enough to confer peace. But don’t concentrate on mere outward 
show; let these virtues saturate your thought, word, and deed. That is also the way to establish world peace.
Certain others declare that prayer can bring about world peace and ask people to pray. Of course, it is good 
to pray; but peace can never be gained by that alone. Prayer must be united with practice. You should not pray 
for one thing and practise another. Such prayer is only a means of deception. The words you utter, the deeds you 
do, the prayers you make must all be directed along the same path. While repeating prayers for world peace, if 
you cannot patiently put up with others, if you slander others and look down upon them, you yourself will have 
no peace, you will have turmoil instead! And, with the turmoil, you will have all the attendant sorrow and pain!
Through world peace, individual peace can be cultivated. When food is taken by the hand to the mouth, 
chewed, and swallowed, the essence spreads to every part of the body; so also, if the hands are engaged in acts 
promoting peace and the tongue is engaged in prayers for peace, by these two means, the essence of peace will 
spread into parts of the world, which is but the body of the Lord. The peace of the world is the basis for genuine 
peace.
Many do not know the meaning of the statement, “The body is the temple ( dehodevalayam )”. Why did the 
temple arise? For the Lord worshipped within. If there is no such Lord, it cannot be called a temple. But people’s 
actions are now all against this plain fact. Now, all worship is being done to the temple, forgetting that the temple 
is not God. The temple is to be preserved, cleaned, and decorated for the sake of God therein; it should be made 
a good means of realizing Him. That is all.
Similarly, the body is the temple of the Lord, the form of the Atma  (Atma-swarupa ). Forgetting the need for 
faith in the Atma , for the bliss derived from the Atma , for the worship of the Atma , and for dedication to the Atma , 
people are now immersed in faith in the body, bliss of the body, decoration of the body, and dedication to the body. 
In spite of everything, the body is evanescent; but through the temple, the Lord can be seen. Through the body, the 
Atma  that is within can be realized. That is your main task. Conscious of this, try always to keep watch over the 
body and protect it. Do not neglect the Lord within; do not hold fast to the unreal, temporary, outer building. Of 
course, you should not ruin the temple, either; its maintenance is also essential. But never forget that what gives 
value and purpose to it is the Atma  within.
Similarly, with world peace ( loka-santhi ) and individual peace ( Atma-santhi ). The temple is world peace; the 
Lord within is individual peace. World peace is a means to subserve the peace of the individual. The world is the 
Lord’s mansion. Know it as such. He is moving about in that mansion, in its many rooms. God’s worship can be 
done well only if the temple is clean and pure. So, engage yourselves in winning the two, peace for the world and 31
Prasanthi Vahini World peace and individual peacepeace for yourselves. Do not ignore the Lord, whose mansion is the world. Without Him, it is a tomb ( savam ), not 
a temple ( sivam ). If you always remember Him, that is joy and victory.
World peace is the life breath of all beings, so strive ever for that. The Lord can be won only when the sa -
cred motherland is immersed in peace. When nature ( prakriti ) merges in God ( Paramatma ), it is called liberation 
(moksha ). So seekers of liberation must yearn for the peace and love of the world as much as they yearn for the 
love and grace of the highest Atma . Without the grace of both the world and the highest Atma , the strong and 
subtle evil of the senses cannot be conquered. That is, the destruction of the mind, the stilling of the agitations of 
the mind, cannot be done. Therefore, everyone’s chief duty is to achieve peace.
Many argue that self-respect is peace. But they confuse self-respect with the respect given to the inferior 
vehicle, the body, or to one’s status. That is respect for the person, not respect for the self ( Atma ). Respect given 
to the Lord within, the Atma , is real self-respect; nothing else is. Truth is Atma ; pure love is Atma ; the Lord is 
Atma ; selfless service is Atma . Respect for these is self-respect. Of course, peace is of this type and not of the other 
types. Keeping the all-merciful Lord, the personification of truth, the Lord whose very nature is love, always in 
memory, that is real Self-respect. To earn this self-respect, one has to cast aside as worthless the respect that the 
world accords to wealth and status, to ignore praise and blame, derision and flattery, and to engage in spiritual 
practice with full faith in truth and the Lord. That is real peace, pure peace, eternal peace.
There is no status higher than that of the Lord; no embodiment of His higher than truth; no beauty of His 
higher than peace. No, not even in all the fourteen worlds ( lokas ) and in the entire Creation. Now, in the past, and 
for ever and ever. This is the truth, and I repeat it. Truth enveloped in the darkest illusion ( maya ) will still shine 
brilliantly; however strongly you may imprison it in darkness, its effulgence cannot be suppressed.
Truth can never die; untruth can never live. You must all get firmly established in this belief.
Of what can one say, “This is permanent”? How can one ever believe that anything is permanent? Truly, 
when one sees from birth all things changing, one’s experience itself undergoing various transformations and the 
atmosphere in which one grows constantly being transformed, when one grows up in an environment that has no 
permanency, how can that belief arise? Observing all this, it can be declared without any fear of contradiction 
that this is an unreal world. For if this is real, how can it change? All that suffers change is unreal; reality alone is 
changeless, stable, permanent. The changeless, stable, permanent entity is the Atma  alone; that alone is real, that 
alone is permanent. The Atma  is the form of the Lord; it is the power of the Lord.32
Prasanthi Vahini Path of inquiry, discrimination, renunciationPath of inquiry, discrimination, renunciation
Only Humanity has the capacity, the credentials for realizing the power of the Lord, for earning that power 
(sakthi ). It is indeed tragic that, even after achieving human birth, people do not realize that eternal reality 
or even make an attempt to understand It. If this chance is missed, when can they attempt it?
Why, they do not concern themselves with the very purpose for which they have come! Did they come only 
for living like all other animals, birds, or insects, eating, wandering about, sleeping, and seeking pleasure? If the 
answer is “no”, then for what else? Can we say that a person is just another animal, like the rest? People have three 
things that animals don’t have: the power to reason, the power to renounce, and the power to decide on right and 
wrong. These are special powers; but of what use are they unless they are applied in actual practice? If they are 
used, the name “human” is apt, otherwise, the name “animal” has to be used.
The three powers mentioned above should be applied by people not only in worldly matters but even in the 
investigation of the ultimate truth. Really speaking, if inquiry, discrimination, and renunciation are carried out 
while passing through the joys and sorrows of life, the conviction is bound to dawn in a moment that all this is 
unreal, that all this has no basis in truth. When such knowledge dawns, one is certain to tread the path of religion 
and spiritual discipline and take up the inquiry that will lead to the truth. This is the task in which people must be 
engaged.
Well! If only everyone would ask the questions “Who are we? Whence did we come? Where have we come 
to? How long will we be here?”, the truth could be easily grasped. That questioning is the sign of discrimination 
(viveka ). When, by means of this discrimination, the idea that the world is impermanent gets deeply rooted in the 
mind, all attachments cease automatically. That is the stage of renunciation or detachment ( vairagya ).
One asks, is it worthwhile to be caught up in this unreal world? This is false and misleading, one tells oneself.  
One then turns one’s efforts to the realm of the Lord, the realm of truth. That is the wise decision.
It is through discrimination ( viveka ) and detachment or renunciation ( vairagya ) that one understands who 
one really is. Without them, it is impossible to know it. The Lord has blessed only humanity with these two. He 
has endowed people so that they might use them for that purpose. Hence, people are truly fortunate. But alas, 
people have forgotten the task for which they have come, ignored the question whence they came, closed they 
eyes to where they are, diverted their intelligence toward amusement and creature comfort, and wasted all their 
powers. What a tragedy! If in this most propitious human birth itself the Godhead is not sought, when else is a 
person to succeed?
If today is squandered so,
Will tomorrow help you?
If one’s real nature is first understood, the rest can all be easily grasped. One will thereafter know who one 
is, whence one came, where one has come to, and how long one exists.
These four issues are dependent, one on the other. If one is solved, all the rest can be known; but not one of 
these can be ignored. For example, suppose you write a letter to somebody. Whatever the contents of the letter, if it 
is put into an envelope and posted, whom will it reach? No one. Well, will it come back at least to the person who 
wrote it? No. In the end, it will be neither here nor there. Instead, if on the cover the address of the person whom 
it should reach and the address of the person who wrote it are both written, one can even predict when the letter 33
Prasanthi Vahini Path of inquiry, discrimination, renunciationwill reach its destination, is it not? So too, what do you do with your letter, your life? To whom do you address 
it? Where do you write it? When can it reach? Whom should it reach? Ignoring all these, not caring even for the 
time, if you simply worry yourself, how can you ever hope to know the reality?
First, you must know your own full address. Who are you? The Atma . Whence did you come? From the 
Atma . Where are you going? To the Atma  itself. How long can you be here? Until you merge with the Atma .
Where are you now? In the unreal, the ever-changing. What are you engaged in? In evanescent tasks. In 
what form? As non-Self ( an-Atma ). Therefore, what should you do? Give up these three and try the other three: 
try to enter the eternal, to engage in never-changing tasks, and to enjoy the bliss of the Atma . This must be the 
chief effort of the individual soul ( jivi), its perpetual aim, the greatest adventure in this world. All other tasks are 
humdrum and silly; they glitter a moment and vanish. You will realize this truth if only you turn your back on 
them and watch, wisely.34
Prasanthi Vahini The Crest-jewel of foolsThe Crest-jewel of fools
A short story will illustrate these points. A king had transferred all responsibility of ruling to his minister and 
was spending his time in ease. He never worried about anything, be it big or small. He had a personal com -
panion, who was always by his side, more or less as a bodyguard. This fellow was very wise, for he never did 
anything without deep deliberation about the how, the why, and the wherefore. The king took all this deliberation 
to be just foolishness and nicknamed him “Crest-Jewel of Fools” ( Avivekasikhamani ). He actually engraved the 
title on a plate of gold and compelled the fellow to wear it on his forehead for all to see! Many people at court 
were misled by this and took the fellow to be an ignoramus; they did not heed his words.
The king fell ill and took to bed. The kingdom was combed for physicians who could heal the king. Mes -
sengers went to the eight corners of the country, seeking drugs and doctors. Hundreds were busy around the royal 
patient, but, all efforts failed; the illness worsened day by day. The king was at the door of death.
The king suspected that his end was near; so he hurriedly made some dispositions, spoke to those whom he 
wanted to meet, and was immersed in sorrow. He had no thought of God or any other auspicious power. He was 
in terrible fear of death and could not think of anything else.
One day, he called Crest-Jewel of Fools to his bedside and whispered feebly in his ear, “Well; I am going 
soon, my friend!” Then, the fool said without any compunction, “What? You are weak and cannot walk a few 
steps; I will order a palanquin. Please wait till it is ready.” “No palanquin can take me there,” said the king. “Then 
I will order a chariot,” entreated the fool. “The chariot is also of no use,” replied the king. “Of course, then the 
horse is the only means of journey,” wailed his companion, who seemed eager to rescue his master and spare him 
the toils of travel. The king said that the horse also could not enter there.
The fool was at his wits end. Then suddenly an idea struck him, and he said, “Come on master! I will carry 
you there.” The king became sad and said, “My dear friend, when one’s time has come, one has to go alone to 
that place! No companion can be taken.” The fool was thrown in great doubt. He asked the king, “It is curious, 
isn’t it? You say that the palanquin won’t reach there, that the chariot can’t go there, or the horse; you say that no 
second person can join you! Well, can’t you tell me at least where that place is?” The king replied, “I don’t know.”
Immediately, the fool unwound the golden plate with the engraving “Crest-Jewel of Fools” and tied it round 
the brow of the king, saying, “King, you know so much about the place, even which things cannot go there, but 
you do not know where it is, and still you are going there soon. You deserve this title much more than I.” 
The king was overcome with shame. “Alas,” he said to himself. “I wasted my years in eating, sleeping, and 
pursuing pleasures, never caring to ask who I am, whence I came, what I am doing, whither I am going, and why I 
came. The precious time allotted to me has come very near its end. I have no more time for all that inquiry. Death 
is knocking at the door; children have started weeping; my subjects are in great anxiety. Can I, under such condi -
tions, immerse myself in inquiry? Can a thought that I never entertained throughout my life suddenly arise now, 
during my last moments? It is impossible. Yes, I deserve the title “Crest-Jewel of Fools” more than anyone else, 
for I wasted my life in useless pursuits, without any thought of the reality.”
The king let it be proclaimed that inquiry is the best means of knowing the truth, that inquiry must be directed 
to separating the true from the untrue, the eternal from the temporary, that people should arrive at the conclusion 
“God is the only true and eternal entity,” and that by their own independent investigation, his subjects must not 35
Prasanthi Vahini The Crest-jewel of foolsonly grasp the entity intellectually but must also attain the grace of God by their pure lives. Announcing this les -
son to his subjects, the king breathed his last.
Note how the king, blinded by material power and pleasures, misdirected his energies toward the world, 
away from God, and ended his days in agony.36
Prasanthi Vahini Inquire, discriminate, detachInquire, discriminate, detach
Every aspirant must enter onto the path of inquiry. Only then can the conviction dawn and grow that nature and 
all learning connected with nature are unreal; only then will these be given a relative, not an absolute value. 
They are, of course, to be learned and experienced as necessary for existence, as a kind of daily routine. However, 
they should not be mistaken to be the highest knowledge, the unchanging eternal truth. That mistake, if commit -
ted, leads to an agitated mind ( a-santhi ). Agitation produces worry and anxiety, which in turn destroy peace.
If you aspire to peace, equanimity, the basic thing is to have faith in the temporary nature of Nature and be 
engaged in the uninterrupted contemplation of the changeless Godhead.
Therefore, do not be bound by selfish attachments. Engage yourself in the discharge of your duties. Do not 
allow yourself to be gladdened by success or saddened by failure. Be ready to renounce all that is harmful. Then, 
through discrimination, you can beat the drum of victory! Great declarations like these reveal the highest truth 
and the glory of the Godhead.
If the two paths of spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) and devotion ( bhakthi ) are compared, it can be said that the 
Lord’s grace is won more easily by devotion than by the other path. In the discipline of devotion, there is the 
need to grasp the reality and its inner meaning fully and clearly. For this, the objective world is itself the proof 
and argument, the effort and means. To know this, spiritual inquiry has to be pursued; such an inquiry will grant 
unshakeable peace. Only inquiry can reveal the truth behind all the objective world. It is your experience, isn’t it, 
that when you do some task carefully for a long time, correcting your mistakes as and when you discover them 
and avoiding their repetition while continuing with the task, you invariably achieve even more success than you 
hoped to get? What is wanted is just the unflagging desire to achieve victory. That will lead you to discover the 
means thereof, to develop earnestness and care in the pursuit of those means, and to get success. The wish must 
be strengthened by the will, and the will by the effort.
Well, take the example of people anxious to become stronger. If the wish is powerful, they will first learn the 
means of realizing this aim —the exercise, the diet, the disciplines, etc. Then, when they practise them, the will is 
changed to steadiness in effort. But one important thing must be noted. There are many who say that the absence 
of wish and will is best. This is not as good as having one wish above all others, or, rather, “one wish” and one 
alone, to the exclusion of all else. Even more superior is having steadiness of effort in realizing that one wish. For 
one can then promote not only one’s own good but even the world’s good. Let your wish and will and effort be 
directed to your own good; do not divert them to worldly pleasures, for that will cause harm and destroy peace.37
Prasanthi Vahini Deep into the ocean of peaceDeep into the ocean of peace
People are bundles of impulses and intentions, and giving free rein to the impulses reduces their innate divinity 
and inner peace. The impulses are the fuel, the intentions are the fire. The fire can be put out only by placing 
the fuel aside. The dying down of the fire is the attainment of peace. Dive deep into the ocean of peace and earn 
the invaluable pearl, the bliss of the Atma  (Atma-ananda ). When that opportunity is seized, one becomes the per -
sonification of the effulgent, the holy state of peace. That is why the Vedas  declare that people are the embodiment 
of peace. Therefore, don’t delude yourself by imagining that you are the seat of disquiet and untruth. Know that 
you are the embodiment of peace, that love is the blood that flows in your veins, and that your very nature is joy; 
realize this by actual practice and experience.
Without peace, it is impossible to see the truth. Just as the rays of the sun are necessary for the blossoming 
flower and the ripening fruit, so the rays of peace are necessary for the full development of humanity. Only with 
peace can one ripen into the realization of the true, the eternal, the blissful Brahman .
Brahman  is a shoreless, bottomless ocean. That ocean is the basis for the ever-shifting waves, the evidence 
and result of its power. The wave emerges from the sea, leaps forth from it, falls back into it, and dissolves itself 
into it. Though the power of the sea is thus manifested in ups and downs, rise and fall, the sea is steady and fixed. 
But the world is concerned more with the temporary and the shifting and thinks that the waves are very important. 
So also, the aspirant is more concerned with attainments that are evanescent and changing than with the unchang -
ing experience of the principle behind, the Brahman . All the senses, all the impulses rise up in overpowering 
strength like waves from the sea, roar in fury, and subside in the waters; they do not confer peace. The wise thing 
is to forget these waves and to direct attention toward the sea beneath, which is without change. Only then can 
you attain peace and swim about happily in the deep undisturbed waters.
Why are the denizens of the deep sea so happy? Because they have water all around them —above, below, 
on all sides. They cannot survive for even a second outside it. Even when they have perforce to come out of the 
water, they struggle frantically to reach it again, for the disaster will bring about death itself. So too, when one is 
immersed in peace, one will experience the joy and exhilaration of that state, in all ways. A person who has tasted 
that joy and exhilaration can never tolerate even for a second the state of peacelessness ( a-santhi ) and will never 
desert the peaceful stage. If it ever happens that one is forced into peacelessness, one will struggle furiously and 
desperately to return to the state of peace and might even die in the attempt.
But why should such a person ever be thrown on the shore of peacelessness and risk life in escaping back 
into peace? One can be ever in a state of bliss, immersed in the ocean of peace, can’t one? One should not float 
on the upper waves of impulses and intentions. One must dive deeper and try to revel at the calmer levels. This is 
the most urgent task. Then, one will not endanger oneself by being thrown out and beyond, upon the dry shore.
Only this type of pure and holy peace will remove the walls that now divide people. It will transform all the 
absurd hatreds, misunderstandings, disgusts, and prejudices that warp human behavior. Peace is the manifestation 
of the greatness of love. It will endow all who come under its authority with tremendous power for good. It can 
place God within your grasp and you within God’s grasp.
Spiritual discipline can confer no higher power. It is the very secret of the life principle in creation. It is the 
highest individualization of the glory of the Atma . It is the magic wand in the hands of the devotee, with which 
one can master the entire world. Besides, it confers the greatest degree of contentment.38
Prasanthi Vahini The need for activity (karma)The need for activity (karma)
But peace does not mean inactivity, the mere inert life of eating and squatting. You should not spend your time 
eating and sleeping, saying to yourself that the Lord will come to your help when the need arises. You must 
arise and work. God helps those who help themselves, and He will help no other. Learn from the life of Prahlada 
the lesson that the Lord alone is to be loved; learn also the technique of that process. Do the work that has fallen to 
your lot sincerely and efficiently. Give up everything that is outside the service of the Lord. Follow the footsteps 
of Prahlada. Through the grace of the Lord, you can win the joy of peace, the thrill of fullness, and the bliss of 
immortality.
Work has to be undertaken, so that time does not hang heavily on you and is not a burden. Work is your 
mission. Without it, you will get lost in the darkness of ignorance and be overwhelmed by dullness and sloth 
(thamas ). Ignorance will multiply your doubts —and these have to be chopped off with the sword of wisdom.
On one occasion, when such mystic subjects were taught to Arjuna, he got puzzled and asked Krishna, “One 
time, You say that we should renounce all activities ( karmas ); another time, You say that the discipline of karma  
(karma-yoga ) has to be adopted. Tell me, which of these two paths is better?” 
Krishna answered thus. “Renunciation ( sanyasa ) and the discipline of karma  both lead to the same goal of 
liberation, Oh Arjuna! But know this. There is greater joy in doing work than in giving up work. Renunciation 
and work are not contradictory; they are interdependent, complementary. By giving up work, without the progress 
derived from activity and the training achieved through it, people will only decline. The real renunciant ( sanyasin ) 
is one who does not desire one thing or hate another.” The word renunciation can well be applied to work done 
without regard to success or failure, profit or loss, honour or dishonour, to any activity performed as an offering to 
the Lord. Mere inactivity announced by the saffron cloth and the shaved head is no renunciation at all. To deserve 
the name, one must have avoided the duality of joy and grief, of good and bad.
 So, better than the giving up of activity is the giving up of its fruits; it also yields greater joy. That is the 
best path. However, whether renunciation or the discipline of activity is followed, the fruit of the other can also 
be won. There is bliss in activity, but there is also bliss in renunciation.
Renunciation devoid of the discipline of activity ( karma-yoga ) will lead to grief. How can anyone get away 
from activity? However much you may avoid action, isn’t it necessary at least to engage yourself in the remem -
brance of the Lord, in meditation or repetition of the name? That too is action. If these are given up, there is no joy 
in life. Everyone has to do some activity, whatever the form. One who engages in the yoga  of action, renouncing 
all fruits of action and following the discipline of silence, can realize Brahman  within a short time. Action will 
not stick to such. Action for such a person is akin to breathing. Life is impossible without the activity of breath -
ing; so too, for the aspirant, work is essential. Unrest ( a-santhi ) comes only when the fruit of action is desired. 
If the fruit is disregarded and joy is derived from the very action itself, then one gets peace. No one thinks of the 
results and benefits of the action of breathing, do they? So too, when work is done, never worry about its result; 
that gives real peace.39
Prasanthi Vahini Canalize the thoughts, reform the characterCanalize the thoughts, reform the character
Many, many ideas take shape in the human heart; they wander to the very ends of the eight directions. Some 
of these are mutually supporting; some are mutually destructive. But without leaving them free, they must 
all be canalized and disciplined to subserve some high purpose. Only then can you be established in peace. You 
must have the cleverness needed for this canalization. It is not merely cleverness in the use of external things; it 
lies more in the control and subjugation of the mental faculties; this is essential for the blossoming of the Atma . 
For understanding the faculties of your own mind, you must move with elders experienced in that line or in the 
sublimation of the vagaries of the mind.
Until you intelligently fix upon a certain direction for all your thoughts and activities, you will only be build -
ing shadowy castles in the air and roaming about in them. Even your senses will be pursuing contradictory paths 
and distracting your attention to such an extent that you cannot easily come to a decision regarding the ideal. They 
make you feel that their paths are the best. But you should always strive to change the course of the senses and the 
imagination to subjects and desires that are conducive to the ideal, whatever the difficulty and however serious 
the crisis. That is the sign of real intelligence; that is the road to real peace.
Everyone has, by virtue of human nature itself, the discrimination needed to strive for the ideal. You should 
not allow the slightest idea of neglect to hinder you or stand in your way. Peace based on spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) 
can arise only out of actual experience; the end and the consequence of each and every act is and must be wisdom. 
The progress of the individual consists in activity done with discrimination.
Take one small example: Even a person who has all the means of comfortable travel through the grace of 
the Lord, namely, cars, planes, or other conveniences, has perforce to walk, in spite of everything, for the sake of 
health! So too, whoever one is, whatever the spiritual discipline engaged in, one has perforce to experience activ -
ity and learn the consequence themself for the sake of their mental health! Otherwise, mental weakness cannot 
be cured.
In order to achieve this, one must move with experienced people and people who are basic supports of good 
life. One must grasp the Reality with their help and experience the Reality oneself. Only then can peace be estab -
lished in the personality.
In this created world, wisdom ( jnana ) is enveloped in ignorance ( a-jnana ). This is inevitable at all times. As 
long as the lamp is burning, there will be a shadow beneath it; so too, when the flame of illusion is burning, the 
shadow of ignorance is inevitable. If the ignorance surrounding the Atma  is destroyed by wisdom, then everything 
will be illumined as at sunrise, and peace will be the result.
If the above result is to be obtained, some effort has to be made to provide the necessary conditions. The 
mind is conditioned into good or bad by the environment. Hence, people have to create the needed environment 
themselves. The reformers of today do not strive to transform people’s qualities. They try to bring about equality 
in economic matters, in outer life. But these can be lasting only when the qualities of character are built on the 
basis of equality. If the quality of equality is not developed, even if everything is divided and shared equally, that 
state of equality cannot last. So, there is need to reform the character by means of the knowledge of the Atma . This 
reform alone will bear fruit, the fruit of peace.
Therefore, culture must be directed toward the reform of character. Along with that reform and to the extent 
it is gained, the outward standard of economic life can also be adjusted. First, one must be trained in the technique 40
Prasanthi Vahini Canalize the thoughts, reform the characterof peace and happiness ( santhosha ). These do not depend on the outer, the external, the visible objective world. 
So there is no profit in worrying about or debating these matters. You must take refuge in the Atma  and the con -
templation of the nature of the Atma , that is to say, in the real I. All this objective world shines only through the 
glory of the Atma .
The body does not deserve to be identified with the immortal; it is inert matter, and nothing better. You are 
not the thing connoted by the word “I”. You are the One, without a second. The body is subject to change, it is 
evanescent, liable to decline. How can it be the Atma ? No, Atma  is One and Only. It cannot coexist with another 
entity. It is only when every spiritual aspirant, everyone, is aware of this that equality, equanimity, and exhilara -
tion can be established on earth.
Therefore, contemplate on the reality ( Thathwa ). Leaving aside the seen, concentrate on the seer. That will 
illumine the truth.41
Prasanthi Vahini The Atma is the RealityThe Atma is the Reality
The nature of light is to reveal objects, by illumining them. But real illumination is the property only of the 
Atma . The sun and fire can only “penetrate” darkness; they do not destroy it completely, because darkness 
and light are opposed to each other. But the effulgence of the Atma  has no opposition at all; all objects, all natures 
are favourable to it. It illumines all. Hence the statement, “The gods acclaim It as the light of lights ( Tham devaa 
jyothishaam jyothih ).”
Its form is spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) —not things, like the physical body. The body is ever-changing; it is not 
eternal. The Atma  shines equally everywhere and illumines everything, without any distinction. It is of the nature 
of bliss and of consciousness ( chaithanya ). So, it automatically becomes Brahman ! This conviction is the essence 
of wisdom.
One who sees a pot can know that it is a pot clearly, by oneself, right? But how is it that one identifies oneself 
with the body simply because attachment makes one feel that it is one’s own body? This is ignorance ( a-jnana ); 
the my-ness, the I-consciousness. Spiritual wisdom ( jnana ), which is of the nature of the Atma , is indestructible; 
ignorance, of the nature of the body, is destructible.
The Atma  is formless; hence, the threefold affliction of the qualities ( gunas ) [pure ( sathwic ), dull ( thamasic ), 
and passionate ( rajasic )] does not afflict It. The six-fold mutation will not affect It, for It is always being ( sat), 
always It and It alone. It is a guest, distinct from the body that It inhabits. The body is subject to illness, growth, 
and decay. The Atma  is free from all mutations. The Atma  has no desires, impulses, or intentions. It is above and 
beyond the pure, dull, and passionate qualities. “The world is the doer; God is as the lotus on the water, unaf -
fected, unattached ( prakritih karthaa Purushasthu pushkara palaasavannirlepah ).”
The Atma  is misleadingly denoted by the word “I” ( aham ). How can the seen be the seer, the eternal? How 
can the body be the real I? When this mistake is made, there can be no peace and no joy. It is only when this truth 
is understood and experienced that one can have peace.
The Atma  has to be realized as distinct from this seen ( drisya ) world, from all that is “seen”. This is possible 
only when one has the discrimination ( viveka ) to be freed from bondage to the world ( prakriti ) and to release one -
self from the ignorance that tells one that the “seen” is indeed the real. Such discrimination has to be acquired by 
the practice of the eightfold discipline, which cleanses the ignorance that darkens the intellect. Then, the intellect 
becomes pure and sharp and gets directed toward the Atma . Ignorant people, to whom the understanding of the 
Atma  is beyond reach, delude themselves by the belief that they can derive joy from the objective world, which 
their senses can experience. If only one reflects a little, even the little joy thus derived will be found to be only 
the same Atmic  bliss ( Atma-ananda ) and not something separate! For, everything, everywhere, is bliss, is nectar 
(amritha ). All bliss is Atmic  bliss.
But when one can rest in the endless coolness of the actual full moon sailing in the sky, who will be content 
with the painted moon and its painted light on a piece of canvas? Who will care even to cast a glance at it? As the 
saying goes, will a honey-sucking bee ever drink bitter juice? So too, the aspirant who has tasted the nectar of self 
knowledge, the knowledge of the Atma , can never relish the sensory objective world.
The person engrossed in a painted moon can never know the real moon. So too, people deluded by the at -
traction of the world grope about in their ignorance of the Atma  and wallow in the unreal manifold world shaped 42
Prasanthi Vahini The Atma is the Realityby the three qualities ( gunas ).
On the other hand, the learned one who seeks the reality gives up glittering falsehood and revels in the Atma , 
deriving peace therefrom.
So, never mistake the “seen ( drisya )” to be permanent or true! You cannot exult in anything else except the 
ocean of the bliss of the indivisible undivided Atma , or Brahman . You can get real and full contentment only in 
the significant, sweet, meaningful experience of the highest Brahman , Supreme Reality Itself; only that can give 
solace from this cycle of birth and death. These unreal things can never afford contentment; the present is without 
existence and significance. Nothing other than the Atma  can ever, at any time or in any manner, confer any benefit 
or bring about any peace. Nothing else can put an end to sorrow and shower bliss.
Everything other than the Atma  is nonexistent ( a-sat ), like silver in the mother of pearl; a delusion, like wa -
ter in the mirage; a mistake, with no real silver that one can take or real water to slake one’s thirst. So too, when 
you base your life on the sensory objective world, which is non- Atma  and produced by ignorance, you can never 
derive happiness or joy. Such pictorial products of fancy can’t appease hunger, slake thirst, or satisfy desire. Only 
the Real can produce those results.
So too, the removal of the recurring sorrow of existence ( samsara ) can be effected only by the attainment of 
Brahman . Genuine peace cannot be earned by means of desires and intentions, study and scholarship, pomp and 
publicity. It can come only by experiencing the Atma , to however small an extent.
By mere force of intention, one can imagine in an instant a scene in America, but can it also be experienced 
in actuality at that very instant? No. There is no use imagining and framing in the fancy; it must be experienced, 
in mind, word, and body. Only then can one claim to have genuine peace. Therefore, merely knowing about Brah -
man, peace, truth, or self-realization leads nowhere; you may even know that there is bliss in these, but all that is 
of no use. You have to dedicate your life to win that bliss and experience it and enter upon the discipline needed 
to acquire it. Only then do you deserve the grace of the Lord and the attainment of Brahman ; only then can you 
get the true bliss.
It is this subject that the Viveka Chudamani  (Crest Jewel of Wisdom) also teaches in many ways. One who 
follows its teaching, without deviation, can taste the nectar of Atmic  bliss, can attain the goal of life. Devoid of 
the sorrow that is inevitable in dealing with sensory objects, having no intentions and desires, one should be im -
mersed in the bliss of one’s own real reality. Humanity alone, of all creation, has the qualification to achieve this 
supreme joy. What a sad tragedy that people should neglect their right and wander about, seeking petty pleasures 
and empty tinsel! Like children playing with dolls and sticks, calling them elephants and horses, people play; but 
that does not make them real elephants and horses. Ignorant people play in all seriousness, imagining the objects 
of the world to be real, and they laugh and weep in joy and sorrow, they blossom and droop while up and down. 
But that does not make the illusory world ( maya  jagath ) less unreal!
When you are immersed in deep sleep, what happens to your joy and sorrow, your profits and losses? They 
have no reality then and no reality later. At both times, they are but the creations of your fancy. One who knows 
this secret will always exult in the joy of companionship with one’s own self, the contemplation of their own inner 
reality. That is real permanent joy. 
Therefore, listen, all aspirants! You, whose real nature is Atmic ! Seek to discover your true Self, your genuine 
Reality; attain the knowledge that you are the Atma  itself; exult in the Atma  alone; taste the undiluted incom -43
Prasanthi Vahini The Atma is the Realityparable unlimited bliss of the awareness of the real self. Let time merge in Him whose form is time; that is the 
legitimate task of humanity, as taught in a philosophical composition of Sankaracharya.
With the amulet of spiritual wisdom around the arm,
One can escape the evil influence of the vile stars called sensual attractions.
Jnana rakshaam samaadrthyaa Jnanee sudrdhavaan bhaveth,
Sa eva niratham svasmin svanandam anu-bhunjathe.
One should not, out of the boldness born of the consciousness of wisdom, give free vent to the senses. One 
should be always vigilant regarding the external world and immersed in the contemplation of one’s own inner 
reality. That is the sign of the knower of the higher truth. When one is ever in that stage, the self-illumining truth 
will ever be before the mind’s eye and the objective world will melt away.
If the seen or the objective world is superimposed on that undivided indivisible Brahman , it will be only as 
real as the turrets and bastions of a city among the clouds. Can anyone build castles on the air and live in them? 
The ether ( akasa ), of course, is your basic form; but for that reason, you cannot erect a city thereon. The turrets 
and bastions you seem to see in the clouds are unreal, baseless creations of your own fancy. So too, in the ether-
like, formless highest Brahman  (Parabrahman ), all this superimposed world is false, baseless. Everything is but 
the consciousness ( chaithanya ) of the non-dual unequaled bliss-pervaded highest Brahman .44
Prasanthi Vahini The Practice of silenceThe Practice of silence
Always enjoy the peace that is the result of the stoppage of all mental agitations. Do not allow the mind to run 
after this and that. Train it to keep quiet. Keep away and afar the mental reactions caused by contact with 
the external world. Then, you can become the very Being ( sat). That is the state of the sage or the state beyond the 
realm of the senses, where their fiat does not run. That is the real self-realization that is the goal of life. 
“Practice silence ( mounam bhajasva ),” it is said. But what is silence? Not simply keeping the mouth shut. It 
means getting beyond the influence of all the senses and getting established always in the consciousness of one’s 
own reality. Perpetual bliss is also perpetual peace. When the mind withdraws from the external world, the tongue 
also becomes silent; all senses follow suit, that is genuine silence.
This stage cannot be described in words; it cannot be communicated to others as “such and such”. It belongs 
to the realm of experience. Silence ( mounam ) means “the form of the absolute Supreme that is beyond all this”. 
The one who has reached it will be in the highest peace and the highest bliss. If the activities of the intelligence 
are stilled, and if the intelligence is harboured in Brahman , one will become suffused with Brahman . One has to 
observe all this world as from afar, with a disinterested attitude —the world can be overcome only by this means. 
One will then escape the wiles of the intellect, which breeds doubts, delusions, and dualistic diversions, away 
from the Atmic  reality.
The intellect ( buddhi ) is the prime instrument. It should be cleaned of the rust of the sensory world and 
made to shine in its own pristine effulgence. The intellect should not be wavering, agitated, or even activated, for 
when it is so, the world appears manifold and multi-formed. When the intellect is tranquil, peace envelops; one 
is immersed in splendour ( tejas ); one is in complete continuous bliss. This stage is also called “without mental 
ideation”, the agitationless-silence ( nir-vikalpa-mounam ).
Therefore, may all aspirants, by their disciplined lives and ceaseless effort, establish themselves in the knowl -
edge of their own Reality. May they keep their minds away from the objective world, always contemplate on the 
highest Atma  (Paramatma ), acquire peace of mind, withdraw from all attachment to the sensory world, saturate 
themselves in bliss, and know themselves as the One without a second.
This is the stage of disinterestedness, the condition of the person who has grasped the truth. There will nev -
ermore be another; everything, that is is themself. The holy Suka, Sanaka, Sananda, and others achieved the bliss 
of this incomparable peace. They had no affliction or doubt or distraction, because they had no need for further 
thought or inquiry. They were not bothered by any change or modification, for the Atma  has no such! Once people 
have tasted this sweetness, they will nevermore give ear to any other word or disturbing argument; they will nev -
ermore entertain distracting thoughts; they will nevermore be drawn toward any diversionary attachment. They 
will hold steadfastly to their convictions.45
Prasanthi Vahini Action rather than inactionAction rather than inaction
The special characteristic of humanity among all created beings is the power of wisdom with discrimination 
(viveka ). One is therefore bound to act, always using the discriminating capacity. But two forces are putting 
obstacles in the way: (1) the ignorant, who prompt toward inaction, and (2) the teachers of Sankhya . The first 
set of people, though they may desist from activity through their senses, are unable to withdraw their minds and 
continue to commit acts in their minds. So, their inactivity is meaningless and unreal; it is relatively or apparently 
but not absolutely true ( mithya ).
The Sankhyans  use a number of arguments against action. “Action causes both good and evil,” so, it is said, 
“the wise must give up all action.”  In the Gita, Krishna met this argument and showed the way to get the good 
out of action and avoid the evil. The Sankhyans  further say that action results in a mixture of pain and pleasure, 
of benefit and loss, and it leads the doer to heaven, to hell, or back again to the earth, that is to say, to bondage of 
some sort. So, they ask people to give up action and take to inaction.
The Gita has a reply for this also. Action will bring about bondage only when it is engaged in with a view 
to the fruit thereof. When done without any thought of the fruit, on the other hand, it leads to liberation ( moksha ) 
itself! Why, even liberated persons engage in action, although they do not derive any benefit therefrom, just to 
promote the welfare of the world! Or rather, whatever a liberated person does must automatically be conducive to 
the welfare of the world. Action has to be engaged in; that is the means of securing the peace already won.46
Prasanthi Vahini Practice of the name of the LordPractice of the name of the Lord
If there is anything sweeter than all things sweet, more auspicious than all things auspicious, holier than all holy 
objects, verily, it is the name of the Lord —or the Lord Himself. Give up the company of the worldly minded, 
the association with those infected by demonic qualities. Keep away from every type of wrong doing. Seek always 
the company of the wise, the good. Take refuge in the Lord Himself (Narayana); He, the pure One, is the perfect 
embodiment of peace, of happiness, and of wisdom. He, the Lord (Sri Hari), is seated within everyone. He stays 
constantly in the place where devotees sincerely and with single-mindedness honour His name. Therefore, first, 
you have to practice intense devotion toward the Lord. Then, you can certainly attain real and permanent happi -
ness and wisdom.
Of what use is the pursuit of the fleeting pleasures of the senses? Worship the Lord (Hari) who lives in the 
cavity of your heart, nearer to you than your dearest friend, or your father, mother, or guru, the Lord who is all 
these and more to you. The physical body for whose sake you crave all this comfort and luxury is subject to dam -
age and decay. One day, it will become food for dogs and jackals. The Lord, on the other hand, makes for joy and 
the thrill of holy love. Surrender your heart to Him; He desires nothing else from you. He can be won by no other 
means, by neither unlimited scholarship nor pompous vows and colorful ritual.
Of the span of human life, one half is wasted in sleep; the other is frittered away in satisfying stupid desires, 
in the helpless ignorance of childhood and boyhood, in misery, travail, and illness, in the inanity of old age. You 
can devote yourself to some worthwhile activity, but beware of misusing even these for the silly pursuit of sensual 
pleasure. Use at least these precious years for the contemplation of the glory of the Lord, for fixing your mind on 
His lotus feet ever more firmly, and thus for transporting yourself across the vast ocean of birth and death.
Therefore, practise at all times and under all conditions, with love and devotion, remembrance of the name 
of the Lord. That name is a thunderbolt that will pulverize mountains of sin. It is the unfailing cure for the dread 
disease of sheer worldliness. Surely, that name will endow you with peace!
The name of God (Hari) is as the effulgence of the rising sun, which scatters the darkness of delusion; it is as 
luminous, as universal, as sacred. Do not misuse that sacred name even for a second. Do not let even a second pass 
without bringing that name to mind. Remember, the sweetness of that name when repeated by Prahlada overpow -
ered the hearts of the demons who heard him; the children of the demons repeated the Name along with Prahlada, 
and, led by him, they began to sing and dance with joy, arming themselves with axes to defend their leader!
The name of the Lord, which can transform the demonic character and purify it into nectar, is verily the 
heaven of peace for all, for the world. To repeat that name without break, to love that form and that name with 
intensity, that is what deserves to be called devotion ( bhakthi ). Devotion means the highest, purest love directed 
toward the Lord. Anyone can attain this devotion. The door of the yoga  of devotion is open to all. The only pass -
port needed is the desire for liberation ( moksha ). That desire entitles everyone to their heritage.47
Prasanthi Vahini Devotion and wisdomDevotion and wisdom
Of course, such love will dawn only after knowing the glory and splendour of the Lord as well as His innate 
characteristics of omniscience, omnipotence, and immanence in all creation. One who is endowed with love 
of this nature, one who lives always with the Lord —that one will certainly be liberated.
What does the expression “to know God” mean? It means “to love God”. Knowledge without devotion 
produces hatred; such knowledge leads to misused power; it is not knowledge worth the name; it is ignorance, 
mistaken for its opposite. It is only through devotion that wisdom becomes established and deep rooted.
What is the sign of a wise person ( jnani )? It is love, the possession of ever-widening love. When devotion, 
or in other words love toward the Lord, dawns, ignorance will vanish step by step. Devotion and hatred cannot 
coexist; they are contradictory. Devotion and love, however, are of the same nature.
The worldly person is infected with love only toward material objects, but the same love, when it assumes 
the form of devotion or love of God, leads one on to the realization of Godhead itself. The phrase sweet essence 
(rasa) indicates the attraction of worldly objects as well as the longing for the joy of God-realization.
The consequences of activity are diminished by undergoing them and then you are born again. But the fruits 
of devotion are never diminished. They last forever. Liberation lasts; it doesn’t end. Truly, devotion is the real 
technique for human liberation. It is the spiritual discipline par excellence; every other technique is built on it.
Devotion and wisdom are like the pair of bullocks for the cart. Both have to pull in unison. Each must keep 
pace with the other and help the other to drag the weight quicker. Wisdom has to help the increase of devotion; 
devotion has to contribute to the growth of wisdom.
It is because of this mutual help, this collaboration, that the cowherd maids of Brindavan were able to attain 
liberation. Their devotion toward Lord Krishna also endowed them with the highest wisdom.
Now, the essence of devotion as well as wisdom is peace, the highest type of peace, the supreme peace. 
Supreme peace ( prasanthi ) leads one on to the glory of spiritual effulgence ( prakanthi ), and thence to the super 
effulgence of the highest revelation ( param-jyothi ).
Wisdom is a concomitant of devotion, its component part. Love fixed on God is most beneficent. It produces 
the greatest good. It will not bind people to the earth. It will take them by the hand along the road to liberation. 
It will automatically release them from all types of bonds and attachments; they have only to strive to avoid evil 
company. Constant association in good company will promote the feeling of detachment.
More than the adherent of the path of activity, wisdom, or yoga , the follower of the path of devotion is de -
clared fortunate and superior. The spiritual aspirant who takes up the discipline of activity is better than the yogi, 
better than the one who has renounced everything ( sanyasin ), and better than the wise person ( jnani ).
This is why Krishna directed Arjuna in the Gita to become a great yogi. He also said, “Among yogis , one who 
steadfastly meditates on the Self as merged in Me is indeed with the highest devotion.”
Then, Arjuna asked Him, “Among those who worship Thee ever like that and those who worship Thee as 
Indestructible, Imperceptible, etc., who among these, Oh Lord, have triumphed in yoga  more?”
Krishna replied, “Whoever fixes the mind on Me and worships Me, whoever is steadfast and exulting in this, 
that one has achieved greater success.”48
Prasanthi Vahini Devotion and wisdomSo, faith ( sraddha ) is ever essential in matters spiritual, related to God. Faith has no limitations, so its results 
also have no decline. The fruits of all acts done in the pursuit of God-realization depend upon spiritual disciplines; 
wisdom, more on internal spiritual disciplines; and devotion, more on external spiritual disciplines.
When Brahman  itself is the object, it becomes spiritual wisdom. Listening to discourses on the scriptures, 
calling to mind what has been heard, and ruminating on things thus recalled to memory —until devotion is fully 
developed, these have to be gone through without interruption. Instead, devotees often deal with God in a bargain -
ing spirit or in the spirit of a tradesman! This attitude should be given up. Whoever one is, one should not ask from 
God anything other than devotion or love. If one does, one is not a true devotee. Real surrender is uninterrupted 
flow of love toward the feet of the Lord. Such surrender alone guarantees and ensures peace, genuine peace.49
Prasanthi Vahini Indirect and direct knowledgeIndirect and direct knowledge
There are two kinds of teaching: indirect and direct. Teaching deduction and induction, reasoning and infer -
ence through the Vedas  and concluding treatises ( Vedanta ) is indirect. When this understanding is experi -
enced and realized, it becomes direct. The highest Brahman  —which is truth, wisdom, and bliss— is self-evident, 
so its understanding can at best be only indirect. Looked at from one point of view, the Brahman  knows neither 
indirect nor direct. It is unique, being beyond both. To obtain this direct knowledge of the Absolute, the first req -
uisite is spiritual practice, and the first step in this practice is service done to a virtuous teacher with full faith and 
full submission.
The teacher too should be always instructing the aspirant in the nature of Brahman , and in simple ways. 
When the disciple grasps this instruction, it becomes indirect knowledge. This indirect knowledge itself can be 
transformed into direct knowledge by constant reflection, turning over in the mind. Indirect knowledge is as shift -
ing as letters drawn on water, while direct knowledge is indelible, like letters carved on rock.
When the sound “horse” is heard, the form of the horse presents itself before the mind; so too, at the word 
“Brahman ”, the nature of Brahman  will come into the consciousness. This is called meditation ( dhyana ) by those 
versed in the four disciplines or the first principles of spiritual discipline. To be stabilized in meditation, the as -
pirant should cultivate control of the senses ( sama ) and passions ( dama ) and cultivate also the attitude of acting 
without any desire for the fruits of action. Whoever is an adept in the six qualifications —control of the senses, 
passions, etc.— can easily see with the mind’s eye the form of Brahman  as soon as the exposition of Its nature is 
heard. Renunciation of the desire for the enjoyment of the fruits of one’s action is also essential. When this detach -
ment is deeply rooted, the consciousness ( chittha ) becomes pure and withdrawal of the senses from the objective 
world is made possible.50
Prasanthi Vahini The Eightfold path of yogaThe Eightfold path of yoga
Yoga (devotional practice) is also of two varieties: royal yoga  (raja-yoga ) and the yoga  of inner contemplation 
(jnana-yoga ). The royal yoga  has eight stages, which have to be well cultivated and realized. Of these, some 
are external and some internal. This is the Aryan  path. In the yoga  of contemplation, there is no “external” at all. 
Both these yogas  have as their goal the stilling of the agitations of all levels of consciousness. For those who have 
calmed all these agitations, everything is Brahman . Primary for this purpose is the yoga  of contemplation more 
than the yoga  of activity —at least that is the opinion of the knowers of Brahman . They say “that is the thing to 
be known, to be reached.”
But, according to the wisdom of the Upanishads , direct knowledge of the Brahman  can be obtained by the 
eightfold yoga  of 
(1) Control of the inner senses ( yama ),
(2) Control of the outer senses ( niyama ),
(3) Regulation of the sitting posture ( asana ),
(4) Regulation of the breath ( pranayama ),
(5) Control of the mind ( prathyahara ),
(6) Concentration or single-mindedness ( dharana ),
(7) Meditation on the Divine ( dhyana ), and
(8) Complete absorption into the reality ( samadhi ).
(1) Control of the inner senses ( yama )
This includes nonviolence, truth, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-acceptance ( ahimsa , sathya , a-stheya , 
brahma-charya , a-parigraha ).
This is the usual meaning given to the control of the inner senses, but I would say instead that it means the 
giving up of attachment to the body and to the senses. The Brahman  entity is devoid of name, form, and qualities; 
is without end, joy, sorrow, and modification; is eternal and of the nature of being-awareness-bliss ( satchidan -
anda ). Creation, on the other hand, is endowed with all qualities and modifications, viz. name, form, transforma -
tion, of rise and decline, joy and sorrow. Nevertheless, as a result of delusion, this Brahman  entity appears as all 
this creation. This appearance has an end; it has various other limitations; it appears to be ever moving, so it is 
called ocean of life ( samsara ). Thus, this Brahman  entity appears in both the individual form of a whole, viewed 
as made up of parts, and the collective form of the individual parts, viewed as an aggregate. It deludes even great 
scholars and pandits. 
One single consciousness ( chaithanya ) becomes manifest in different ways as all this multiplicity. Therefore, 
we speak of the particular and of the collective, i.e. a collection of particulars. Of course, the particular is a super-
imposition on the Brahman , like seeing the snake in the rope, the lake in the mirage. For the knower of Brahman , 
each of the three bodies —the gross ( sthula ), subtle ( sukshma ), and causal ( karana )— is itself a super-imposition. 
To say that one of the bodies is real or unreal is not correct; it is neither real nor unreal, it is something between 
truth and untruth ( mithya ). The ignorant person, caught in the meshes of this delusion, believes that the objective 
world is everlasting and a source of happiness.
Falsely identifying themselves with the body, people suffer in the coils of attachment to their mother, father, 51
Prasanthi Vahini The Eightfold path of yogaspouse, children, relatives, and friends. They do not realize that they have neither body nor senses and that they 
are Brahman  (the sustenance and support of the three-fold body and everything else). This can be realized through 
the constant contemplation of the Brahman  having the characteristics of being-awareness-bliss ( satchidananda ), 
through the never-ceasing discrimination between the changeless and the changing, through association with the 
good, service of the wise, and through acquisition of purity of intelligence. The establishment of one’s intellect 
in this consciousness is the real renunciation of the body and the senses, which is implied in the word yama  as 
defined earlier. This is what is called control of the inner senses ( yama ) in the practice of inner contemplation 
(jnana-yoga ).
Joy in times of good fortune and sorrow in times of bad, mistaking the pain of the body and the senses as 
one’s own, such dual attitude and feeling must be overcome. Step by step, identification with the body and the 
senses has to be given up. This is the sign of acquiring the “limb” ( anga ) of self-control ( yama ). This limb is the 
very foundation of the practice of inner contemplation.
(2) Control of the outer senses ( niyama ).
Niyama  means purity, being full of joy, engaged in spiritual exercises or repetition of the name of the Lord. 
This is what is mentioned in the king of yogas  (raja-yoga ): purity, joy, asceticism, Self-study, and surrender to 
the Lord ( soucha , santhosha , tapas , swadhyaya , Iswara-pranidhana ). These are the components of control of the 
outer senses.
But I would explain it in the following manner. Control of the outer senses is the condition of steady love in 
the Godhead, at all times and under all conditions. “It is the highest form of love”, it is said in the Narada Bhakthi 
Sutra . It is only when such steadfast love toward the Absolute is gained that the purity, the joy, the asceticism, the 
study, and the surrender to the Lord mentioned in the yoga  of activity will also be obtained. When control of the 
inner senses is won, bliss and peace will become your possession through the source of all bliss and peace, the 
being-a-wareness-bliss ( satchidananda ) Universal Absolute Entity ( Parabrahman ).
These two (control of the inner and outer senses) are not derived from dry worldly material objects. “He 
is sweetness”, “ Brahman  is bliss”, say the Upanishads . It is in and through Brahman  that the material world is 
endowed with even the tiniest modicum of joy. Without the basic Brahman , which is the most complete and the 
fullest sweetness and joy, this fleeting evanescent appearance thereon cannot be so sweet and joy-giving to the 
worldly minded! Without that basic sweetness, the world would have been terribly bitter. For the little sweetness 
that material objects give, the Ocean of Nectar is the cause. Association with the knowers of Brahman , discus -
sion with them of the nature of the absolute in a spirit of humility and earnestness, a thirst to realize the Reality, 
unwavering love toward the Lord —these are the characteristics of those established in control of the outer senses. 
Stalwarts with these characteristics will not be affected by derision or praise, by wind or sun or rain, by honour or 
dishonour. They will tread the path of liberation free from all attachment to anything except the one single aim of 
realizing the bliss of unison with the basic Brahman .
People who have realized the stage of outer-sense control will be ready to sacrifice everything for the acqui -
sition of wisdom. They will run to any distance to listen to discussion of Brahman ; they will obey every instruc -
tion of the wise; they will attach themselves to those who teach the science of ultra-consciousness ( chinmaya-tha -
thwa ), as if they alone are their most intimate friends; they will put up with any trouble in fulfilling their wishes. 
These are the signs of peopls who have achieved control of the outer senses ( niyama ).52
Prasanthi Vahini The Eightfold path of yoga(3) Regulation of the (sitting) posture ( asana ).
One should have a steady posture in sitting. That is to say, one should neither shake nor sway. But even 
sitting like a rock, motionless and with all joints locked, can never be called asana . That is not the sign of real 
asana . Asana  means both steadiness of the physical frame and inner joy that blooms in the heart. So whatever the 
posture adopted by the aspirant of yoga , it must be both steady and comfortable. That is why Patanjali advised a 
steady and comfortable posture.
I am telling you the same thing, in another way, what the best and most success-yielding posture is. It is 
that posture in which one is most unaffected by the external world. It is the posture that comes from practice of a 
moral life, meritorious in the world and in accordance with the Vedic  path. It is absolute lack of interest in matters 
unconnected with the highest Atma . When people whose ways you do not appreciate come near you, there is no 
need to find fault with them; there is no need either to laugh at them or show them your contempt. It is enough to 
continue to do your work, unaffected by their arrival.
Let those whose behavior you do not appreciate follow their path; leave them alone. That is the attitude of 
unaffectedness. After the dawn of love for the Absolute, the aspirant gets this feeling toward all worldly things. 
To be more exact, one should constantly be turning over in the mind the reality of Brahman  and the unreality of 
the world — Brahman  is truth; the world is unreal. One must avoid comradeship with the bad and even too much 
friendship with the good! Attachment of this nature will drag one away from the path of withdrawal from the 
objective world to the path of external activity. Give up attachment to the momentary, the things clothed with the 
trappings of name and form. Once you have achieved this attitude of unaffectedness, you will have unshakeable 
peace, self control, and purity of mind. You will have the steadiness and stability of posture ( asana ).
(4) Regulation of the breath ( pranayama ).
Pranayama  usually means control and regulation of the inhaling and exhaling of the breath. In the yoga-
sastras, this is explained as comprising the various stages of regulation of breathing —practices to gain control of 
the five vital airs, closing the right nostril and inhaling air through the left, closing the nostril with the right hand 
while breathing, etc.
But I would explain it this way: Control of the breath is possible only for those who consider this whole 
universe as “unreal”. We see golden ornaments of various types and styles, all made of the same metal, gold; and 
yet, we like one more and another less —not all of them equally. We have given various names and forms to these 
articles according to needs and fashions, likes and desires; and yet, we are bound by a meaningless delusion that 
blinds us to the actuality. When the ornaments are thought of, are being manufactured, are in use, and are finally 
melted into a lump they are and remain “gold”, don’t they?
Likewise, so many names and forms appear and reappear in this world, rise, grow, and get destroyed. And 
yet, that which is the basic substratum, the eternal, persists in and through all this change and remains eternal. Just 
as the multiple forms create illusion and arouse feelings of hatred and love, so too these forms and names delude 
and create attachment. They make us believe that they themselves are the source of joy. But don’t the scriptures 
say that the universe is nothing but Brahman , the beginningless, the endless, the unblemished, the ever pure? They 
declare that the ornaments are passing phases, that gold alone is eternal and real and true. Therefore, you must 
take everything to be Brahman  and Brahman  alone. Convince yourselves that all appearances are the product of 
delusion ( maya ), practise always that type of discrimination, evince great interest in knowing the reality, and be 53
Prasanthi Vahini The Eightfold path of yogaever alert to recognize the truth that everything is Brahman .
Of course, in the deluded stage, the world appears as real and Brahman  as a meaningless concoction. In the 
stage of intelligent clarity, the world is grasped in its true sense as unreal. The fairy of delusion overpowers you 
by her charms and her arrows of falsehood and gilt. Only the person possessed of the vision of universal Brahman  
can soon escape her wiles. Such a person fully knows that names and forms arose a little time ago and disappear a 
little time after. In the Gita [II 28], too, it is said; “These, Oh descendent of Bharath (India), appear in the middle 
only.” The world is subject to evolution and involution. To understand this, one need not wait till the end of the 
world; it is enough if the angle of vision is corrected. That is the gateway to real knowledge. That is real control 
of breath, the consciousness that the world is unreal ( mithya ).
The genuine master of breath control will picture the world like letters written in pencil many years ago: 
indistinct, hazy, misty. Knowing that Brahman  alone is all this, such a one will never be drawn toward their envi -
ronment, however fascinating it may be. Earnings, wealth, property —everything is unreal, valueless, not worth -
while. This conviction is the best sign of breath control ( pranayama ).
(5) Control of the mind ( prathyahara ).
The tongue tastes, the eye sees, the ear hears, the skin feels, the nose smells. Each sense acts thus throughout 
life, right? The senses have to be withdrawn from the external objective world and turned toward the internal 
mental consciousness or awareness ( chittha ). This process is called mind control by Patanjali in his Yoga Sutras . 
However, I shall define it in another manner.
The inward activity of the mental consciousness ( chittha ), that is to say, the perpetual insight of the mind, 
the fundamental directive force of all the senses, that is the real meaning of mind control. It is only when the con -
sciousness realizes that this is all delusion-born and delusion-maintained that it will draw back its feelers from the 
sensory world and give up its worldly selfish attitude. The general nature of the mind is to waver and hesitate and 
flutter in its search for happiness and peace. When it knows that the things it ran after are transitory and meaning -
less, it suddenly grows ashamed and disillusioned. Then it begins to illumine and clarify the consciousness.
Aspirants who have attained this stage will be watching the outer world as a huge pantomime; the inward 
look will give them such joy and contentment that they will repent for all the time wasted in external activities 
and pursuit of sensory joy. So, the straight, sharp, single-pointed vision of the mind toward the Atma  within is the 
real control of the mind ( prathyahara ).
(6) Concentration or single-mindedness ( dharana ).
Patanjali has explained that when the awareness ( chittha ) is fixed in one place, it is named concentration 
(dharana ). I would say that it means more the undeviating attitude of the mind, its unwavering character. When 
the mind gives up attachment to external objects, when it is saturated with repentance for past foolishness, when 
it is filled with remorse, renunciation, and understanding, when it directly fosters the development of progressive 
qualities of the head and heart, then it truly becomes fit to join the ideal. It contemplates only the ideal. Such fixed 
attention is what is meant by concentration.
To whichever place the mind may wander, instruct it to find only Brahman  there. Whatever ideas and pic -
tures it may form, instruct it to find only Brahman  in those creations of the mind stuff.
Treat your consciousness ( chittha ) as a little boy. Bring up that boy, training it to become wiser and wiser. 54
Prasanthi Vahini The Eightfold path of yogaCaress it into good ways. Make it aware that all objects that are “seen” are just products of one’s own illusion. 
Remove all its fears and foibles and focus its attention steadily on the goal only. Never deal forcibly with the 
mind; it will yield easily to tenderness and patient training. Correct its waywardness by means of the attitude of 
renunciation. Destroy its ignorance by means of instruction in the knowledge of the Atma . Strengthen the inter -
est with which it is already endowed toward the realization of Brahman . Let it give up the attraction toward the 
evanescent and the false, the mirages created by fancy and fantasy. Turn its face inward, away from the external 
world. By these three methods, concentration can be firmly established.
During both the waking and the dream stages, as well as during all the process of mental spinning and weav -
ing of colourful pictures by the imagination, the mind has to be watched and trained. It must be made to flow, 
single-pointedly and steadily like water from a sluice, toward Brahman  and Brahman  only. That is real concentra -
tion ( dharana ).
(7) Meditation on the Divine ( dhyana ).
Spiritual wisdom ( jnana ) that flows in a single direction is meditation ( dhyana ). I have already described its 
various characteristics in Dhyana Vahini . Meditation, in short, is the uninterrupted dwelling of the consciousness 
in wisdom, the consciousness itself becoming thereby the embodiment of wisdom.
All this is Brahman . The ocean of divine nectar ( amritha ) is everywhere divine nectar. Whether in the well, 
in the tank, in the river, or in the ocean, water is water. So too, when all is Brahman , all is the same substance ap -
pearing under a multiplicity of names and forms. Space ( akasa ) is inside as well as outside the pot, and it is the 
same space, although it appears as two, interior space and exterior space! The Brahman , too, appearing as various 
bodies with their own individual characteristics, is One and One only. Like space inside as well as outside the 
pot, it is One. Experiencing that One and only Brahman , avoiding all feelings of difference and distinction, that 
is the sign of meditation on the Divine, the essence of the meditation on the Divine experience, however much 
individuals may vary.
(8) Complete absorption in the reality ( samadhi ).
When form is ignored and only meaning is felt, that is samadhi . This is the opinion of Patanjali. Samadhi  
can be explained in another manner also. When someone who is engaged in meditation on the Divine forgets 
both themself and the fact that one is engaged in meditation, then it becomes samadhi . That is to say, when one is 
merged in the thing on which one meditates, one enters into the stage called samadhi . Meditation on the Divine 
fulfils itself, becomes complete, in samadhi . Meditation strives, proceeds through effort, but samadhi  comes ef -
fortlessly. It is the culmination of the eight-fold discipline.
When one knows that there is not one iota of distinction between the individual ( jiva) and the Atma , that 
they are one and the same, then it is the highest samadhi . It is the fruit of ripest meditation, the dearest moment of 
yogis , the destroyer of ignorance, the signal of the grace of God. Incessant thirst to know the Atma  as all is worthy 
to be encouraged and welcomed, for it is the path through which all doubts can be eliminated.
Samadhi  is of two types, differentiated and undifferentiated. In differentiated samadhi , the threefold nature 
of knower, knowing, and knowee will still persist. When it is realized that the knower is Brahman , knowing is 
also Brahman , and the thing to be known is also Brahman , then there is no more agitation or activity; that is un -
differentiated samadhi .55
Prasanthi Vahini The Eightfold path of yogaSamadhi  is the ocean to which all spiritual discipline flows. The seven streams of inner-sense control, outer-
sense control, posture, regulation of the breath, mind control, concentration, and meditation on the Divine all find 
their consummation in samadhi . Every trace of name and form disappear in that Ocean. The server and the one 
who is served, the meditator and the one who is meditated upon —all such duality is dispelled and destroyed. 
One won’t even experience the experience, that is to say, one won’t be aware that one is experiencing! Oneself 
alone, nothing else —that is samadhi . If there is anything else, it cannot be samadhi . It is something like a dream, 
a fantasy, a passing vision at best. Samadhi  can admit of nothing other than Brahman .56
Prasanthi Vahini The Eightfold path of yogaGlossary
This glossary contains many Sanskrit words, people, places, and literature that Sathya Sai Baba uses in His 
discourses, especially discourses appearing in this volume. The glossary attempts to provide comprehensive 
meanings and detailed explanations of the more important Sanskrit words, for the benefit of lay readers who are 
interested in Hindu religion and philosophy.
In an electronic version of this volume (e.g. an e-book for the Ipad, Kindle, or Nook), you can click on most 
names, places, people, and Sanskrit words within the text in order to immediately access the word in this glossary. 
Your device will also have an arrow or other link to press to get back to the text.57
Prasanthi Vahini GlossaryGlossary
a-dwaitha . Nondualism, monism, the doctrine that everything is God, the philosophy of absolute oneness of 
God, soul, and universe.
agni. Fire element.
Agni . God of Fire; the fire element; name for fire when it is out of sight range.
aham . The knower, the “I”.
ahamkara . Ego, self-love, selfish individuality.
ahimsa . Nonviolence.
aikya . Oneness with God, union of the individual soul ( jiva) with God.
a-jnana . Ignorance, stupidity.
akasa . Space, ether, the subtlest form of matter.
amritha . Divine nectar (literally, no death or immortal).
ananda . Divine bliss. The Self is unalloyed, eternal bliss. Pleasures are but its faint and impermanent shadows.
an-atma . Not Atma , or not-Self.
anga . Limb, part, fact, feature, “earth bit”.
anritha . Not true, false.
anthah-karana . Inner psycho-somatic fourfold instruments of mind, intellect, memory, and ego.
a-parigraha . Non-acceptance of gifts, renunciation.
Arjuna . Krishna’s disciple, in the Bhagavad Gita ; third of five Pandava brothers. See Mahabharatha .
artha . Wealth, prosperity, material object, thing, aim, purpose, desire.
Aryan . (a) Literally noble. (b) Follower of Vedic  or spiritual path. (c) Ancient dwellers of India who composed 
the Rig-veda ; the chief tribe was that of the Bharathas.
asana . Yoga  posture; sitting posture.
a-santhi . Lack of peace; agitated mind; restlessness. Opposite of santhi .
a-sat . Falsehood, unreal, non-existent, bad.
a-stheya . Non-stealing.
asthika . Believer; theist; God-revering person.
a-sura . Demon; term arose when Diti’s sons refused to drink the divine liquor ( suraa ) offered by Varuni, the 
daughter of Varuna .
Atma . Self; Soul. Self, with limitations, is the individual soul. Self, with no limitations, is Brahman , the Su -
preme Reality.
Atma-ananda . Atmic  bliss, bliss of Self-realization.
Atma-droha . Self-tormenting, treason to the higher Self.
Atma-rama . Eternal bliss; Rama  in the heart.
Atma-santhi . Individual peace.
Atma-swarupa . Embodiment of the all-pervading divine Self.58
Prasanthi Vahini GlossaryAtmic . Of or relating to the Atma .
Aum . Om; Designation of the Universal Brahman ; sacred, primordial sound of the universe.
Avatar . Incarnation of God. Whenever there is a decline of dharma , God comes down to the world assuming 
bodily form to protect the good, punish the wicked and re-establish dharma . An Avatar  is born and lives free 
and is ever conscious of His mission. By His precept and example, He opens up new paths in spirituality, 
shedding His grace on all.
Ayodhya . City where Rama was born and ruled.
Bhagavad Gita . Literally, Song of God. Portion of the Mahabharatha  that is a dialogue between Arjuna , one of 
the Pandava  brothers, and Krishna .
Bhagavatha . A sacred book composed by Sage Vyasa  dealing with Vishnu and His incarnations, especially 
Krishna . It also means those with attachment to God, or the Godly.
bhajans . Congregational chant group worship by devotees with devotional music in which repetition of holy 
names predominates.
bhakthi . Devotion to God.
Bharatha-desa . India; region of God-loving people.
bhashya . Commentaries on spiritual texts by great sages.
Bhishma . The guardian and patriarch of the Kauravas and Pandavas. Son of King Shantanu. Remarkable for his 
wisdom and unflinching devotion to God. Trapped by his fate to fight on side of evil Kauravas; bled to death 
on a bed of arrows while thinking of God. See Mahabharatha . He also vowed life-long celibacy to ensure 
that his offspring would not claim the throne.
Brahma . The Creator, the First of the Hindu Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and Siva 
(the Destroyer).
brahma-charya . Path to knowledge of Brahman; state of an unmarried religious student; first stage of life of a 
brahmin ; spiritual studentship.
Brahman . The Supreme Being, the Absolute Reality, Impersonal God with no form or attributes. The uncaused 
cause of the Universe, Existence, Consciousness-Bliss Absolute ( Sat-Chit-Ananda ); The Eternal Changeless 
Reality — not conditioned by time, space, and causation.
Brahma Sutra . Spiritual text of Vedantic  teachings in short maxims, attributed to Badharayana or Vyasa.
brahmin . First of four castes of social order, the priestly or teacher caste; a person belonging to this caste.
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad . The Upanishad  that sets forth teachings maintained by Yajnavalkya regarding 
Brahman.
Brindavan . Forest and pastoral lands where Krishna played in his childhood.
Buddha . Prince Gautama, circa 556 –480 BC. Founder of Buddhism after attaining enlightenment.
buddhi . Intellect, intelligence, faculty of discrimination.
caste . The four castes of social order are: brahmin  (priestly or teacher), kshatriya  (warrior, protector), vaisya  
(trader, merchant, agriculturist), and sudra  (worker, helper). See varna dharma .
chaithanya . Consciousness, intelligence, spirit.
Chidambaram . Town 122 miles SSW of Chennai, noted for its temple dedicated to Siva in his aspect of “cos -
mic dancer”, Nataraja.59
Prasanthi Vahini Glossarychinmaya-thathwa . The science of ultra-consciousness, pure intelligence.
chith-sakthi . Power of universal consciousness or intelligence.
chittha . Mind stuff, memory, subconscious mind.
Viveka Chudamani. A spiritual text, “Crest Jewel of Spiritual Wisdom” by Sankara.
dama . Control of the outer senses.
darsana . Any of the six principal systems of ancient Indian philosophy; insight or vision of truth.
Devi Bhagavatham . The story of the glory of Universal Divine Mother. One of the Puranas .
dharana . Concentration, fixed attention, support. One of 8 steps in Patanjali’ s yoga  discipline.
dharma . Righteousness, religion, code of conduct, duty, essential nature of a being or thing. It holds together 
the entire Universe. Man is exhorted to practise dharma  to achieve material and spiritual welfare. The Vedas  
contain the roots of dharma . God is naturally interested in the reign of dharma .
Dharma Sastras . Codes of law and ethics concerning virtuous living.
dharmic . According to dharma , righteous.
dhyana . Meditation.
drisya . That which is perceived by the senses; the seen.
Droupadi . Wife of Pandavas. See Mahabharatha .
dwaitha . Dualism, the doctrine that the individual and the Supreme Soul are two different principles or entities.
Gajendra . Elephant. In one discourse, Sai Baba mentions that the Gajendra or elephant (man) who was caught 
by the alligator (egotism) while frolicking in the lake (the objective world) was saved by the Lord (spiritual 
practices).
Ganga . The 1560-mile-long Ganges river; starts in the Himalayas and flows generally east into the Bay of Ben -
gal; the most sacred river of India.
Gayatri mantra . A very sacred Vedic  prayer for self-enlightenment; it is repeated piously at dawn, noon, and 
twilight devotions.
Gita. See Bhagavad Gita .
Godavari . Sacred river of south India; cuts across central south India, flowing from west to east.
guna . Quality, property, trait; one of the three constituents of nature ( sathwa , rajas , and thamas ). They bind the 
soul to the body. Man’s supreme goal in life is to transcend the gunas  and attain liberation from the cycle of 
birth and death.
guru . Spiritual guide; a knower of Brahman, who is calm, desireless, merciful, and ever ready to help and guide 
spiritual aspirants who approach him.
Hari . God; destroyer of sins; name for Vishnu.
Hiranyakasipu . A demonic person who forbade mention of Vishnu’s name, wicked father of Prahlada, who was 
a great devotee of the Lord; killed by the man-lion Narashimha, an Avatar  of Vishnu.
iccha-sakthi . Will power.
idam . This.
Iswara-pranidhana . Surrender to the Lord.
jagath . Cosmos, world of change, creation.60
Prasanthi Vahini GlossaryJanaka . A self-realized king; Sita’s father and Rama’s father-in-law. His ancestor was Nimi, a great emperor.
jiva. Individual or soul, in a state of non-realisation of its identity with Brahman. It is unaware of its own nature 
and is subjected to sensations of pain and pleasure, birth and death, etc.
jivi. Individual or soul.
jnana . Sacred knowledge; knowledge of the spirit, pursued as a means to Self-realisation. It is direct experience 
of God, as the Soul of the souls. Jnana  makes a man omniscient, free, fearless, and immortal.
jnana-yoga . Path of inner contemplation, spiritual wisdom.
jnani . Wise man, realized soul.
Kabir . Also Kabirdas . 15th century mystic poet; preached equality before God of all creatures and the religion 
of love/devotion, which was aimed at the union of the soul with God. Born to a Muslim weaver family of 
Benares.
Kali-yuga . Fourth in a cycle of four ages; the evil age; the one we are now in. See yuga .
kama . Desire, lust, worldly fulfillment; one of four goals of humans.
Kapila . Also Kapilamaharshi. Ancient sage-philosopher; prime exponent of the one of the six systems of phi -
losophy known as Sankhya, which emphasizes duality of spirit and nature.
karana . Causal or cause.
karma . Action, deed, work, religious rite, the totality of innate tendencies formed as a consequence of acts done 
in previous lives. Every karma  produces a lasting impression on the mind of the doer, apart from affecting 
others. Repetition of a particular karma  produces a tendency ( vasanas ) in the mind. Karma  is of three kinds: 
(i) praarabdha , which is being exhausted in the present life: (ii) aagami , which is being accumulated in 
the present life, and (iii) samchitha , which is being accumulated or stored to be experienced in future lives. 
Akarma  is action that is done without any intention to gain the consequences; vikarma  is action that is inten -
tionally done.
karma-yoga . Yoga of action.
Kauravas . Family that fought Pandavas. See Mahabharatha .
kaya . Body, feeling, temperament.
Krishna . The Avatar  of Vishnu  in the Dwapara yuga , prior to the present Kali yuga .
Krishna . A holy river.
krodha . Anger.
kuru-kshetra . Field of battle or action.
lobha . Greed.
loka. Region, world. Usually refers to the three worlds of earth, atmosphere, and sky, but it can mean 7 or even 
14 worlds (7 above and 7 lower).
loka-santhi . World peace.
Mahabharatha . The Hindu epic composed by Sage Vyasa , which deals with the deeds and fortunes of the cous -
ins (the Kauravas and Pandavas ) of the Lunar race, with Lord Krishna  playing a significant and decisive role 
in shaping the events. The Bhagavad Gita  and Vishnu  Sahasranama  occur in this great epic. It is considered 
to be the Fifth Veda  by devout Hindus. Of this great epic, it is claimed that “what is not in it is nowhere .
mahatma . Great soul.61
Prasanthi Vahini GlossaryMaitreyi . Female consort of Yajnavalkya; one of greatest sage-philosophers in the Upanishads . Maitreyi was 
known for her wisdom. See the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad .
mama-kara . Mine-ness.
manas . Mind, the inner organ, which has four aspects: (i) mind ( manas ), which deliberates, desires, and feels; 
(ii) intellect ( buddhi ), which understands, reasons, and decides; (iii) the  ‘I’ sense, and (iv) memory ( chitha ). 
The mind, with all its desires and their broods, conceals the Divinity within man. Purification of the mind is 
essential for realisation of the Self.
mantra . A sacred formula, mystic syllable or word symbol uttered during the performance of the rituals or 
meditation. They represent the spiritual truths directly revealed to the rishis  (seers). The section of the Veda  
that contains these hymns ( mantras ) is called the Samhitha .
Manu . The first father of mankind; author of the codes of righteous conduct ( Dharma Sastras ); son of Surya 
(the sun) and father of Vaivaswatha Manu, the present progenitor of mankind.
maya . Delusion. The mysterious, creative, and delusive power of Brahman through which God projects the 
appearance of the Universe. Maya  is the material cause and Brahman is the efficient cause of the Universe. 
Brahman and maya  are inextricably associated with each other like fire and its power to heat. Maya  deludes 
the individual souls in egoism, making them forget their true spiritual nature.
mithya . Mixture of truth and falsehood; neither true nor untrue, but something in between. The world is not 
untrue ( asat) but mithya .
moksha . Liberation from all kinds of bondage, especially the one to the cycle of birth and death. It is a state of 
absolute freedom, peace, and bliss, attained through Self-realisation. This is the supreme goal of human en -
deavour, the other three being, righteousness ( dharma ), wealth and power ( artha ), and sense-pleasure ( kama ).
mounam . Silence.
mukthi . See moksha .
nama-smarana . Remembrance of God’s name — one of the important steps of spiritual discipline to obtain 
God’s grace and to make progress in the spiritual journey.
Nandanar . Great 13th century devotee of Siva, born in the labourer ( sudra ) caste. Through devotion, he over -
came all obstacles and merged with God in the temple in Chidambaram.
Narada . Sage-bard; traveled the world chanting Narayana . Famous for creating disputes, resulting in solutions 
for the spiritual advancement or victory of the virtuous. Expert in law and author of texts on dharma .
Narada Bhakthi Sutra . A text of aphorisms on devotion; attributed to Narada, the celestial sage who traveled 
the world chanting Narayana.
Narasimha . Man-lion. One of the ten Avatars  of Vishnu.
Narayana . The Primal Person, the Lord, Vishnu.
nethi . Not this.
nir-vikalpa-mounam . Silence without agitation or ideation.
nir-vikalpa-samadhi . Undifferentiated deep communion, transcendental absorption.
nir-vishaya . Contentless objectless.
niyama . Control of the outer senses.
Om. Designation of the Universal Brahman; sacred, primordial sound of the Universe.62
Prasanthi Vahini GlossaryOmkara . The form of AUM , or Om.
Pandavas . Sons of Pandu; family of 5 brothers that fought the Kauravas: Dharmaraja , Bhima, Arjuna , Nakula, 
and Sahadeva. See Mahabharatha .
Para-brahman . Universal Absolute Brahman.
Param-ananda . Highest bliss.
Param-atma . Supreme Self, Supreme Atma .
Param-jyothi . Highest revelation, supreme light, divine intelligence.
Para-thathwa . Absolute supreme principle.
Patanjali . Author of the Yoga Sutras , which form the foundation of the yoga  system of Indian philosophy. See 
raja-yoga .
Prahlada . Son of the demon king Hiranyakasipu. As a boy, he was beaten, trampled, and cast into fire and wa -
ter. But he saw only God everywhere, and repetition of the Name of God saved him. Once, Prahlada asserted 
that God was everywhere, and Narayana appeared in his man-lion form from within a pillar to destroy the 
king.
prakanthi . Radiance, spiritual effulgence.
prakriti . Nature, the Divine Power of Becoming. Also known as maya , avidya , and sakthi ; the world of matter 
and mind as opposed to the spirit. Prakriti  has three dispositions or gunas  (sathwa , rajas , and thamas ), which 
go into the make-up of all living and non-living beings in the Universe, in varying proportions leading to the 
appearance of infinite multiplicity in form, nature, and behaviour .
prana . Life-breath, life force, vital energy, the five vital airs of the body. English doesn’t seem to have names 
for these vital airs, so we list them with their Sanskrit names: prana  (located in lungs), apana  (flatus, which 
moves downward through the rectum), vyana  (diffused throughout the whole body), samana  (navel; essential 
to digestion), and udana  (rises through throat to head).
Pranava . Om; the sacred seed-sound and symbol of Brahman. “The most exalted syllable in Vedas ”. It is used 
in meditation on God. It is uttered first before a Vedic  mantra  is chanted.
pranayama . Breath control.
prasanthi . Supreme peace, equanimity.
prathyahara . Control of mind; withdrawing senses from external world and turning them toward a higher con -
sciousness.
prema . Ecstatic love of God; divine love of the most intense kind.
Puranas . Any of a number of collections of ancient legends and lore embodying the principles of the universal, 
eternal religion and ethics. There are 18 Puranas , the most famous being the Mahabhagavatham  and the Devi 
Bhagavatham .
raga . Sense of attachment, passion, affection.
rajas . One of the three gunas  (qualities or dispositions) of maya  or prakriti . Passion, restlessness, aggressive -
ness, emotions such as anger, greed, grief. Associated with colour red. See guna .
rajasic . Adjective form of rajas , passionate, emotional.
raja-yoga . Royal yoga  of meditation, detachment, and desirelessness. Eight-fold path of yoga  developed by 
Patanjali, which includes control of the mind and withdrawal of the senses from the external world.
rajoguna . Quality of passion, restlessness, aggressiveness. Associated with colour red. See guna.63
Prasanthi Vahini GlossaryRama . Avatar  of the Thretha yuga . Hero of the Ramayana ; killed the wicked Ravana  to rescue his wife Sita, 
who had been kidnapped. “Rama” means “he who pleases”.
Ramanuja . Eleventh century teacher and interpreter of the Brahma-sutra ; proponent of the ultimate oneness 
of the differentiated ( visishta-adwaitha ). Believed in a personal God reached by devotion and faith and the 
everlasting self-identity of the individual soul in communion with God as the goal of life.
Ramayana . This sacred epic, composed by Sage Valmiki , deals with the incarnation of Vishnu as Sri Rama , 
who strove all his life to reestablish the reign of dharma  in the world. The Ramayana  has played an important 
role in influencing and shaping the Hindu ethos over the centuries.
Ramdas . Maratha 17th century saint; author of work on religious duty; guru of the great King Sivaji.
rasa. Taste, sweetness, essence of enjoyment.
Rig-veda . First Veda  composed by the sages, consisting of 1028 hymns. Oldest religious text in world.
rishi . Sage, wise man.
sadhaka . Spiritual aspirant.
sahana . Tolerance, fortitude.
sakthi . Great universal power, divine energy, strength. Maha  means Great , so Mahasakthi  is great sakthi .
sama . Control of the senses, peace, equanimity, tranquility.
samadhi . Literally, total absorption. The state of super consciousness resulting in union with or absorption in 
the ultimate reality, the Atma ; perfect equanimity. The state that transcends the body, mind, and intellect. In 
that state of consciousness, the objective world and the ego vanish and Reality is perceived or communed 
with, in utter peace and bliss. When people realise in this state their oneness with God, it is called nirvikalpa 
samadhi .
sama-rasa . Enjoyment in equanimity.
samsara . Worldly life; life of the individual soul through repeated births and deaths. Liberation means getting 
freed from this cycle.
samskara . Inborn desire, mental impression of acts done in a former state of existence. Also, purificatory cer -
emony or sacrament.
Sanaka . A rishi, one of four mental sons of the Creator, Brahma.
Sananda . A rishi, one of four mental sons of the Creator, Brahma, (the others are Sanathana, Sanatkumara, and 
Sanaka).
Sanathana Dharma . Eternal religion. A descriptive term for what has come to be called Hinduism. It has no 
single founder or text of its own. It is more a commonwealth of religious faiths and a way of life.
Sankara . Another name for Siva (means beneficent, conferring happiness).
Sankara . Also Sankaracharya . Celebrated philosopher, preceptor of non-dualistic Vedanta . Defeated all reli -
gious opponents in debates throughout India.
sankhya . One of six leading systems of spiritual Vedic  philosophy, attributed to Kapila. Chief object: the eman -
cipation of soul from the bonds of worldly existence. Measurement, calculation, number.
santha-bhakthi . Peaceful devotion.
santhi . Peace, equanimity, serenity, tranquility.
santhosha . Peace, contentment, happiness.64
Prasanthi Vahini Glossarysanyasa . Renunciation-detachment, mendicancy.
sanyasi . Also sanyasin . Renunciant, mendicant.
sat. Existence, being, good, real.
sat-chit-ananda . Existence-knowledge-bliss, or being-awareness-bliss.
sat-guna . Virtuous quality.
sathwa . One of the three gunas  (qualities and dispositions) of maya  or prakriti . It is the quality of purity, bright -
ness, peace, and harmony. It leads to knowledge. Man is exhorted to overcome thamas  by rajas  and rajas  by 
sathwa  and finally to go beyond sathwa  itself to attain liberation.
sathwic . Adjective form of sathwa ; serene, pure, good, balanced.
sathya . Truth.
savam . Corpse.
Sita. Wife of Rama; brought up by King Janaka  who found her in a box in the earth. Also, a tributary of the 
Ganga, flowing westward.
siva. Also sivam . Temple, the divine; refers to Siva. Also, grace, auspiciousness, goodness.
Siva. The Destroyer, the Third of the Hindu Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and Siva 
(the Destroyer).
Sivam . The divine —Siva.  Also temple; see siva.
Sivanandalahari . Spiritual poetic work in adoration of Siva by Sankaracharya.
soucha . Purity, cleanliness.
sraddha . Faith.
sthula . Gross, material, superficial.
sudra . Labourer, the fourth caste of workers. See Caste.
Suka . Divine son of author of the Mahabharatha , Vyasa. Visited King Janaka, who instructed him in the path to 
liberation.
sukshma . Subtle.
surya . The sun.
Surya . The sun god, the father of time. A name for the sun. Also, son of Kasyapa and father of 
Manu. swadhyaya . Study of religious scriptures, especially the Vedas .
tapas . Concentrated spiritual exercises to attain God, penance, severe austerities.
tejas . Spiritual power, splendour.
thamas . One of the gunas  (qualities and dispositions) of maya  or prakriti . It is the quality of dullness, inertia, 
darkness and tendency to evil. It results in ignorance.
thamasic . Adjective form of thamas , dull, ignorant, passive.
thamoguna . Quality of dullness, ignorance, delusion, inactivity, inertia, sloth. Associated with colour black. See 
guna .
Thath . That, the Godhead.
Thathwa . Principle, truth, essence. That-this entity. Thathwa  is regarded as made up of That ( Thath ) and you 
(twam ).65
Prasanthi Vahini Glossarythwam . Thou, You, This, the individual.
Thyagaraja . 18th and 19th century mystic singer/ composer. Leader in Karnatak tradition of classical Indian 
music. Born in Thanjavur District of south India.
Tukaram . Well-known Maratha 17th century writer. He abandoned the world and became a wandering ascetic.
Upanishads . The very sacred portions of the Vedas  that deal with God, humanity, and universe, their nature and 
interrelationships. Spiritual knowledge ( jnana ) is their content, so they form the Jnana-kanda  of the Vedas .
vaak . V ocal organs, word, word of mouth.
vahini . Stream or flow.
vairagya . Detachment, renunciation.
varna . Caste.
varna dharma . The Hindu community is divided into four social groups, or castes ( varnas ), based on qualities 
(gunas ) and vocations: (1) Brahmana  (the brahmins ), the custodian of spiritual and moral role), (2) kshatriya , 
the warrior group, which rules and defends the land), (3) vaisya , the group dealing with commerce, business, 
and trade, and (4) sudra , the group devoted to labour and service to the community. Each varna  has its own 
dharmic  restrictions and regulations that strive to canalise impulses and instinct into fields that are special to 
their place in society, controls pertaining to the duties of the caste.
Varuna . Chief Rig-vedic  god associated with Mitra; god of rain, water, the ocean, night; a great sage.
vasana . Inclination, impression of anything remaining in the subconscious mind from past action.
Veda . Knowledge, wisdom. This knowledge is generally viewed as being given in the Vedas .
Vedanta . Means “the end of the Vedas ”. It is the essence of the Vedas  enshrined in the Upanishads . The philoso -
phy of non-dualism, or qualified non-dualism, or dualism based on the Upanishadic  teachings, is denoted by 
this term.
Vedantic . Of or pertaining to Vedanta .
vedanthin . Knower of Vedanta .
Vedas . The oldest and the holiest of the Hindu scriptures, the primary source of authority in Hindu religion and 
philosophy. They are four in number: the Rig-Veda , Sama-Veda , Yajur-Veda , and Atharva-Veda .
Vedic . Of your relating to the Vedas .
vichakshana . Discriminating intellect.
vichara . Inquiry, analysis and reflection of the nature of the Self or truth.
vidya . Spiritual education, spiritual knowledge, learning, that which illumines, that which gives light, supreme 
teaching.
vikasa . Expansion, blooming state.
Vishnu . The Preserver, the Second of the Hindu Trinity of Brahma (the Creator), Vishnu (the Preserver), and 
Siva (the Destroyer).
visishta-adwaitha . Qualified nondualism. The doctrine that men’s spirits of have a qualified or partial identity 
with God.
viveka . Discrimination.
Vyasa . Compiler of Vedas  and author of the Mahabharatha , Mahabhagavatham , and Brahma Sutra ..
yaga . Oblation, sacrifice, ceremony in which oblations are presented.66
Prasanthi Vahini Glossaryyajna . Holy ritual, sacrifice, or rite. Also, personification of rite (when capitalized).
Yajnavalkya . Great Upanishadic person. Priest and guru of King Janaka . Taught monistic adwaithic  doctrine of 
identity of Atma  and Brahman  in Brihadaranyaka Upanishad .
yama . Control of inner senses.
yoga . (a) Union of individual self or Atma  with Supreme Being or Universal Self; act of yoking. (b) Spiritual 
discipline or exercise aimed at control of the senses. (c) Science of divine communion. (d) self control. Patan -
jali’s Yoga-sutras define yoga  as a series of 8 steps leading to union with God.
Yoga Sutras . An aphoristic treatise on yoga  by Patanjali.
yogi. One who practices yoga .
yuga . Era or age. There is a cycle of four yugas : the Kritha yuga , Thretha yuga , Dwapara yuga , and Kali yuga . 
Present age is the Kali yuga .67
Prasanthi Vahini Glossary