Great	Epics	of	India:	Vedas
The	Rig	Veda
Bibek	Debroy
Dipavali	Debroy
Books	For	All
(An	Imprint	of	Low	Price	Publications)Delhi©	Publisher
All	rights,	including	the	right	to	translate	or	to	reproduce	this	book	or	parts
thereof	are	reserved.
Published	byBooks	For	All
(An	Imprint	of	Low	Price	Publications)
A-6,	2
nd
	Floor,	Nimri	Commercial	Centre,
Ashok	Vihar	Phase	4,	Delhi	110052	(INDIA)
tel.:	+91-11-27302453		fax.:	+91-11-47061936
e-mail:	info@LPPindia.com
website:	
www.LPPindia.comIntroduction
The	
Vedas	
are	ancient	texts	that	are	sacred	in	India	and	renowned	the	world
over.	The	word	
veda
	literally	means	knowledge.	The	root	is	
vid,
	‘to	know’.	The
Vedas	
are	thus	texts	that	provide	knowledge.
There	are	four	
Vedas,
	known	as	the	
Rig	Veda,
	the	
Yajur	Veda,
	the	
Sama
Veda
	and	the	
Atharva	Veda.
	Many	years	ago,	the	
Vedas
	were	referred	to	as	
trayi
or	three.	There	must	have	been	some	point	of	time	when	there	were	only	three
Vedas.
	These	are	acknowledged	to	have	been	the	
Rig	Veda,
	the	
Yajur	Veda
	and
the	
Sama	Veda.
	The	
Atharva	Veda
	is	believed	to	have	been	a	later	addition	to	the
sacred	canon.
Each	of	the	
Vedas
	has	two	parts,	a	
samhita
	and	the	
brahmanas.
	The
samhita
	part	consists	of	
mantras
	or	incantations.	These	were	hymns	that	were
used	in	sacrifices.	But	these	
mantras
	are	difficult	to	interpret	without
commentaries.	This	is	what	the	
brahmanas
	set	out	to	do.	They	explain	the
hymns	and	indicate	how	these	are	to	be	used	in	sacrifices.	The	
brahmanas
	also
have	detailed	descriptions	of	sacrifices	and	how	they	are	to	be	conducted.	The
samhitas
	and	the	
brahmanas	
are	often	known	as	
karma	kanda,
	that	is,	the	part	of
the	
Vedas
	that	deals	with	rituals.
In	addition,	Vedic	literature	also	includes	
jnana	kanda.
	This	is	the	part	that
deals	with	supreme	knowledge.	Included	in	
jnana	kanda
	are	the	
aranyakas	
and
the	
upanishads.
	These	are	identified	with	various	
Vedas.
We	can	therefore	have	a	narrow	definition	of	a	
Veda
	as	well	as	a	broad	one.
The	narrow	definition	would	take	the	word	
Veda
	to	mean	the	
samhita
	alone.	The
broad	definition	would	include,	in	addition,	associated	
brahmanas,	aranyakas
and	
upanishads.
	By	the	word	
Veda,
	here	we	mean	the	
samhita
	alone.	That	is,
when	we	are	retelling	the	
Rig	Veda,
	we	are	retelling	the	
Rig	Veda	Samhita.
When	were	the	
Vedas
	composed	and	who	composed	them?	Strictly
speaking,	there	is	no	answer	to	these	questions.	The	
Vedas
	were	revealed;	they
were	
shrutis.	
They	were	not	written	down	or	composed.	They	were
communicated	by	the	supreme	godhead	or	the	divine	essence	(
brahman)
	to	the
ancient	seers	(
rishis
).	These	
rishis
	did	not	compose	the	
Vedas;
	they	merely
obtained	this	divine	knowledge	through	their	extraordinary	powers.	In	this	sense,
the	
Vedas
	are	
apourusheya.
	Their	authorship	cannot	be	ascribed	to	any	human
author.Just	as	it	is	impossible	to	determine	
who
	composed	the	
Vedas,
	it	is	also
impossible	to	determine	
when
	they	were	composed.	Widely	different	dates	have
been	suggested	by	scholars.	Tilak	suggested	a	date	of	around	6000	B.C.,	while
Jacobi’s	date	was	around	4500	B.C.	Most	scholars	would	agree	that	the	
Vedas
were	compiled	sometime	between	4000	B.C.	and	1000	B.C.	and	that	it	is
impossible	to	narrow	down	the	range	further.	The	earliest	of	the	
Vedas
	is	clearly
the	
Rig	Veda.
	This	reached	a	stage	of	final	compilation	between	1000	B.C.	and
900	B.C.The	Rig	Veda	Samhita
It	is	first	important	to	understand	that	there	were	four	classes	of	priests	who
were	required	at	any	sacrifice,	or	
yajna.
	The	first	class	consisted	of	the
officiating	priests	or	acolytes	(
hotri).
	They	invoked	the	gods	by	reciting	the
mantras,
	prepared	the	sacrificial	ground	and	the	altar,	and	poured	out	the
libations.	The	hymns	of	the	
Rig	Veda
	are	for	this	class	of	priests.	The	second
class	of	priests	consisted	of	the	choristers	(
udgatri
).	These	were	the	ones	who
chanted	the	sacred	hymns	and	the	hymns	of	the	
Sama	Veda
	are	for	this	class	of
priests.	The	third	class	of	priests	consisted	of	the	reciters	(
adhvaryu
).	They
carried	out	sacrificial	rites	while	chanting	the	sacred	texts	and	the	hymns	of	the
Yajur	Veda
	are	for	this	class	of	priests.	The	fourth	class	of	priests	consisted	of
brahmana
	overseers.	They	supervised	the	sacrifice	and	the	hymns	of	the	
Atharva
Veda
	are	for	this	class	of	priests.
The	
Rig	Veda
	derives	its	name	from	the	word	
rik,	
which	means	a	
mantra.
There	are	10,589	verses	in	the	
Rig	Veda	Samhita.
	These	are	divided	into	ten
mandalas	
or	books.	Each	of	the	
mandalas
	is	subdivided	into	
anuvakas
	(lessons)
and	
suktas
	(hymns).	The	ten	
mandalas
	have	85	
anuvakas,
	1080	
suktas
	and
10,589	verses.	There	is	also	a	
valakhilya
	section	or	supplement.	This	seems	to
have	been	a	later	addition.
Let	us	now	see	what	the	
Rig	Veda
	has	to	say.	Since	the	
Rig	Veda
	is	fairly
long,	we	will	have	to	be	selective.	We	cannot	be	exhaustive.Mandala	One
(This	
mandala
	has	181	
suktas
	and	2006	
mantras.	
The	bulk	of	the	
mantras
are	addressed	to	Indra.	Agni	comes	next	in	order	of	importance.)Agni
(Agni	is	the	fire-god.	It	is	to	Agni	that	oblations	in	a	sacrifice	are	offered.
Agni	is	regarded	as	a	messenger	who	summons	the	other	gods	to	the	sacrifice
and	carries	the	offerings	to	them.	This	particular	hymn	is	ascribed	to	a	sage
named	Madhuchhanda	Vaishvamitra.	He	was	descended	from	the	famous	sage
Vishvamitra.	Various	hymns	follow	various	metres	and	this	one	is	in	the	
gayatri
metre.)
I	pray	to	Agni.	He	advances	to	the	front	so	that	he	can	bring	about	the
welfare	of	men.	It	is	Agni	who	makes	the	sacrifice	a	success.	This	is	a	sacrifice
that	is	being	performed	according	to	the	rites	of	the	season.	Agni	is	the
prosperous	one.	He	will	summon	the	gods	to	this	sacrifice.
Agni	has	been	praised	by	many	sages	of	earlier	times.	He	is	being	praised
by	the	sages	who	are	here	now.	May	Agni	bring	the	gods	to	this	sacrifice.
Every	day,	men	will	obtain	nourishment	from	Agni.	They	will	certainly
obtain	fame,	valour	and	riches.
O	Agni!	This	is	a	non-violent	sacrifice	that	is	being	performed.	Make	it
successful	from	every	direction.	May	we	be	able	to	attain	the	proximity	of	the
gods.
You	are	the	one	who	will	summon	the	gods.	You	are	the	one	who	will
ensure	that	the	sacrifice	is	successfully	completed.	You	are	the	one	who	inspires
learned	men	to	action.	O	Agni!	Many	are	your	forms	and	you	are	always
truthful.	You	are	the	radiant	one	who	has	performed	wonderous	deeds.	Agni	has
come	to	the	sacrifice	with	the	other	gods.
O	my	beloved	Agni!	You	ensure	the	welfare	of	those	who	give	alms.	You
are	the	one	who	is	present	in	every	portion	of	our	anatomy.	The	acts	you	perform
are	the	ones	that	are	truly	righteous.
O	Agni!	We	pray	to	you	always,	night	and	day.	May	we	use	our
intelligence	to	come	close	to	you.
You	are	the	radiant	one.	You	are	the	protector	of	non-violent	sacrifices.
You	are	the	one	who	manifests	the	immutable	truth.	We	bow	in	obeisance	before
Agni	and	come	close	to	him.	He	will	make	our	houses	prosper.
O	Agni!	You	are	the	famous	one.	We	are	like	your	sons;	be	like	a	father
unto	us.	Grant	us	happiness	and	ensure	our	welfare.	Aid	us	in	our	endeavours.Vayu
(Vayu	is	the	god	of	the	wind.	This	hymn	is	also	ascribed	to	the	sage
Madhuchhanda	Vaishvamitra.	And	this	too,	is	in	the	
gayatri
	metre.)
O	Vayu!	You	are	the	one	who	is	fit	to	be	seen.	Come	here.	This	
soma
	juice
has	been	prepared	for	you.	Drink	the	
soma
	juice	and	listen	to	our	prayers.
O	Vayu!	The	learned	priests	are	well-versed	in	the	knowledge	of	which
days	are	auspicious	and	which	are	not.	They	have	prepared	the	
soma
	juice	on	an
auspicious	day.	The	choristers	are	singing	your	praise	through	their	hymns.
O	Vayu!	These	great	words	are	being	addressed	to	you.	You	are	the	great
one.	You	are	the	one	who	grants	boons.	We	desire	that	you	may	drink	this	
soma
juice.
O	Indra!	O	Vayu!	This	is	
soma
	juice	that	has	been	prepared.	Take	great
care	in	coming	here.	This	
soma	
juice	wishes	to	be	united	with	you.
O	Vayu!	You	and	Indra	know	well	the	wonderful	properties	of	the	
soma
juice.	You	are	the	ones	who	have	an	abundance	of	riches	and	foodgrains.	Come
here	quickly.
O	Vayu!	You	and	Indra	are	the	leaders.	You	are	always	in	the	forefront.
Use	your	wisdom	to	come	here	quickly.	Accept	the	
soma
	juice	that	has	been
extracted.
I	call	upon	the	powerful	god	Mitra.	I	call	upon	the	god	Varuna	who	is	the
destroyer	of	enemies.	Through	their	benevolent	wisdom,	may	they	enable	our
tasks	to	be	completed.
Mitra	and	Varuna	are	always	connected	with	truth.	They	are	the	ones	who
enhance	the	truth.	They	will	use	the	power	of	truth	to	make	the	sacrifice	a
success.
Mitra	and	Varuna	are	omnipresent.	They	are	learned	and	powerful.	They
will	provide	us	the	strength	that	will	inspire	us	to	action.
(Although	the	hymn	is	basically	addressed	to	Vayu,	Indra,	Mitra	and
Varuna	also	figure	in	it.	Indra	is	the	chief	god	of	the	
Vedas.
	He	rules	over	the
atmosphere	(
antariksha
),	the	intervening	region	between	the	earth	(
prithivi
)	and
heaven	(
dyuloka
).	Indra	kills	the	demons	with	his	weapon	
vajra.
	In	particular,	he
killed	the	demon	Vritra.	Mitra	is	an	aspect	of	the	sun	that	presided	over	the	day.
Correspondingly,	Varuna	presided	over	the	night.	
Soma
	juice	was	extracted	fromthe	
soma	
herb,	the	herbs	having	been	collected	by	moonlight.	The	herbs	were
crushed	to	extract	the	juice,	which	was	next	purified	by	straining.	The	purified
juice	was	mixed	with	water,	milk	and	flour	and	offered	to	the	gods).Indra
(This	hymn	is	also	ascribed	to	Madhuchhanda	Vaishamitra	and	the	metre
continues	to	be	
gayatri.)
O	friends!	You	who	are	desirous	of	performing	a	sacrifice.	Come	here	and
be	seated.	Sing	the	praise	of	the	great	Indra.
When	you	are	seated	and	have	begun	to	extract	the	
soma
	juice,	praise	the
wonderful	qualities	of	the	great	lndra.	He	is	the	one	who	has	destroyed	many
enemies.	He	is	the	one	who	is	the	lord	of	a	lot	of	riches.
Indra	will	certainly	grant	us	an	abundance	of	riches.	Indra	will	grant	us
riches	and	a	lot	of	wisdom.	He	will	come	to	us	with	an	abundant	supply	of	food
grains.
When	there	is	a	battle,	enemies	are	not	even	able	to	touch	Indra’s	horses.
His	chariot	cannot	be	touched.	Sing	his	praise.
This	
soma
	juice	has	been	extracted	and	pure	curds	have	been	mixed	with	it.
This	is	the	juice	that	deserves	to	be	drunk.	It	will	be	united	with	Indra.
O	Indra!	You	are	the	performer	of	wonderful	deeds.	You	are	the	great	one
who	drinks	the	
soma
	juice.	You	become	great	so	as	to	perform	these	wonderful
deeds.
O	lndra!	You	are	the	one	who	deserves	to	be	praised.	May	the	
soma
	juice,
which	is	a	source	of	inspiration,	be	united	with	you.	May	it	gladden	your	heart.
O	brave	one!	You	are	the	performer	of	several	wonderful	deeds.	May	these
hymns	enhance	your	greatness	and	increase	your	fame.	May	our	words	increase
your	fame.
O	Indra!	You	have	the	unlimited	power	to	protect.	Partake	of	these
offerings	of	food	grains.	All	forms	of	strength	can	be	found	in	these	offerings.
O	Indra!	You	are	the	one	who	deserves	to	be	praised.	May	the	soldiers	of
the	enemy	not	be	able	to	harm	our	bodies.	You	are	the	lord	of	all	that	there	is.
Please	keep	the	weapons	of	the	enemies	at	a	distance.The	Ribhus
(The	Angirasa	formed	an	important	priestly	family.	In	this	line	was	born	a
sage	named	Sudhanva.	Sudhanva	had	three	sons	named	Ribhu,	Vibhvan	and
Vaja.	These	three	were	collectively	referred	to	as	the	Ribhus.	Their	deeds	were
such	that	they	were	elevated	to	the	status	of	gods.	This	hymn	is	ascribed	to	the
sage	Medhatithi,	son	of	the	sage	Kanva.	The	metre	is	
gayatri.)
The	learned	recited	the	words	of	this	hymn	with	their	own	mouths.	So
sacred	is	this	hymn	that	it	gives	birth	to	a	cluster	of	jewels.	This	hymn	is
addressed	to	the	Ribhus,	the	ones	who	had	divine	births.
The	Ribhus	were	very	skilled.	They	trained	two	horses	so	that	the	horses
could	follow	instructions	given	by	signs.	The	Ribhus	gave	Indra	these	horses.
The	Ribhus	will	come	to	every	sacrifice.
The	Ribhus	constructed	a	beautiful	and	swift	chariot	for	the	Ashvinis.	They
made	the	cows	yield	a	lot	of	milk.
The	Ribhus	were	righteous	and	straightforward	in	conduct.	They	travelled
in	all	the	directions	and	they	made	their	aged	parents	young	again.
O	Ribhus!	This	
soma
	juice	is	being	offered	for	your	pleasure.	Come	and
savour	it	with	Indra,	the	Maruts	and	the	other	gods.
Tvashta	made	only	one	ladle.	But	the	Ribhus,	with	their	skills,	made	four
sacrificial	ladles	out	of	that.
(Tvashta	was	the	architect	of	the	gods.	It	has	been	suggested	that	the	Ribhus
were	Tvashta’s	disciples.)
May	the	Ribhus	be	pleased	with	our	prayers.	May	they	come	to	our
sacrifice	and	accept	the	
soma
	juice	that	the	priests	have	offered.	May	they	grant
us	twenty-one	types	of	riches.
(Twenty-one	simply	signifies	a	large	number.)
The	energy	of	the	Ribhus	rivals	that	of	Agni.	Through	their	deeds,	the
Ribhus	came	to	be	accepted	as	gods.	They	are	entitled	to	a	share	of	the	oblations
made	at	sacrifices.Varuna
(This	hymn	is	ascribed	to	a	sage	named	Shunahshepa.	He	was	the	son	of	the
sage	Ajigarta.	The	metre	in	which	this	hymn	is	composed	is	
gayatri.)
O	Varuna!	Other	men	commit	sin.	We	are	no	different,	we	too	commit	sin.
We	violate	your	commandments	every	day.
Your	anger	is	terrible.	You	raise	your	weapon	to	kill	those	who	sin	and
those	who	violate	you.	But	despite	the	sins	we	have	committed,	spare	us	from
your	anger.
O	Varuna!	A	charioteer	pacifies	his	horses	when	they	are	tired.	Like	that
brave	warrior,	we	use	these	hymns	to	pacify	your	anger.	May	you	look	upon	us
with	favour	and	may	you	grant	us	happiness.
A	bird	flies	here	and	there	and	finally	returns	to	its	nest.	Like	that,	my	mind
and	my	heart	roam	here	and	there	in	search	of	riches.	(What	is	left	implicit	is
that	the	mind	and	the	heart	seek	refuge	with	Varuna	after	the	pursuit	of	riches	is
over.)
Varuna	is	the	source	of	all	valour.	Varuna	is	the	source	of	all	good	fortune.
Varuna	is	the	one	who	sees	everything.	We	desire	to	ensure	our	happiness.	Who
can	we	pray	to	but	Varuna?
Mitra	and	Varuna	are	the	gods	who	wish	to	elevate	those	who	observe
religious	rites.	They	elevate	those	who	give	alms.	Mitra	and	Varuna	will	partake
of	the	oblations	we	have	offered.	They	will	never	desert	their	devotees.
These	two	gods	know	the	ways	of	the	birds	that	fly	in	the	atmosphere.	They
know	the	ways	of	the	boats	that	travel	in	the	oceans.
Varuna	is	the	god	who	follows	the	proper	rites.	He	is	acquainted	with	the
twelve	months	that	bring	prosperity	to	the	subjects.	He	knows	well	the	thirteenth
month	that	comes	in	between.
(The	twelve	lunar	months	add	up	to	360	days.	Therefore,	a	supplementary
and	intercalary	thirteenth	month	has	to	be	introduced	every	sixth	year	to	bring
conformity	between	the	solar	and	the	lunar	years.)
Varuna	knows	the	ways	of	the	great	and	fast	winds.	He	knows	well	the
ways	of	the	gods	who	rule.
Varuna	observes	the	proper	rites.	He	is	the	performer	of	excellent	deeds.	He
comes	amidst	his	subjects	so	that	kingdoms	may	flourish.He	is	the	one	who	knows	how	extraordinary	deeds	are	to	be	performed.	He
knows	what	has	been	done	and	what	remains	to	be	done.	He	is	the	one	who	sees
everything.
Varuna	is	the	son	of	Aditi.	He	is	the	performer	of	wonderous	deeds.	May
Varuna	guide	us	along	the	righteous	path.	May	he	increase	our	life	expectancy.
Varuna	is	the	one	who	wears	a	golden	gown.	On	top	of	this,	he	dons
clothings	that	radiate	energy.	The	rays	of	the	sun	spread	out	in	the	four
directions	and	are	his	messengers.
The	evil	ones	who	are	assassins	can	bring	no	harm	to	Varuna.	Those	who
bear	hatred	in	their	hearts	can	bring	no	harm	to	Varuna.	Enemies	can	bring	no
harm	to	the	great	god.
He	is	the	one	who	brings	fame	to	mankind.	He	is	the	one	who	brings
fruition	to	all	action.	He	is	the	one	who	created	our	wonderful	digestive	systems.
Varuna	is	a	witness	to	everything.	When	our	intelligence	is	elevated,	we
wish	to	attain	his	proximity,	the	way	a	cow	desires	closeness	to	a	pasture.
I	have	brought	you	offerings	of	honey.	May	these	offerings	be	as	beloved	to
you	as	the	officiating	priest	himself.	Accept	this	honey.	And	after	you	have	eaten
it,	you	and	I	will	sit	together	and	converse.
I	have	seen	the	god	whose	glory	can	be	seen	everywhere	in	the	universe.	I
have	seen	his	chariot	travel	on	the	ground.	He	has	accepted	my	prayers.
O	Varuna!	Listen	to	my	prayers.	Make	us	happy	today.	We	seek	your
protection.	Grant	it	to	us.
O	god!	You	are	the	one	who	manifests	himself	through	wisdom.	You	rule
over	earth,	heaven	and	the	rest	of	the	universe.	Listen	to	our	prayers	and	grant	us
our	wishes.
Remove	all	the	bondage	that	we	suffer	from.	Free	us.	And	grant	us	long
lives.The	Ashvinis
(The	two	Ashvinis	were	gods	whose	identities	are	not	very	clear.	They
brought	light	to	the	morning	sky.	They	were	probably	two	stars,	one	identified
with	the	morning	and	the	other	with	the	evening.	They	were	subsequently
characterised	as	the	physicians	of	the	gods.	This	hymn	is	ascribed	to	a	sage
named	Hiranyastupa,	son	of	the	sage	Angirasa.	The	metre	is	partly	
jagati
	and
partly	
trishtupa.)
O	learned	Ashvinis!	We	are	performing	three	sacrifices	today.	Come	and	be
with	us	on	the	occasion.	The	two	of	you	travel	on	a	chariot	that	is	huge	and
greatness	characterises	your	generous	hearts.	You	are	as	intimately	connected
with	us	as	clothing	is	connected	to	the	coldness	of	winter.	Those	who	are	learned
can	easily	attain	proximity	to	you.
The	chariot	of	the	Ashvinis	bears	honey	and	three	wheels	are	attached	to
the	chariot.	(This	is	a	reference	to	the	three	daily	sacrifices	that	are	held).
Everyone	knows	that	the	two	of	you	desire	to	partake	of	the	
soma
	juice.	Three
are	the	pillars	that	hold	up	your	chariot.	And	you	travel	thrice	during	the	day	and
thrice	during	the	night.
O	Ashvinis!	You	are	the	ones	who	forgive	all	sins.	Today	we	will	perform
three	sacrifices.	Come	here	and	make	our	sacrifices	overflow	with	honey.
Morning	and	evening,	grant	us	three	offerings	of	food	grains.
O	Ashvinis!	Come	to	our	household	thrice.	Come	thrice	to	your	devotees.
Come	thrice	to	those	who	deserve	to	be	protected.	Come	thrice	and	increase	our
learning.	The	two	of	you	will	bring	us	wonderful	objects	three	times.	You	will
thrice	nourish	us	by	bringing	food	grains	and	other	objects.
O	Ashvinis!	You	will	come	to	the	sacrifice	thrice.	You	will	bring	us	riches
thrice.	Three	are	the	occasions	on	which	you	will	protect	and	preserve	our
sacrifices.	You	will	thrice	bring	us	riches	and	foodgrains.	Your	chariot	has	three
wheels.	And	the	daughter	of	the	sun	sits	in	your	chariot.	(The	Ashvinis	were
married	to	the	sun's	daughter.)
O	Ashvinis!	You	are	the	ones	who	ensure	the	performance	of	righteous
deeds.	Grant	us	thrice,	medicines	from	heaven.	Grant	us	thrice,	herbs	from	the
earth.	Grant	us	thrice,	herbs	from	the	water.	Grant	protection	and	happiness	to
our	sons.	Grant	them	a	proper	balance	of	the	three	constituents.
(The	three	constituents	(
dhatu
)	of	the	human	body	are	
vata
	(wind),	
pitta(bile)	and	
kafa
	(phlegm).	When	these	are	in	perfect	balance,	a	person	is	well.)
O	Ashvinis!	You	are	the	ones	who	deserve	to	be	worshipped.	The	earth	is
the	altar	on	which	we	perform	three	sacrifices	every	day.	Come	on	your	chariot
and	be	seated	here	thrice.	You	are	the	protectors	of	the	truth.	You	may	be	far
away.	But	like	the	breath	of	life	that	unites	with	the	
atman
	(the	human	soul),
come	and	be	united	with	us.
O	Ashvinis!	There	are	seven	sacred	rivers.	The	vessels	have	been	filled
thrice	with	water	from	these	sacred	rivers.	The	oblations	have	been	divided	into
three.	The	two	of	you	travel	in	the	three	worlds	(
loka
).	You	are	the	ones	who
protect	divine	happiness	during	night	and	day.
(The	seven	sacred	rivers	were	Indus	(Sindhu),	Vitasta,	Asikli,	Parushni,
Vipasha,	Shatadru	and	Sarasvati.	The	three	
lokas
	were	the	earth	
(prithivi
),	the
atmosphere	(
antariksha)
	and	heaven	(
dyuloka
).)
O	gods	who	ensure	that	truth	prevails!	Where	are	the	three	pillars	that	hold
up	your	chariot?	Where	are	its	three	wheels?	When	will	powerful	donkeys	be
harnessed	to	your	chariot?	When	will	you	climb	into	your	chariot	and	come
here?
O	Nasatyas!	The	oblations	have	been	poured	into	the	fire.	Come	here.
Drink	the	sweet	
soma
	juice	with	your	mouths.	Wonderful	are	the	decorations	on
your	chariot.	Before	the	onset	of	dawn,	the	sun	sends	your	chariot	to	the
sacrifice.
(Nasatyas	is	another	name	for	the	Ashvinis.	Literally,	the	word	means	one
who	preserves	the	truth.	Sacrifices	were	begun	at	the	stroke	of	dawn.)
O	Nasatyas!	Come	with	the	thirty-three	gods	to	drink	the	
soma
	juice	we
have	offered.	Grant	us	long	lives	and	purify	us	of	our	sins.	Stay	with	us	and
purge	us	of	all	thoughts	of	enmity.
O	Ashvinis!	Three	are	the	pillars	that	hold	up	your	chariot.	Bring	us	riches
in	that	chariot.	Bring	us	valour.	We	call	upon	you	for	protection	and	happiness.
Increase	our	intelligence	at	the	time	of	battle.
(The	thirty-three	gods	included	eight	Vasus,	eleven	Rudras	and	twelve
Adityas.	This	adds	up	to	thirty-one.	The	remaining	two	are	sometimes	identified
as	Prajapati	and	Vashatkar.)The	Vishvadevas
(The	‘Vishvadevas’	was	a	general	expression	which	signified	all	the	gods
collectively.	Sometimes	the	suggestion	however	is	that	Vishvadevas	were	a
special	group	of	gods.	In	the	hymn	that	follows,	most	verses	are	addressed	to	the
Vishvadevas,	although	other	gods	are	also	mentioned.	This	hymn	is	important	as
it	includes	a	phrase	that	is	often	quoted.	
Ekam	sad	vipra	vahudha	vadanti
	-	truth
is	one,	but	the	learned	speak	of	it	in	various	ways.	The	hymn	is	ascribed	to	the
sage	Dirghatama,	the	son	of	the	sage	Ouchathya.	The	metres	that	figure	are
trishtupa,	jagati,	prastarapamkti	
and	
anushtupa.)
Surya	is	the	beautiful	one.	He	is	the	one	who	rules	over	everything	and
sucks	out	the	juices	from	the	earth.	The	brother	who	is	in	the	middle	pervades
everything.	The	younger	brother	has	a	radiant	back	and	his	back	is	sprinkled
with	clarified	butter.	I	have	seen	the	one	who	rules	over	the	world	through	his
seven	sons.
(Surya	is	the	god	of	the	sun.	The	three	brothers	are	Surya,	Vayu	and	Agni.
Surya	rules	in	
dyuloka
	and	is	the	eldest.	Vayu	rules	in	
antariksha
	and	is	the
brother	who	is	in	the	middle.	Agni	rules	on	
prithivi
	and	is	the	youngest	brother.
The	seven	sons	are	Surya's	seven	rays	with	which	Surya	governs	the	world.)
Surya's	chariot	has	only	one	wheel,	but	seven	horses	are	harnessed	to	it.
Although	there	seem	to	be	seven	horses,	there	is	actually	only	one	horse	with
seven	names.	The	immortal	and	constant	wheel	has	three	naves.	It	is	through	this
wheel	that	the	entire	universe	is	established.
(The	seven	horses	are	again	the	seven	rays	of	the	sun,	which	actually	are
but	one.	The	three	naves	have	been	identified	as	the	seasons	autumn,	summer
and	monsoon.)
Seven	are	the	rays	that	sit	astride	the	sun’s	chariot.	Seven	are	the	wheels
and	seven	the	horses	that	Surya	uses	to	drive	through	time.	Seven	are	the	forms
of	speech	that	worship	the	sun.	The	seven	sisters	praise	Surya	in	the	four
directions.
(The	seven	wheels	refer	to	different	periods	into	which	time	is	divided.
These	are	
ayana
	(six	months),	
ritu
	(season),	
masa
	(month),	
paksha
	(fortnight),
dina	
(day),	
rata
	(night)	and	
muhurta
	(roughly	equivalent	to	an	hour).	The	seven
forms	of	speech	are	the	seven	major	metres.	The	seven	sisters	could	be	these
metres.	Alternatively,	they	could	be	the	seven	sacred	rivers.)He	who	has	no	bones	created	all	living	beings	that	have	bones.	Did	anyone
see	him	being	created?	Where	then	were	to	be	found	the	life,	the	blood	and	the
soul	of	the	earth?	Who	is	the	learned	one	who	knows	the	answers	to	these
questions?
(This	refers	to	the	creation	and	the	one	with	no	bones	is	Prajapati,	the
creator.	The	life	of	the	earth	is	the	wind,	the	blood	is	the	water,	and	the	soul	is
the	sun.	The	sense	is	that	these	were	not	present	prior	to	creation.)
I	am	the	one	whose	learning	is	incomplete.	Yet,	with	all	due	humility,	I
wish	to	know	how	the	gods	were	created.	The	learned	ones	used	seven	different
types	of	thread	to	create	the	universe	that	can	be	seen	and	lived	in.
(The	learned	ones	are	the	gods.	They	created	the	universe	with	seven
threads	-	mind,	life,	earth,	water,	energy,	wind	and	the	sky.)
He	who	created	the	six	regions	of	the	universe	is	Prajapati.	He	himself	was
not	born.	Who	can	comprehend	the	nature	of	Prajapati?	I	am	the	ignorant	one,
but	I	wish	to	learn	of	this	knowledge.	I	will	resort	to	the	learned	for	wisdom.
(Three	
lokas
	or	regions	have	already	been	mentioned.	There	is	a	reference
here	to	three	additional	regions	that	are	above	these.)
Surya	is	handsome	and	always	mobile.	Who	knows	of	the	origin	of	the	sun?
Let	that	learned	one	come	here	and	reveal	to	me	the	knowledge.	The	supreme
rays	of	the	sun	suck	up	the	water	from	the	earth.	The	water	is	borne	by	the	sun
and	is	then	rained	down	on	earth.
The	earth	is	the	mother	and	heaven	is	the	father.	They	had	united	to	bring
about	the	cosmic	act	of	creation.	The	earth	bore	the	food	grains	in	her	womb.
May	those	who	desire	food	grains	worship	the	earth.
It	is	the	sun’s	powers	of	preservation	that	bear	up	the	earth.	The	calf	saw
the	many	forms	of	the	cow	in	the	three	worlds	and	began	to	call.	It	was	then	that
the	seed	was	implanted	in	the	womb	of	the	earth.
(The	cow	symbolises	the	rays	of	the	sun	that	create	clouds	and	rain,	and	the
clouds	are	the	calf.	The	calling	of	the	calf	indicated	thunder	and	then	it	began	to
rain.	It	is	this	rain	that	leads	to	the	seed	of	food	grains	being	implanted	in	the
womb	of	the	earth.)
Prajapati	alone	bears	aloft	the	three	mothers	and	the	three	fathers.	He	bears
them,	but	is	above	them	all.	He	is	untouched	by	misery.	He	knows	the	universe
and	rules	over	it,	but	himself	remains	unattached.	The	gods	who	populate	heavendebate	about	the	nature	of	Prajapati.
(The	three	mothers	are	heaven,	the	atmosphere	and	the	earth.	The	three
fathers	are	Surya,	Vayu	and	Agni.)
Twelve	are	the	spokes	(the	twelve	months)	on	the	sun's	wheel.	Surya's
wheel	traverses	heaven	in	the	four	directions.	It	never	wears	thin.	O	Agni!	The
seven	hundred	and	twenty	twin	sons	are	always	present.
(The	seven	hundred	and	twenty	twin	sons	are	the	three	hundred	and	sixty
days	and	three	hundred	and	sixty	nights	in	any	year.)
The	father	has	five	feet	and	twelve	forms.	Some	say	that	he	traverses	the
further	half	of	heaven.	Others	say	that	the	chariot	has	seven	wheels	and	six
spokes.
(This	is	difficult	to	interpret.	The	father	is	Surya.	He	traverses	the	further
half	of	heaven,	that	is,	the	sky	as	opposed	to	the	earth.	The	twelve	forms	are	the
twelve	months	and	the	five	feet	are	the	five	seasons	spring,	monsoon,	summer,
autumn	and	winter.	There	are	six	spokes	when	autumn	is	further	subdivided	into
early	autumn	and	late	autumn.	The	seven	wheels	are	the	seven	rays	of	the	sun.)
All	the	worlds	are	gathered	together	in	the	movement	of	the	wheel	with	the
five	spokes	(the	five	seasons).	No	matter	what	the	weight	may	be,	the	axle	of	the
wheel	never	gets	heated.	It	travels	perpetually	through	time,	but	never	breaks.
The	wheel	with	the	axle	is	like	the	universe	and	moves	all	the	time.	It	never
breaks.	When	nature	was	created,	the	chariot	began	to	be	drawn	by	ten	horses.
The	sun's	radiance	is	shrouded	in	water	and	it	is	the	sun	who	rules	over	all	the
worlds.
(The	ten	horses	are	intelligence,	mind,	heart,	ego,	the	earth,	water,	fire,
wind,	sky	and	the	soul.)
The	seven	elements	were	created	at	the	same	time.	They	have	the	same
origin,	that	is,	Prajapati.	Six	of	these	are	connected	to	one	another,	like	twins.
They	are	like	the	sages	who	were	created	by	the	gods.	In	six	of	them,
independent	sacrifices	are	held,	depending	on	the	occasion.	Although	the	seven
elements	function	independently,	they	were	created	at	the	same	time	and	have
the	same	origin.
(This	is	difficult	to	interpret.	The	six	who	are	connected	to	one	another
seem	to	be	the	six	seasons,	of	two	months	each.	The	seventh	element	is	the
thirteenth	intercalary	month.)The	rays	of	the	sun	have	both	masculine	and	feminine	traits.	He	who	has
the	eyes	of	learning	can	see	this.	He	who	is	blind	and	ignorant	never	realises
this.	Learned	sons	know	this	wisdom	and	become	so	learned	that	they	are	as
revered	as	fathers.
The	cow	(the	sun)	has	borne	her	calf	(the	clouds)	in	the	region	that	is	below
heaven	and	above	the	earth.	Who	knows	where	the	cow	travels?	And	who	knows
where	the	calf	is	born?	This	much	is	certain	that	the	calf	is	not	born	on	earth.
The	earth	is	below	heaven	and	Agni	is	the	ruler	of	the	earth.	Heaven	is
above	the	earth	and	Surya	is	the	ruler	of	heaven.	Who	knows	where	divine
minds	originate?	He	who	knows	the	answer	to	this	question	is	learned.	Let	him
come	here	and	tell	us	the	answer.
The	universe	is	in	constant	movement.	That	which	is	near	today,	is	far
tomorrow.	That	which	is	far	today,	is	near	tomorrow.	O	Soma!	You	and	Indra
have	created	the	paths	that	you	traverse.	Along	these	paths,	your	steeds	draw
your	chariots.	Thus	it	is	that	all	the	worlds	are	pulled.
(Soma	is	a	personification	of	the	
soma
	herb,	but	is	also	identified	with	the
moon-god.	In	this	context,	the	sun	is	being	referred	to	as	Indra.	That	is,	the	sun
and	the	moon	traverse	paths	across	the	sky).
The	two	birds	have	beautiful	wings.	They	sit	on	the	same	tree	and	are
friends.	One	of	the	birds	eats	the	sweet	fruit	that	grows	on	the	tree.	The	other
does	not	eat	the	fruit,	it	merely	manifests	itself.
(The	two	birds	are	the	divine	soul	
(paramatman)	
and	the	human	soul
(
atman
).	The	tree	is	the	world.	The	
paramatman
	and	the	
atman
	are	intimately
connected	with	each	other.	The	
atman
	savours	the	fruit	of	the	world,	that	is,	the
rewards	of	actions.	But	the	
paramatman
	does	not	savour	these	fruit.	It	remains	a
detached	and	passive	spectator.)
The	two	birds	with	beautiful	wings	sit	on	the	tree	and	pray	for	immortality
with	their	words.	May	the	learned	one	who	is	the	lord	of	the	universe	impart
wisdom	to	my	ignorant	heart.
The	two	birds	with	beautiful	wings	sit	on	the	tree	that	is	the	world.	They
create	all	living	beings	and	drink	the	honey	that	the	tree	provides.	Sweet	are	the
fruits	that	grow	in	the	upper	parts	of	the	tree.	But	he	who	does	not	know	the
nature	of	the	
paramatman,	
does	not	get	to	eat	these	fruits.
Gayatri
	is	established	on	
gayatri,	trishtupa
	is	established	on	
trishtupa
	andjagati
	is	established	on	
jagati.
	He	who	knows	this,	attains	the	immortality	that
knowledge	confers.
(
Gayatri,	trishtupa
	and	
jagati
	are	metres.	But	this	verse	is	interpreted	as
follows.	Agni	(the	first	
gayatri
)	has	been	established	on	earth	(the	second
gayatri).	
Vayu	(the	first	
trishtupa)
	has	been	established	in	the	atmosphere	(the
second	
trishtupa).
	Surya	(the	first	
jagati)
	has	been	established	in	heaven	(the
second	
jagati).)
Riks
	have	been	composed	in	the	
gayatri
	metre.	Many	
riks
	taken	together,
constitute	
sama
	hymns.	Hymns	have	also	been	composed	in	the	
trishtupa
	metre.
With	different	combinations	of	syllables,	the	seven	major	metres	can	be	formed.
Surya	is	the	speedy	one.	Through	the	sun,	Prajapati	ensured	that	there	is
always	water	in	heaven.	The	sun	is	united	with	the	earth	through	the	medium	of
rain.	It	is	said	that	the	sun	is	like	a	verse	that	has	three	components.	It	is	Surya
who	enhances	the	strength	and	greatness	of	Prajapati.
(The	three	components	of	the	sun	are	heaven,	the	atmosphere	and	the
earth.)
For	the	sacrifice,	I	call	upon	the	cow	which	yields	excellent	milk.	I	call
upon	the	person	who	will	milk	the	cow	with	his	hands.	May	Savita	(the	sun)
grant	me	a	plentiful	supply	of	milk.	May	the	containers	for	boiling	the	milk	be
heated.
The	cow	calls	to	her	beloved	calf.	She	yields	the	milk	that	will	ensure
prosperity	and	nourish	the	eight	Vasus.	This	cow	does	not	deserve	to	be	killed.
Milk	will	be	provided	for	the	Ashvinis.	May	the	cow	thrive	so	that	prosperity	is
ensured.
The	eyes	of	the	calf	are	closed.	The	cow	calls	and	goes	near	the	calf.	She
licks	its	head	and	drags	its	mouth	to	her	udders.	The	cow	calls.	Her	udders	are
warm.	She	will	satiate	the	calf	with	her	milk.
The	clouds	have	covered	the	sun's	rays	form	the	four	directions.	The	clouds
thunder.	The	lightning	that	is	in	the	clouds	roars.	Through	their	act	of	showering
rain,	the	clouds	ensure	that	mankind	thrives.	Once	it	rains,	the	clouds	shine	in
their	glory.
The	
atman
	is	always	mobile.	When	life	is	over,	the	
atman
	forsakes	the
physical	body	that	is	dead	and	enters	a	new	one.	The	
atman
	resides	with	the
physical	body,	but	is	itself	immortal.	Through	its	powers,	the	
atman
	moves	allthe	time.
I	have	seen	the	sun	which	never	falls	down.	I	have	seen	the	sun	which
travels	far	and	near.	I	have	seen	the	sun	who	is	the	protector.	The	sun	is	the	one
whose	energy	blazes	forth	in	the	four	directions.	The	sun	manifests	himself	in
the	world.
So	vast	is	the	universe	that	he	who	has	created	it	does	not	know	its	full
expanse.	When	the	
atman
	tries	to	visualise	the	universe,	the	universe	seems	to
disappear.	The	
atman
	is	born	in	the	mother's	womb.	It	has	many	offspring.	And
although	the	
atman
	is	itself	immortal,	the	physical	body	must	eventually	die.
Heaven	has	created	me	and	heaven	is	my	preserver.	Heaven	is	like	my
brother	and	is	the	fulcrum	of	my	being.	This	vast	earth	is	my	mother.	Heaven
and	earth	are	like	two	vessels	that	face	each	other.	The	sun	is	between	the	two.	It
is	the	sun	who	implants	the	seed	of	food	grains	in	the	womb	of	the	earth.
I	ask	you	about	the	end	of	this	earth.	I	ask	you	about	the	centre	of	this
universe.	I	ask	you	about	the	origin	of	horses.	I	ask	you	about	the	origin	of
speech.
This	sacrificial	altar	is	the	end	of	the	earth.	This	sacrifice	is	the	centre	of	the
universe.	
Soma
	is	the	origin	of	all	horses.	The	
brahman
	(the	divine	essence)	is
the	origin	of	all	speech.
(The	sacrificial	altar	is	the	end	of	the	earth	as	it	is	the	place	that	is	closest	to
heaven.	It	is	there	that	the	gods	come	to	meet	men.	The	
brahman
	is	used
synonymously	with	the	
paramatman.)
The	essence	of	the	universe	is	in	seven	sons.	They	follow	their	own	paths
according	to	the	instructions	received	from	the	supreme	godhead.	The	seven
sons	encompass	the	entire	universe.	There	is	nothing	that	is	beyond	their	reach.
(The	seven	sons	are	mind,	life	and	the	five	elements	of	earth,	water,	energy,
the	wind	and	the	sky.	Everything	in	the	universe	is	formed	out	of	these	seven
constituents.)
I	do	not	know	what	the	
atman
	may	be	compared	to.	The	
atman
	is
constrained	inside	the	physical	body,	but	the	mind	is	free	to	wander.	When	the
atman
	is	united	with	the	
paramatman
	and	realises	the	truth,	it	is	then	that	I	grasp
the	significance	of	these	words.
The	
atman
	is	immortal.	But	it	remains	with	the	mortal	body	through	its	own
powers.	The	
atman	
attains	higher	births	and	lower	ones.	The	physical	body	andthe	
atman
	are	together,	but	their	destinations	are	different.	People	can	easily	see
the	physical	body.	But	it	is	difficult	to	visualise	the	
atman.
The	
paramatman
	is	as	vast	as	the	sky	and	as	constant	as	the	syllables	of	the
riks.
	All	the	gods	are	to	be	found	in	the	
paramatman.
	What	use	are	the	
mantras
of	the	
Vedas
	to	someone	who	does	not	understand	the	nature	of	the	great
brahman
?	He	who	knows	the	
paramatman
	is	the	one	who	is	the	most	learned.
He	gets	to	sit	in	the	most	elevated	of	places.
O	cows!	You	do	not	deserve	to	be	killed.	Drink	the	purest	of	water	and	eat
the	best	of	grass.	May	you	have	good	fortune.	Roam	at	will.	May	we	also	have
good	fortune.
The	cow	(here	symbolising	clouds)	which	gives	water	has	thundered.
Sometimes	the	cow	has	one	foot,	sometimes	two,	sometimes	four,	sometimes
eight	and	sometimes	nine.	It	is	the	voice	of	heaven	itself	that	thunders	in	a
thousand	syllables.
(The	clouds	have	only	one	foot	when	they	thunder	only	from	the	cloud.
There	are	two	feet	when	the	thunder	is	heard	both	from	the	cloud	and	from	the
sky.	Similarly,	the	four	feet	refer	to	the	four	cardinal	points	and	the	eight	feet	to
the	four	cardinal	points	plus	the	four	intermediate	points.	Nine	feet	include,	in
addition,	the	zenith.)
From	the	cow,	the	oceans	flow.	It	is	because	of	the	cow	that	the	four
directions	prosper.	The	rains	shower	so	that	the	entire	universe	can	live.
From	a	great	distance,	I	have	seen	the	many	forms	of	powerful	smoke.	(I
therefore	know	that	there	must	be	a	fire.)	There	the	brave	ones	are	preparing	the
soma	
juice	that	is	the	source	of	strength.	This	is	what	must	always	be	done
before	any	major	task	is	embarked	on.
The	objects	with	three	rays	can	be	seen,	depending	on	the	season.	One	of
them	is	lit	once	every	year.	The	second	lights	up	the	entire	universe	with	its	rays.
The	movement	of	the	third	can	be	seen,	but	its	form	itself	remains	invisible.
(The	objects	with	three	rays	are	Agni,	Surya	and	Vayu.	The	flames	of	the
fire	were	lit	at	the	beginning	of	the	year	and	the	fire	was	not	put	out	throughout
the	year.	Surya's	rays	light	up	the	universe.	Vayu	is	the	one	who	remains
invisible,	although	the	movement	of	the	wind	can	be	seen.)
Speech	has	been	measured	out	in	four	divisions.	Learned	
brahmanas
	are
aware	of	this	division.	Three	of	these	divisions	remain	secret	and	do	not	appear.It	is	the	fourth	division	that	mankind	are	familiar	with.
(This	is	obscure,	but	the	meaning	seems	to	be	as	follows.	The	first	division
of	speech	is	its	origin.	The	second	division	of	speech	is	when	it	reaches	the
heart.	The	third	division	of	speech	is	when	it	reaches	the	brain.	These	three
divisions	cannot	be	seen.	The	fourth	and	final	division	of	speech	is	when	it
reaches	the	mouth.	This	is	the	one	that	can	be	seen,	or	felt.)
Truth	is	one	(the	
paramatman
).	Learned	people	refer	to	it	by	various	names.
Some	call	it	Indra,	others	Mitra,	others	Varuna	and	still	others	Agni.	It	is
referred	to	as	Yama	or	as	Matarishvan.	It	is	also	known	as	the	golden-winged
Garutman	(a	celestial	bird).
The	rays	of	the	sun	carry	water	up	into	the	sky.	The	water	next	descends
from	the	atmosphere	in	the	form	of	rain.	It	is	this	water	that	makes	the	earth	wet.
There	is	a	wheel	which	has	twelve	bounds	around	it.	The	wheel	has	three
naves	and	three	hundred	and	sixty	spokes.	Only	the	learned	ones	know	of	this.
(The	bounds	are	the	twelve	months.	The	naves	are	the	three	seasons	of
summer,	autumn	and	monsoon.	The	spokes	are	the	three	hundred	and	sixty
days.)
O	Sarasvati!	You	are	the	source	of	happiness.	Nurture	us	with	all	sorts	of
riches.	You	are	the	possessor	of	jewels,	you	are	the	one	who	grants	jewels.	You
grant	the	gifts	that	ensure	our	welfare.	May	you	look	upon	us	with	favour.
(Sarasvati	was	a	river.	It	was	only	later	that	she	came	to	be	identified	as	the
goddess	of	learning.)
The	gods	themselves	worship	the	
paramatman.
	The	worship	of	the
paramatman
	is	the	righteous	path.	He	who	follows	this	dictum	achieves	the	best
of	worlds,	where	there	is	perpetual	happiness.	It	is	there	that	the	gods	dwell.
During	the	space	of	a	day,	it	is	the	same	water	that	goes	up	(into	the	sky)
and	comes	down.	The	clouds	satisfy	the	earth	and	the	fires	of	heaven.
I	call	upon	Surya	for	the	sake	of	my	protection.	He	is	the	one	who	was	born
in	heaven	and	he	is	the	one	who	is	always	on	the	move.	He	is	the	fulcrum	of	the
water	as	he	ensures	that	it	rains.	He	nourishes	the	herbs	and	satisfies	the	earth.	I
worship	Surya.Mandala	Two
(This	
mandala
	has	43	
suktas
	and	429	
mantras.	
Almost	all	the	
suktas
	are
ascribed	to	a	sage	named	Gritsamada).Rudra
(The	bulk	of	the	
suktas
	in	
mandala
	two	are	addressed	to	Indra.	Then	follow
those	addressed	to	Agni.	But	since	we	have	already	recapitulated	
suktas
addressed	to	Indra	and	Agni,	we	now	choose	one	that	is	addressed	to	Rudra.	The
Rudra	of	the	
Vedas
	seems	to	have	been	a	god	of	storms.	It	was	only	later	that	he
came	to	be	identified	with	Shiva.	Rudra	is	the	father	of	the	Maruts,	who	were
gods	of	the	wind.	The	hymn	that	follows	is	composed	in	the	
trishtupa
	metre.)
O	father	of	the	Maruts!	Confer	happiness	on	us.	May	we	not	be	parted	from
the	rays	of	the	sun.	May	our	warriors	be	able	to	vanquish	enemies	in	battle.	O
Rudra!	May	we	have	many	subjects.
O	Rudra!	You	will	grant	us	the	herbs	that	bring	happiness.	With	their	aid,
we	will	be	able	to	live	for	a	hundred	years.	May	we	be	free	of	all	thoughts	of
hatred.	May	we	never	sin.	May	the	diseases	that	overcome	the	body	maintain
their	distance.
O	Rudra!	Your	riches	make	you	the	best	of	all	objects	that	have	been
created.	You	are	the	one	who	holds	weapons	in	your	hands.	You	are	the
strongest	of	the	strong.	Preserve	us	from	sin	and	ensure	our	welfare.	May	we
never	tread	the	path	of	evil.
O	Rudra!	May	we	never	anger	you	through	worship	that	is	fraudulent.	May
we	not	anger	you	through	the	utterance	of	hymns	that	are	improper.	May	we	not
anger	you	through	mixed	worship.	Make	our	progeny	strong	through	your	herbs.
I	have	learnt	that	you	are	the	best	of	all	physicians.
(Mixed	worship	signifies	worship	in	which	other	gods	are	also	invoked
together	with	Rudra.)
Rudra	is	the	one	who	is	summoned	through	oblations	and	hymns.	May	I
pacify	Rudra	through	my	hymns.	He	is	the	one	who	has	a	soft	heart.	He	is	the
one	who	deserves	to	be	prayed	to.	He	is	the	nourisher	and	preserver.	He	is	the
one	who	grants	us	the	best	of	protection.	May	we	not	fall	prey	to	envy	and	anger
Rudra.
Rudra	is	the	strong	one.	He	is	the	one	who	is	associated	with	the	Maruts.
We	seek	Rudra's	favour.	May	he	satisfy	us	through	food	grains	that	provide
energy.	Those	who	suffer	from	the	sun	seek	the	refuge	of	the	shade.	Like	that,
we	are	plagued	by	sin	and	seek	refuge	with	Rudra.	May	we	be	happy.	May	we
be	able	to	serve	Rudra.O	Rudra!	Your	hands	banish	disease.	Your	hands	grant	happiness.	Where
are	those	hands?	Lay	them	on	us.	Forgive	us	our	sins	and	remove	any
impediments	that	the	gods	may	cast	in	our	paths.
You	are	the	one	who	nourishes	everything.	You	permeate	all	objects	that
are	full	of	strength	and	energy.	I	praise	you	as	best	as	I	can.	May	the	radiant
Rudra	be	pleased	with	our	prayers.	We	chant	Rudra's	glorious	names.
Rudra	is	the	one	whose	body	is	firm.	Many	are	his	forms.	He	is	the	radiant
one	who	nourishes.	He	is	the	one	who	is	lit	up	through	his	energy.	He	nurtures
all	that	there	is	in	this	universe.	He	is	the	supreme	ruler.	Rudra	always	has	the
power	to	destroy	the	demons.
O	Rudra!	You	are	the	deserving	one	who	holds	bows	and	arrows.	You	are
the	one	who	deserves	worship.	You	bear	the	metal	gold,	gold	of	many	hues.	You
are	the	protector	of	this	vast	universe.	O	Rudra!	There	is	no	one	to	rival	your
energy.
O	man!	Rudra	is	the	famous	one.	He	is	the	one	who	rides	in	a	chariot.	He	is
as	terrible	as	a	young	lion.	He	is	the	brave	one	who	destroys	enemies.	Pray	to
him.	O	Rudra!	Be	pleased	and	confer	happiness	on	your	devotees.	Let	your
soldiers	not	kill	us,	let	them	kill	others	instead.
O	Rudra!	A	son	worships	his	revered	father.	Like	that,	we	are	praying	to
you.	We	pray	that	you	may	be	near	us.	You	are	the	one	who	protects	those	who
are	righteous.	You	are	the	one	who	grants	boons.	May	Rudra	be	pleased	through
our	prayers	and	grant	us	herbs.
O	Maruts!	You	are	the	strong	ones.	You	possess	pure	and	sacred	herbs.
Grant	us	the	herbs	that	will	ensure	our	welfare	and	confer	happiness	on	us.
These	are	the	herbs	that	our	father	Manu	accepted.	These	are	the	herbs	that
please	Rudra	and	banish	disease.	We	crave	those	herbs.
(Manu	was	the	father	of	the	human	race,	although	there	were	several
Manus.	One	of	these	Manus	built	a	boat	when	there	was	a	universal	flood,	and
preserved	himself	in	it.	The	
Mahabharata
	states	that	Manu	took	some	seeds	with
him	into	the	boat.)
May	we	not	suffer	from	Rudra's	terrible	weapons.	May	his	anger	plague
others.	O	Rudra!	Grant	us	happiness.	May	you	not	use	your	bow	when	you	deal
with	us.	Make	our	sons	and	grandsons	happy.
You	are	the	nourisher	and	the	preserver	of	the	universe.	You	are	the	strongand	radiant	one.	You	are	the	one	who	is	omniscient.	Listen	to	our	prayers	and	do
not	be	angered.	Reveal	to	us	the	way	in	which	we	may	please	you.	May	we	be
blessed	with	excellent	sons	and	grandsons.	May	we	thus	be	able	to	perform
sacrifices	in	your	honour.The	Maruts
(This	hymn	follows	the	
jagati
	metre.)
The	Maruts	are	supreme	in	the	field	of	battle.	They	are	as	terrible	as	lions
and	force	enemies	to	flee.	They	are	as	radiant	as	Agni	and	their	strength	deserves
worship.	The	Maruts	are	swift	of	feet.	They	are	the	ones	who	drink	the	
soma
juice.	May	the	powers	of	the	brave	Maruts	free	us	from	the	prisons	of	our
enemies.
As	stars	adorn	the	sky,	bangles	adorn	the	hands	of	the	brave	Maruts.	The
Maruts	are	the	brave	ones	who	shower	strength.	They	are	like	lightning	in	the
clouds.	O	radiant	Maruts!	You	wear	golden	necklaces	on	your	chests.	O	brave
ones!	The	great	Rudra	gave	you	birth	and	the	earth	was	your	mother.
The	Maruts	make	their	steeds	as	strong	as	race	horses.	They	are	the	ones
who	thunder	as	they	swiftly	charge	into	battle.	O	brave	Maruts!	You	are	the
source	of	inspiration.	You	are	adorned	with	golden	helmets.	You	are	the	ones
who	vanquish	your	enemies.	You	obtain	food	grains	from	those	enemies.	Come
to	us	with	your	spotted	deer.
(The	relevance	of	a	deer	is	not	at	all	clear.	The	horses	of	the	Maruts	are
probably	being	compared	with	deer.)
You	are	the	ones	who	swiftly	accomplish	victory.	You	are	the	ones	who
possess	spotted	steeds.	Your	riches	can	never	be	stolen.	You	are	the	ones	who
follow	the	straight	path	to	upliftment.	You	are	always	at	the	forefront	of	every
deed.	O	Maruts!	You	are	seated	first	at	every	sacrifice	and	grant	food	grains	to
our	friends	who	are	performing	the	sacrifice.	You	are	the	ones	who	shelter	the
entire	universe.
O	brave	Maruts!	Great	is	your	inspiration.	You	wield	flaming	weapons.
You	are	the	radiant	and	energetic	ones.	You	are	the	possessors	of	riches.	You	are
the	ones	who	deserve	to	be	worshipped.	You	are	the	owners	of	cows.	Come
along	the	immortal	paths	to	the	sacrifice	at	which	
soma
	juice	is	being	offered.
Come	here	the	way	a	swan	returns	to	its	nest.
O	Maruts!	You	are	the	source	of	inspiration.	You	are	the	bravest	of	the
brave.	Our	sacrifice	is	blessed	with	learning	and	
soma
	juice	is	being	offered	on
the	occasion.	Come	and	bless	our	cows	with	on	abundant	supply	of	milk.
Perform	the	acts	that	will	ensure	to	your	devotees	unlimited	food	grains	and
beauty.O	brave	Maruts!	Grant	us	courageous	sons	who	may	ride	on	our	chariots.
May	we	be	blessed	with	learned	sons.	May	your	devotees	be	blessed	with	the
food	grains	that	they	desire.	Please	grant	riches	and	intelligence	to	the	warriors
who	are	brave	in	battle.	May	their	powers	of	endurance	be	increased.
The	Maruts	are	generous	in	their	gifts.	They	wear	golden	necklaces	on	their
breasts.	They	will	harness	their	horses	to	their	chariots	and	come	here.	They	will
grant	us	prosperity.	They	will	make	our	houses	full	of	food	grains.	They	will
nourish	us	the	way	a	cow	nourishes	her	calf	with	milk.
O	brave	Maruts!	You	will	establish	us.	There	are	men	who	are	cruel	as
wolves;	they	are	our	enemies.	Protect	us	from	their	violence.	Surround	them
with	your	chariots,	hurl	your	weapons	at	them.	You	are	the	ones	who	will	make
our	enemies	weep.	Our	enemies	are	greedy.	They	deserve	to	be	killed.	Slay
them.
O	brave	Maruts!	Everyone	is	familiar	with	your	prowess	in	battle.	You	will
bless	us	with	your	friendship.	You	are	the	ones	who	drink	milk	from	the	udders
of	cows.	You	are	the	invincible	ones.	May	those	who	criticise	your	devotees
come	to	grief.	It	is	well	known	that	you	will	bring	destruction	to	the	enemies
who	are	attempting	to	kill	the	sage	Trita.
O	brave	Maruts!	You	are	the	swift	ones.	You	are	the	great	ones.	We	call
upon	you	so	that	you	may	ensure	our	welfare.	We	call	upon	you	so	that	our
wisdom	may	be	increased.	We	call	upon	you	so	that	we	may	be	able	to	perform
righteous	deeds.	You	are	as	radiant	as	gold.	You	are	the	superior	ones.	We	pray
to	the	brave	Maruts	for	riches.
They	are	the	brave	ones	who	performed	a	sacrifice	for	ten	months.	May
they	inspire	us	at	the	time	of	dawn.	The	blushing	rays	of	dawn	encompass	the
dark	night.	May	the	shining	rays	of	the	brave	Maruts	encompass	the	entire
world.
(The	word	that	is	used	for	the	Maruts	is	Dashavgas.	This	literally	means
one	who	has	performed	a	sacrifice	for	ten	months.	The	Maruts	are	believed	to
have	been	the	first	ones	to	have	performed	a	sacrifice.)
The	Maruts	are	the	brave	ones	who	make	the	enemies	weep.	They	scatter
the	enemies	in	all	directions.	They	are	adorned	in	yellow	ornaments	and	yellow
clothing.	May	the	Maruts	thrive	in	houses	where	there	is	no	shortage	of	water.
May	they	be	beauteous	and	handsome.	May	they	look	upon	us	with	favour	and
impart	their	strength	to	us.The	sage	Trita	called	upon	the	five	brave	ones	for	his	protection.	Those
were	the	ones	who	performed	a	sacrifice.	(This	is	clearly	a	reference	to	the
Maruts.	But	the	number	five	remains	obscure,	the	Maruts	were	not	five	in
number.)	We	call	upon	those	to	whom	the	sage	Trita	prayed.	We	praise	them	for
our	protection.
O	brave	Maruts!	Your	powers	preserve	your	devotees	from	sin.	Your
powers	preserve	those	who	pray	to	you	from	all	manner	of	criticism.	We	pray	to
your	powers	of	protection.	May	your	powers	of	protection	preserve	us.	May
wisdom	come	to	us	like	a	lowing	cow	comes	home.Mandala	Three
(This	
mandala
	has	62	
suktas
	and	617	
mantras.
	Most	of	these	are	ascribed	to
the	sage	Vishvamitra	or	to	his	family.	The	bulk	of	the	
suktas
	are	addressed	to
Indra,	followed	by	Agni.	But	for	the	sake	of	variety,	we	will	start	with	a	
sukta
that	is	primarily	addressed	to	the	sacrificial	post	or	
yupa.
	The	hymn	is	composed
in	a	mixture	of	the	metres	
trishtupa
	and	
anushtupa.).Yupa
O	tree!	We	wish	to	become	like	the	gods	themselves.	On	the	occasion	of
the	sacrifice,	we	sprinkle	you	with	divine	nectar	(clarified	butter).	Whether	you
stand	straight	upright	or	whether	you	lie	down	on	the	lap	of	the	earth,	may	you
grant	us	riches	on	the	occasion	of	the	sacrifice.
O	sacrificial	post!	You	are	the	superior	one	and	you	stand	up	before	the	fire
of	the	sacrifice.	You	are	the	one	who	listens	to	the	hymns	that	are	a	source	of
valour.	Banish	all	evil	thoughts	from	our	heads.	Stand	up	straight	so	that	you
may	bring	us	good	fortune.
O	sacrificial	post	made	out	of	a	tree!	Stand	up	straight	at	an	auspicious	spot
on	the	earth.	The	ground	of	the	sacrifice	has	been	measured	out.	Stand	up	there
and	energise	the	one	who	is	performing	the	sacrifice.
The	youthful	sacrificial	post	has	been	wrapped	up	in	excellent	clothing	and
brought	to	the	place	of	the	sacrifice.	Wonderful	is	the	sight	of	the	sacrificial	post
ever	since	it	was	erected.	We	are	the	intelligent	and	learned	ones	who,	through
this	sacrifice,	wish	to	become	like	the	gods	themselves.	We	have	erected	the
sacrificial	post.
The	sacrificial	post	will	increase	in	glory	as	the	sacrifice	proceeds	through
the	day.	The	learned	ones	who	are	performing	the	sacrifice	will	sanctify	the	post
through	their	wisdom.	The	learned	ones	who	pray	to	the	gods	will	chant	hymns.
O	sacrificial	post	made	out	of	a	tree!	There	are	men	who,	by	dint	of	this
sacrifice,	wish	to	become	godlike.	It	is	they	who	have	measured	you	out.	An	axe
has	been	used	to	fashion	the	divine	sacrificial	post.	The	
yupa
	which	stands
upright	is	as	radiant	as	the	sun.	May	the	sacrificial	post	grant	the	devotee
subjects	and	riches.
An	axe	was	used	to	cut	and	trim	the	sacrificial	post.	The	officiating	priests
set	it	up	on	the	ground.	The	post	will	purify	the	sacrifice.	May	the	post	grant	us
the	best	of	riches	on	the	occasion	of	this	sacrifice.
Aditya,	Rudra,	the	Vasus	and	the	other	gods	traverse	the	best	of	paths.	They
populate	the	vast	heaven,	the	atmosphere	and	the	earth	and	increase	love	in	these
worlds.	May	the	gods	preserve	this	sacrifice.	May	they	hold	aloft	the	post	which
is	the	symbol	of	the	sacrifice.
The	sacrificial	post	is	full	of	energy.	It	shines	like	the	sun	itself.	When	the
post	is	set	up	on	the	ground,	chips	are	lopped	off	so	that	a	stake	may	be	formed.When	these	chips	fall	to	the	ground,	it	seems	as	if	a	flock	of	geese	is	flying	in
the	sky.	The	learned	ones	have	set	up	this	post	on	the	occasion	of	the	sacrifice.	It
rises	up	into	the	atmosphere,	the	place	where	the	gods	roam.
The	sacrificial	post	shines	like	the	sun.	Its	sides	have	been	lined	with	rings
of	iron	before	the	pillar	was	set	up	in	the	ground.	The	
yupa
	gleams	like	the	horns
of	animals.	May	the	sacrificial	post	listen	to	the	hymns	that	are	being	chanted	at
the	time	of	the	sacrifice.	May	it	protect	us	at	the	time	of	battle.
A	sharp	axe	was	used	to	fashion	out	the	sacrificial	post,	so	that	our	good
fortune	may	be	ensured.	O	tree	from	which	this	yupa	was	made!	May	you
flourish	with	many	branches.	May	we	have	a	thousand	branches,	and	prosper.Usha
(Usha	is	the	personification	of	the	dawn.	We	now	have	a	
sukta
	addressed	to
Usha.	The	sage	to	whom	this	hymn	is	ascribed	continues	to	be	Vishvamitra.	The
metre	is	
trishtupa.)
O	Usha!	You	are	the	one	who	grants	food	grains	and	riches.	Listen
attentively	to	the	hymns	we	are	chanting.	You	are	the	goddess	who	deserves	to
be	praised	by	all	of	us.	You	have	been	around	for	a	long	time,	but	you	are
always	youthful.	You	are	the	wise	one	who	permits	the	observance	of	religious
rites.
O	goddess	Usha!	You	ride	on	a	chariot	that	is	as	beautiful	as	the	moon.	You
are	the	one	who	inspires	sweet	speech.	You	are	the	manifestation	of	immortality.
May	you	manifest	yourself.	There	are	strong	steeds	which	have	the	hue	of	gold.
May	those	steeds	bring	you	here.
O	Usha!	You	are	at	the	forefront	of	all	the	worlds.	You	are	in	the	loftiest	of
places,	like	the	flag	of	immortality.	You	are	the	one	who	is	always	youthful.	You
keep	rotating	like	a	wheel.	May	you	grant	us	prosperity.
Your	radiant	rays	banish	the	darkness.	You	are	the	wife	of	the	day	which
brings	riches.	You	are	the	beautiful	one	who	makes	the	day	manifest.	You	are
the	one	who	grants	good	fortune.	Your	light	spreads	to	the	furthest	extremity	of
heaven	and	earth.
O	those	who	are	chanting	the	hymns!	The	goddess	Usha	is	manifesting
herself	before	you.	Bow	in	obeisance	before	her	and	chant	hymns	to	her.	She	is
the	one	whose	energy	can	be	felt	in	the	loftiest	parts	of	heaven.	She	is	the	one
who	is	the	source	of	all	sweetness.	Beauteous	is	her	form.	Radiant	Usha	is
becoming	manifest.
Usha	is	the	preserver	of	truth.	Her	rays	percolate	through	to	heaven.	Usha	is
the	source	of	all	prosperity.	It	is	she	who	sustains	the	myriad	hues	of	heaven	and
earth.	O	Agni!	You	are	lit	on	earth	and	your	flames	spread	upwards	as	if	to	greet
Usha.
It	is	the	powerful	Surya	who	sends	Usha	at	the	onset	of	the	day.	Usha
spreads	herself	in	heaven	and	on	earth.	The	energies	of	Mitra	and	Vanina	bear
Usha's	rays	in	the	four	directions.	Usha	is	golden.Mandala	Four
(This	
mandala
	has	58	
suktas
	and	589	
mantras.
	Most	of	these	are	ascribed	to
the	sage	Vamadeva,	the	son	of	the	sage	Goutama.	The	bulk	of	the	
suktas
	are
addressed	to	Agni.	We	however	start	with	one	that	is	addressed	to	the	falcon
(
shyena
).	This	falcon	brings	down	
soma
	juice	from	heaven.	Agni,	in	his	form	of
lightning,	rends	the	clouds	and	brings	down	a	shower	of	rain.	The	lightning	is
being	compared	to	a	falcon	and	the	rain	to	
soma
	juice.	The	metre	in	which	the
hymn	is	composed	is	mostly	
trishtupa.)Shyena
When	1	(the	falcon)	was	in	the	womb,	I	learnt	the	account	of	the	birth	of
the	gods.	A	hundred	cities	fortified	with	iron	protected	me.	But	I	swiftly
emerged	in	the	form	of	a	falcon.
(The	context	is	that	of	the	falcon	bringing	
soma	
juice	from	heaven.	The
hundred	cities	of	the	gods	in	heaven	were	protected	through	iron	fortifications.
But	despite	these,	the	falcon	managed	to	emerge	with	the	
soma
	juice.)
Those	dries	could	not	surround	me	well.	I	overcame	the	dries	with	my	great
powers.	The	
paramatman,
	who	is	the	creator	of	all	that	there	is,	destroyed	the
enemies.	The	
paramatman
	killed	the	enemies	who	were	as	swift	as	the	wind.
The	falcon	thundered	in	heaven	when	it	grasped	the	
soma.
	The	learned	ones
who	were	the	protectors	of	the	
soma,
	tried	to	take	it	away	from	the	falcon.	The
swift	archer	Krishanu	strung	his	bow	and	let	fly	an	arrow	at	the	falcon.
(Krishanu	was	one	of	the	guards	who	protected	the	
soma.)
The	falcon	flew	in	a	straight	path.	It	brought	the	
soma
	from	heaven,	despite
the	fact	that	Indra	himself	protects	heaven.	The	falcon	rescued	the	
soma
	the	way
the	Ashvinis	rescued	Bhujyu.	In	the	fight	that	ensued,	one	of	the	wings	of	the
falcon	was	cut	off	with	a	weapon.
(Bhujyu	was	a	sage	who	was	rescued	by	the	Ashvinis	from	drowning.	The
fight	and	the	weapon	refer	to	Krishanu's	shooting	an	arrow	at	the	falcon.
Krishanu	has	been	interpreted	as	the	demon	of	drought.	He	prevents	mankind
from	enjoying	the	fruits	of	rainfall.	The	wing	of	the	falcon	fell	off	and	became
the	
parna
	or	
palasha
	tree.)
It	was	after	all	this	that	the	powerful	
soma
	juice	was	kept	in	pots.	The
energetic	
adhvaryu
	priests	mixed	the	
soma
	juice	with	the	milk	of	cows.	The
excellent	juice	was	sweet	and	brought	satiation.	It	was	like	food	and	brought
bliss	to	the	prosperous	Indra.	The	brave	Indra	drank	
soma
	juice	for	his
happiness.	May	Indra	accept	the	
soma
	juice.Dadhikra
(This	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	Dadhikra.	Dadhikra	was	a	mythical	being,	a	bit
like	a	celestial	horse.	The	name	is	derived	from	
dadhi
	(curds)	and	
kri
	(to	scatter).
Dadhikra	has	been	identified	as	a	personification	of	the	morning	sun.	The	rising
sun	seems	to	spread	dew	and	frost	and	these	are	likened	to	curds.	This	
sukta
	also
is	ascribed	to	Vamadeva	and	the	metre	is	
trishtupa.)
O	heaven	and	earth!	The	generous	Trasadasyu	gave	mankind	many	riches.
All	of	these	riches	belong	to	the	two	of	you.	You	have	granted	us	horses	that
conquer	the	land.	You	have	granted	us	sons	who	will	make	the	land	fertile.	You
have	granted	us	sharp	weapons	so	that	we	may	triumph	over	the	evil	ones.
(Heaven	and	earth	were	regarded	as	the	parents	of	Dadhikra.	Trasadasyu
was	a	victorious	king.	He	was	favoured	by	the	gods,	particularly	the	Ashvinis.)
Heaven	and	earth	bore	the	strong	Dadhikra.	He	is	the	destroyer	of	many
enemies.	He	is	the	one	who	brings	welfare	to	all	of	mankind.	The	energetic
Dadhikra	traverses	a	straight	path	like	the	falcon	bird.	The	best	of	men	have
praised	him.	He	is	as	swift	and	brave	as	a	great	king.
The	god	Dadhikra	is	as	fast	as	water	flowing	downhill.	He	is	the	brave	one
who	desires	to	triumph	in	all	battles.	He	is	the	one	who	advances	on	his	feet	and
is	as	fleet-footed	as	Vayu.	Dadhikra	is	the	one	who	inspires	our	chariots.	It	is
him	that	all	men	seek	to	please.
He	is	the	god	who	prevents	riches	from	falling	into	the	hands	of	the	enemy
at	the	time	of	battle.	He	is	the	one	who	travels	everywhere	and	in	all	the
directions	with	his	riches.	Dadhikra	is	the	one	who	uses	his	weapons	and
becomes	famous	in	battle.	He	is	the	god	who	will	vanquish	the	enemies	of	the
best	of	men.
Men	shout	when	they	see	a	thief	running	off	with	articles	of	clothing.	Like
that,	the	soldiers	of	the	enemy	shout	when	they	see	Dadhikra's	prowess	in	battle.
Great	are	his	riches	and	great	his	animals.	Other	birds	flee	when	they	see	a
hungry	vulture	descending.	Like	that,	enemies	flee	when	they	catch	sight	of
Dadhikra.
Dadhikra	advances	in	the	front.	The	wheels	of	his	chariot	plough	through
the	ranks	of	the	enemy.	The	handsome	Dadhikra	adorns	his	body	with	garlands,
like	women	do.	He	bites	at	the	bridle	and	his	hooves	raise	a	cloud	of	dust.
(Remember	that	the	image	is	that	of	a	horse.)The	strong	horse	destroys	enemies	in	the	course	of	battle.	He	licks	his	body
and	serves	himself.	Swiftly	does	Dadhikra	advance	on	the	enemies.	Straight	is
his	path	as	the	cloud	of	dust	is	raised.	The	dust	is	such	that	it	blinds	his	own
eyes.
So	great	is	Dadhikra's	prowess	that	enemies	cower	before	him,	the	way	they
shrink	before	a	stroke	of	lightning.	The	enemies	are	scared	of	his	attack,	as	they
know	that	it	brings	certain	destruction.	In	the	four	directions,	Dadhikra	fights
with	thousands	of	enemies.	And	no	one	can	stand	up	to	the	terrible	one.
He	is	the	swift	one	who	fulfils	the	desires	of	all	men.	Men	pray	to	his	speed
and	valour.	Warriors	who	advance	into	battle	say	that	Dadhikra	tore	through	the
ranks	of	a	thousand	enemies.
Surya	spreads	his	radiance	throughout	the	atmosphere.	Like	that,	Dadhikra's
energy	spreads	through	the	five	types	of	men.	Hundreds	and	thousands	are	the
riches	that	this	powerful	horse	grants.	May	Dadhikra	listen	to	our	prayers	and
grant	us	sweet	boons.
(The	five	types	of	men	are	priests,	warriors,	traders,	artisans	and	slaves.)Ghrita
(Ghrita
	is	clarified	butter.	Although	Agni	and	Surya	are	mentioned	in	the
hymn	that	follows,	the	hymn	is	essentially	addressed	to	clarified	butter.	The
sukta
	is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Vamadeva	and	the	metre	is	a	combination	of
trishtupa
	and	
jagati.)
From	the	ocean,	waves	of	sweetness	surged	forth.	These	mixed	with	
soma
juice	and	attained	immortality.	
Ghrita
	has	a	secret	name.	It	is	the	tongue	of	the
gods	and	the	navel	of	
amrita.
(Amrita
	is	a	heavenly	drink	that	confers	immortality.	But	that	apart,	the	rest
of	the	passage	is	exceedingly	obscure.	The	ocean	probably	represents	the
sacrificial	fire	and	the	waves	are	the	clarified	butter	that	is	poured	into	the	fire	as
libation.	The	sense	of	the	second	part	may	be	that	
ghrita
	pleases	the	tongues	of
the	gods	and	is	like	a	heavenly	drink.)
We	praise	
ghrita.
	May	we	worship	it	on	the	occasion	of	this	sacrifice.	May
the	
brahman
	listen	to	the	prayers	that	we	are	chanting.	The	buffalo	
(goura)
	with
four	horns	created	this	universe.
(The	buffalo	is	the	
paramatman
	or	the	
brahman.
	The	four	horns	are
interpreted	as	the	four	
Vedas.)
The	god	of	the	sacrifice	(Agni)	has	four	horns	(the	four	
Vedas)
	and	three
legs	(morning,	afternoon	and	evening).	He	has	two	heads.	(The	two	heads	are
two	ceremonies	named	
brahmoudana
	and	
pravargya.
	At	the	
brahmoudana
ceremony,	boiled	rice	was	distributed	to	
brahmanas.	Pravargya
	formed	part	of
the	ceremony	of	offering	
soma
	juice.	At	this,	fresh	milk	was	poured	into	a	heated
vessel.)	The	god	has	seven	hands	(the	seven	basic	metres).	He	is	the	strong	god
who	roars	at	the	three	places	where	he	is	tethered.	(The	three	bonds	are	the	three
components	of	the	sacrifice,	
mantras,	brahmanas
	and	
kalpas.	Kalpas
	refer	to
ceremonies.)	The	god	of	the	sacrifice	is	always	to	be	found	among	men.
The	gods	discovered	how	the	
panis
	had	hidden	the	three	types	of	clarified
butter	among	cows.	The	first	type	was	created	by	Indra,	the	second	by	Surya,
and	the	third	type	by	all	the	gods	from	the	energy	of	fire.
(The	three	types	of	clarified	butter	signify	milk,	curds	and	butter.	The
creation	of	milk	is	ascribed	to	Indra,	that	of	curds	to	Surya,	and	that	of	butter
primarily	to	Agni.	The	
panis
	were	robbers	or	malignant	demons.	They	stole
cows	and	hid	them	in	caves.)From	the	ocean,	the	sacred	flow	issues	in	a	hundred	streams.	The	enemies
have	not	been	able	to	see	this	flow.	I	have	seen	the	sacred	flow	of	clarified
butter.	I	see	the	radiant	and	golden	Agni	in	the	midst	of	this	flow.
This	flow	of	energy	issues	out	of	the	heart.	It	is	purified	by	the	mind	and
flows	like	a	river	that	is	the	source	of	happiness.	The	flow	of	clarified	butter	is	as
swift	as	a	deer	fleeing	from	a	hunter.
The	juice	flows	as	swiftly	as	the	water	of	a	river	coursing	downhill.	It	is	as
strong	as	Vayu.	The	waves	surge	and	the	juice	dashes	like	a	strong	horse.	Great
streams	of	clarified	butter	flow.
Wives	who	are	good	at	heart	happily	unite	with	their	husbands.	Like	that,
the	flows	of	clarified	butter	unite	with	Agni.	The	flames	of	the	fire	are	pleased	at
the	offerings	of	clarified	butter.	They	rise	upwards.
A	sacrifice	is	held	at	the	place	where	
soma
	juice	is	extracted.	It	is	there	that
flows	of	clarified	butter	are	to	be	found.	A	bride	who	is	about	to	be	married,	is
adorned	with	ornaments	and	looks	radiant.	Radiant	are	the	flows	of	clarified
butter,	as	I	gaze	upon	them.
O	men!	Chant	excellent	hymns	for	the	gods.	O	gods!	Grant	us	cows	and
victory.	Grant	us	riches	that	will	ensure	our	welfare.	May	our	sacrifice	attain	the
gods.	Sweet	indeed	is	the	clarified	butter	that	flows.
O	
paramatman
!	The	entire	universe	seeks	refuge	in	your	energy.	Your
sweet	juices	flow	in	the	ocean.	Your	sweet	juices	flow	in	our	hearts.	They	are	to
be	found	in	food	grains	and	in	water.	They	are	to	be	found	in	the	midst	of
battles.	May	your	sweet	juices	fulfil	us.Mandala	Five
(This	
mandala
	has	87	
suktas
	and	727	
mantras.
	These	are	ascribed	to
various	sages.	The	
suktas
	are	addressed	mostly	to	Agni,	followed	by	the
Vishvadevas,	the	Maruts	and	Indra,	in	that	order.	We	begin	with	a	
sukta
addressed	to	the	
apris.	Apris
	is	a	collective	name	for	gods	and	deified	objects.
Many	such	deified	objects	were	forms	of	Agni.	
Apri	suktas
	were	recited	prior	to
animal	sacrifices.	The	
sukta
	we	reproduce	is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Vasushruta,	the
son	of	the	sage	Atri.	The	metre	is	
gayatri.)Apris
O	men!	Agni	is	the	learned	one.	His	flames	are	full	of	energy	and	flare	up
well.	Offer	into	the	fire	oblations	of	powerful	clarified	butter.
Agni	is	the	one	who	is	praised	by	men.	May	Agni	inspire	this	sacrifice.
Agni	is	the	non-violent	one.	He	is	the	learned	one.	His	rays	are	full	of	sweetness.
O	Agni!	Be	praised	and	offer	us	protection.	Come	to	us	on	the	chariot	that
brings	happiness.	Bring	our	beloved	Indra	here.	Indra	is	the	one	who	is	strong.
O	men!	Spread	out	as	seats	mats	that	are	soft	as	wool.	The	chanting	of
hymns	has	begun.	O	powerful	seats!	May	you	grant	us	riches.
O	divine	doors!	May	you	open.	May	you	be	blessed	with	excellent	qualities
and	may	you	grant	us	protection	in	the	course	of	the	sacrifice.	(This	refers	to	the
doors	of	the	sacrificial	hall.)
O	night	and	dawn!	You	are	beauteous	of	form.	You	increase	our	life
expectancies.	You	enable	this	great	sacrifice	to	be	performed.	We	pray	to	you.
O	officiating	priests!	You	are	divine.	May	the	two	of	you	be	praised.	May
your	speed	be	that	of	the	wind	and	may	you	swiftly	come	to	this	sacrifice	that	is
being	performed	by	men.	(The	two	divine	officiating	priests	could	be	Agni	and
Aditya,	or	Agni	and	Varuna.)
May	the	three	goddesses	Ila,	Sarasvati	and	Bharati	grant	us	happiness.	May
they	be	non-violent.	May	they	come	and	be	seated	on	the	occasion	of	the
sacrifice.
(Ila	has	been	identified	as	the	goddess	of	sacred	speech	and	action.
Sarasvati	was	a	river,	and	so,	a	river-deity.	Later,	she	came	to	be	identified	with
the	goddess	of	speech.	Bharati	has	also	been	identified	as	a	goddess	of	speech.)
O	Tvashta!	You	are	great	and	you	are	the	one	who	grants	welfare.	Come
here	and	nourish	us	on	the	occasion	of	every	sacrifice.	Grant	us	protection.
(Tvashta	was	a	divine	artisan	and	the	architect	of	the	gods.)
O	
vanaspati
!	You	are	acquainted	with	the	secret	places	of	the	gods.	Take
our	oblations	to	the	gods.
(Vanaspati
	means	a	tree.	But	here,	it	seems	to	signify	the	sacrificial	stake.)
These	offerings	are	being	made	to	Agni.	These	offerings	are	being	made	to
Varuna.	These	offerings	are	being	made	to	Indra	and	the	Maruts.	These	offeringsare	being	made	to	all	the	gods.Mitravaruna
(Mitra	and	Varuna	are	often	addressed	in	unison	and	referred	to	as
Mitravaruna.	Mitra	presides	over	the	day	and	Varuna	over	the	night.	This	
sukta
is	addressed	to	Mitravaruna	and	is	composed	in	the	
trishtupa
	metre.	It	is	ascribed
to	the	sage	Shrutavidatreya.)
O	Mitravaruna!	The	two	of	you	have	places	that	are	always	constant.	That
is	the	place	where	the	sun's	horses	(the	rays)	are	unharnessed	and	the	true	nature
of	the	sun	is	shrouded	in	water.	(This	seems	to	visualise	an	ocean	in	heaven.	And
the	sun	traverses	this	ocean.)	One	thousand	horses	dwell	together.	I	have	seen
the	beauty	of	those	handsome	gods.
O	Mitravaruna!	Wonderful	is	your	greatness.	One	of	you	is	always	mobile
and	instils	juices	in	trees	and	herbs.	The	second	one	nourishes	the	celestial	cow
with	energy.	One	of	you	possesses	a	wheel	that	always	moves.
(Both	Mitra	and	Varuna	were	probably	manifestations	of	Surya.	But	in	this
passage,	Mitra	seems	to	be	identified	with	the	sun	and	Varuna	with	water.	The
sun	is	the	one	who	is	always	mobile	and	whose	wheel	moves	constantly.	The
celestial	cow	is	an	image	for	clouds	and	these	are	nourished	by	Varuna’s	water.)
O	powerful	Mitravaruna!	You	are	the	ones	who	bear	up	heaven	and	earth
through	your	energy.	You	are	the	ones	who	nourish	and	sustain	trees,	herbs	and
cows.	You	are	the	ones	who	grant	boons	with	quickness.	You	are	the	ones	who
make	rain	flow	in	torrents.
O	Mitravaruna!	May	steeds	that	are	harnessed	well	bring	you	here.	May	the
bridles	of	the	horses	bring	you	here.	Your	forms	mirror	clarified	butter.	You
make	rivers	of	clarified	butter	flow	down	from	heaven.
(The	rivers	of	clarified	butter	that	flow	down	from	heaven	must	be	an
image	for	rain.)
O	Mitravaruna!	You	are	the	source	of	strength.	You	have	been	famous	from
time	immemorial.	You	protect	the	earth	in	the	way	that	
mantras
	protect	a
sacrifice.	You	are	the	source	of	food	grains.	You	climb	into	your	chariot	and
come	to	the	place	of	the	sacrifice.
Your	hands	remove	all	impediments.	You	are	capable	of	protecting	us	even
when	you	are	at	a	distance.	You	are	the	ones	who	do	not	cause	violence	to
anyone.	O	Mitravaruna!	The	two	of	you	combine	to	preserve	righteous	deeds
through	a	sacrifice.	May	you	grant	us	riches.	May	you	grant	us	houses	with	athousand	pillars.
Beautiful	is	the	chariot	of	these	gods.	The	pillars	in	the	chariot	are	made	of
gold.	The	chariot	shines	in	heaven	like	lightning.	The	sacrificial	altar	has	been
measured	out	in	an	auspicious	place.	It	has	been	sprinkled	with	sacred	water.
May	Mitravaruna	come	here	on	their	chariot.
O	Mitravaruna!	When	dawn	manifests	herself	and	the	sun	rises,	you	climb
into	your	chariot.	You	climb	into	the	chariot	with	golden	pillars.	From	your
chariot	you	gaze	upon	the	earth	and	the	beings	who	dwell	here.
O	Mitravaruna!	You	are	the	protector	of	the	universe	and	the	granters	of
excellent	boons.	You	are	the	ones	who	cannot	be	vanquished	by	the	most
powerful	of	enemies.	O	Mitravaruna!	Pure	is	your	home.	Protect	us	from	that
home	of	yours.	We	desire	to	obtain	riches.	We	desire	to	plunder	the	riches	of	our
enemies.	Grant	us	these	boons.Savita
(Savita	is	a	manifestation	of	Surya	in	his	form	of	the	generator.	The	
sukta
that	follows	is	addressed	to	Savita	and	is	composed	in	the	metre	
jagati.
	It	is
ascribed	to	the	sage	Shyavashva,	son	of	the	sage	Atri.)
The	god	Savita	is	great,	intelligent	and	learned.	Learned	ones	devote	their
minds	and	their	intelligence	to	the	worship	of	Savita.	Savita	is	the	one	who
knows	the	best	of	paths	and	the	best	of	deeds.	It	is	for	that	reason	that	he	alone	is
the	source	of	all	fame.	May	Savita's	praise	increase.
Savita	is	the	one	who	can	see	far	into	the	future.	Savita	is	the	god	who	has
many	forms.	He	is	the	one	who	grants	welfare	to	all	bipeds	and	quadrupeds.
Savita	is	the	superior	god	who	mokes	heaven	manifest.	When	dawn	comes,
Savita	makes	his	presence	felt.
All	the	other	gods	follow	the	path	that	is	indicated	by	Savita.	It	is	Savita
who	energises	the	other	gods.	Savita	is	the	one	who	measures	out	the	dimensions
of	the	earth.	Great	is	Savita's	energy.
O	Savita!	You	travel	in	the	three	radiant	worlds.	You	are	the	one	who	is
associated	with	the	rays	of	the	sun.	You	approach	the	night	from	both	directions
(rising	and	setting).	O	god!	Such	are	your	qualities	that	you	befriend	everyone.
O	Savita!	You	alone	are	the	lord	and	ruler	of	all	the	worlds	that	were
created.	You	nourish	the	universe	through	your	care.	You	are	the	king	of	all	the
worlds.	Brave	warriors	who	possess	energetic	horses	chant	hymns	dedicated	to
you.Parjanya
(We	now	have	a	
sukta
	that	is	addressed	to	Parjanya.	Parjanya	is	the	god	of
thunderstorms	and	rain.	The	
sukta
	is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Bhoumotri.	It	is
composed	in	a	mixture	of	the	metres	
trishtupa,	anushtupa
	and	
jagati.)
The	clouds	are	strong	and	swift.	They	thunder	and	grant	boons.	They	instil
juices	into	the	wombs	of	trees	and	herbs.	O	men!	Pray	to	the	powerful	clouds.
Pray	to	them	well.	Pray	to	them	through	these	words.	And	chant	their	praise	in
all	humility.
Clouds	lead	to	lightning	and	burn	down	trees.	Clouds	destroy	demons.	Such
is	the	terrible	fury	of	clouds	that	the	universe	trembles.	Those	who	are	evil	are
destroyed	through	the	thunder	of	clouds.	Clouds	shower	down	rain	and	preserve
those	who	are	righteous.
Parjanya	encompasses	the	sky	with	rain.	Like	a	charioteer	spurring	on	his
horses	with	a	whip,	Parjanya	spurs	on	the	clouds	to	shower	down	rain.	Parjanya's
roar	is	like	that	of	a	lion.	It	can	be	heard	from	a	great	distance.
The	clouds	shower	down	the	life	force	on	earth.	It	is	then	that	winds	begin
to	blow.	Lightning	blazes	and	trees	and	herbs	drink	up	the	water.	The	sky	itself
is	nourished.	The	earth	and	the	entire	universe	is	nourished	and	begins	to
prosper.
It	is	the	acts	of	the	clouds	that	make	the	land	fertile.	It	is	the	acts	of	the
clouds	that	make	living	beings	thrive.	It	is	the	acts	of	the	clouds	that	make	trees
and	herbs	grow.	O	Parjanya!	May	you	grant	us	a	lot	of	happiness.
O	Maruts!	Grant	us	rain	from	heaven.	Nourish	us	through	the	showers.	O
clouds!	Come	towards	us	with	your	thunder.	Shower	down	rain	and	make	life
flourish.	May	the	clouds	nurture	us.
O	Parjanya!	May	you	thunder	and	roar.	May	you	instil	juices	into	the
wombs	of	the	trees.	Travel	in	the	four	directions	in	your	watery	chariot.
Overturn	your	vessels	of	water	so	that	we	may	have	showers.	May	there	be	such
a	lot	of	rain	that	there	remains	no	difference	between	mountains	and	plains.
O	Parjanya!	Open	up	your	treasure-house	of	water.	May	the	water	flow
downwards.	May	the	rivers	overflow	with	water	and	head	towards	the	east.	Fill
heaven	and	earth	with	water	so	that	the	cows	may	drink	their	fill.
O	Parjanya!	When	you	roar	and	thunder,	the	evil	ones	are	killed.
Everything	that	there	is	on	earth	is	pleased	by	your	action.	(The	evil	ones	are	thedemons	of	drought.)
O	Parjanya!	It	has	rained	for	many	years.	Now	withdraw	your	showers.
You	have	made	the	deserts	fertile.	You	have	provided	food	for	our	delight	in	the
form	of	trees	and	herbs.	All	the	subjects	have	sung	your	praise.Prithivi
(Prithivi
	is	the	earth	and	the	next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	
prithivi.
	This	too	is
ascribed	to	the	sage	Bhoumotri.	It	is	in	the	
anushtupa
	metre.)
O	
prithivi
!	You	are	the	possessor	of	excellent	qualities.	You	are	greatness
itself.	You	satisfy	living	beings	through	your	greatness.	You	are	indeed	the	one
who	bears	aloft	the	mountains.
O	land!	You	are	full	of	energy	and	you	move	in	all	the	directions.	You	roar
like	a	horse	when	you	accept	rain	from	the	clouds.	Your	devotees	sing	your
praise	through	the	hymns	that	they	chant.
O	land!	There	are	clouds	in	heaven	and	lightning	streaks	through	them.	It
rains	and	it	is	your	strength	that	sustains	trees	and	herbs	on	the	ground.Mandala	Six
(This	
mandala
	has	75	
suktas
	and	765	
mantras.	
Almost	all	the	
suktas
	are
ascribed	to	the	sage	Bharadvaja	and	his	family.	The	
suktas
	are	addressed	mostly
to	Indra,	followed	by	Agni.	But	we	have	already	reproduced	
suktas
	addressed	to
Indra	and	Agni.	Let	us	therefore	start	with	a	
sukta
	that	is	addressed	to	cows.	This
is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Bharadvaja,	descended	from	Brihaspati.	It	is	composed	in
a	mixture	of	the	metres	
trishtupa,	jagati
	and	
anushtupa.)Cows
May	cows	come	to	our	homes	and	may	they	ensure	our	welfare.	May	cows
reside	in	the	cowsheds	and	please	us.	Many	are	the	forms	that	cows	take,	many
the	hues.	Some	of	them	have	calves.	May	the	cows	yield	milk	in	the	morning	so
that	offerings	can	be	made	to	Indra.
Indra	is	the	one	who	enables	sacrifices	to	be	performed.	He	is	the	one	who
grants	food	grains.	He	is	the	one	who	grants	riches.	Indra	never	reduces	the
riches	of	one	who	gives	alms;	instead,	he	increases	them.	Those	who	wish	to
become	like	the	gods	are	thereby	protected	at	their	homes.
Cows	never	perish.	Even	thieves	bear	them	no	hatred.	The	weapons	of	the
enemies	do	not	pierce	cows.	Me	who	possesses	cows	uses	their	milk	to	make
offerings	to	the	gods.	May	he	always	have	cows	that	yield	milk.
May	those	who	invade	us	on	horses	not	be	able	to	rob	us	of	our	cows.	May
they	not	be	able	to	kill	these	cows.	May	the	cows	remain	in	the	possession	of	he
who	performs	sacrifices.	May	the	cows	be	free	from	fear	and	roam	the	vast
expanses	at	will.
Cows	are	wealth.	May	Indra	grant	me	cows.	The	milk	obtained	from	cows
should	first	be	mixed	with	
soma
	juice.	O	men!	These	cows	are	nothing	but	forms
of	Indra.	With	great	devotion,	I	pray	for	the	proximity	of	the	Indra	who	is	in
these	cows.
O	cows!	Make	us	strong.	Make	those	who	are	ill	and	lean,	strong	and
handsome.	O	cows!	You	are	the	source	of	blessed	speech.	Make	our	households
happy.	Grant	us	food.	May	your	fame	be	chanted	in	the	assemblies.
O	cows!	May	you	have	calves.	Eat	soft	grass	and	drink	limpid	water	from
the	ponds.	May	you	not	be	stolen	by	thieves.	May	you	not	be	possessed	by
sinners.	May	Rudra's	weapons	never	pierce	you.
May	various	objects	which	give	strength	be	mixed	with	the	milk	of	cows.	O
Indra!	We	have	mixed	milk	with	
soma
	juice	so	that	your	strength	is	increased.Pusha
(Pusha	is	a	manifestation	of	Surya;	that	is,	he	is	a	solar	deity.	In	particular,
Pusha	acts	as	a	guide	on	travels	and	protects	cows	and	other	possessions.	The
next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	Pusha.	It	is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Bharadvaja	and	is
composed	in	the	metres	
gayatri
	and	
anushtupa.)
O	Pusha!	You	are	the	protector	of	all	routes.	You	harness	steeds	to	your
chariot	so	that	you	may	come	and	grant	us	food	grains.	May	you	come	and
increase	the	wisdom	of	mankind.
O	Pusha!	Grant	us	the	riches	that	will	bring	welfare	to	mankind.	Grant	us
brave	sons	who	will	be	generous.	Take	us	to	households	where	the	residents	are
generous	of	heart.
O	radiant	Pusha!	There	are	those	who	are	miserly.	Change	their	hearts	so
that	they	may	become	generous.	Traders	tend	to	be	hard	of	heart.	Make	their
hearts	soft.
Seek	out	the	paths	that	lead	to	prosperity.	Defeat	assassins	and	enemies.	O
brave	Pusha!	May	all	our	acts	come	to	fruition.
O	learned	and	far-sighted	one!	If	traders	continue	to	be	hard	of	heart,
destroy	them	with	your	weapons.	For	our	welfare,	demolish	all	these	evil	ones.
O	Pusha!	The	
panis
	are	robbers.	Bring	misery	to	their	hearts.	May	you
desire	to	bring	welfare	to	everyone.	But	destroy	our	enemies	for	us.
O	radiant	Pusha!	You	are	learned	in	the	usage	of	weapons.	But	others	also
display	the	same	knowledge	in	the	usage	of	weapons.	O	god!	Bring	wisdom	to
our	hearts	so	that	we	may	look	upon	everyone	as	an	equal.	May	our	minds	be
purified	and	may	all	thoughts	of	evil	be	banished.
O	brave	warrior!	Your	power	is	all	pervasive	and	increases	the	number	of
animals	we	possess.	May	your	wisdom	be	imparted	to	us.	This	is	our	desire.
O	god!	Motivate	us	so	that	we	may	serve	our	cows	and	horses.	May	we
attain	food	grains	as	well	as	sons	and	grandsons.	May	we	live	in	peace	with	the
rest	of	mankind.	May	our	hearts	be	directed	towards	that	purpose.Sarasvati
(The	next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	Sarasvati.	It	is	ascribed	to	the	sage
Bharadvaja	and	is	composed	in	a	mixture	of	the	metres	
gayatri,	jagati
	and
trishtupa.)
Vadhryashvaya	(a	sage)	was	generous	and	patient.	When	he	prayed	to
Sarasvati,	the	goddess	granted	him	a	son	named	Divodasa.	Divodasa	cancelled
all	his	father's	debts.	O	Sarasvati!	Your	wisdom	is	such	that	it	destroys	those
who	are	misers	and	bring	harm	to	others.
(Every	man	owes	a	debt	to	his	ancestors.	That	debt	is	repaid	only	when	he
gives	birth	to	a	son.	Once	Divodasa	was	born,	his	father's	ancestral	debt	was
cancelled.)
This	Sarasvati	(the	river)	tears	down	the	highest	peaks	of	mountains	with
her	torrents.	Such	is	her	strength	that	the	mountains	seem	to	be	as	delicate	as
lotus	stalks.	With	sincere	devotion,	we	pray	to	the	goddess	Sarasvati	for	our
protection.
O	Sarasvati!	Destroy	those	who	criticise	god.	Destroy	all	the	subjects	who
are	fraudulent	and	evil.	For	the	welfare	of	mankind,	grant	us	the	land	masses	that
are	well	protected.	You	are	the	one	who	grants	food	grains.	You	make	the	waters
flow.	You	nourish	the	worlds.
The	goddess	Sarasvati	is	the	source	of	all	food	grains.	She	is	the	one	who
grants	food	grains.	May	the	one	who	protects	our	intelligence	grant	us
protection.
O	goddess	Sarasvati!	Indra	prayed	to	you	before	he	set	out	to	do	battle	with
the	demon	Vritra.	Others	too	invoke	you	before	a	fight.
O	goddess	Sarasvati!	You	are	the	source	of	strength.	May	you	grant	us
protection	in	the	course	of	a	battle.	Like	Pusha,	grant	us	riches.
Sarasvati	is	the	valiant	one.	She	rides	in	a	golden	chariot.	She	is	the	one
who	destroys	Vritra.	She	is	the	one	who	desires	to	listen	to	our	prayers.
Sarasvati's	waters	know	no	bounds.	They	are	swift	and	constantly	on	the
move.	The	waters	roar	as	they	course.
Sarasvati	will	banish	all	our	enemies.	She	is	a	lover	of	the	truth.	She	will
take	us	to	her	sisters,	the	other	rivers.	Sarasvati's	radiance	is	like	the	sun	during
the	day.Sarasvati	is	our	beloved	one.	She	is	the	one	who	deserves	to	be	worshipped.
The	seven	sisters	are	the	seven	rivers.	Sarasvati	is	the	one	who	deserves	to	be
praised.
(The	seven	rivers	have	been	named	earlier.)
Sarasvati	is	the	one	who	grants	material	wealth.	She	is	the	one	who	radiates
energy	in	the	atmosphere.	May	Sarasvati	preserve	us	from	those	who	criticise	us.
Sarasvati	resides	in	the	three	worlds	(heaven,	the	atmosphere	and	the	earth).
She	has	seven	sisters.	She	increases	the	prosperity	of	the	five	types	of	men.	(The
five	types	of	men	have	been	enumerated	earlier.)	She	is	the	goddess	who	should
be	worshipped	before	every	battle.	She	is	the	goddess	who	should	be	praised
before	every	action.
Sarasvati	is	supreme	among	rivers	in	her	greatness,	her	energy	and	her
influence.	Her	stream	is	swifter	than	that	of	other	rivers.	Her	flow	is	as	vast	as	a
chariot.	The	supreme	creator	himself	gave	birth	to	Sarasvati.	Such	is	her	learning
that	she	should	be	praised.
O	Sarasvati!	Take	us	to	the	riches	that	we	desire.	May	the	flow	of	your
waters	not	bring	us	any	harm.	May	we	not	be	denied	your	proximity.	Accept	our
devotion	and	our	friendship.	Please	ensure	that	we	do	not	forsake	you	and	go	to
others.Dyavaprithivi
(Dyavaprithivi	is	a	word	that	connotes	heaven	and	earth	taken	together.	The
next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	Dyavaprithivi.	It	is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Bharadvaja
and	is	composed	in	the	
jagati
	metre.)
Dyavaprithivi	is	full	of	water	and	is	the	refuge	of	all	the	worlds.	Vast	is	the
expanse	of	Dyavaprithivi	and	sweet	are	the	juices	of	food	grains	that	grow	there.
Beautiful	is	heaven,	and	the	earth	never	decays.	Both	these	regions	possess
wonderful	powers.	Varuna	is	the	one	who	decrees	the	rules	that	heaven	and	earth
follow.
O	Dyavaprithivi!	The	two	of	you	are	actually	separate.	You	are	full	of
water.	You	are	full	of	milk.	You	ensure	the	performance	of	religious	deeds.	You
are	the	source	of	sacred	rites	and	clarified	butter.	You	make	this	universe
manifest.	O	Dyavaprithivi!	Make	the	waters	flow	so	that	the	welfare	of	mankind
can	be	ensured.
O	Dyavaprithivi!	You	are	the	ones	who	sustain	everything.	A	man	who
devotes	himself	to	the	pursuit	of	a	simple	life	is	the	one	who	becomes	famous.
One	who	lives	according	to	the	norms	of	righteousness	is	the	one	who	is	blessed
with	sons	and	grandsons.	Many	are	the	codes	of	conduct	that	emanate	from	you
and	they	are	all	sacred.
O	Dyavaprithivi!	You	are	full	of	water.	You	have	an	intimate	association
with	that	beautiful	water.	You	are	great	and	you	know	no	bounds.	You	are	at	the
forefront	to	receive	any	oblations	that	an	officiating	priest	may	make.	Learned
ones	pray	to	you	for	the	sake	of	happiness.
O	Dyavaprithivi!	May	you	unite	us	with	the	sweetest	of	juices.	The	two	of
you	are	the	sources	of	all	kinds	of	sweet	juices.	The	two	of	you	shower	down
sweet	juices.	The	granting	of	sweet	juices	forms	part	of	your	nature.	You	sustain
fame,	sacrifices	and	divinity.	Grant	us	strength,	energy	and	great	fame.
May	heaven	and	earth	increase	our	strength.	They	are	like	our	parents.	They
are	the	omniscient	ones	who	ensure	the	performance	of	the	best	of	deeds.	O
powerful	heaven	and	earth!	You	grant	welfare	to	everyone.	Grant	us	fame,
strength	and	riches.Brihaspati
(Brihaspati	is	not	quite	a	god.	He	is	divinity	personified	in	the	officiating
priest.	He	is	also	the	priest	of	the	gods,	and	subsequently,	their	preceptor.	The
next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	Brihaspati.	It	is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Bharadvaja	and	is
composed	in	the	
trishtupa
	metre.)
Brihaspati	is	the	one	who	destroys	the	fortresses	of	the	enemies.	He	is	the
one	who	was	created	first	and	he	is	the	one	who	ensures	the	performance	of
righteous	deeds.	He	was	born	in	the	lineage	of	Angirasa	and	he	is	personified	in
the	oblations	made	by	warriors.	Brihaspati	is	the	one	who	protects	the	land
through	his	excellent	qualities.	He	is	radiant	with	energy.	Brihaspati	is	the	strong
one	and	he	is	like	our	father.	His	roar	can	be	heard	in	heaven	and	on	earth.
Brihaspati	is	the	one	who	ensures	the	preservation	of	those	who	are
righteous.	It	is	righteousness	that	Brihaspati	preserves	in	the	sacrifices	of	the
gods.	He	has	killed	the	enemies,	demolished	their	cities	and	triumphed	over
them.
Brihaspati	wins	riches	from	the	enemies.	He	wins	cows	and	cowsheds	from
the	enemies.	It	is	he	who	brings	down	water	from	heaven.	Brihaspati	is	the
invincible	one.	Through	his	powers,	he	destroys	the	enemies.Weapons	of	War
(The	next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	various	weapons	of	war.	It	is	ascribed	to	the
sage	Bharadvaja	and	is	composed	in	the	metres	
trishtupa,	jagati,	anushtupa	
and
pamkti.)
Armour
	-	The	warrior	dons	this	armour	and	goes	forth	to	do	battle.	He	looks
like	a	cloud	in	the	armour.	The	warrior	will	not	be	killed,	he	will	attain	victory.
May	the	glory	of	the	armour	protect	the	soldier.
Bow	-
	This	bow	will	be	used	to	win	cows	in	battle.	This	bow	will	be	used
for	the	sake	of	victory.	Fierce	will	be	the	battle,	but	the	bow	will	triumph.	The
bow	will	nullify	all	the	desires	of	the	enemies.	The	enemies	will	be	defeated	and
the	bow	will	be	victorious	in	all	the	directions.
The	string	of	the	bow	-
	The	string	of	the	bow	is	drawn	back	upto	the	ear.	It
seems	to	be	whispering	something	into	the	ear.	The	string	of	the	bow	is	extended
on	the	bow.	It	makes	a	sound	that	is	like	the	voice	of	a	woman.	The	string	of	the
bow	will	remove	all	impediments	in	battle
The	ends	of	the	bow
	-	Like	two	co-wives	who	have	similar	minds,	the	two
ends	of	the	bow	remain	united	in	action.	Like	a	mother	carrying	her	son	on	her
lap,	the	two	ends	of	the	bow	cradle	the	arrow.	The	two	ends	of	the	bow	help	to
pierce	enemies	in	battle	and	destroy	them.
The	quiver	-
	The	quiver	is	the	father	of	many	arrows.	It	has	many	sons.	The
clanging	of	the	quiver	can	be	heard	in	battle.	This	father	of	arrows	is	slung	onto
the	back.	The	arrows	that	come	out	of	the	quiver	destroy	the	soldiers	of	the
enemy.
The	charioteer
	-	An	excellent	charioteer	sits	astride	a	chariot	and	drives	the
horses	where	he	wills.	Marvel	at	the	power	of	the	reins.	They	take	the	chariot
where	one	wants.
The	horses	-
	The	horses	are	stronger	than	bulls.	They	are	so	powerful	that
they	swiftly	run	with	the	chariot.	Loud	is	the	noise	that	the	horses	make.	They
attack	the	enemies	with	their	hooves.	Not	retreating	for	a	moment,	the	horses
destroy	the	enemies.
The	chariot
	-	In	the	chariot	has	been	kept	fodder	that	will	please	the	horses.
In	the	chariot	have	been	kept	weapons	for	destroying	the	enemies.	Armour	too
has	been	kept	in	the	chariot.	May	I	always	be	able	to	sit	on	the	superior	chariot
that	brings	pleasure	to	the	mind.Defenders	of	the	chariot
	-	These	are	the	ones	who	bring	pleasure	and	aid.
These	are	the	ones	who	grant	refuge	in	times	of	danger.	These	are	the	firm	and
strong	ones,	armed	with	the	power	of	arrows.	These	brave	warriors	fight	on	the
side	of	righteousness.	Enemies	can	bring	them	no	harm.	Many	are	the	enemies
who	are	defeated	by	these	defenders.
Various	gods
	-	May	
brahmanas,
	the	ancestors,	Soma,	Pusha	and
Dyavaprithivi	preserve	us	from	sin	and	ensure	our	welfare.	May	those	who
traverse	the	righteous	paths	grant	us	protection.	May	the	evil	ones	not	be	able	to
enslave	us.
(This	passage	does	not	quite	seem	to	belong	to	the	
sukta.)
The	point	of	the	arrow	-
	The	arrow	has	an	excellent	trail	made	of	feathers.
Sharp	indeed	is	the	point	of	the	arrow.	The	string	of	the	bow	is	made	out	of
cowhide.	And	it	is	with	this	that	the	arrow	is	shot	into	the	ranks	of	the	enemy.
There	are	battles	in	which	warriors	fight	together	and	there	are	battles	in	which
warriors	fight	singly.	Whatever	the	nature	of	the	battle,	may	the	point	of	the
arrow	bring	me	pleasure.
The	arrow
	-	O	arrow!	May	you	follow	a	straight	path.	Protect	me	from	the
four	directions	and	make	my	body	as	firm	as	stone.	May	Soma	increase	my
inspiration	and	may	Aditi	grant	me	happiness.
The	whip
	-	O	whip!	You	are	the	one	who	drives	the	horses.	It	is	you	who
inspire	the	horses	in	the	course	of	battle.	You	descend	on	the	horses	from	above.
And	you	lash	at	them	from	below.
The	arm-guard
	-	It	twirls	around	the	arm	like	a	snake.	It	guards	the	arm
from	the	lash	of	the	string	of	the	bow.	The	arm-guard	is	like	a	learned	person
who	knows	the	secret	of	all	action.	May	the	arm-guard	protect	the	warrior	from
the	four	directions.
(The	arm-guard	was	worn	on	the	archer's	left	arm	and	was	fastened	on	with
leather	straps.)
The	shaft	of	the	arrow
	-	The	shaft	of	the	arrow	has	been	dipped	in	snake-
venom.	It	is	like	the	horn	of	a	deer	and	a	bit	of	iron	has	been	fixed	to	the	mouth.
Parjanya	himself	has	increased	the	strength	of	the	arrow	with	his	showers.	I	bow
in	obeisance	before	the	god	of	arrows.
(The	head	of	the	arrow	used	to	be	tipped	with	deer-horn.	Later,	iron	came	to
be	used.	The	shaft	was	often	made	out	of	reeds	and	it	was	the	rain	that	made	thereeds	grow.)
The	arrow	-
	The	arrow	has	been	sharpened	by	our	knowledge.	When	one
lets	go,	the	arrow	flies	into	the	ranks	of	the	enemy.	May	not	a	single	one	of	the
enemy	lives.
The	battlefield
	-	Like	a	boy	who	does	not	have	a	tonsure,	let	the	arrow	fly
where	it	will.	Let	Brahmanaspati	and	Aditi	bring	us	happiness	on	the	battlefield.
May	we	always	be	happy.
(This	is	not	dear.	Brahmanaspati	is	the	god	of	prayers	and	is	sometimes
used	synonymously	with	Brihaspati.	A	boy	who	does	not	have	a	tonsure	has	not
had	his	sacred	thread	ceremony.	There	are	thus	no	restrictions	on	his
movements.	And	like	such	a	boy,	the	arrow	is	free	to	go	anywhere.)
The	armour	-
	I	cover	the	delicate	parts	of	your	anatomy	with	armour.	King
Soma	will	bless	you	with	the	boon	of	immortality.	Varuna	will	make	you	great
and	grant	you	the	best	of	riches.	May	all	the	gods	be	pleased	when	you	attain
victory	and	may	they	work	towards	this	end.
Gods
	-	Those	who	want	to	kill	us	may	be	close	to	us,	or	they	may	be	far
away.	They	may	be	our	inferiors.	But	whatever	be	their	nature,	may	all	the	gods
destroy	them.	I	will	be	protected	as	I	am	armed	with	the	armour	of	knowledge.Mandala	Seven
(This	
mandala
	has	104	
suktas
	and	841	
mantras.	
Most	of	the	
suktas
	are
addressed	to	Indra,	followed	by	those	addressed	to	Agni.	All	the	hymns	are
ascribed	to	the	sage	Vasishtha,	although	his	sons	also	feature	in	a	few	
suktas.
The	first	
sukta
	that	we	choose	glorifies	Vasishtha	and	his	family.	It	is	composed
in	the	
trishtupa
	metre.)Vasishtha
Those	who	belong	to	Vasishtha's	family	are	fair	in	complexion.	They	are
the	intelligent	ones	who	perform	righteous	action.	They	wear	their	tonsures	to
the	right.	Great	is	the	joy	that	Vasishtha	and	his	family	have	brought	me.	I	arose
from	my	seat	and	told	everyone	that	I	did	not	wish	to	be	separated	from
Vasishtha	and	his	family.
(There	is	an	interpretation	that	the	above	words	are	being	uttered	by	Indra.)
The	brave	Indra	drinks	the	
soma
	juice	that	is	offered	in	vessels.	He	comes
from	far	away	to	drink	the	
soma	
juice	that	is	offered.	
Soma
	juice	was	also
offered	by	Pashadyumna,	the	son	of	Vayat.	But	Indra	preferred	the	
soma
	juice
offered	by	Vasishtha.
(There	was	a	king	named	Sudas	and	Vasishtha	was	his	priest.	So	Vasishtha
offered	the	
soma
	juice	on	behalf	of	Sudas.	Pashadyumna	was	a	rival	king.)
Indra	crossed	the	river	easily	and	removed	all	impediments.	Thus	did	Indra
help	Sudas	in	the	battle	of	the	ten	kings.	O	Vasishtha!	It	is	because	of	your
prayers	that	Indra	protected	Sudas.
(This	needs	some	explanation.	The	battle	of	the	ten	kings	
(dasha	rajna)
	was
a	fairly	important	battle	to	which	stray	references	can	be	found	in	the	
Rig	Veda.
Sudas	was	the	king	of	the	Tritsu	tribe.	He	crossed	the	river	Parushni	(Iravati	or
Ravi)	with	Indra’s	aid	and	put	his	enemies	to	flight.	Ten	kings	or	tribes	were
allied	against	Sudas,	but	they	were	defeated.)
O	leaders!	Your	hymns	please	the	ancestors.	I	have	driven	the	axle	of	my
chariot.	I	have	driven	the	chariot	so	that	I	can	go	home.	(This	"I"	may	be	Indra.)
O	those	who	belong	to	the	family	of	Vasishtha!	May	you	be	strong	and	may	you
not	grow	infirm.	Recite	hymns	and	be	blessed	with	the	strength	that	Indra
confers.	Increase	your	strength	and	chant	Indra's	praise.
Vasishtha	was	like	a	man	who	was	thirsting	for	water.	He	sang	Indra's
praise	prior	to	the	battle	of	the	ten	kings.	Indra	heard	the	hymns	that	Vasishtha
chanted.	He	made	vast	expanses	free	for	the	Tritsu	tribe.
The	Bharatas	were	initially	as	small	and	insignificant	as	a	rod	that	is	used	to
beat	cows.	But	Vasishtha	became	the	priest	of	the	Tritsus	and	the	Bharatas.	It	is
then	that	the	Bharatas	began	to	prosper.
(In	this	verse,	the	suggestion	is	that	the	Bharatas	and	the	Tritsus	were
identical.	Other	parts	of	the	
Rig	Veda
	indicate	that	this	was	not	quite	the	case.Sudas	was	originally	the	king	of	the	Bharatas,	not	of	the	Tritsus.	At	this	point,
the	priest	of	the	Bharatas	was	Vishvamitra	and	Vasishtha	was	the	priest	of	the
Tritsus.	Sudas	made	Vasishtha	his	priest	and	thus	forged	an	alliance	between	the
Bharatas	and	the	Tritsus.	Vishvamitra	felt	slighted	and	formed	a	confederation	of
ten	kings	against	Sudas.	But	the	ten	kings,	who	were	led	by	Bheda,	were
defeated.)
There	are	three	gods	(Agni,	Vayu	and	Surya)	who	infuse	the	worlds	with
energy.	There	are	three	types	of	subjects	who	are	known	as	
aryas.
	(These	are
brahmanas
	or	priests,	
kshatriyas
	or	warriors	and	
vaishyas
	or	traders.)	There	are
three	types	of	sacrifice	that	are	begun	at	the	stroke	of	dawn.	Vasishtha	is	well-
versed	in	all	this	knowledge.
O	sons	of	Vasishtha!	May	your	glory	spread	before	the	rays	of	the	sun.	May
your	fame	be	deep	as	the	ocean	itself.	May	your	hymns	reach	the	gods	as	swiftly
as	Vayu.	May	no	one	else	be	able	to	duplicate	the	hymns	that	you	chant.	It	is
only	you	who	possess	that	special	knowledge.
O	those	who	belong	to	the	family	of	Vasishtha!	There	are	hundreds	and
thousands	who	labour	hard	to	attain	this	knowledge.	They	strive	to	light	up	their
hearts	with	this	wisdom.	To	a	person	who	has	attained	this	knowledge,	the	entire
universe	is	like	a	piece	of	cloth	spread	out.
O	Vasishtha!	Your	energy	flashed	out	like	a	streak	of	lightning.	When	you
appeared	from	the	lightning,	that	was	like	a	birth	and	Mitra	and	Varuna
witnessed	this	birth	of	yours.	The	sage	Agastya	introduced	you	to	mankind.
(Vasishtha	is	believed	to	have	been	Agastya's	younger	brother.	Presumaby,
Agastya	introduced	Vasishtha	to	the	Tritsus.)
O	Vasishtha!	You	are	the	son	of	Mitra	and	Varuna.	O	
brahmona
!	You	were
mothered	by	the	celestial	nymph	Urvashi.	When	you	were	born,	divine	hymns
were	chanted	and	the	gods	showered	down	their	benediction.
Vasishtha	is	acquainted	with	all	the	knowledge	of	heaven	and	earth.	He	is
the	one	who	gives	a	thousand	forms	of	alms.	He	is	the	one	who	donates
everything.	Vasishtha	is	the	one	who	spreads	out	knowledge	like	an	open	piece
of	cloth.	Vasishtha	was	born	of	an	
apsara
	(a	celestial	nymph).
Mitra	and	Vanina	were	initiated	as	priests	at	the	time	of	a	sacrifice.	They
put	their	energy	into	a	pot.	From	this	energy,	first	Agastya	was	born.	Vasishtha
was	born	after	that.O	Bharatas!	Vasishtha	is	coming	to	you.	Welcome	him	with	due	respect.
Vasishtha	will	be	your	leader	in	the	chanting	of	sacred	hymns.	He	will	be	the
chief	of	the	
adhvaryus.Water
(The	next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	water	and	is	composed	in	the	
trishtupa
metre.)
O	water!	You	will	enable	us	to	obtain	divinity.	
Soma
	herbs	have	been
obtained	from	the	ground,	thanks	to	the	generosity	of	water.	Water	has	been
mixed	with	the	extracted	
soma
	juice	and	is	being	offered	to	Indra.	The	water	that
comes	from	rain	is	pure	and	free	of	sin.	May	this	sweet	water	be	mixed	with
soma
	juice.	May	we	obtain	this	juice	today.	May	we	drink	it	today.
O	water!	Your	sweet	flow	has	been	mixed	with	the	
soma
	juice.	May	Agni
protect	the	water	and	the	
soma	
juice.	Indra	and	the	Vasus	are	pleased	when	they
drink	this	
soma
	juice.	We	wish	to	become	like	the	gods	themselves.	May	we	too
obtain	the	
soma
	juice	today.	May	we	get	to	drink	it.
Divine	water	performs	purification	in	a	hundred,	ways.	It	grants	pleasure
through	the	provision	of
Food	grains.	Divine	water	is	used	in	the	sacrifices	of	the	gods.	This	is	the
water	that	preserves	all	of	Indra's	actions.	Offer	oblations	of	clarified	butter	to
the	water	of	the	rivers.
With	its	rays,	the	sun	spreads	the	water	in	all	directions.	Indra	himself	dug
the	routes	along	which	water	could	travel.	O	water	of	the	rivers!	May	your	flow
grant	us	the	best	of	food	grains	and	riches.	May	water	always	protect	us	and
ensure	our	welfare.Vastoshpati
(The	next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	Vastoshpati.	The	word	
vastu
	means	house
and	Vastoshpati	is	the	god	of	the	household.	In	the	course	of	the	hymn,	he	is	also
referred	to	as	Indu.	Indu	is	another	name	for	Soma.	The	
sukta
	is	composed	in	the
trishtupa
	metre.)
O	Vastoshpati!	May	you	look	upon	us	as	your	own.	Make	sure	that	disease
does	not	frequent	our	houses.	Grant	us	the	riches	that	we	ask	of	you.	Ensure	the
welfare	of	all	bipeds	and	quadrupeds.
O	Vastoshpati!	You	are	the	one	who	delivers	us.	You	are	the	one	who
increases	our	prosperity.	O	Indu!	May	we	be	blessed	with	cows	and	horses.	May
we	not	suffer	from	old	age.	May	you	look	upon	us	as	friends.	A	father	takes	care
of	his	son.	Like	that,	you	will	take	care	of	us.
O	Vastoshpati!	May	we	attain	happiness	and	beauty	through	your	blessings.
May	we	get	to	attend	your	assembly.	May	we	be	counted	as	members	of	your
assembly.	You	will	grant	us	the	riches	that	we	deserve.	You	will	also	grant	us
the	riches	that	we	do	not	deserve.	You	will	protect	all	our	riches	and	ensure	our
welfare.Vishnu
(Vishnu	was	a	minor	god	in	the	
Vedas.
	He	became	prominent	in	post-Vedic
times.	In	the	
Vedas,
	Vishnu	seems	to	have	been	a	manifestation	of	Surya.	The
next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	Vishnu	and	is	composed	in	the	
trishtupa
	metre.)
O	Vishnu!	Your	superior	form	is	one	that	expands.	No	one	is	capable	of
fathoming	your	greatness.	I	know	of	the	two	worlds,	heaven	and	earth,	that	you
inhabit.	But	O	god!	There	is	also	a	world	above	all	these	that	you	inhabit.
O	Vishnu!	The	furthest	extremities	of	your	greatness	remain	unknown.	He
who	has	been	born	does	not	know	this.	Nor	will	he	who	will	be	born,	ever	know
this.	It	is	you	who	have	established	heaven	above.	That	is	a	beautiful	sight,	fit	to
behold.	It	is	you	who	hold	up	the	eastern	frontiers	of	the	earth.
O	Dyavaprithivi!	You	wish	to	ensure	the	welfare	of	all	of	mankind.	It	is	for
that	reason	that	you	produce	food	grains	and	cows.	O	Vishnu!	You	have	held
aloft	heaven	and	earth.	With	mountain	ranges,	you	have	made	the	earth	firm.
O	Vishnu!	You	have	created	vast	expanses	so	that	sacrifices	may	be	held.	O
Vishnu	and	Indra!	The	two	of	you	are	the	leaders.	You	have	given	birth	to
Surya,	Usha	and	Agni.	The	enemies	were	strong	and	well-protected.	But	you
invaded	and	vanquished	them	in	your	clever	way.
O	Indra	and	Vishnu!	The	demon	Shambara	possessed	ninety-nine
invincible	fortresses.	But	you	demolished	them.	You	killed	the	hundreds	and
thousands	of	soldiers	that	the	demon	Varchasvi	sent.
This	hymn	of	praise	is	indeed	lofty.	It	is	a	hymn	that	has	been	composed	in
praise	of	the	strong	and	valiant	Indra	and	Vishnu.	O	Indra	and	Vishnu!	1	have
submitted	these	hymns	so	that	they	may	be	chanted	on	the	occasion	of	the
sacrifice.	May	you	provide	us	food	at	the	time	the	battle.
O	Vishnu!	I	have	offered	these	oblations	of	food	grains	to	you.	O	Vishnu!
You	are	the	energetic	one.	Accept	the	offerings	that	I	have	made.	May	these
excellent	hymns	that	I	have	composed	add	to	your	fame.	Grant	us	protection	and
ensure	our	welfare.The	Frog	Song
(Our	final	
sukta
	from	
mandala
	seven	is	the	frog	song.	This	is	composed	in
the	
trishtupa
	and	
anushtupa	
metres.	What	is	remarkable	about	this	
sukta
	is	the
element	of	satire	in	the	comparison	of	the	priests	to	the	frogs.)
The	
brahmanas
	who	have	been	observing	religious	rites	have	been	quiet	for
a	year	while	the	rites	were	going	on.	Now	that	the	rites	are	over,	they	have	begun
to	recite	hymns.	They	are	like	the	frogs	which	have	remained	quiet	for	a	year,	as
long	as	it	was	hot.	Now	that	the	monsoon	has	started,	the	frogs	have	started	to
croak.
The	frogs	lay	there,	in	ponds	that	were	dry.	They	seemed	to	be	wrinkled
bags	made	of	skin.	As	soon	as	water	descended	from	the	monsoon	clouds,	the
frogs	began	to	croak.	Their	sound	was	like	the	lowing	of	cows	that	have	calved.
One	whose	throat	is	parched	thirsts	for	water.	The	frogs	were	like	thirsty
people.	When	the	clouds	gave	rise	to	monsoon	showers,	the	frogs	started	to
croak.	The	sound	of	the	croaking	was	like	the	sound	of	a	father	talking	to	his
son.	One	frog	went	to	another,	and	they	gathered	together.
One	frog	welcomed	another,	as	the	monsoon	showers	made	them	all	happy.
Once	it	rained,	the	frogs	began	to	leap.	A	spotty	frog	leaped	to	a	green	frog	and
the	two	seemed	to	talk.
One	frog	seemed	to	talk	to	another.	It	was	almost	as	if	a	disciple	was
conversing	with	his	teacher.	The	frogs	leaped	on	the	water	and	croaked,	and
their	bodies	glistened	and	shone.
One	frog	croaked	like	a	cow,	another	croaked	like	a	goat.	One	frog	was
spotty,	another	was	green.	All	of	them	were	frogs,	as	commonly	referred	to.	And
yet	they	were	all	different.	Distinct	from	one	another.	Many	were	their	forms
and	different	were	the	voices	in	which	they	croaked.
At	the	sacrifice	named	
atiratra,	brahmanas
	gather	together.	The	frogs	were
like	
brahmanas
	assembled	for	such	a	sacrifice.	As	soon	as	the	monsoon	made
the	pond	full,	the	frogs	gathered	together.	The	first	day	of	monsoon	showers	is
earmarked	for	such	an	assembly.
Brahmanas
	observe	sacrifices	for	a	year.	
Soma
	juice	is	offered	at	these
sacrifices	and	hymns	are	recited	at	the	end	of	the	year.	The	
adhvaryu
	priests
sweat	as	they	chant	the	
mantras.
	No	one	leaves	the	place	of	the	sacrifice.	No	one
stays	hidden.	The	frogs	were	like	these	priests.The	leaders	are	the	ones	who	follow	the	divine	codes	of	conduct.	They
observe	the	religious	rites	in	each	of	the	twelve	months.	As	soon	as	it	rains,	the
frogs	which	have	suffered	from	the	heat,	emerge.
The	frog	which	croaks	like	a	cow	will	grant	us	riches.	The	frog	which
croaks	like	a	goat	will	grant	us	riches.	The	frog	that	is	spotty	will	grant	us	riches,
the	one	that	is	green	will	grant	us	riches.	The	monsoon	indicates	the	advent	of	a
thousand	herbs.	The	frogs	will	grant	us	a	hundred	cows.	They	will	increase	our
life	expectancies.
(The	frogs	grant	all	these	objects	as	they	proclaim	the	onset	of	the
monsoon.	The	rains	revive	the	earth,	and	in	this	sense,	grant	all	these	riches.)Mandala	Eight
(This	
mandala
	has	103	
suktas
	and	1716	
mantras.	
The	
suktas
	are	ascribed	to
various	sages.	Most	of	the	
mantras
	are	addressed	to	Indra,	followed	by	those	to
Agni	and	the	Ashvinis.	The	
valakhilya
	section	that	was	mentioned	in	the
introduction	forms	part	of	this	
mandala.
	In	order	to	learn	about	gods	other	than
those	who	have	figured	earlier,	we	start	with	a	
sukta	
addressed	to	the	Adityas.
Aditi	is	the	mother	of	the	gods	and	Aditya	signifies	'son	of	Aditi'.	Thus,	Aditya
is	a	general	expression	for	all	gods.	But	the	word	Aditya	is	also	used	in	a	more
specific	sense.	There	are	twelve	manifestations	of	Surya,	one	for	each	of	the
twelve	solar	months.	These	are	the	twelve	Adityas.	The	
sukta
	that	we	reproduce
is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Kanva	and	is	composed	in	the	
ushnika
	metre.)
It	is	certain	that	a	man	who	worships	the	Adityas	and	follows	the	rules
indicated	by	them,	will	obtain	riches	and	happiness	such	as	have	never	been
obtained	before.
The	path	followed	by	the	Adityas	is	a	straight	one	and	is	free	of	all
violence.	The	path	indicated	by	the	Adityas	is	the	path	that	should	be	followed
by	mankind.	It	is	the	path	that	leads	to	happiness.
May	Savita,	Bhaga,	Varuna,	Mitra	and	Aryama	(five	Adityas)	grant	us	the
great	happiness	that	we	have	been	desiring.
O	goddess!	You	nourish	us	along	the	path	that	Is	blessed	with	the	best	of
qualities.	That	path	is	free	of	all	violence	and	is	full	of	love.	You	are	the
immortal	goddess.	Come	to	us	with	learning	and	come	to	us	with	happiness.
Come	to	us	with	all	the	gods.
(The	goddess	in	question	is	Aditi.)
O	mother	Aditi!	Your	great	sons	are	free	from	evil	and	perform	the	best	of
deeds.	They	know	well	how	to	banish	the	enemies	who	hate	them.	They	know
well	the	means	of	destroying	sinners.
Aditi	is	the	goddess	who	is	never	destroyed.	May	the	pure	Aditi	protect	our
animals	during	the	day.	May	she	protect	them	during	the	night.	May	mother
Aditi	ensure	the	prosperity	of	our	sons	and	our	animals.	May	she	preserve	us
from	sin.
Aditi	is	the	source	of	all	intelligence.	She	will	come	to	us	with	her	powers
of	protection.	Aditi	will	grant	us	peace	and	happiness.	She	will	banish	all	our
enemies.The	two	Ashvinis	are	the	physicians	of	the	gods.	May	they	grant	us
happiness	and	may	they	protect	us	from	sin.	May	they	banish	our	enemies.
Agni's	flames	and	energies	will	ensure	our	welfare.	Surya	will	radiate	just
the	right	amount	of	heat,	so	that	we	are	warmed,	but	not	burnt	up.	May	the	pure
Vayu	blow	and	grant	us	happiness.	May	all	the	gods	banish	our	enemies.
O	Adityas!	May	disease	not	come	dose	to	us.	Banish	our	enemies.	May	we
not	fall	prey	to	evil	thoughts.	Preserve	us	from	all	manner	of	sin.
O	Adityas!	Banish	all	our	enemies	and	banish	all	our	evil	thoughts.	You	are
the	ones	who	possess	all	the	wisdom	that	there	is.	Please	make	sure	that	those
who	hate	us	do	not	get	to	come	near	us.
O	Adityas!	You	are	the	generous	ones.	Grant	us	the	happiness	that	makes
even	sinners	forsake	the	path	of	sin.
There	are	men	who	have	become	like	demons	and	wish	to	kill	us.	May	such
men	be	destroyed	through	their	own	deeds.	May	such	men	not	be	able	to	come
near	us.
There	are	those	who	hate	us	and	are	treacherous	towards	us.	These	violent
and	evil	ones	are	our	enemies.	May	their	sins	devour	them	up.
O	Adityas!	You	are	the	gods	who	establish	everything.	You	know	who	are
fraudulent	and	who	are	not.	May	you	only	reside	with	men	who	are	pure	of
heart.
We	desire	to	obtain	the	happiness	that	there	is	in	mountains	and	in	water.
May	heaven	and	earth	protect	us	from	sin.
O	gods!	You	are	the	ones	who	establish	everything.	Grant	us	happiness	and
ensure	our	welfare.	The	chanting	of	your	names	will	protect	us	from	all	sin.
O	great	Adityas!	The	sacrifice	to	which	you	wish	to	come	is	being
performed.	We	are	the	ones	who	desire	to	be	like	your	friends.	May	you	look
upon	us	with	favour.
We	call	upon	the	Indra	who	protects	the	Maruts.	We	call	upon	the	Ashvinis,
Mitra	and	Varuna.	We	call	upon	Vastoshpati,	the	lord	of	households.	May	all
these	gods	ensure	our	welfare.
O	Mitra,	Aryama	and	Varuna!	O	Maruts!	Make	us	non-violent	and	grant	us
fame.	Grant	us	three-storeyed	houses.
O	Adityas!	All	of	us	men	will	eventually	die.	But	grant	us	long	lives.	Maywe	live	for	many	years.
Praskanva's	Gift
(We	next	have	a	
sukta
	from	the	
valakhilya
	section.	The	
valakhilyas
	were
sages	who	were	physically	small	in	stature.	In	
mandala
	eight,	there	are	eleven
suktas	
which	constitute	the	
valakhilya
	section.	These	eleven	hymns	are	not
included	in	
mandala
	eight,	but	are	placed	after	it,	as	a	sort	of	supplement.
Commentators	on	the	
Rig	Veda
	have	tended	to	ignore	them.)
The	
sukta
	we	reproduce	from	the	
valakhilya
	section	is	called	Praskanva's
gift	and	is	composed	in	the	
gayatri
	and	
anushtupa
	metres.	It	is	ascribed	to	the
sage	Kanva.	But	there	seems	to	have	been	a	sage	named	Praskanva,	who
belonged	to	the	Kanva	family.	He	invoked	Indra	to	aid	a	king	in	a	fight	against
the	enemies.)
It	is	Indra's	great	valour	which	becomes	manifest	the	four	directions.	O
Indra!	You	are	the	one	who	slices	up	all	the	demons.	May	we	receive	your
bounty.
O	Indra!	There	are	a	hundred	white	bulls	in	heaven.	They	shine	like	the
stars	in	the	sky.	Indra	has	granted	us	these	bulls,	he	has	granted	us	a	hundred
bamboos.	He	has	granted	us	a	hundred	dogs	and	as	many	soft	hides.	Indra	gave
us	a	hundred	bundles	of	sacrificial	grass	and	four	hundred	red	horses.
O	son	of	Kanva!	(This	is	a	reference	to	Praskanva.)	May	you	become	like	a
god	and	room	like	the	birds.	May	you	roam	like	a	horse.
O	men!	Pray	to	the	Indra	who	is	the	lord	of	the	seven	regions	that	there	are.
Indra	is	the	complete	one	and	his	fame	is	widespread.	There	are	paths	that	are
dark	with	the	shadow	of	sin.	One	who	has	managed	to	cross	these	paths	gets	to
see	Indra.Mandala	Nine
(There	are	114	
suktas
	and	1108	
mantras
	in	
mandala	
nine.	Barring	a	single
exception,	all	the	
suktas
	are	addressed	to	Pavamana	Soma.	Soma	is	the
personification	of	the	
soma
	juice,	and	is	also	identified	with	the	moon-god.
Pavamana	signifies	'that	which	is	being	purified.	This	refers	to	the	purification	of
the	extracted	
soma
	juice,	to	its	being	strained	through	strainers.	To	avoid
repetition,	we	reproduce	only	one	
sukta
	from	
mandala
	nine.	This	is	composed	in
the	
gayatri
	metre	and	is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Vishvamitra.)Pavamana	Soma
The	
soma
	juice	has	been	extracted	so	that	Indra	may	drink	it.	O	Soma!	May
you	be	pleasing	to	the	palate.	Flow	in	streams	that	will	be	a	source	of	happiness.
Soma	is	the	one	who	destroys	all	the	demons.	Soma	is	the	one	who	sees
everything.	The	place	where	pots	of	
soma
	juice	have	been	placed	has	been	made
firm	with	iron	stakes.
O	Soma!	You	are	the	one	who	grants	riches.	You	are	the	one	who	destroys
powerful	enemies.	Rob	the	enemies	of	their	riches	and	grant	those	riches	to	us.
Sacrifices	are	being	performed	for	the	great	gods.	May	
soma
	juice	be
offered	at	these	sacrifices,	together	with	food	grains.	May	
soma
	juice	grant	us
food	grains	and	riches.
O	Soma!	We	serve	you	well.	That	is	our	desire	every	day.	O	Soma!	It	is	to
you	that	we	express	all	our	wishes.
Soma
	juice	is	extracted	from	
soma
	herbs.	It	is	then	purified.	It	is	poured
through	a	piece	of	doth	that	is	spread	out.	It	is	Surya’s	daughter	who	performs
the	act	of	straining,	an	act	of	purification.
(Surya's	daughter	is	
shraddha,
	or	respect.	The	implication	is	that	
soma
	juice
is	strained	most	respectfully,	with	faith	and	devotion	in	one's	heart.)
On	the	day	of	the	sacrifice,	ten	fingers	grasp	the	
soma
	herbs.	The	ten
fingers	of	the	hand	are	like	ten	women	who	are	sisters.
The	fingers	bring	the	
soma
	herbs.	They	extract	the	powerful	
soma
	juice
from	the	herbs.	Sweet	is	the	juice	and	there	are	three	types	of	power	in	it.	
Soma
juice	prevents	all	sorts	of	misery.
(The	three	types	of	power	in	
soma
	juice	are	the	powers	to	purify	the	body,
the	mind	and	intelligence.)
Cows	should	never	be	killed.	They	look	upon	Soma	as	their	son.	The	milk
from	cows	is	mixed	with	
soma	
juice	and	an	offering	is	then	made	to	Indra.
It	is	the	pleasure	that	is	derived	from	drinking	the	
soma
	juice	which
provides	Indra	energy	to	demolish	the	enemies	who	surround	him.	It	is	the
valiant	Indra	who	grants	riches.Mandala	Ten
(Mandala
	ten	is	the	richest	
mandala
	of	the	
Rig	Veda	Samhita.
	Most	of	the
references	that	one	finds	to	the	
Rig	Veda
	are	from	this	
mandala.
	As	a	whole,	the
mandala
	has	181	
suktas
	and	1754	
mantras.
We	start	with	a	dialogue	between	Yama	and	Yami.	Yama	and	Yami	were,
respectively,	the	son	and	daughter	of	Vivasvana	or	Surya.	They	were	thus,
brother	and	sister.	The	
sukta
	is	ascribed	to	no	particular	sage.	Yama	and	Yami
are	themselves	referred	to	as	the	sages.	The	hymn	is	composed	in	the	
trishtupa
metre.)Yama	and	Yami
Yami	tells	Yama	-	In	the	secret	places	that	are	near	the	vast	ocean,	I	would
like	to	become	your	friend.	I	welcome	you	with	an	open	heart.	Prajapati,	the
creator,	has	made	us	and	is	like	our	father.	He	has	desired	that	we	may	unite	and
have	an	excellent	son.	Otherwise,	the	human	race	will	not	multiply.
Yama	replies	-	I	am	indeed	your	friend	and	your	companion.	But	I	do	not
desire	to	become	your	husband.	You	are	my	sister	and	a	brother	cannot	marry	a
sister.	Besides,	this	is	not	a	secret	place	at	all.	There	are	the	sons	of	the	demons,
who	are	mighty	and	strong.	They	are	everywhere	and	see	all	that	happens	on
heaven	and	earth.
Yami	says	-	You	may	be	right.	Such	a	union	between	a	brother	and	a	sister
may	be	forbidden	among	men.	But	such	a	union	is	not	frowned	upon	or
discouraged	by	the	gods.	I	wish	to	become	your	wife,	do	not	refuse	me.	Become
my	husband	and	grant	me	a	son	that	I	may	bear	in	my	womb.
Yama	replies	-I	have	never	done	anything	like	this	before,	I	always	follow
the	path	of	truth.	I	have	never	lied.	Our	parents	are	the	
gandharvas
	(a	semi-
divine	species)	in	heaven,	the	Adityas	who	rule	over	the	water,	and	the	great
Pusha.	They	are	our	best	friends.	What	you	propose	is	not	proper,	as	our	parents
would	disapprove	of	such	a	union.
Yami	says	-	The	great	god	Tvashta	is	the	creator	of	all	that	there	is.	He	is
everywhere	and	bears	up	everything.	It	is	Tvashta	himself	who	decreed	that	we
should	be	man	and	wife;	for,	there	is	no	one	else.	How	can	one	go	against	the
wishes	of	that	great	creator?	Heaven	and	earth	will	approve	of	our	marriage.
Yama	replies	-	Who	knows	the	secrets	of	the	first	day	of	creation?	Who
knows	how	the	universe	was	created?	Who	knows	what	relationships	are
sanctioned?	But	what	you	propose	is	a	sin.	It	will	lead	to	a	downfall	of	the	world
that	Mitra	and	Varuna	preside	over.
Yami	says	-	All	that	I	know	is	that	I	want	you	to	become	my	husband.	We
will	be	like	the	two	wheels	of	a	chariot,	united	in	action.	Let	us	be	man	and	wife.
Yama	replies	-	The	spies	of	the	gods	roam	throughout	the	world,	night	and
day.	They	never	rest	in	one	place,	their	eyes	are	never	closed.	If	we	commit	a
sin,	it	will	not	escape	them.	You	will	bring	unhappiness	to	both	of	us.	Go	to
some	other	man.	You	and	he	can	be	like	the	two	wheels	of	a	chariot.	Establish	a
relationship	with	him.Yami	says	-	Let	night	and	day	grant	us	what	we	desire.	Let	the	energy	of
the	sun	grant	Yama	what	he	wants.	Heaven	and	earth	know	that	there	is	no	one
but	the	pair	of	us.	May	Yami	become	Yama's	wife.	There	is	no	sin	in	this.
Yama	replies	-	Perhaps	there	will	be	some	era	in	the	future,	when	a	brother
may	become	his	sister's	husband.	But	that	day	has	not	come.	O	beauteous	one!
Wish	for	someone	else	as	your	husband.	Seek	refuge	with	another.
Yami	says	-	What	sort	of	a	brother	do	I	have?	He	cannot	even	satisfy	his
sister's	wishes.	What	sort	of	a	sister	am	I?	I	am	forced	to	be	unhappy,	even
though	I	have	a	brother	to	succour	me.	Many	are	the	words	I	have	uttered.	I	love
you.	Marry	me.
Yama	replies	-	Unfortunately,	it	is	also	true	that	I	do	not	wish	to	marry	you.
A	brother	who	marries	a	sister	commits	
a
	sin.	Leave	me	alone.	Go	to	some	other
man	and	find	your	pleasure	with	him.	O	beautiful	one!	Your	brother	does	not
wish	to	become	your	husband.
Yami	says	-	O	Yama!	You	are	indeed	weak.	I	have	not	been	able	to	fathom
what	goes	on	in	your	mind.	Do	you	have	some	other	wife?	Has	some	other
woman	tied	you	up,	the	way	a	horse	is	tied	up	with	a	noose?	Like	a	creeper
entwines	itself	around	a	tree,	has	some	other	woman	embraced	you?
Yama	replies	-	O	Yami!	Go	and	embrace	some	other	man	like	a	creeper
embracing	a	tree.	May	some	other	man	embrace	you.	May	you	be	able	to	charm
his	mind.	May	he	be	able	to	charm	you.	May	you	be	happy	with	him.Havirdhanas
(The	next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	the	Havirdhanas.	Two	
shakatas
	or	carts
were	used	at	sacrifices	to	carry	offerings,	for	example,	
soma
	herbs.	These	carts
were	known	as	the	
Havirdhanas.
	The	
sukta
	is	composed	in	the	
trishtupa
	and
jagati
	metres.	It	is	not	clear	to	which	sage	the	
sukta
	is	ascribed,	but	he	seems	to
have	belonged	to	the	Angirasa	family.)
O	carts!	These	
mantras
	originated	many	years	ago.	I	utter	the	
mantras
	and
place	food	grains	and	other	sacrificial	offerings	on	you.	I	take	you	to	the	place	of
the	sacrifice.	My	hymns	are	like	the	oblations.	May	they	attain	the	gods.	The
gods	are	the	sons	of	the	great	creator.	They	live	in	divine	places.	May	the	gods
listen	to	my	prayers.
The	two	carts	are	taken	to	the	place	of	sacrifice	together.	Men	who	are
devoted	to	the	gods	place	oblations	on	the	carts.	You	(the	carts)	know	the	place
where	you	are	supposed	to	stand.	You	are	the	excellent	stands	on	which	
soma
juice	is	placed.
There	are	five	steps	that	lead	to	the	sacrifice.	May	I	climb	each	of	the	steps.
Four	of	these	are	
trishtupa
	and	other	metres	in	which	hymns	are	composed.	The
fifth	step	is	the	sacred	syllable	
om,
	to	whose	chanting	I	perform	the	sacrifice.	On
the	altar	of	the	sacrifice	is	placed	the	purified	
soma
	juice.
For	the	sake	of	the	gods,	may	death	be	banished.	May	the	immortal	life	that
all	living	beings	are	entitled	to,	not	be	destroyed.	The	officiating	priests	are
performing	the	sacrifice	to	the	chanting	of	sacred	hymns.	May	the	nooses	of
death	not	be	able	to	encompass	our	physical	bodies.
Soma
	juice	is	like	our	father.	It	deserves	to	be	praised.	It	is	from	
soma
	juice
that	the	seven	basic	metres	emanate.	The	choristers	are	chanting	the	hymns.	The
two	carts	shine	in	heaven	and	on	earth.	The	two	carts	try	to	nourish	men	and
gods.Manasa
(Manasa
	means	spirit.	This	hymn	is	addressed	to	the	spirit	of	a	man	who	is
about	to	die.	It	attempts	to	call	the	spirit	back.	The	
sukta
	is	composed	in	the
anushtupa
	metre.	It	is	ascribed	to	sages	named	Shrutabandhu,	Viprabandhu	and
Gopayana.)
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away.	Yama	is	the	son	of	Vivasvana.	Your	spirit
has	gone	to	Yama.	May	your	spirit	come	back.	You	have	been	born	so	that	you
may	live	in	this	world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away.	It	has	gone	near	heaven	and	the	earth.	May
your	spirit	return.	You	have	been	born	so	that	you	may	live	in	this	world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away.	It	has	reached	the	earth	which	is	heated	from
the	four	directions.	(This	suggests	the	desert.)	May	your	spirit	return.	You	have
been	born	so	that	you	may	live	in	this	world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away	in	the	four	directions.	May	your	spirit	return.
You	have	been	born	so	that	you	may	live	in	this	world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away.	It	has	reached	the	water	of	the	ocean.	May
your	spirit	return.	You	have	been	born	so	that	you	may	live	in	this	world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away.	It	has	reached	the	rays	that	radiate	out	in	the
four	directions.	May	your	spirit	return.	You	have	been	born	so	that	you	may	live
in	this	world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away.	It	has	reached	the	water,	the	trees	and	the
herbs.	May	your	spirit	return.	You	have	been	born	so	that	you	may	live	in	this
world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away.	It	has	reached	the	sun	and	the	dawn.	May
your	spirit	return.	You	have	been	born	so	that	you	may	live	in	this	world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away.	It	has	reached	the	lofty	mountains.	May	your
spirit	return.	You	have	been	born	so	that	you	may	live	in	this	world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away,	beyond	the	portals	of	this	world.	May	your
spirit	return.	You	have	been	born	so	that	you	may	live	in	this	world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away,	as	far	away	as	is	possible	to	imagine.	May
your	spirit	return.	You	have	been	born	so	that	you	may	live	in	this	world.
Your	spirit	has	gone	far	away.	It	has	reached	the	past	and	the	future.	Mayyour	spirit	return.	You	have	been	born	so	that	you	may	live	in	this	world.Rivers
(The	next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	rivers.	It	is	composed	in	the	
jagati
	metre
and	is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Preyamedha.)
O	waters!	I	sing	hymns	in	praise	of	your	greatness.	I	chant	them	at	the
house	of	the	one	who	is	performing	the	sacrifice.	Twenty-one	are	the	rivers	that
flow,	seven	for	each	of	the	three	worlds.	The	most	famous	of	all	these	rivers	is
the	Sindhu	(Indus).	It	is	the	greatest.
O	Sindhu!	When	you	headed	for	the	fertile	plains,	Varuna	himself	charted
out	a	path	for	you.	Excellent	is	the	course	that	you	follow.	You	are	the	source	of
life	for	all	living	beings.
The	thunder	of	your	roar	is	heard	in	the	sky,	above	the	earth.	Your	waters
shine	as	they	speed	past.	The	river	Sindhu	thunders	like	a	bull.	The	sound	it
makes	is	like	the	clouds	thundering	before	the	onset	of	showers.	It	has	been	said
that	the	Sindhu	roars	in	the	sky	before	descending	on	earth.
O	Sindhu!	A	mother	goes	to	her	son	with	love	in	her	heart.	A	cow	goes	to	a
calf	that	has	just	been	born,	to	offer	it	milk.	Like	that,	other	rivers	head	towards
a	confluence	with	the	Sindhu.	You	are	the	leader	of	the	rivers,	like	a	king	is	the
leader	of	his	army.	You	are	foremost	among	all	the	rivers.
O	Ganga!	O	Yamuna!	O	Sarasvati!	O	Shutudri!	(The	Shutudri	is	the	Sutlej.)
O	Parushni!	O	Asikli!	(The	Asikli	is	the	Chandrabhaga	or	the	Chenab.)	O
Marudvridha!	(This	river	has	not	been	identified.)	O	Vitasta!	(The	Vitasta	is	the
Jhelum.)	O	Sushoma!	(The	Sushoma	is	said	to	be	another	name	for	the	Sindhu.)
O	Arjikiya!	(The	Arjikiya	has	been	identified	as	the	Vipasha	or	the	Beas.)	O
Sindhu!	May	you	and	the	other	seven	rivers	listen	to	our	prayers.
(Originally,	there	were	seven	rivers	including	the	Sindhu.	Moreover,	in
addition	to	the	Sindhu,	nine	rivers	are	mentioned	in	the	above	passage.)
O	Sindhu!	You	wish	to	unite	with	the	fast-flowing	Gomati	river.	But	first
you	unite	with	the	river	named	Tushtama.	Then	you	unite	with	the	rivers
Susartu,	Shveti,	Kubha	and	Mehatnu.	You	unite	with	them,	as	if	you	are	riding
on	the	same	chariot	with	them.
White	are	the	waters	of	the	Sindhu	and	they	flow	straight	ahead.	Fast	is	the
Sindhu	and	its	speed	cannot	be	stemmed.	The	river	is	like	a	fleet-footed	stallion.
It	is	as	handsome	as	a	beautiful	woman.
Sindhu	possesses	excellent	horses,	beautiful	chariots,	handsome	clothingand	golden	ornaments.	Its	water	is	pure	and	it	abounds	in	aquatic	plants.
Flowering	trees	line	its	banks.
Sindhu	possesses	a	chariot	that	brings	happiness.	To	this	chariot,	steeds	are
harnessed.	Sindhu	will	bring	us	food	grains	in	that	chariot.	The	praise	of	the
river	is	chanted	at	the	time	of	a	battle	or	a	sacrifice.	Great	and	famous	is	Sindhu's
chariot.	It	performs	no	violent	deeds.Vishvakarma
(The	next	
sukta
	is	addressed	to	Vishvakarma.	Vishvakarma	is	regarded	as
the	creator	of	the	universe.	Later,	he	came	to	be	regarded	as	the	architect	of	the
gods.	The	
sukta
	is	composed	in	the	
trishtupa
	metre	and	is	ascribed	to	the	sage
Bhouvana.)
Vishvakarma	was	the	first	priest.	He	performed	a	sacrifice	so	that	all	the
worlds	and	all	the	riches	could	be	created.	He	offered	oblations	to	Agni	and	to
himself.	He	is	our	father.	Vishvakarma	recited	hymns	so	that	the	riches	that	are
typified	in	heaven	might	be	created.	First,	he	created	the	universe.	Next,	he
merged	into	Agni.
Where	was	Vishvakarma	at	the	time	of	creation?	What	did	he	look	like
then?	Where	did	he	start	his	act	of	creation?	How	did	he	go	about	the	task?	Who
knows	why	Vishvakarma	created	the	land	masses	of	the	earth?	Why	did	he
create	the	vast	expanse	of	the	sky?	Who	knows	the	answers	to	these	questions?
Vishvakarma	is	the	
paramatman.
	He	is	omniscient.	His	mouths,	his	arms,
and	his	feet	are	everywhere.	It	is	this	
paramatman
	who	created	the	three	worlds.
With	his	own	hands	and	feet,	he	created	heaven	and	earth	at	the	same	time.	He	is
the	single	and	supreme	godhead	who	oversees	the	functioning	of	the	universe.
What	was	the	forest	and	what	the	trees	with	which	heaven	and	earth	were
fashioned?	O	learned	one!	Search	in	your	mind	to	see	if	you	know	the	answer	to
this	question.	Think	of	the	place	where	the	supreme	godhead	resides.	It	is	there
that	he	bears	up	the	entire	universe.
O	Vishvakarma!	You	are	the	supreme	creator.	You	have	a	superior	body,
you	have	a	medium	body,	and	you	have	an	inferior	body.	May	all	these	bodies
make	the	elements	our	friends.	May	water	be	mixed	with	your	body	to	generate
food	grains.	May	we	obtain	these	food	grains.
O	Vishvakarma!	The	oblations	increase	your	strength.	Through	your	power
and	wisdom,	you	bear	up	heaven	and	earth.	May	oblations	be	offered	to	heaven
and	earth	at	the	time	of	sacrifices.	Those	who	do	not	perform	sacrifices
according	to	the	proper	rites,	may,	they	be	deluded.	Vishvakarma	is	the	lord	of
all	riches	at	all	sacrifices.	May	he	grant	us	heaven	and	earth.
Vishvakarma	is	the	lord	of	all	speech.	He	is	as	swift	as	the	speed	of
thought.	We	call	upon	Vishvakarma	so	that	he	may	offer	us	protection	at	the
time	of	this	sacrifice.	May	he	accept	our	oblations	and	grant	us	protection.	He	isthe	one	who	is	the	source	of	all	happiness	and	the	source	of	all	righteous	action.Purusha
(The	next	
sukta
	is	the	famous	
Purusha	sukta.	Purusha	
is	the	embodiment	of
the	universal	soul	and	is	thus	regarded	as	the	origin	of	the	universe.	The	
sukta
	is
composed	in	the	
anushtupa
	and	
trishtupa
	metres	and	is	ascribed	to	the	sage
Narayana.)
Purusha
	is	the	supreme	godhead	who	has	a	thousand	heads,	a	thousand
eyes	and	a	thousand	feet.	He	surrounds	the	earth	from	the	four	directions.	One	of
his	forms	is	merely	ten	fingers	tall.	But	it	pervades	creation.
(One	interpretation	is	that,	
purusha
	or	the	
paramatman
	also	has	a
manifestation	in	terms	of	the	individual	soul	or	
atman.
	It	is	the	
atman
	which	is
ten	fingers	in	length.)
It	is	the	
purusha
	who	is	the	past	and	the	future.	It	is	the	
purusha
	who	is	the
present.	The	
purusha
	flourishes	through	food	grains.	He	is	the	lord	of
immortality	and	of	divine	bliss.
Immense	is	the	greatness	of	the	
purusha.
	But	there	is	a	
purusha
	who	is
superior	to	him	as	well.	All	the	elements	that	constitute	the	universe	are	merely
like	one	foot	of	the	
purusha.
	Three	of	his	footsteps	provide	immortality	in
heaven.
Three	of	the	
purusha's
	footsteps	can	be	traced	in	heaven.	His	form	is
divided	into	four	quarters.	One	fourth	of	his	form	is	born	again	and	again	in	the
universe	in	the	shape	of	living	beings.	He	created	in	the	four	directions	being
that	live	on	food	grains	and	beings	that	do	not.
(Beings	that	live	on	food	grains	are	the	sentient	ones.	The	others	are
insentient.)
It	is	from	the	
purusha
	that	
virat
	was	created.	Above	
virat,
	there	is	the
greater	
purusha.	Virat
	was	divided	into	various	parts.	First,	the	land	and	the
worlds	were	created.	Physical	bodies	emerged	later.
(Virat
	is	regarded	as	the	female	counterpart	of	the	primeval	
purusha.)
The	gods	offered	oblations	to	
purusha
	and	
virat.	
They	performed	a
sacrifice.	The	spring	season	was	the	clarified	butter	that	was	offered	on	the
occasion	of	the	sacrifice.	The	summer	season	was	the	kindling	and	the	autumn
season	was	the	oblation.
Virat	was	the	first	to	be	created	and	deserved	to	be	worshipped.	The	godsand	the	sages	saw	
virat
	and	
purusha
	and	performed	a	sacrifice	in	their	honour.
From	that	sacrifice	were	obtained	curds	and	clarified	butter.	The	birds	that
fly	in	the	sky	were	created.	The	animals	that	live	in	the	forests	where	Vayu	rules,
also	emerged.	Domesticated	animals	were	created.
From	the	sacrifice	emerged	the	
mantras	of
	the	
Rig	veda,	Sama	hymns,
Various	metres	and	the	
mantras
	of	the	
Atharva	Veda
	and	the	
mantras
	of	the
Yajur	Veda
	as	well.
From	that	sacrifice	were	created	horses	and	animals	that	have	two	tusks.
Cows,	goats	and	sheep	emerged.
The	
purusha
	who	has	been	mentioned	was	described	in	all	sorts	of	ways.
What	was	his	mouth	like?	Where	were	his	two	arms?	Where	were	his	thighs	and
where	were	his	feet?	Such	are	the	questions	that	are	asked.
From	the	mouth	of	the	
purusha
	were	born	the	learned	
brahmanas.
	From	his
arms	were	bom	the	brave	
kshatriyas.
	From	his	thighs	were	bom	
vaishyas	
and
from	his	feet	were	bom	the	
shudras
	(a	servant	or	slave	class).
The	moon	was	created	from	the	mind	of	the	
paramatman.
	His	eyes	became
the	sun.	Indra	and	Agni	were	born	from	the	mouth	and	Vayu	was	created	from
the	breath	of	life.
The	atmosphere	was	made	from	the	
paramatman's	
navel.	His	head	became
heaven	and	his	feet	the	earth.	The	directions	were	created	from	his	ears.	In	this
fashion,	other	worlds	can	be	thought	to	have	been	created	from	other	parts	of	the
paramatman's	
anatomy.
Seven	were	the	fencings	(the	metres)	that	encircled	the	place	where	the
sacrifice	was	held.	Twenty-one	bundles	of	kindling	were	used.	The	gods
performed	the	sacrifice	and	the	
paramatman
	himself	was	the	sacrificial	beast.
The	gods	began	to	perform	the	sacrifice	with	the	aid	of	the	
purusha.
	This
was	one	of	the	most	righteous	acts	ever	performed.	The	individuals	who
performed	this	righteous	act	reside	in	the	most	sacred	of	places.	It	is	certainly	the
case	that	learned	men	go	to	that	most	happy	of	places.Urvashi	and	Pururava
(In	this	
sukta,
	Urvashi	and	Pururava	are	described	as	the	divinities	to	whom
the	hymn	is	addressed.	They	are	also	described	as	the	sages	to	whom	the	hymn	is
ascribed.	The	entire	hymn	is	in	the	form	of	a	dialogue	between	Urvashi	and
Pururava.	The	
sukta
	is	composed	in	the	
trishtupa
	metre.
In	a	naturalistic	sense,	Pururava	has	been	interpreted	as	the	morning	sun
and	Urvashi	as	the	dawn.	The	
sukta
	in	question	is	however	based	on	a	more
earthy	legend.	Urvashi	was	an	
apsara
	from	heaven	who	was	banished	to	the
earth.	There	she	encountered	King	Pururava	and	Pururava	wished	to	marry
Urvashi.	Urvashi	agreed,	subject	to	two	conditions	being	met.	The	first	was	that
Pururava	should	always	take	care	of	two	rams	that	Urvashi	possessed.	The
second	condition	was	that	Urvashi	should	never	see	Pururava	naked.	The	couple
married	and	lived	together	for	four	years.	But	the	
gandharvas	
plotted	to	take
Urvashi	back	to	heaven.	One	night,	they	stole	one	of	the	rams.	In	an	attempt	to
catch	the	thief,	Pururava	rose	from	his	bed,	without	having	the	time	to	put	his
clothes	on.	At	that	moment,	there	was	a	flash	of	lightning	and	Urvashi	caught	a
glimpse	of	her	husband	naked.	Since	the	conditions	were	violated,	Urvashi
vanished	and	returned	to	heaven.	Pururava	met	her	subsequently	and	begged	her
to	return	to	him.	Urvashi	consented	to	do	this,	but	only	until	a	son	was	born	to
them.)
Pururava	-	O	cruel	wife!	Stay	here	for	a	short	while	with	your	loving	words.
May	the	two	of	us	remain	together	for	some	time	and	converse.	The	memory	of
the	conversation	that	we	have	together	will	be	a	source	of	happiness	in	the	days
to	come.
Urvashi	-	What	purpose	will	these	dry	words	serve?	What	happiness	can	be
gleaned	from	them?	I	will	disappear	from	your	presence	like	the	dawn.	O
Pururava!	Return	to	your	home.	I	am	as	elusive	as	the	wind.
Pururava	-	Your	separation	has	caused	me	much	pain.	I	can	no	longer	lift	an
arrow	from	my	quiver	in	pursuit	of	victory.	I	am	strong.	Yet,	I	find	myself
unable	to	rob	my	enemies	of	their	cattle	and	riches.	I	no	longer	find	the	power	to
carry	on	with	my	kingly	duties.	I	used	to	be	like	a	lion	whose	roars	struck	terror
into	enemies	on	the	field	of	battle.	Alas,	all	that	is	a	thing	of	the	past.
Urvashi	-	O	dawn!	This	Urvashi	wishes	to	cook	food	for	her	father-in-law.	I
think	of	my	husband	often,	and	I	wish	to	go	to	his	house.	Night	and	day,	I	think
of	my	happy	life	with	him.	O	Pururava!	I	think	of	the	joy	we	have	had	together.	Inever	had	any	feelings	of	jealousy	for	my	co-wives.	O	brave	warrior!	You	were
my	lord.
Pururava	-	O	Urvashi!	You	came	to	me	with	four	of	your	friends.	Their
names	were	Sujurni,	Shreni,	Sumnapi	and	Hridechakshu.	But	after	you	left,	they
no	longer	come	to	visit	me,	dressed	in	their	gorgeous	clothing.	I	no	longer	hear
the	sounds	of	their	voices,	like	the	voices	of	cows	that	have	just	calved.
Urvashi	-	O	Pururava!	When	you	were	born,	the	wives	of	the	gods	came	to
witness	the	birth.	The	rivers	that	flow	bowed	down	in	salutation	before	the	baby.
The	gods	gave	you	the	strength	to	vanquish	and	kill	enemies	in	battle.	When
Pururava	came	before	the	a
psaras,
	they	fled	before	his	energy.	It	was	as	if	deer
were	fleeing	from	a	hunter.	Yet	Pururava	married	this	
apsara
	and	loved	her.
Urvashi	had	a	fleeting	presence	like	the	lightning	that	flashes	through	the	clouds.
My	wishes	will	be	fulfilled	if	I	bear	your	son.	Urvashi	prays	that	the	boy	may
have	a	long	life.	O	Pururava!	The	son	that	I	bear	you	will	rule	over	the	whole
world.	I	warned	you	that	my	conditions	would	have	to	be	met,	but	you	paid	no
heed.	You	broke	the	conditions.	What	is	the	point	of	sorrowing	now?
Pururava	-	When	will	you	give	birth	to	a	son	who	will	address	me	as	father?
He	will	come	to	me	and	ay.	Who	will	wipe	his	tears	then?	How	can	a	son	be
born	who	will	lead	to	his	parents	being	separated?	When	will	your	son	frolic	in
the	house	of	your	father-in-law?
Urvashi	-	I	will	answer	your	questions.	When	your	son	cries,	I	will	pray	for
his	welfare.	I	will	make	sure	that	he	has	no	reason	to	cry.	I	will	send	your	son	to
you	when	he	is	bom.	It	is	time	for	you	to	return	home	now.	Do	not	be	ignorant.
It	is	impossible	for	me	to	be	with	you	now.
Pururava	-I	was	your	beloved	husband,	but	I	have	fallen	from	that	pedestal.
How	does	it	matter	if	I	die	unprotected	in	distant	lands?	How	does	it	matter	if	I
sleep	on	the	ground	or	die	in	grief?	How	does	it	matter	if	wolves	devour	me	in
the	forests?
Urvashi	-	O	Pururava!	May	you	not	die.	Do	not	fall	from	your	pedestal.
May	you	come	to	no	harm	and	may	wolves	not	bring	you	grief.	May	you	be
preserved.	The	love	of	women	is	but	fickle.	Their	hearts	are	as	cruel	as	those	of
wolves.	I	adopted	the	form	of	a	woman	and	lived	among	men.	I	lived	with	you
for	the	space	of	four	years.	I	loved	you.	Those	memories	will	serve	me	well	once
I	take	leave	of	you.
Pururava	-	You	are	the	joy	of	the	atmosphere.	I	am	the	generous	Pururava,	Iam	the	performer	of	great	deeds.	1	love	you.	May	I	be	united	with	you.	My	heart
is	suffering	at	the	thought	of	the	impending	separation.	Do	not	go	away.	Please
return	to	me.
Urvashi	-	O	Pururava!	You	are	the	son	of	Ila.	The	gods	are	telling	you	that
you	are	mortal.	But	you	will	worship	the	best	of	gods.	And	after	your	death,	you
will	go	to	heaven	and	be	happy.Herbs
(The	next	
sukta
	is	a	praise	to	herbs.	It	is	ascribed	to	a	sage	named	Bhishag,
bom	in	the	line	of	the	sage	Atharvan.	The	hymn	is	composed	in	the	
anushtupa
metre.)
Many	are	the	forms	that	herbs	take.	They	are	full	of	juices.	The	gods
themselves	gave	birth	to	herbs	in	three	different	periods	of	time.	(The	three
periods	of	time	are	the	seasons	spring,	monsoon	and	autumn.)	I	know	that	the
brown	herbs	are	to	be	found	in	a	hundred	and	seven	different	places.	(Hundred
and	seven	is	probably	simply	a	large	number.)
O	herbs!	You	are	like	our	mothers.	You	are	to	be	found	in	a	hundred
different	places.	You	have	a	thousand	saplings.	Many	are	the	acts	that	you	are
capable	of	performing.	May	you	cure	us	of	all	ailments.
O	herbs!	May	you	thrive	and	may	you	have	flowers.	May	you	look	upon
patients	with	favour.	The	diseases	are	like	enemies,	may	you	invade	them	like
horses	attacking	foes.	You	free	us	from	illnesses.	You	deliver	us	from	disease.
O	herbs!	You	are	the	possessors	of	divine	qualities.	You	are	like	mothers	in
the	way	that	you	take	care	of	us.	That	is	what	I	feel	about	you.	O	physician!	I
grant	you	my	horses,	cows	and	clothing	for	the	sake	of	these	herbs.
O	herbs!	It	is	certain	that	you	grow	on	trees.	You	are	to	be	found	on	the
palasha
	tree.	You	are	praised	by	mankind	and	you	are	the	ones	who	nourish
cows.
Like	kings	coming	together	to	do	battle,	various	herbs	come	together	and
mingle.	The	physician	is	a	learned	person.	He	is	well-versed	in	the	treatment	of
diseases	and	ailments.
I	know	the	names	of	the	herbs	Ashvavati,	Somavati,	Udojasa	and	Urjayanti.
These	and	other	herbs	heal	the	body.
Like	cows	emerging	from	cowsheds,	all	sorts	of	powerful	juices	emerge
from	herbs.	O	man!	These	herbs	will	serve	your	body	and	grant	you	the	wealth
of	good	health.
													O	herbs!	Your	mother	is	named	lshkriti	(relief).	You	cure	ailments
and	banish	all	disease.	May	you	quickly	fall	down	(presumably,	from	the	trees).
May	he	who	is	a	patient,	be	quickly	cured.
Like	a	thief	invading	a	cowshed,	the	herbs	invade	all	sorts	of	disease.	Herbsbanish	all	the	ailments	that	cause	trouble	to	the	body.
													I	grasp	with	my	hands	herbs	that	are	a	source	of	strength.	Like
animals	fleeing	before	a	hunter,	the	symptoms	of	the	disease	run	away.
O	herbs!	The	disease	has	entered	the	limbs	and	the	bones	of	the	patient.
May	the	herbs	enter	his	body	and	purge	all	disease.
O	disease!	Fly	away	like	birds.	Run	quickly	away.	May	you	have	the	speed
of	the	wind.
O	herbs!	The	juice	of	one	herb	is	mixed	with	that	of	a	second.	The	juice	of
the	second	herb	is	mixed	with	that	of	a	third.	May	all	the	herbs	of	the	world	be
united	in	listening	to	my	prayers.	May	I	be	protected.
There	are	herbs	that	have	fruit,	and	there	are	those	that	do	not.	There	are
herbs	that	have	flowers,	and	there	are	those	that	do	not.	All	these	herbs	were
created	by	Brihaspati.	May	all	herbs	free	us	from	illness.
May	herbs	protect	me	from	all	curses.	May	herbs	protect	me	from	the
weapons	of	Varuna,	Yama	and	the	other	gods.	May	herbs	make	me	free.
The	herbs	descended	from	heaven.	If	the	herbs	look	upon	a	person	with
favour,	he	never	suffers	from	ill	health.
Soma	is	the	king	of	herbs.	Soma	is	blessed	with	many	qualities.	O	Soma!
You	are	the	best	of	the	herbs.	May	you	fulfil	my	desires	and	may	you	bring
happiness	into	my	life.
The	herbs	are	to	be	found	on	earth	and	Soma	is	their	chief.	Brihaspati
created	the	herbs	so	that	they	may	cure	patients.
O	herbs!	The	one	who	digs	you	out	of	the	ground,	may	he	not	be	destroyed.
I	dig	you	out	from	the	ground	for	the	sake	of	the	patient.	May	the	patient	not	be
destroyed.	May	all	bipeds	and	quadrupeds	be	free	from	disease.	May	our	sons
and	our	animals	be	free	from	disease.
The	herbs	which	are	far	away	will	listen	to	these	prayers.	The	herbs	which
are	near	will	also	listen	to	these	prayers.	All	the	herbs	will	combine	to	make	the
diseased	body	healthy	again.
The	physician	uses	the	herbs	for	treatment.	Soma	is	the	king	of	the	herbs.
The	other	herbs	propose	to	Soma	that	the	patient	may	be	cured.	May	the	danger
of	disease	be	removed.
O	herbs!	You	are	the	best	of	all	the	herbs.	You	are	superior	to	all	othertrees.	There	are	those	who	wish	to	destroy	us.	(This	means	ailments.)	May	such
foes	become	our	slaves.Sarama	and	the	Panis
(The	next	
sukta
	is	in	the	form	of	a	dialogue	between	Sarama	and	the	
panis.
Sarama	is	a	messenger	of	the	gods.	Later,	she	became	the	divine	dog.	As
mentioned	earlier,	the	
panis
	were	robbers.	This	
sukta
	is	composed	in	the
trishtupa
	metre.	It	is	not	ascribed	to	any	particular	sage.	Sarama	and	the	
panis
are	named	as	the	sages.)
The	
panis
	-	O	Sarama!	Why	have	you	come	here	to	visit	us?	The	path	that
comes	here	is	long	and	difficult.	How	did	you	come	here?	How	did	you	pass	the
night?	How	did	you	manage	to	cross	the	waters	of	the	river?
(The	
panis
	have	stolen	some	cows	and	have	hidden	them	in	a	mountain
cavern.	This	place	is	surrounded	by	a	river.)
Sarama	-	O	
panis
!	I	am	Indra's	messenger.	It	is	he	who	has	sent	me	to	you.
You	have	stolen	a	lot	of	cows	and	it	is	my	desire	to	retrieve	them.	The	waters	of
the	river	could	do	me	no	harm	as	I	was	protected	by	the	gods.	It	is	true	that,	at
first,	I	was	scared	of	the	crossing.	But	I	managed	to	cross	and	come	over	to	the
other	bank.
The	
panis
	-	O	Sarama!	What	is	your	master	Indra	like?	How	strong	is	he?
What	does	he	look	like?	How	many	soldiers	does	he	have?	You	have	come	a
long	way	at	the	behest	of	your	master.	We	would	like	Indra	to	be	our	friend.	We
would	like	him	to	be	our	master.	We	would	like	Indra	to	look	after	our	cattle	as
well.
Sarama	-	I	know	that	my	master	can	never	be	destroyed.	He	is	the	one	who
destroys	everything.	Such	is	the	master	at	whose	behest	I	have	travelled	such	a
long	distance.	The	deep	waters	of	the	river	could	not	run	counter	to	the	wishes	of
my	master.	O	
panis
!	Listen	to	what	I	have	to	say.	It	is	certain	that	Indra	will
slaughter	you	all.
The	
panis	-
	O	Sarama!	You	are	the	fortunate	one.	You	may	be	able	to	reach
the	furthest	points	of	the	sky.	You	expressed	a	desire	to	obtain	the	cows.	But
who	is	going	to	let	go	of	the	cows	without	a	fight?	We	have	many	sharp
weapons	that	we	can	fight	with.
Sarama	-	O	
panis
!	Your	words	are	not	those	that	should	be	used	by
warriors.	You	are	sinners.	And	therefore	you	will	not	have	the	strength	to	use
your	arrows.	You	will	not	be	able	to	tread	properly.	Brihaspati	will	never	grant
you	happiness.The	
panis	-
	O	Sarama!	We	have	hidden	the	treasure	in	a	place	that	is
surrounded	by	mountains.	There	are	cows,	horses	and	many	other	riches.	We
panis
	are	well-versed	in	the	art	of	defence.	We	will	be	able	to	protect	our
treasure.	Our	cows	and	riches	are	safe.	You	have	wasted	a	trip.
Sarama	-	The	sages	Angirasa	and	Ayasya	will	be	fortified	after	drinking	the
soma
	juice.	They	will	come	here	straight.	They	will	free	all	the	cows.	O	
panis
!
Then	you	will	have	to	retract	your	proud	words.
The	
panis	-
	O	Sarama!	We	know	that	you	have	been	frightened	by	the	gods
and	forced	to	come	here.	We	look	upon	as	our	own	sister.	Do	not	return	to	Indra.
O	beautiful	one!	Stay	here.	We	will	give	you	a	share	of	the	cows.
Sarama	-	O	
panis
!	I	cannot	be	your	sister	and	you	are	not	my	brothers.	I	do
not	know	these	relationships.	I	only	know	Indra	and	the	powerful	Angirasa.
When	I	return	and	tell	Indra	what	has	happened,	he	will	come	and	invade	you.
He	will	deliver	the	cows.	You	will	run	far	away	if	you	know	what	is	good	for
you.	O	
panis
!	Flee	far	away.	Free	the	cows	and	let	them	go	up	to	heaven.
Brihaspati	will	receive	the	cows	that	you	have	secreted	so	well.	You	have	tried
to	keep	it	a	secret.	But	Soma,	Indra	and	the	sages	have	found	out	where	the	cows
are	hidden.Prajapati
(The	next	
sukta	is
	addressed	to	Hiranyagarba	or	Prajapati,	the	creator.	It	is
composed	in	the	
trishtupa	
metre	and	is	ascribed	to	no	particular	sage.)
Prior	to	the	act	of	creation,	only	Hiranyagarbha	was	there.	Hiranyagarbha	is
the	
paramatman.
	He	is	the	one	and	only	one	who	created	the	universe.	He	is	the
one	who	bears	aloft	the	earth	and	the	atmosphere.	The	
paramatman
	is	the	source
of	all	happiness.	It	is	him	that	we	worship	through	our	oblations.
He	is	the	one	who	provides	the	knowledge	of	the	
atman.
	He	is	the	source	of
all	strength.	All	the	worlds	and	all	the	gods	follow	his	instructions.	It	is	his
decree	that	is	followed	everywhere.	In	the	shadow	of	his	refuge	there	is	the	seed
of	immortality.	To	forsake	the	
paramatman
	is	to	get	to	know	death.	The
paramatman	
is	the	source	of	all	happiness.	It	is	him	that	we	worship	through	our
oblations.
His	greatness	makes	him	the	lord	of	all	things,	sentient	and	insentient.	He
alone	is	the	king	of	all	things,	mobile	and	immobile.	He	is	the	master	of	all
bipeds	and	quadrupeds.	The	
paramatman
	is	the	source	of	all	happiness.	It	is	him
that	we	worship	through	our	oblations.
The	snow-clad	mountains	have	been	created	by	his	power.	The	rivers	that
flow	and	the	earth	that	moves	have	been	created	by	him.	It	is	he	who	created	the
oceans	and	the	sky.	The	four	directions	owe	their	origin	to	his	strength.	The
paramatman
	is	the	source	of	all	happiness.	It	is	him	that	we	worship	through	our
oblations.
It	is	he	who	instilled	energy	in	the	sky	and	the	atmosphere.	It	is	through	his
grace	that	the	earth	has	been	made	firm.	He	created	heaven	and	he	established
the	sun	in	the	atmosphere.	It	is	he	who	placed	water	in	the	sky.	The	
paramatman
is	the	source	of	all	happiness.	It	is	him	that	we	worship	through	our	oblations.
Heaven	and	earth	are	full	of	sound.	But	they	are	firm	so	that	living	beings
may	be	protected.	It	is	his	will	that	has	achieved	all	this.	It	is	through	his	powers
that	the	sun	rises	and	shines	in	the	sky.	The	
paramatman
	is	the	source	of	all
happiness.	It	is	him	that	we	worship	through	our	oblations.
The	great	fire	and	the	entire	universe	was	created	by	him.	It	is	he	who	bore
the	golden	(
hiranya
)	egg	
(anda)
	from	which	the	universe	was	created.	He	is
Hiranyagarbha.	He	is	the	one	who	made	water	course	in	the	universe.	He	is	the
supreme	Prajapati.	He	is	the	one	who	provided	water	so	that	gods	and	otherliving	beings	could	thrive.	The	
paramatman
	is	the	source	of	all	happiness.	It	is
him	that	we	worship	through	our	oblations.
He	is	the	creator	of	sacrifices	and	of	the	water	that	pervades	the	universe	at
the	time	of	destruction.	It	is	through	his	grace	that	the	waters	rise	up	into	the	sky.
He	is	the	lord	of	all	the	gods.	He	alone	is	supreme.	The	
paramatman
	is	the
source	of	all	happiness.	It	is	him	that	we	worship	through	our	oblations.
May	the	creator	of	the	earth	preserve	us	from	all	harm.	He	is	the	origin	of
righteousness	and	he	is	the	creator	of	heaven.	He	is	the	source	of	the	waters	that
bring	bliss.	The	
paramatman
	is	the	source	of	all	happiness.	It	is	him	that	we
worship	through	our	oblations.
O	Prajapati!	There	is	no	one	else	but	you.	You	alone	are	the	one	who
permeates	the	past,	the	present	and	the	future.	You	are	the	vastness	itself.	We
offer	oblations	to	you	so	that	our	desires	may	be	fulfilled.	Grant	us	our	wishes.
May	we	be	the	possessors	of	riches.Creation
(Let	us	next	have	a	
sukta
	on	creation.	It	is	addressed	to	Prajapati	and	is
composed	in	the	
trishtupa
	metre.	The	
sukta
	is	not	ascribed	to	any	particular
sage.)
After	the	destruction,	there	was	no	truth.	Nor	was	there	any	untruth.	This
was	prior	to	the	creation	and	there	were	no	worlds	then.	The	objects	that	can	be
seen	in	the	sky	were	not	present.	Who	was	it	that	covered	up	everything	then?
Where	were	all	objects	then?	Where	were	the	deep	and	silent	waters?
At	that	time,	there	was	no	death.	But	nor	was	there	immortality.	The	sun
and	the	moon	were	not	there.	Therefore,	there	was	no	sense	of	night	or	day.
Winds	did	not	blow.	The	
brahman
	alone	was	there.	And	it	was	the	
brahman
alone	who	breathed	through	his	powers.	Apart	from	the	
brahman,
	there	was	no
other	object.
This	was	the	scene	of	destruction	and	chaos	that	prevailed	before	creation
began.	Everything	was	shrouded	in	darkness.	There	was	water	all	around.	All
that	could	be	seen	around	was	the	power	of	the	
brahman.
The	time	of	creation	came.	The	idea	of	creation	entered	the	
paramatman's
mind.	From	the	powers	of	his	mind,	he	first	created	the	origin	of	seeds.	Through
the	intelligence	of	his	heart,	he	next	created	the	elements	that	constitute	the
universe.
It	was	the	
purusha
	who	bore	the	seeds.	The	power	of	greatness	was	created.
The	rays	that	emanated	from	the	
paramatman
	spread	out	In	all	the	directions,
above	and	below.
No	man	knows	and	no	man	can	tell	how	creation	began.	Men	are	ignorant
of	who	performed	the	act	of	creation.	Even	the	learned	ones	were	born	only	after
creation	started.	How	can	one	oneself	say	how	one	was	created?
No	one	is	learned	enough	to	know	about	the	creation.	How	does	one	know
who	bore	all	that	was	created?	The	learned	ones	only	know	that	the
paramatman,
	the	creator,	resides	above.	And	even	that	knowledge	is	probably
suspect.The	Forests
(We	now	have	a	
sukta
	addressed	to	the	goddess	of	the	forests.	This	is
composed	in	the	
anushtupa
	metre	and	is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Devamuni.)
O	goddess	of	the	forests!	You	can	be	seen	in	the	forests	and	in	the
wilderness.	But	you	vanish	before	our	eyes.	Why	are	you	not	seen	in	towns	and
villages?	Why	do	you	go	to	the	deserted	forests?	Do	you	not	feel	sacred	there?
There	are	animals	that	roar	in	a	loud	voice.	There	are	animals	that	call	in	a
soft	voice.	When	these	two	types	of	voices	mingle,	the	sound	is	that	of	a	musical
instrument	(
veena
)	being	played.	It	is	as	if	the	animals	are	chanting	the	praise	of
the	goddess	of	the	forest.
Animals	like	cows	also	graze	in	the	forest.	The	trees	and	creepers	that	grow
in	the	forest	seem	to	set	up	a	canopy	above	one's	head.	When	it	is	evening,	carts
emerge	from	the	forest.	They	are	laden	with	saplings	and	firewood.	It	is	almost
as	if	the	goddess	of	the	forests	is	sending	the	carts	home.
O	goddess	of	the	forest!	There	a	man	is	calling	to	his	cows.	There	is	another
chopping	down	firewood.	Men	who	spend	the	night	in	the	forests	hear	all	sorts
of	sounds	and	are	frightened.	So	it	is	said.
The	forests	do	not	perform	violent	acts	towards	anyone.	In	fact,	no	one
brings	any	harm	to	the	forests.	The	forest	is	the	place	where	sweet	fruits	can	be
found.	One	can	eat	those	and	live	happily.
All	sorts	of	fragrances	can	be	found	in	the	forest.	There	is	food	in	the	form
of	fruits	and	roots.	The	forest	is	a	fertile	region.	It	is	the	mother	of	the	deer.	Is	it
not	natural	that	I	should	sing	the	praise	of	the	goddess	of	the	forests?Shraddha
(Shraddha
	connotes	respect,	faith	and	devotion,	and	in	the	
sukta
	which
follows,	
shraddha
	is	itself	described	as	the	sage	to	whom	the	
sukta	is
	ascribed.
The	hymn	is	composed	in	the	
anushtupa
	metre.)
It	is	through	devotion	that	a	fire	is	kindled	in	every	household.	It	is	through
devotion	that	oblations	are	offered	at	a	sacrifice.	We	praise	
shraddha.
	It	is	the
best	of	all	riches.
O	
shraddha!
	May	the	desires	of	one	who	gives	alms	be	fulfilled.	O
shraddha!
	Ensure	the	welfare	of	one	who	is	generous.	Listen	to	these	words	of
mine.	And	grant	the	desired	fruit	to	those	who	are	performing	the	sacrifice.
Indra	and	the	other	gods	decided	to	destroy	the	powerful	demons.	You
ensured	that	their	desires	were	fulfilled.	Like	that,	may	the	wishes	of	those	who
are	performing	the	sacrifice	be	granted.
Gods	and	men	pray	to	devotion	so	that	they	may	be	protected	from	strong
winds.	They	make	up	their	minds	that	they	will	worship	
shraddha.
	May
shraddha	
grant	them	riches.
We	pray	to	devotion	in	the	morning.	We	pray	to	devotion	in	the	middle	of
the	day.	We	pray	to	devotion	in	the	evening.	O	
shraddha
!	Grant	devotion	to
those	of	us	who	live	in	this	world.Shachi
(Shachi	is	Indra's	wife.	In	the	
sukta
	that	follows,	she	exults	at	her	triumph
over	her	co-wives.	She	is	the	sage	to	whom	the	hymn	is	ascribed	and	the	hymn	is
composed	in	the	
anushtupa
	metre.)
The	sun	which	is	established	in	heaven	has	risen.	It	is	Indra	himself	who
adopts	the	form	of	Surya.	May	my	good	fortune	also	dawn	like	the	sun.	I	know
my	husband	and	I	know	that	he	will	be	devoted	to	me.	I	have	the	power	to
triumph	over	my	co-wives.	I	will	be	victorious	over	them.
I	am	the	chief	of	the	wives,	like	the	head	is	the	chief	of	the	body.	I	am
learned	and	rise	above,	like	a	flag.	Even	when	I	am	angry,	I	can	persuade	my
husband	to	utter	sweet	words	to	me.	I	am	the	one	who	triumphs	over	my	co-
wives.	They	will	listen	to	me	and	obey	my	wishes.
It	is	my	son	who	will	defeat	the	enemies.	It	is	my	daughter	who	will	be
adorned.	I	will	triumph	over	everyone.	I	am	the	one	who,	with	my	husband,	will
be	famous.
My	husband	Indra	gains	his	strength	from	the	oblations	that	are	offered.	He
is	supreme	in	the	universe.	O	gods!	It	is	I	who	offered	those	oblations.	It	is
thanks	to	this	that	my	co-wives	have	been	subdued.
I	do	not	have	enemies.	I	triumph	over	my	enemies.	I	am	the	victorious	one
who	triumphs	over	all.	Just	as	the	power	and	the	energy	of	enemies	gets
destroyed,	the	power	and	energy	of	my	co-wives	have	been	neutralised	by	me.
I	am	the	one	who	defeats	others.	I	have	defeated	my	co-wives.	I	will	lord
over	Indra	and	his	relations.	Such	is	my	wish.A	Charm	against	Nightmares
(We	now	have	a	charm	against	nightmares.	This	is	ascribed	to	the	sage
Angirasa,	descended	from	the	sage	Prachetas.	The	hymn	is	composed	in	a
mixture	of	the	metres	
anushtupa,	trishtupa
	and	
pamkti.)
O	lord	of	the	mind!	Do	not	cause	me	distraction	while	I	sleep.	May	you	be
banished.	Go	far	away.	Go	and	dwell	in	distant	regions.	Tell	Nirriti,	the	goddess
of	sin,	to	keep	her	distance.	I	am	still	alive	and	my	mind	is	preoccupied	with
thoughts	of	the	material	world.	Let	her	not	bring	me	grief.
(Nirriti	is	the	goddess	of	destruction.)
Everyone	desires	to	have	the	best	of	rewards.	And	they	do	attain	what	they
want.	I	ask	the	favour	of	Yama,	the	son	of	Vivasvana.	May	he	not	cause	me
unhappiness.	May	my	mind	be	able	to	think	of	various	subjects.
When	I	am	awake,	I	think	of	the	various	misfortunes	that	may	descend	on
me.	When	I	go	to	sleep,	I	try	to	be	free	from	fear	and	think	of	the	good	things
that	may	happen	to	me.	But	the	various	misfortunes	plague	me	in	my	sleep.	O
Agni!	Please	ensure	that	such	nightmares	keep	their	distance.
O	Indra!	O	Brihaspati!	If	I	have	committed	sins	against	you,	please	forgive
me.	May	those	sins	not	give	rise	to	nightmares.	May	Angirasa	arid	the	learned
Varuna	preserve	me	from	all	manner	of	sin.
Today	is	the	day	when	I	will	be	victorious.	Today	is	the	day	when	I	will
attain	my	desires.	I	have	been	cleansed	of	all	sin.	I	have	been	forgiven	all	the
sins	that	I,	asleep	or	awake,	may	have	committed.	I	have	even	been	forgiven	the
sins	that	I	may	have	thought	of	committing.	May	sin	plague	only	those	who	hate
me.The	Destruction	of	Rivals
(The	next	
sukta
	is	a	prayer	for	the	destruction	of	rivals.	It	is	ascribed	to	the
sage	Rishabha	and	is	composed	in	the	
anushtupa
	and	
mahapamkti
	metres.)
O	Indra!	Make	me	the	best	among	all	my	peers.	May	I	have	special	powers
so	that	I	can	defeat	my	enemies.	May	I	defeat	my	enemies	and	become	radiant.
May	I	become	the	possessor	of	cows.
I	am	the	one	who	destroys	enemies.	I	will	be	like	Indra.	No	one	will	be	able
to	hate	or	hurt	me.	All	my	enemies	will	have	to	cower	down	before	my	feet.
The	two	ends	of	a	bow	are	tied	down	with	the	string	of	the	bow.	O	lord	of
speech!	I	tie	you	down	like	the	two	ends	of	a	bow.	Influence	the	words	that	my
enemies	utter;	make	them	speak	humbly	to	me.
I	will	be	the	one	who	will	vanquish	everyone.	I	will	be	the	powerful	and
strong	one.	O	my	enemies!	I	conquer	your	minds.	I	conquer	your	deeds.	I
conquer	you	in	battle.
O	my	enemies!	I	will	rob	you	of	all	your	good	qualities	and	become
superior	to	you	in	every	respect.	I	will	be	acknowledged	as	your	leader	and
adorn	you	like	a	crown.	You	will	be	gathered	together	at	my	feet	and	croak	like
frogs	do	from	a	pond.The	King
(Our	next	
sukta
	is	a	hymn	that	was	recited	when	a	new	king	was	crowned.
It	is	ascribed	to	the	sage	Dhruva	Angirasa	and	is	composed	in	the	
anushtupa
metre.)
O	king!	You	have	been	crowned	the	lord	of	this	kingdom.	You	are	our	king.
May	you	always	be	constant	and	firm.	May	all	the	subjects	love	you.	We	pray
that	you	may	not	bring	any	harm	to	the	kingdom.
O	king!	May	you	be	firm	and	constant	in	this	kingdom.	May	you	never	be
dislodged	from	your	throne.	May	you	be	as	firm	as	a	mountain.	May	you	rule	on
earth	the	way	Indra	rules	in	heaven.	May	you	sustain	the	kingdom.
Many	are	the	oblations	that	have	been	offered	to	Indra.	May	Indra	be
pleased	and	bless	this	king.	May	Soma	look	upon	this	king	with	favour.	May
Brahmanaspati	look	upon	this	king	with	favour.
Let	the	sky	be	firm.	Let	the	earth	be	firm.	Let	the	mountains	also	be	firm.
May	the	entire	universe	be	firm.	This	king	is	the	lord	of	his	subjects.	May	he	be
firm.
O	king!	The	powerful	Varuna	will	preserve	your	kingdom.	Brihaspati	is	the
generous	one.	He	will	preserve	your	kingdom.	Indra	and	Agni	will	preserve	your
kingdom.	You	have	made	offerings	of	cakes.	These	oblations	will	please	Soma.
They	will	please	Indra.	Indra	will	ensure	that	your	subjects,	pay	their	taxes.
There	are	many	other	hymns	in	the	Rig	Veda	Samhita.	We	cannot	hope	to
reproduce	them	all.	But	the	sample	that	we	have	given	you	should	have
stimulated	your	interest.	The	Rig	Veda	is	like	a	vast	storehouse.	If	your	interest
has	been	stimulated,	why	don't	you	read	the	original	text?	And	if	you	cannot
read	all	of	it,	you	should	certainly	read	the	tenth	mandala.
	