 
13. SKANDA  PURANA  
I. MAHESHWAR  KHAND  
 
DAKSHA'S ANIMOSITY TOWARDS LORD  SHIVA  
 
Skanda Purana begins with the eulogy of Lord  Shiva -- 
Yasyagya Jagat Srishta Viranchih Palko  Harih; 
Sanharta Kalrudrakhyo Namastasmai  Pinakine.  
(Meaning) --- Salutations to Lord Shankar w ho has entrusted the job of creation to Lord  Brahma -- 
Who  has instructed  Lord  Vishnu  to nurture  the world  and who himself  acts as the supreme 
annihilator.  During  ancient  times,  once,  Sage  Shaunak  had performed  a grand  'yagya'  at his 
hermitage in Naimishara nya forest. Many sages had thronged Naimisharanya to attend it. One  of 
them  was Sage  Lomesh.  After  the yagya  was over,  all the assembled  Sages  requested  Sage 
Lomesh to narrate the divine tales of Lord  Shiva.  
 
Sage Lomesh said --Daksha -Prajapati had got his daughter, Sati married to Lord Shiva. Once,  he 
had performed a grand yagya in which he had invited everybody except his own  son-in-law. 
When Sati learnt about the yagya, she sought Lord Shiva's permission to attend that yagya.  Lord 
Shiva tried to convince her that it was not proper to attend a ceremony in which one had not  
been invited. But Sati did not pay any heed and was bent upon attending that yagya. Ultimately,  
Lord Shiva had no option but to give his conscent. But he did not forget to send his 'Rudra ganas'  
with her for her  protection.  
   
 
SATI JUMPS INTO THE SACRIFICIAL  FIRE  
When Sati reached her father's place, she saw a grand yagya being performed. A large number  of 
people had been invited --the deities, the sages and the  hermits.  
 
Sati became sad be cause Daksha had invited everybody except her husband. She knew quite  well 
that it was a deliberate decision on part of her father, not to invite Lord Shiva. But, she  got 
infuriated  when  she found  that Daksha  had not even  kept Shiva's  share  in the yagya  while the 
'shares' of other deities had been  kept.  
 
When Daksha saw Sati, he was enraged ---How dare you come here? Your husband is  an 
embodiment  of inauspiciousness.  He is the Lord  of the spirits,  ghosts  and all types  of mean 
powers. This was the reason why I did not invite  him.'  
 
The insult  heaped  on her husband  in front  of everybody  devastated  Sati. She felt so humiliated 
that she decided  to give up her life. Before  any one could  understand,  she jumped  into the 
sacrificial fire and was charred to death. All  the deities present there were stunned by this  sudden 
development. All the 'Rudraganas' mourned Sati's death with deep sorrow. Meanwhile,  Lord 
Shiva  got the sad news  from  Narada.  He got mad with anger  and uprooted  some  hair from  his 
scalp. He then dashed the hair against a mountain. There was a thundering sound and  Veerbhadra 
manifested  within  a split second.  Lord  Shiva  ordered  him to punish  Daksha  for his evil deed, 
which  caused  the death  of Sati. Veerbhadra  proceeded  with a huge  army  of spirits,  ghosts  and 
marudganas  to punish  Daksha.  When  he reached  the oblation  site, Daksha  and all the other 
deities became scarred. But, Sage Bhrigu came at the deities' rescue and told them not to  worry. 
He then chanted few mantras, which helped the deities to win the fi rst round of the  battle.  
 
The defeat  of his army  enraged  Veerbhadra  to such an extent  that he created  havoc  in the ranks 
of deities' army. He showered volleys of arrow on them, which forced the deities to make a  hasty 
retreat  from  there.  Veerbhadra  dashed  Sage  Bhrigu  against  the ground  and uprooted  his beard. 
He then severed  the head  of Daksha  and threw  it in flames  of sacrificial  fire. Lord  Brahma  took 
the refuge  of Lord  Shiva  and requested  him to stop Veerbhadra  from  causing  further  death  and 
destruction.  Lord  Shiva  told Brahma --'Nobody  else but Daksha  himself  was responsible  for his 
death. But, Lord Brahma requested Lord Shiva to make Daksha alive once again. Lord  Shiva 
then went  to Daksha's  place  and fixed  a goat's  head  on the trunk  of Daksha's  body.  This way 
Daksha became alive once again albeit with a goats body. He was very ashamed of his  behaviour 
and requested Lord Shiva to forgive him. Lord Shiva blessed him and  said-- 
 
"Salvation  can not be attained  merely  by performing  the rituals.  If you are desirous of salvation 
then engage yourself in virtuous deeds  with."  
   
 
VIRTUES OF WORSHIPPING LORD  SHIVA  
Sage Lomesh told the assembled sages --- One who brooms the courtyard of Shiva temple  attains 
to Shiva loka. Those who make offerings of incense to Lord Sh iva not only liberate himself  from 
the bondage  of this world  but also both his 'Kulas'.  One who gets constructed  a Shiva  temple  or 
renovates  it, attains  incomparable  virtue.  One who chants  the holy mantra  'Om Namah  Shivay' 
daily  and begins  his day by visiting Shiva  temple  in the morning  becomes  absolved  of all his 
sins. CHURNING OF THE  OCEAN  
Sage Lomesh narrated the tale, which described how Indra lost heaven after he  showed 
disrespect to  Brihaspati -- 
 
Once,  Indra  was enjoying  the songs  sung  by Gandharvas  when  sage Vashishtha  arrived.  But, 
Indra was so engrossed in music, that he forgot to welcome his distinguished guest.  Sage 
Vashishtha  was enraged  by his behaviour  and went  away  fuming  with anger.  When  the demon 
King  Bali--the lord of Patal  loka,  learnt  about this incident  he attacked  Indraloka  with a large 
army. A fierce battle took place in which all the deities were defeated. Bali and his army  brought 
all the wealth to Patal -loka. But the demons were not destined to be the owner of this  plundered 
wealth  for too long as the whole  wealth  got submerged  into the ocean.  Bali was surprised  and 
asked  Shukracharya  about  the reason.  Sage  Shukracharya  revealed  to Bali that he could  not 
enjoy the splendours of deities' wealth because he had not performed 100 Ashwam edha  yagyas.  
 
The deities, after being defeated went to seek Lord Vishnu's help. Lord Brahma was also  present 
with them. After giving a deep thought to the whole issue, Lord Vishnu advised them to patch  up 
with the demons so that all the wealth could be re trieved from the ocean bed. The deities went  to 
Patal -loka and convinced  the demons  to participate  in the churning  of the ocean.  When  the 
process  of churning  of the ocean  began,  Mandarachal  mountain  was used as a churner  and the 
serpent -Vasuki as the rope . Both the parties immersed the Mandarachal mountain into the  ocean 
but it sank down, as there was no base upon which it could be placed. So, Lord Vishnu took  the 
form of a tortoise and held the mountain on his  back.  
 
Churning  of the ocean  resulted  into the emergence  of many  things  like Chandrama,  Surabhi 
(cow), Kalpa tree, Kaustubh, Uchchaihshrava (Horse), Eravat (elephant), goddess  Lakshmi, 
poison, ambrosia, intoxication etc.When poison emerged from the sea bed, neither the deities  nor 
the demons  made  any claim  for it. The poison  was so venomous  that the whole  world  started 
getting  inflamed  by it. Lord  Shiva  then drank  the Halahal  poison  and thus the world  was saved. 
Lord Vishnu accepted goddess Lakshmi as his  consort.  
   
 
THE EMERGENCE OF  AMBROSIA  
When  Dhanvantri  appeared  with a pot of ambrosia  in his hands,  a demon  named  Vrishparva 
snatched  it from  him. All the demons  then fled to Patal  loka with the pot of ambrosia.  Lord 
Vishnu disguised himself as an enchanting beauty and went to Patal loka. There, he f ound all  the 
demons quarrelling among themselves. Each of them wanted to have his own share of  ambrosia. 
The demons were stunned by Mohini's beauty the moment they saw Lord Vishnu in the form of  a 
beautiful lady. Mohini took control of the ambrosia pot and  summoned the deities to Patal  loka.  
 
All the deities  and demons  were  made  to sit in separate  rows.  Mohini  then started  distributing 
ambrosia  to the deities.  A demon  named  Rahu,  who had disguised  himself  as a deity  was also 
sitting among the deities. Hardl y had Rahu gulped down some ambrosia then Mohini severed  his 
head  on the information  given  by chandrama  (Moon).  The severed  head  of Rahu  tried to take 
revenge  by swallowing  chandrama,  who took the refuge  of Lord  Shiva.  Shiva  kept chandrama  
within the lock of his hair. Meanwhile, Rahu too came chasing chandrama and Lord Shiva  wore 
his head as a garland in his  neck.  
   
 
LORD BRAHMA'S BOON TO  TARAKASUR  
After the death of Sati, Lord Shiva became aloof and engaged himself in an austere penance.  His 
lack of interest in performing  his duties  resulted  into the predominance  of sin in the world.  A 
demon  named  Tarakasur  had received  a boon  of invincibility  from  Lord  Brahma.  Only  a child 
and nobody else could kill him. Tarakasur, being drunk with power started to tormen t the deities.  
 
All the deities eulogized Lord Brahma and they heard a heavenly voice  saying --- 
 
'Nobody can kill Tarakasur except Shiva's son. So you must put all your efforts to help Shiva  get 
married.'  
 
The deities  were  aware  that after the death  of Sati, Shiva  had lost all interest  in life and was 
living like a recluse. Nevertheless, they wanted to give a try. So they went to Himalaya, who  had 
no progeny  at that time and requested  him to beget  a girl. Himalaya  agreed,  as he was aware  of 
the misdeeds  of Tarakasur.In  course  of time,  Himalaya's  wife,  Mena  gave  birth  to a girl child 
who was in fact the reincarnation of Sati. The girl child was named Girija. Girija was brought  up 
with great love and care. When she attained the age of eight, Himalaya once took  her to the  cave 
where  Lord  Shiva  was doing  penance.  Initially,  Shiva  was little hesitant  to meet  Himalaya 
because  Girija  was accompanying  her father  and he had vowed  never  to put his glance  on any 
woman  after the death  of Sati. But, Later  on he relented  and allowed  both of them  to meet  him 
whenever  they liked.  Now,  Girija  made  it her habit  to visit Lord  Shiva  regularly.  She used to 
look after all the needs of Shiva while he was engrossed in his  penance.  
 
Even  after the passage  of a long time the deities'  wishes  did not look like getting  fulfilled,  as 
Shiva  remained  as nonchalant  as ever.  So, the deities  requested  Kamadeva's  help in sowing  the 
seeds  of love and passion  in Shiva's  heart.  Kamadeva  went  to the place  where  Lord  Shiva  was 
doing  his penance.  He tried to sow seeds  of compassion  in Shiva's  heart  only to receive  his 
wrath. Lord Shiva was infuriated by the efforts of Kamadeva. He opened his third eye as  the 
result of which Kamadeva was charred to death. Rati started wailing inconsolably at the death  of 
her husband  but Girija  assured  her that she would  try to bring  Kamadeva  back  to life. Girija 
commenced her penance to please Lord Shiva. There was a great turmoil in the world on  account 
of her penance.  Lord  Vishnu  led the deities  to Shiva  and requested  him to marry  Girija  so that 
the world  could  be protected  from  the torments  of Tarakasur.  Finally,  Shiva  gave  his conscent 
and went to the place where Girija was doing  penance.  
   
 
SHIVA TEST'S PARVATI'S  DEVOTION  
After reaching there, Lord Shiva found Parvat i engrossed in her penance. Parvati was  surrounded 
by her few trusted companions.Lord Shiva decided to test Parvati's devotion towards him. So  he 
disguised himself as a hermit and asked her companions about the reason why Parvati was  doing 
such a severe Pe nance. Jaya, one of Parvati's companions informed him that her friend was  doing  
penance in order to get Lord Shiva as her husband. Jaya also informed Lord Shiva that her  friend 
Girija was the daughter of  Himalaya.  
 
Lord  Shiva,  who was in the guise  of a hermit said---'Why  is this tender  girl so eager  to marry 
Shiva who is an embodiment of inauspiciousness --who carries a skull in his hand and who  lives 
in a crematorium. How can your friend think of marrying one who has been expelled by  Daksha 
from the yagya c eremony? Does your friend know that Shiva wears a snake around his neck  and 
is surrounded by numerous spirits and  ghosts?'  
 
Parvati, who had been listening to all those nonsensical utterances, told Jaya ---'This fellow  seems 
to abhor Shiva. We should not ta lk to this evil person. Tell him to leave at once.' Lord Shiva  was 
extremely pleased by Parvati's unwavering devotion towards him. He appeared in his  original 
form and said --'You can ask for anything you  wish.'  
 
But Parvati replied --- 'O Supreme Lord! I am  the same Sati for the sake of whom you  had 
destroyed Daksha's yagya. Don't you recognize me? There is a great purpose behind  my 
reincarnation. A son born to us would kill Tarakasur. So go to my father and request for my  hand 
in marriage.'But Lord Shiva re fused to make a request to Himalaya considering it as  an 
undignified act. He then returned to the place where he had been meditating.After a  while, 
Himalaya  and Mena  arrived  there  and asked  Parvati  how her penance  had been  progressing. 
Parvati  narrated  the whole  incident  how Lord  Shiva  had finally  given  his conscent  to marry 
her.Himalaya and Mena were extremely pleased by this good  news.  
   
 
THE ARRIVAL OF  'SAPTARISHIS'  
Later  on Lord  Shiva  sent the Saptarishis  with the proposal  of marriage  to Himalaya.  Hima laya 
received his distinguished guests with respect and enquired about the purpose of their visit.  The 
Saptarishis  replied --'We have  come  to request  you to give your daughter's  hand  in marriage  to 
Shiva.' After consulting his wife, Mena and other mountains , Himalaya agreed to accept Shiva  as 
his son -in-law. The Saptarishis then returned and conveyed the good news to  Shiva.The 
preparation for marriage ceremony started being made. Finally the marriage  procession 
proceeded towards the bride's home. The marriag e procession consisted of all the  deities, 
apsaras, gandharvas even spirits and  ghosts.  
 
Sage  Garg  supervised  the rituals  of marriage  ceremony.  Vishwakarma  constructed  the canopy, 
where  marriage  ceremony  was supposed  to take place.  After  the marriage  was over,  Himalaya 
performed the ritual of Kanyadan and this way Shiva returned with his  consort.  
 
BIRTH OF  KARTIKEYA  
Lord  Shiva  and Parvati  lived  happily  at Gandhamadan  Mountain  enjoying  every  bit of their 
conjugal life. Once it so happened that a small quant ity of Shiva's sperm fell on the ground  while 
he was enjoying  intimate  moments  with Parvati.  As a result,  tremendous  amount  of heat was 
generated and the whole world started burning. Lord Brahma and Lord Vishnu instructed Agni  to 
employ some means so that the destruction caused by Shiva's over flowing sperms could come  to 
an end.Agni  went  to Gandhamadan  mountain  in the guise  of a hermit.  He requested  Parvati  by 
saying ---'O Mother! Please give me something as alms. I have nothing but my hands  as  a 
begging  bowl' 
 
Parvati kept Shiva's sperms on his palm, which was eaten up by Agni. Parvati was enraged to  see 
this and cursed  Agni --"You  have  shown  disrespect  to me. From  today  onwards  you would 
become omnivorous. The sperms which you have devoured would cause  unbearable 
inflammation in your  body."  
 
As the result of Parvati's curse, Agni really started experiencing unbearable inflammation in  his 
body.  He requested  Lord  Shiva  to reveal  the means  by which  his pain would  come  to an end. 
Lord  Shiva  instructed  Agni  to implant  those  sperms  in any woman's  womb  to get rid of the 
unbearable inflammation. Thus, Agni, who was suffering from extreme heat that generated in  his 
body,  sat at a lonely  place  waiting  eagerly  for a woman  to arrive  there.  He did not have  to wait 
for to o long, as six Kritikas, shivering with cold arrived there to warm themselves. The sperms  of 
Shiva entered into their bodies through the pores. These six Kritikas became  pregnant.  
 
When  their respective  husbands  learnt  about  their pregnancy  they cursed  them. As a result  they 
got transformed  into 'Nakshatras'  and established  themselves  in the sky. But, they aborted  their 
respective  foetus  at Himalaya  mountain  before  getting  transformed  into six constellations.  The 
holy Ganges carried that foetus to a seclude d place, which was covered with dense bushes  of 
reeds.  In course  of time,  Lord  Kartikeya  manifested  from  those  reed bushes.  He had six heads. 
The deities  were  delighted  at the birth  of Kartikeya.  Lord  Shiva  along  with Parvati  went  to the 
place where Kartik eya had incarnated. Parvati took young Kartikeya in her  embrace.  
 KARTIKEYA KILLS  TARAKASUR  
Lord Shiva assured the deities, who were also present there that Tarakasur's days  were 
numbered.  The deities's  army  then proceeded  towards  the battlefield.  On their way,  the deities 
heard  a heavenly  voice --'You  can defeat  the demons  only if you fight  under  the leadership  of 
Kartikeya.'  
 
Now all the deities requested Kartikeya to become their leader. Menawhile,  Devasena --the 
daughter  of Mrityu  arrived  there  and reque sted Kartikeya  to become  her husband.  Kartikeya 
accepted  Devasena  as his wife.  This is the reason  why he is also known  as Deva  senapati. 
Karitkeya was leading the deities' army, mounted on an elephant. The army had all the deities  in 
its rank- Indra,  Varun a, Vayu,  Kuber,  Dharma  Raj, etc. Both  the rival armies  met at an island 
situated  between  Ganga  and Yamuna.  Tarakasur  had come  with a large  army,  which  boasted  of 
many brave and mighty  warriors.  
 
The battle  commenced  and the first phase  was dominated  by the demons.  The deities  could  not 
stand  up to the might  of demons.  Even  Indra  was severely  wounded  when  Tarakasur  attacked 
him with his deadly  weapon - 'Shakti'.  On seeing  the level  of destruction  caused  in the deities' 
army,  King  Muchkunda,  who was on the side of the deities'  attacked  Tarakasur.  In the ensuing 
battle  Muchkunda  got injured  and fell down  on the ground.  He got up furiously  and tried to kill 
Tarakasur  with his Brahmashtra.  Sage  Narada  told him that Brahmashtra  would  be of no use as 
Tarakasur  had been blessed  with invincibility  against  mortals.  Narada  said--'Only  Kartikeya  is 
capable  of killing  Tarakasur.  So, you all need  to have  patience  till Kartikeya  accomplishes  his 
mission.'  
 
Meanwhile  Veerabhadra  was fighting  a dual bought  against  Tarakasur.  He had already  caused 
indescribable losses to the demons. While the fight was going on, Tarakasur realized that it  was 
not easy to defeat him. So, he decided to use his illusionary powers, which helped him  in 
acquiring ten thousand hands. The deities ran aw ay from the battle field, when they  saw 
ferocious Tarakasur approaching them.Lord Vishnu instructed Kartikeya to kill Tarakasur  before 
it was too late. Kartikeya chased Tarakasur with his deadly weapon - Shakti in his hand. A  fierce 
fight took place betwee n both of them. Kartikeya attacked Tarakasur with his Shakti.  Tarakasur 
retaliated  by hitting  him with his own Shakti.  The assault  was so severe  that Karikeya  lost his 
consciousness for few  moments.  
 
When Kartikeya regained his consciousness, he got up qui ckly to fight against Tarakasur.  Once 
again a fierce battle commenced. Kartikeya remembered his parents in reverence and released  his 
Shakti  in the direction  of Tarakasur.  Tarakasur  died instantly.  The deities  were  delighted  at the 
death of their  tormentor . 
   
 
VIRTUES OF OBSERVING FAST ON  'SHIVARATRI'  
Sage  Lomesh  eulogizes  the virtues  of Shivaratri  in the following  words --'The fourteenth  day of 
the dark half of a month  is dedicated  to the worship  of Lord  Shiva  and is famously  known  as 
'Shivaratri'. It destroys all the sins committed by a man. Sage Lomesh then narrated a tale,  which 
emphasized the greatness of  Shivaratri -- 
 
Once upon a time a brahmin widow developed an illicit relationship with a 'Chandal' (a low  caste 
man). Later on she gave birth to a son who was named Dussah. Her son had all the bad  qualities 
one can think of -- a gambler, a drunker, a thief, a murderer,  etc. 
 
One day, Dussah  went  to a Shiva  temple  with the intention  of committing  robbery.  It was the 
festive  night  of Shivaratri  and people  had thronged  the temple  in a large  number.  So, he did not 
get an opportunity  to steal temple  property.  He remained  awakened  for the whole  night  waiting 
for an opportune moment but his wishes remained unfulfilled. He spent his time listening to  the 
divine  tales of Lord  Shiva  that was being  narrated  by the temple  priest.  Though  he was a sinner 
yet he took his next birth in a royal family on account of his two virtuous  deeds --he had 
remained awakened for the whole night of Shivaratri and he had listened to the  tales of Shiva.  In 
his next birth,  he was born to a king named  Chitrangad  and he himself  was named 
Vichitraveerya. Vichitraveerya was a great devotee of Lord Shiva. He ultimately united with lord 
Shiva and manifested as Veerabhadra at the time when Lord S hiva had shaken his head  violently 
after hearing the sad news of Sati's demise. There are numerous instances of people  attaining 
salvation by observing a fast on Shivaratri. The names of some great devotees to do so are  King 
Bharata, Mandhata, Dhundhumar, Harishchandra  etc. 
   
 
KARTIKEYA'S  SORROW  
While  the deities  hailed  the glory  of Kartikeya  for having  killed  Tarakasur,  Kartikeya  himself 
was saddened by his act. He told the deities --'I regret for having killed Tarakasur because he  was 
a great devotee of L ord Shiva. Is there any way to atone for my sin?' 
 
Lord  Vishnu  consoled  him---'Killing  a wicked  person,  who nourishes  himself  on the blood  of 
innocent  people,  is not a sinful  deed.  But, still, if you feel guilty  then there  is no better  way to 
atone for you r sin than worshipping Lord Shiva. Install Shivalingas and worship them with  deep 
devotion.' Kartikeya instructed Vishnukarma to make three divine Shivalingas. Later on 
Kartikeya installed these Shivalingas at three different places and worshipped them  with 
appropriate rituals. In course of time these three holy places came to be known as  Pratigyeshwar, 
Kapaleshwar and Kumareshwar. Kartikeya, while worshipping at Kapaleshwar sprinkled  holy 
water  on the Shivalinga  and prayed  so that Tarakasur's  soul rested  in peace.  He also offered 
sesame seeds to Lord Kapaleshwar and prayed --'May my offerings made in the form of  sesame 
seeds reach Tarak --the descendant of Sage  Kashyap.'  
 
This way, Kartikeya was absolved of his  sins. 
   
 
KILLING OF  PRALAMB  
A demon  named  Pralamb had escaped  unharmed  in the battle  fought  between  the deities  and 
demons.  As the deities  were  busy  installing  Shivalingas  at different  places,  Pralamb  started  to 
torment their families in their absence. The deities got this information from Kumud  who 
appeared at the time when the deities were digging up a reservoir near 'Siddheshwar' temple.  All 
the deities  requested  Kartikeya  to do something.  Kartikeya  released  his fiery  weapon,  Shakti  in 
the direction of Pralamb. Shakti pierced the heart of earth and went right up to Patal loka  where 
Pralamb lived with the surviving demons. All the demons were killed within few  moments.  
 
A long tunnel had been created as the impact of Shakti's penetration of the earth. This tunnel  was 
later on filled up with the water of Patal Ganga and became famous as  'Siddha -koopa.'  
   
 
KALBHITI'S AUSTERE  PENANCE  
There  is an amazing  tale related  with the birth  of Kalbhiti.  During  ancient  times  there  lived  a 
sonless brahmin named Manti in Kashi. He did an austere penance to get a son.   At last,  lord 
Shiva became pleased by his devotion and appeared. Lord Shiva said --'You will be blessed  with 
an enlightened son who would liberate your whole  clan.'  
 
In course of time Manti's wife became pregnant but amazingly did not deliver a baby even after a 
long time.  Four  years  passed  like this but Manti's  wife did not deliver  the child.  Manti  was 
perplexed  by this unusual  event  so he asked  the baby,  who was still in his mother's  womb  as to 
why he was hesitant  to come  out. The child  replied  that he feared  'Kal' and this was the reason 
why he was not taking birth. The child said --'If you can assure me of protection from 'Kal' then  I 
shall  certainly  take birth.'  How  could  have  Manti  given  such an assurance.  So he took refuge  in 
Lord  Shiva.Lord  Shiva  ordered four of his ganas  to go and convince  the baby.  The names  of 
these five ganas were Dharma, Gyan, Vairagya Aishwarya and Adharma. They assured the  baby  
by saying --'Get rid of your fear. We assure  you that each four of us (Dharma,  Gyan,  Vairagya 
and Ais hwarya) will never abandon  you."  
 
The fifth gana named Adharma on the contrary promised not to caste his evil Shadow on  the 
baby.  These  assurances  were  enough  for the baby  to come  out from  the womb.  But, even  after 
taking birth the child was trembling and wailing in fear.The ganas said --Manti! Your child is  still 
fearful  of the Kal. He is trembling  and crying  inspite  of the best of our efforts  to drive  away  is 
fears. So he will become famous as Kalbhiti (one who is fearful of  Kal).  
 
Kalbhiti grew up to be a  virtuous person. He used to engage himself in various kinds  of 
austerities.  He was a great  devotee  of Lord  Shiva.  One day, as Kalbhiti  was meditating  under  a 
'bael'  tree (wood  apple),  he went  into his trance.  The joy experienced  during  trance  period  was 
something, which he had never experienced before. He decided to regularly meditate under  that 
tree. He did penance  for one hundred  years  standing  on his toe. Lord  Shiva  became  pleased  by 
his devotion  and appeared  in the guise  of a human  being.  Lord  Shiva  said--'O Great  soul Please 
discontinue with your penance. I have brought some water for you! Please quench your  thirst!'  
 
But Kalbhiti  refused  to take water  from  an unknown  person.  He requested  Lord  Shiva  to reveal 
his identity.  Kalbhiti  also inquired  Lord  Shiva about  his religion  and conduct.  Lord  Shiva  told 
him that he was beyond  any religion  or conduct.When  Kalbhiti  refused  to have  water,  Lord 
Shiva  dug up a large  pit and emptied  the pot into it. After  that he disappeared.  Kalbheeti  stood 
fixed  at that place, being  stunned  by the disappearance  of Lord  Shiva.  Suddenly,  an effulgent 
Shivalinga  appeared  under  that bael (wood  apple)  tree. Kalbheeti  worshipped  that Shivalinga 
which  was radiating  light in all directions.  Now,  Lord  Shiva  appeared  and blessed  Kalbh eeti to 
become  free from  the fear of Kal (Death).  From  that day onwards  the Shivalinga  situated  there 
became famous as Mahakal. Before disappearing once again, Lord Shiva instructed Kalbheeti  to 
preach Sage Karandham who was expected to visit him shortly. Kalbheeti himself  became 
renowned as Mahakal because he had been successful in conquering  death.  
   
 
KARANDHAM'S  QUERIES  
 
As predicted  by Lord  Shiva,  king Karandham  arrived  at the place  where  Mahakal  (Kalbheeti) 
was staying.  First of all he worshipped  Lord  Mahakal  and subsequently  went  to meet  Sage 
Mahakal (previously Kalbheeti). King Karandham had numerous doubts regarding the rituals  of 
Shraddh so he asked Mahakal --'How does the rituals related to 'tarpan' satisfy the  dead 
ancestors?'  
 
Mahakal  replied --The souls  of dead  ancestors  are capable  of accepting  whatever  is offered  to 
them.  Time  and distance  does not matter  to them.  They  accept  only the essence  of whatever  is 
offered to them and not the gross materials as such. Karandham posed his second query --'I think 
a soul,  after it has abandoned  the mortal  body  is bound  by its own karma.  Then,  how,  can the 
dead ancestors be expected of giving us blessings and changing our  fortunes.'  
 
Mahakal  replied ---Not all Pitras  (dead  ancestors)  are bound  by their karma.  Pitras belonging  to 
different classes like deities, 'asuras' and 'yaksha' are unembodied and formless  (amurta). 
Similarly,  the dead  ancestors  of all the four castes  are called  'murta  Pitras'  (with  form).  These  
seven  types  of Pitras  are considered  to be eternal and powerful.  They  also transcend  the law of 
Karma. A total number of 31 ganas are subordinate to them. The rituals of Shraddh  are 
performed for the pacification of these seven eternal Pitras. These seven Pitras are the ones  who 
shower  blessings  on the performers  of Shraddh  rituals.'  Karandham's  next question  was--'Some 
people are of the view that one can attain salvation only by taking refuge in Lord Vishnu.  While 
some  think  that only Lord  Brahma  is capable  of giving  salvation.  There  are many  people  who 
consider Lord Shiva as the supreme liberator. What do you have to say on  this?'  
 
Mahakal replied --'God is one. The three deities you have named even they eulogize each other.  It 
is nothing  but foolishness  to grade  them  as superior,  average  or inferior.  The thing,  which 
matters most in the path of salvation, is individual's unflinching faith and devotion. Any deity  in 
whom  he has total devotion  is capable  of giving  salvation.  Karandham  then requested  Mahakal 
to describe the appropriate rituals related with  the worship of Lord  Shiva.  
 
Mahakal  replied ---A devotee  who puts on 'tripund'  mark  on his forehead,  chest  and both the 
shoulders  while  worshipping  Lord  Shiva  is blessed  to see the divine  appearance  of Lord  Shiva. 
He should enter the temple premise with a pure heart. After entering the temple he should  purify 
the Shivalinga  by removing  all the unnecessary  articles  which  may be lying  there.  He should 
then fill up four 'Garuas'  (drinking  pot with a curved  spout)  with water.  Articles  like milk,  curd 
clarified  butter,  honey  and sugarcane  juice  are kept to the left side of Shivalinga.  The devotee 
should then come out of the temple and worship the 'dwarpalas'. After that, deities like  Kuldevta, 
Nandi, Mahakal Dhata and Vidhata are  worshipped.  
 
Once  again  he should  enter  the temple  and sit in front  of the Shivalinga  and meditate  on Lord 
Shiva.  While  performing  'ardhya'  he should  make  offerings  of articles  like water,  akshat,  kusha 
grass, sandalwood, flowers, mustard seeds, milk, curd and honey. Having offered ardhya , a 
devotee should perform the ritual of ablution with water, milk, curd, honey, clarified butter,  and 
sugarcane juice in the given  order.  
 
 
 
 While performing this ritual the devotee should also offer dhupa (incense) and  chant 
'Om Hoom Vishvamurtaye  Namah '. 
Some  other  deities  whom  a devotee  must  worship  along  with the worship  of Lord  Shiva  are 
Ishan, Tatpurush, Sadryojat etc. A devotee must also not forget to worship Shiva's trident.  While 
doing this he should  chant -- 
 
Trishul Dhanuh Khadga Kapal Kutharebh yo Namah.  
 
A devotee should conclude his worship by begging for Lord Shiva's forgiveness for any  mistake 
that he might have committed while performing the  rituals.  
   
 
ARUNACHAL  SHIVALINGA  
Once, Sutji had gone to Naimisharanya. All the sages residing there  asked him about  the 
manifestation  of Arunachal  Shivalinga.  Sutji  recounted  a tale when  Sage  Sanak  had posed  the 
same  query  to Lord  Brahma  -- 'Lord  Brahma  had told Sanak - Son, once  Lord  Vishnu  and I 
witnessed  an effulgent  pillar.  It had manifested  from  nowhere and was limitless  in size. Its 
radiance  put the whole  world  ablaze.  Both  of us worshipped  that marvelous  pillar  by chanting 
vedic  mantras.'  Actually,  that effulgent  pillar  was a Shivalinga.  Lord  Shiva  manifested  from  it 
after being pleased by our devo tion. We requested him to minimize his size and establish  himself 
in the form of Arunachal  Shivalinga.'  
 
'Lord  Shiva  agreed  to minimize  his size as well as his effulgence  by establishing  himself  in the 
form  of 'Arunachaleshwar'.  The holy place  of Arunachal eshwar  remains  untouched  while  the 
whole world gets submerged in water at the time of  deluge.  
   
 
LORD SHIVA --THE SOVEREIGN  CREATOR  
The sages then asked Sutji how Lord Shiva had created the  universe.  
 
Sutji replied ---Lord Shiva commenced creation by his ow n will. Vishnu manifested from the  left 
side of his body while Brahma from the right side. He then attributed the qualities of 'Rajas'  and 
'Satva' to Brahma and Vishnu respectively. From then onwards Lord Brahma took  the 
responsibility  of further  creation  and Lord  Vishnu  became  the preserver  of the world.  Later  on 
Lord  Brahma  created  his ten Manasputras  (Marichi  etc,) by his will and Daksha  Prajapati  from 
his right  thumb.  He also created  the brahmins  from  his mouth,  Kshatriyas  from  both his arms, 
Vaishyas f rom both his thighs and Shudras from both his feet respectively. Both, the deities  and 
demons  came  from  the lineage  of Sage  Kashyap,  who himself  was Marichi's  son. Not only that 
Kashyap also fathered different species like Marut, Nag, Yaksha, Gandharva and  Apsaras.  
 
Similarly,  Lord  Brahma  had also created  Manu  who is believed  to be the person  from  whom 
human race originated. All the sages as well as the Kshatriyas are the descendants of Sage Atri. 
Yakshas  originated  from  Pulastya  whereas  Rakshashas  were  the descendants  of Pulah.  Agni  as 
well as Sages  like Chyavan  was the descendant  of Bhrigu.  Many  famous  sages  came  from  the 
lineage  of Vashishtha.  These  are the names  of few prominent  sages,  whose  descendants  have 
populated  the earth.  Thus,  Lord  Shiva  is the Sovereign  creator  because  he created  Brahma --the 
creator.  
   
EXECUTION OF SHUMBH NISHUMBH  AND 
MAHISHASUR  
The demons  named  Shumbh  and Nishumbh  had received  boons  from  Brahma  according  to 
which  no deity,  demon  or Man could  kill him. Shumbh  and Nishumbh  became  excessively 
arrogant  and started  tormenting  the deities.  All the deities  including  Lord  Vishnu  went  to Lord 
Shiva and requested for his help. Lord Shiva assured them that both the demons would be  killed at  
the opportune  time.  The deities  were  satisfied  and returned  back  to their respective  abodes. 
Parvati was of dark complexion. She thought that Shiva would be more affectionate towards  her 
if she somehow discarded her dark skin. She eventually discarded her dark skin at a place and  it 
instantly  got transfo rmed  into 'Kali  Kaushiki'.  She then did an austere  penance  at Vindhyachal 
mountain. At that time, Shumbh and Nishumbh lived there. When both the demons saw  goddess  
Kali Kaushiki  her divine  beauty  infatuated  them.  But Goddess  Kali Kaushiki  ultimately  killed 
both of  them.  
Having  accomplished  her mission,  Kali Kaushiki  did a tremendous  penance  at 'Gauri -peak'  and 
regained her fair complexion. In course of time she became the mother of Ganesh and  Kartikeya. 
Once, goddess Parvati went to Arunachal mountain wher e Sage Gautam was doing penance.  She 
was so enchanted  by the scenery  over there  that she decided  to do penance.  She instructed 
goddess  Durga  to stand  guard  till she accomplished  her penance.  She also ordered  the two 
goddesses Subhaga and Dhundhukumari to k eep a watch in all  directions.  
 
Mahishasur --the demon  sent a female  messenger  to convince  Parvati  into marrying  him. The 
female messenger disguised herself as a female hermit and tried to impress all the three  goddess 
who were keeping surveillance by prais ing the glory of  Mahishasur -- 
 
'O beautiful ladies! Why is your mistress living in such a secluded place? She is worthy of  living 
in a royal palace. There is nobody among the deities who is fit enough to marry her.  But, 
Mahishasur --the lord of all the three worlds  is certainly  fit to become  her husband.'But  all the 
three  goddesses  drove  the female  messenger  away.  Ultimately,  Mahishasur  came  accompanied 
by a large army to forcibly abduct goddess Parvati. The commotion caused by the  demons 
disturbed Parvati's  meditation. She instructed Durga to kill all the demons. Goddess  Durga 
transformed  her appearance.  Now  she looked  ferocious  in her new appearance.  She was well 
equipped  with all sort of lethal  weapons  and was mounted  on a lion. She thundered  loudly  and 
challenged  Mahishasur.  Countless  'yoginis'  manifested  from  her body.  These  yoginis  attacked 
Mahishasur's army and killed many demons. The whole battlefield was splashed with  blood.  
 
Goddess Chamunda (Durga) severed the heads of 'Chand' and 'Mund' with her  chakra. 
Mahishasur was enraged and he attacked goddess Durga. Some other demons like  Prachanda, 
Chamar, Mahamauli, Mahahanu, Ugravaktra, Vikataksha and Dahan also came forward to  help 
him but each one of them  was killed  by goddess  Durga.  Now,  Mahishasur's  anger crossed  all 
limits  and he menacingly  ran towards  goddess  Durga.  A severe  battle  was fought  between  both 
of them. When Mahishasur realized that the goddess was dominating the battle, he  started 
changing his guises frequently. He tried to dodge goddess D urga by transforming his  appearance 
into that of a boar.  But, goddess  Durga  kept on chasing  him. Then,  Mahishasur  became  a lion. 
This way he kept on changing  his appearances  frequently  to avoid  getting  killed  by goddess 
Durga. Once he transformed himself i nto a buffalo but goddess Durga attacked  him. 
This way,  Mahishasur  was forced  to change  his appearance  frequently  on account  of relentless 
attack by goddess Durga. Ultimately Durga killed him. Goddess Durga picked up his  severed 
head and danced in joy. The  deities were relieved at the death of  Mahishasur.   
PARVATI RECEIVES ARUNCHALESHWAR'S  GRACE  
Goddess  Durga  then went  to the place  where  goddess  Parvati  was still doing  penance.  She held 
Mahishasur's  head  in one hand  and a sword  in the other.  Goddess  Parvati  said---'O 
Vindhyavasini!  You have  accomplished  an impossible  act. If it were  not for you I would  not 
have been able to accomplish my own penance. Now, you should get rid of this skull and create  a 
holy spring bathing in which would destroy your sin acquir ed by killing  Mahishasur.'  
 
Goddess Durga hit ferociously at a huge rock breaking it into pieces. A large pit was  created 
which was soon filled up with underground water. She then took her bath in it by  chanting 
Namah  Shonadrinathay.  
 
In the meantime, an a mazing incident took place. While goddess Durga was taking her bath  with 
Mahishasur's  skull in her hand,  a Shivalinga,  which  was struck  in Mahishasur's  throat  fell down.  This 
Shivalinga  later on became  famous  as 'Papanashan  Shivalinga'.  She then released  the skull and came  
out from the pond.  Arunachaleshwar  (Lord  Shiva)  became  pleased  by Parvati's  devotion  and appeared  
before  her. Lord Arunachaleshwar  then made  Parvati  to sit by his left side.  The next moment  Parvati's  
identity  mingled  with that of Lord Arunachaleshwar.  The place  where  this incident  took place,  there  is 
situated  a grand  temple  of goddess  Apitastani  and Lord Arunachaleshwar.  
   
 
II. VAISHNAV  KHAND  
 
LORD VARAHA SATISFIES PRITHVI'S  CURIOSITY  
 
Sutji then narrated the tale of Lord Varaha to the sages , which he had heard from Sage  Vyasa --- 
Once, while Narada was wandering about, he reached Meru mountain where he saw the abode  of 
Lord Brahma. He also saw a giant sized entity, just next to Brahma's abode. The  person 
possessed  four arms  and his face resem bled a boar.  The person  held a conch  and a chakra  in his 
two hands --The remaining two hands were in the postures of giving blessings. Narada was  very 
surprised to see that divine person being surrounded by Sages like Vashishtha, Atri,  Markandeya 
and Bhrigu . After paying his eulogy to him, he stood in a corner. In the meantime, Prithvi  (earth) 
arrived  there  with her two companions --Ila and Pingla.  She was curious  to know  about  the 
identities  of various  mountains,  which  Lord  Varaha  had established  on her. Lord Varaha  told 
Prithvi about the prominent mountains ---Mountains like Sumeru, Himavan,  Mandarachal, 
Vindhyachal,  Pariyatrak,  Mahendra,  Malay,  Sinhachal  and Gandhamadan  are situated  to the 
north of  Himalaya.  
 
The mountain  ranges  situated  to the south  of Hima laya are Arunachal,  Hasti,  Gridhachal  and 
Ghatikachal.  Sages  believe  that in Satyayuga  Lord  Vishnu  had his abode  at Anjan  Mountain, 
while in Treta yuga, Dwapar yuga and Kali yuga he has his abode at Narayangiri, Sinhachal  and 
Shrivenketachal respectively. Lord Varaha and Prithvi flew away towards  Venkatachalgiri 
mounted on  Garuda.  
   
 
LORD VARAHA  MANTRA  
On their way,  Prithvi  requested  Lord  Varaha  to reveal  the sacred  mantra,  chanting  of which 
makes him  pleased.  
 
Lord  Varaha  said--'The secret  mantra  that pleases me to no limits  is ---Om Naham  Shrivarahay 
Dharanyu Uddharnay Swaha. This mantra is capable of liberating a man and also brings all  sort 
of worldly accomplishments to him. In the first Krita yuga, a Manu named Dharma had  realized 
me by continuously ch anting this mantra. Even Indra regained the control of heaven by  chanting  
it. Anant --the lord of all serpents,  chanted  Varaha  mantra  and as a result  became  capable  of 
holding the earth on it's  hood.'  
   
 
MANIFESTATION OF  PADMAVATI  
Lord  Varaha  then narrate d the tale of Padmavati's  manifestation  to Prithvi.  He also revealed  to 
her that Padmavati  was the reincarnation  of Vedavati  and had manifested  so that she could 
become his (Vishnu) consort.Lord Varaha said ---Once upon a time there lived an emperor  named 
Akash. One day he ordered his men to get the land situated at the bank of Arani ploughed so  that 
a grand  yagya  could  be organized  there.  As the land was being  cultivated,  the plough  suddenly 
struck against something. People ploughing the field dug up that p lace and were surprised to  find 
an infant girl, crying loudly. The news of girls' manifestation spread like a wild fire. The  emperor 
became extremely happy since he had no progeny. He brought up that child as his own  daughter. 
This way the baby  girl was brought  up like a princess.  She was named  Padmavati.  Padmavati 
proved  very lucky  for the emperor,  as the emperor,  who was still sonless  till then was blessed 
with a son. This male child was named  Vasudan.  
 
One day, Narada  visited  the palace  and met both the children.  He was impressed  by Vasudan's 
intelligence but Padmavati appeared to be shy and absorbed in her own thoughts.  Narada 
lovingly  called  her and instructed  her to spread  her left palm.  Narada  was amazed  to find signs, 
which  predicted  Padmavati's  marr iage to Lord  Vishnu.  Everybody  living  in the palace  became 
happy after getting this news. Narada then went  away.  
   
 
PADMAVATI BECOMES LORD HARI'S  CONSORT  
Continuing  with the tale, Lord  Varaha  said-- One day, while  Padmavati  and her companions 
were playing  in the garden, they saw an equestrian approaching them. He held a bow and  arrows 
in both his hands.  The stranger  asked  all the girls whether  they had seen a wolf.  Apparently  the 
stranger was on his hunting spree. Padmavati angrily reminded the stranger th at hunting  was 
strictly  prohibited  in that area and hence  he should  go back  home.  The stranger  was stunned  by 
Padmavati's beauty and said --'I am Ananta from Venketachal mountain. People also call  me 
Veerpati. Can I have this beautiful lady as my wife.'  
 
Padmavati's  companions  angrily  rebuffed  Anant  who then galloped  back  on his horse.  These 
unfortunate girls were unable to recognize Lord Vishnu who had come disguised as Anant.  After 
reaching his palace, Anant found it very difficult to concentrate on his wo rk. His mind  was 
occupied  by the thoughts  of Padmavati.  One day, while  he was sitting  in a thoughtful  mood, 
Vakulmalika (a maid servant) arrived there and requested him to come down for lunch. But,  Sri 
Hari (Anant)  was lost in the thoughts  of Padmavati.  On being  asked  by Vakulmalika,  Sri Hari 
narrated the following tale to her  --- 
 
In Treta yuga, when I had incarnated as Ram, Ravan had deceitfully abducted my  consort --Sita. 
But fortunately she was not Sita but Agni's consort Swaha. Before this incident coul d  occur, 
Agni  had already  taken  Sita to Patalloka  and kept his own wife 'Swaha'  in her place.  Indra's  act 
had special purpose behind it --to avenge Swaha's death, who was Vedavati in her previous   birth  
and who had committed suicide after being touched by  the same demon. Actually, Agni's  consort 
'Swaha' was 'Vedavati' in her previous birth. So, in reality Ravan had abducted Vedavati  instead 
of Sita. Later  on, I thanked  Agni  and promised  him that I would  make  Vedavati  my consort  in 
Kali yuga. The same Vedav ati has taken birth as Padmavati. You must go and  convince 
Padmavati to become my consort. Vakulmalika went to Narayanpur and informed the king  about 
Sri Hari's  desire.  Emperor  Akash  was extremely  delighted  at the prospect  of having  Sri Hari as 
his son-in-law. An auspicious  day was chosen  for the marriage  and thus,  Lord  Sri Hari got 
Padmavati as his  consort.  
   
 
KING  PARIKSHIT  
Once,  Sutji  narrated  the tale of king Parikshit  to all the assembled  sages ---Parikshit  ruled  over 
Hastinapur.  One day he went  into a forest on a hunting  spree.  He saw a deer and managed  to 
injure  it with his arrow.  But the injured  deer disappeared  from  his sight.  Parikshit  chased  the 
injured  deer in the direction  it had disappeared.  He reached  a place  where  Sage  Shamik  was 
engrossed in hi s meditation. Parikshit enquired Sage Shamik if he had seen that injured deer.  But 
Sage  Shamik  being  in deep  meditation  did not respond  to Parikshit  query.  This made  Parikshit 
extremely  angry  and he wrapped  a dead  snake  around  Shamik's  neck  as a punishment  for not 
having answered his question. But, it made no difference to Sage Shamik and he continued with 
his meditation. Parikshit went back fuming in  anger.  
 
Shringi was the son of Sage Shamik. When he saw a dead snake coiling around his father's  neck, 
he cursed --'Whoever  has tried to insult  my father  will not live to see the seventh  day because  a 
takshak nag would bite him to  death.'  
 
When Sage Shamik learnt about his son's curse, he reproached his son and sent a disciple  named 
Daurmukh to inform Parikshit  so that he (Parikshit) could take some preventive  measures. 
Daurmukh went and narrated the whole incident to king Parikshit. Parikshit became very  scared 
and he started living on a canopy that had been constructed in the middle of river Ganges on  his 
instructions.  Now  he felt secured  and safe. Meanwhile  a poor brahmin  named  Kashyap  came  to 
know  about  the curse  that poor Parikshit  had received.  He knew  how to cure a person  bitten  by 
snake.  So he thought  that it was an excellent  opportunity  for him to receiv e monetary  awards 
from the king. So, he proceeded towards the place where Parikshit was  staying.  
 
On his way, Kashyap met a brahmin who in reality was Takshak in disguise. Takshak was on  his 
way to kill Parikshit. He asked Kashyap about the reason he was g oing to meet  Parikshit. 
Kashyap  revealed  to Takshak  that he could  neutralize  the influence  of poison  in any person 
bitten  by a snake.  Takshak  wanted  to examine  the authenticity  of Kashyap's  statement,  so he 
inserted  his poisonous  fangs  into the trunk  of a huge  tree. A man was sitting  on the branches  of 
that tree. The tree as well as the man was charred to death within no  time.  
 
Kashyap, really brought the tree and that man back to life. Takshak was stunned by  this 
unbelievable  act. He asked  Kashyap  how much  he expected  as reward  from  the king.  Kashyap 
revealed the amount, which he expected from Parikshit in lieu of giving him a fresh lease of  life. 
Takshak  gave  lot of wealth  to him as a bribe  and Kashyap  went  back  home  satisfied.  Takshak 
then summoned all hi s companions and instructed them to go to the place where Parikshit   lived,  
disguising themselves as hermits. All the serpents went to meet Parikshit impersonating  as 
hermits  and offered  fruits  to him. According  to his plan,  Takshak  had hidden  himself  within a 
plum  fruit.  He bit Parikshit  as soon  as he got a chance.  Parikshit  died instantly.  Janmejaya  was 
crowned as the next king. Meanwhile, people started criticizing the treacherous conduct  of 
Kashyap,  which  had resulted  in the death  of king Parikshit.  He decided  to make  a pilgrimage  to 
Venketachaleshwar so that he became liberated from his  sin. 
   
 
KRISHNA  TEERTH  
Sutji narrated a tale to all the assembled sages --During ancient times, a brahmin  named 
Ramkrishna did an austere penance at Venketachal mountain.  He remained immobile during  the 
entire course of his penance resulting into the development of mole hills all over his body.  Indra 
was scarred  by Ramkrishna's  penance  and caused  a heavy  downpour  for a week.  All the mole 
hills were  washed  away  from  Ramkris hna's  body.  Lord  Srinivas  became  pleased  and appeared 
before  him. He blessed  Ramkrishna  by saying --'This  holy place,  where  you have  performed  a 
great  penance  will be named  after you as Krishna  teerth.  Anybody  who makes  a pilgrimage  to 
this place will be li berated from all the  sins.'  
 
Eulogizing  Lord  Venketashwar,  Sutji  says---'A man,  who has the good  fortune  of seeing  the 
divine appearance of Lord Srinivas even for a moment, attains  salvation.'  
   
 
SOME OTHER PLACES OF PILGRIMAGE  ON 
VENKETACHAL  MOUNTAIN  
All the sages  then requested  Sutji  to tell about  some  other  places  of pilgrimage  situated  on 
Venketachal  mountain.  
 
Sutji replied ---There are about one hundred and eight holy places situated on  Venketachal 
mountain. Among all these holy places, six are consider ed to be capable of bestowing  salvation -- 
-Swami  pushkarini,  Akash  ganga,  Papvinashan,  Panduteerth,  Kumar  dharika  teerth  and Tumbu 
teerth.  
   
 
ANJANA'S PENANCE AT AKASHGANGA  TEERTH  
Describing  how Vayudeva  had once  assured  Anjana  that he would  take birth  as her son, Sutji 
told the sages ---Anjana, being issue less even after a long married life, decided to do penance  in 
order  to beget  a son. Sage  Matang  advised  her to go to Akashganga  teerth  where  her wishes 
would get fulfilled. Sage Matang also described the ge ographical location -- 'At a distance of  ten 
yojans towards south is situated Dhanachal mountain, which is believed to be the abode of  Lord 
Nrisimha.  Brahma  teerth  lies in its vicinity.  At a distance  of ten yojans  south  of Brahma  teerth, 
flows river 'Suvarn amukhari'. Venkentachal mountain is situated to the north of this river and  the 
holiest place called Swamipushkarni is situated among its numerous peaks. You should visit  that 
place  and  take  a  holy  dip  in  its  water.  After  that  you  should  seek  the  blessings  of   Lord  
Varahaswami  and Lord  Venketeshwar.  You should  then go towards  north  of Swami  teerth  and 
you would reach  Akashganga.'  
 
Acting as per Matang's instructions, Anjana went to Akashganga teerth and did her  penance. 
Finally Lord Vayude va appeared before her and promised to incarnate as  Hanuman.  
   
 
VISHNU ADVISES BRAHMA TO GO  TO 
PURUSHOTTAM  KSHETRA  
The Sages  asked ---'O revered  sage!  We would  like to know  more  about  Purushottam  Kshetra, 
where there is a majestic wooden idol of Lord  Vishnu.'  
 
Sage Jaimini replied --The sacrosanct place of Purushottam Kshetra is graced by the presence  of 
Lord  Jagannath.  During  ancient  times,  Lord  Varaha  had rescued  Prithvi  from  the clutches  of 
Hiranyaksha --the mighty demon who had abducted her to Rasatala. Aft er Prithvi had  been 
established in its original position, Lord Brahma commenced his creations. Lord  Brahma 
wondered about the means by which human beings could get liberated from three major types  of 
sorrow ---Adhyatmic (spiritual), Adhidaivik (deities wrat h), Adhibhantik (related with  this 
world). He sought the help of Lord Vishnu who eulogized the greatness of Purushottam  Kshetra 
and advised  him to go there.  Lord  Vishnu  said-- 'Purushottam  Kshetra  is situated  at the sea- 
shore, to the south of river Mahana di. This sacroscant place of mine does not get affected  by 
deluge.  I dwell  at this holiest  place  as 'Lord  Purushottam'.  There  is a holy pond  called  Rohin  in 
the vicinity. Anybody who takes a holy dip in that pond gets absolved of all his sins. O  Brahma! 
You must  pay a visit to Purushottam  kshetra  where  spending  a day bestows  virtues  greater  than 
all the austerities combined  together.'  
 
This way, Lord Brahma went to Purushottam kshetra as per the instructions of Lord  Vishnu.  
  MARKANDEYA EULOGIZES  VISHNU  
Lord  Brahma soon after reaching Purushottam kshetra sat down and started meditating. He  was 
so engrossed  in his meditation  that he remained  in that state for a very long time.  This resulted 
into total chaos as Yamaraj found that his power of causing death had no effect on people  living 
in Purushottam  kshetra.  Worried  as he was, Yamaraj  rushed  towards  Neelachal  mountain  and 
sought Lord Vishnu's intervention in the  matter.  
 
Lord Vishnu smiled and signaled goddess Lakshmi to say something. Goddess Lakshmi  said--'O 
Suryanandan!  Anybody  residing  at this holy place  is freed  from  the vicious  cycles  of birth  and 
death  after becoming  absolved  of all his sins. This is the reason  why you are experiencing  this 
unusual problem. The whole world except this holy place will com e into your  jurisdiction.'  
 
Yamaraj was amazed by this revelation so he asked Lakshmi --'I would like to know why such  a 
privilege is being given to this  place?'  
Lakshmi replied --'O Ravinandan! At the time of deluge when the whole world was submerged  in 
the water  sage Markandeya  was struggling  to find a secure  place  for his survival.  Although  he 
was blessed with an unusually long life of seven kalpas but still he needed a place to live in.  He 
started swimming and finally managed to reach Purushottam kshetra , which had  remained 
unscathed  by the turbulence  of the deluge.  There  he saw a divine  tree called  'Akshay  Vat'. 
Markandeya  continued  to swim  along  the coast  wondering  how that place  had managed  to 
remain  unaffected  by deluge  when  the whole  world  had been  submerged.  Suddenly  he heard  a 
voice, which appeared to be coming from the direction of the Akshay Vat --'O  Markandeya! 
Don't worry! Take my refuge and you shall be  protected.'  
 
Markandeya  was very surprised  and looked  all around.  He kept on swimming  and saw Lord 
Vishnu,  who was engrossed  in his yoga nidra  in Ksheer  Sagar.  I (Lakshmi)  was also present 
there. Markandeya eulogized Vishnu in the following way --'Salutations to the supreme lord - the 
source of all creations! O Jagannath! Protect me from getting  drowned.'  
 
Lord Vishnu opened his eyes and found Markandeya gasping for breath. On realizing the  gravity 
of the situation  he said--'Raise  your head  and look at the top of this Kalpa  Vat. You would  find 
an infant  sleeping  on a leaf of the Kalpa  Vat. The infan t is none  other  than Kal himself.  You 
should enter inside his (Kal's) body through his opened mouth and live peacefully as there is  no 
other place for you to live  in.' 
Markandeya entered into Kal's body as per the instructions given by Lord Vishnu and  was 
amazed  by the expanse  of his belly,  which  appeared  like a bottomless  pit. He also saw all the 
fourteen  Bhuvans  existing  within  Kal's  belly  including  all the creatures -deities,  sages,  siddhas, 
gandharvas, etc. Markandeya wandered all over the place and af ter getting tired came  out 
through  Kal's  opened  mouth.  He found  Lord  Vishnu  was still present  there  accompanied  by his 
consort -Lakshmi. Markandeya made salutations to both of them and narrated his experiences  he 
had inside  Kal's  belly.  Lord  Vishnu  blessed  him and made  a revelation --' The place  you had 
visited few moments ago is beyond the limits of creation or deluge. The name of this  holiest 
place is Purushottam kshetra and it is my permanent abode for I do not leave it even for  a 
moment.'Markandeya was v ery impressed and requested Lord Vishnu to allow him to live  there. 
Lord  Vishnu  replied --' O Brahmarishi!  I shall  remain  at Purushottam -kshetra  till the end of this 
kalpa. I shall also create a sacrosanct place, which would enable you to become  immortal.'  
Sage  Markandeya  then dug up a reservoir  with the help of Vishnu's  chakra.  He did an austere 
penance to please lord Maheshwar as the result of which he was indeed blessed with  immortality. 
In course of time, this reservoir became famous as 'Markandeya  kund '.  
HOLY PLACES IN THE VICINITY OF PURUSHOTTAM  - 
KSHETRA  
Dwelling in length upon the majesty of Purushottam kshetra, goddess Lakshmi  said-- 
Purushottam kshetra resembles a conch in shape and is graced by the presence of lord  Shiva. 
Towards  its north  is situated  a temple  of lord Neelkanth.  A famous  Shivalinga  named  Kapal  
mochan  is also situated  in the vicinity.  One who makes  a pilgrimage  to Kapalmochan  becomes 
liberated from gravest of sins. A temple of goddess Vimla devi is also situated  nearby.  
 
Purushott am kshetra is considered to be supreme among all the places of pilgrimage and for  this 
very reason  it is aptly  named  'Teerth  Raj'. A divine  pond  called  Rohin  kund  is also situated 
nearby. Anybody who takes a holy dip there is freed from the vicious cycles of birth and death.  It 
is believed that the increased level of water at the time of deluge ultimately recedes  and 
disappears into this  pond.  
 
Goddess Lakshmi said --' O Dhanraj! This holy place is beyond your jurisdiction because  people 
living there never experience death. It is well protected by eight goddesses from all the  eight 
directions. The names of these eight goddesses are Mangla, Lamba, Kalratri, Marichika,  Vimla, 
Sarvamangla,  Ardhashini  and Chandrupa.  How  can Lord  Rudra  be absent  when  Rudrani  has 
manifested herself in eight forms, so, he has manifested himself in eight different forms as  well- 
Kapalmochan,  Kshetrapal,  Yameshwar,  Markandeyeshwar,  Ishan,  Bilveshwar,  Neelkanth,  and 
Vateshwar.While  describing  the majesty  of Purushottam  kshetra,  goddess  Lakshmi  revealed  to 
Lord Brahma --' In the coming Satya yuga there would be a king named Indradyumna and  would 
be famous  for his unflinching  devotion  in Lord  Vishnu.  Being  pleased  by the king's  devotion, 
Lord Vishnu would ultimately manifest himself from a  wooden structure to bless  him. 
Vishwakarma  would  then carve  out four idols  (Jagannath,  Balbhadra,  Subhadra  and Sudarshan 
chakra) from the wooden block all of which would be installed by none other than  you 
(Brahma).'  
 
Once, while Sage Jaimini was describ ing the greatness of Purushottam kshetra to the  assembled 
sages, all of them curiously asked him --'Where is Purushottam kshetra  situated?'  
 
Jaimini  replied  --'Utkal  is situated  at the eastern  coast  of Bharatavarsha.  At the time of deluge, 
when everything g ets submerged in water Utkal remains unaffected and it is the very place  from 
where  the knowledge  of the Vedas  spread  in all directions.  The residents  of Utkal  are not only 
learned but also very prosperous. There is not a single person in this land who is not a devotee  of 
lord Vishnu. All the people belonging to the four prominent castes (Brahmin, Kshatriya,  Vaishya 
and Shudra) diligently follow their respective dharma. This holy place never experiences  natural 
calamities of any  kind.'  
 
Sage Jaimini then we nt on to narrate the tale of king Indradyumna to all the assembled sages  --'In 
Satya  yuga  there  lived  a noble  and virtuous  king named  Indradyumna,  who ruled  over the 
province  of Malva.  He was a great  devotee  of Lord  Vishnu.  One day, while  worshipping  in a 
temple, he asked the priest - I have a wish, which still remains unfulfilled. I have a deep desire  of 
seeing  lord Jagannath  with my mortal  eyes.  Is there  any means  with the help of which  I can get 
my wish  fulfilled?'  
 
 
 The royal priest had no answer to the k ing's query so he kept quiet. Suddenly, he saw a group  of 
pilgrims  coming  towards  the temple.  He thought  that perhaps  one of them  might  be having  an 
answer  to the king's  query.  When  the pilgrims  arrived  at the temple,  the royal  priest  posed  the 
same  questi on to them.  One of the pilgrims  answered --' There  is a place  called  Odhra,  where  is 
situated  a grand  temple  of Lord  Jagannath.  This sacrosanct  place  is also famously  known  as 
Purushottam  kshetra  and is situated  at the foothills  of the Neelachal  mountain.  There  is a holy 
pond called Rohin situated nearby. At the eastern bank of this pond is situated a majestic  temple 
of Lord  Vasudev.  The idol of Lord  Vasudev  is made  of 'Indraneel'  diamond.  To the west of this 
temple lies 'Shabardeep' hermitage, from where s tarts a path leading to Jagannath  temple.'  
 
Having said this, the pilgrim disappeared from everybody's sight. Not only Indradyumna but  all 
the pilgrims were equally amazed by his sudden disappearance. Indradyumna was convinced  that 
lord Jagannath  had himse lf come  there  in the guise  of a pilgrim.  Now,  his desire  of visiting 
Purushottam kshetra became even more intense. Indradyumna instructed his priest to find out  the 
exact location of Purushottam kshetra by sending somebody over there. Later on, the priest  went 
home  and sought  the help of Vidyapati -his younger  brother  in this regard.  Vidyapati  readily 
agreed to help his brother and one fine day he proceeded on his journey with a select group of  his 
trusted  friends.  
 
After a long and arduous journey all of t hem reached 'Ekamravan' forest, situated at the  foothills 
of Neelachal mountain. The thought of being so near their destination made everybody  extremely 
excited. But, despite their best of efforts they could not find Shabardeep ashram. Being tired,  all 
of them decided to take rest for a while and then recommence their efforts to find out the  location 
of Shabardeep  hermitage.  Finding  a huge  tree, all of them  took rest under  the shade  of that tree. 
Suddenly, they heard a heavenly voice, which appeared to be c oming from the western  direction. 
They followed the voice and reached Shabardeep ashram in a short time. There they saw a large 
gathering of devotees. One of the devotees, whose name was Vishvavasu, curiously  asked 
Vidyapati --'It is not easy to reach  this place.  From  where  are you coming  and where  do you 
intend to go? You must be tired --wait, till I return with some refreshment for all of  you.'  
 
Vidyapati  was not in a mood  to waste  his time,  as he was aware  that Indradyumna  was eagerly 
waiting for him to re turn. He told Vishvavasu -- I have a difficult mission to accomplish so, I  am 
not in a position to waste my time. I am the younger brother of the royal priest of  king 
Indradyumna. The king has vowed not to have a single morsel of food till he makes a  pilgri mage 
to Purushottam  kshetra.  He has sent me with a specific  purpose  of finding  the exact  location  of 
Purushottam kshetra and the easiest route leading to it. So, help me reach the temple of  Lord 
Jagannath as soon as  possible.'  
   
 
 
VIDYAPATI EULOGIZES LORD  NEELMADHAV  
Vishvavasu  told Vidyapati --' I have  heard  this prophesy  of Indradyumna's  possible  arrival  at 
Purushottam kshetra in the near future. Not only that, I have also heard that Indradyumna  would 
become  so impressed  with Purushottam  kshetra  that he would  settle  down  there  for good  after 
renouncing  everything.'  
 
Vishvavasu  then requested  Vidyapati  to follow  him and started  negotiating  the steep  heights  of 
Neelachal mountain. Vidyapati followed him through the curvy and arduous paths of  the 
mountain.  Having  walked  for sometime,  Vishvavasu  pointed  towards  a pond  and said--'This 
pond is famously known as Rohin kund. The kalpa vat that you see towards the east of this  pond 
is considered  to be so sacrosanct  that a sinner  becomes  liberated  of all his sins once  he comes 
under  its shade.  Lord  Jagannath's  temple  is situated  between  Rohin  kund  and the kalpa  vat. Go 
ahead  and have  a darshan  of Lord  Jagannath  for whom  you have  undertaken  such an arduous 
travel.'  
 
Vidyapati's joys knew no bounds as he had been waiting fo r this moment for a long time. First  he 
purified  himself  by taking  a holy dip in Rohin  kund  and then went  inside  the temple  to worship 
Lord Jagannath. He worshipped Lord Jagannath by chanting the sacred pranav mantra. After  the 
worship was over, Vishvavasu  requested Vidyapatito visit his place which was nearby.  Vidyapati 
agreed and accompanied Vishvavasu to his place. Vidyapati was given a royal treat by his  host, 
which  made  him wonder  as to how could  Vishvavasu  arrange  all the luxurious  things  at such a 
remote place. He could not control himself and asked Vishvavasu -- Even a king would  have 
found  it difficult  to treat his guest  as lavishly  like you! I am amazed  how you could  make  
arrangements  for all these  things  at a remote  and secluded  place  like this! How do you manage 
this?  
 
Vishvavasu replied -- It is not as difficult as you believe. Since Purushottam kshetra is  a 
sacrosanct  place  and it is frequently  visited  by the deities  who make  divine  offerings  to Lord 
Jagannath. I collect the residuals of whatever  is offered to Jagannath from the temple and bring  it 
home.  So, I really  don't  have  to make  any special  efforts  to accumulate  divine  food stuffs.  On 
account  of eating  these  divine  food stuffs,  not only we have  been  blessed  by eternal  youth  but 
also we are never troubled by old age. Vidyapati was very impressed and requested  Vishvavasu 
to become his friend. He also reminded Vishvavasu that he wanted to return as soon as  possible 
so that the king could  go on a pilgrimage  to Purushottam  kshetra.  But, Vishvavas u made  a 
shocking disclosure to Vidyapati and said -- King Indradyumna will never be able to have  a 
divine  glimpse  of Lord  Jagannath  as the lord is soon  going  to disappear.  But, don't  disclose  this 
fact to the king otherwise he would get disheartened and ab andon his plan of making  a 
pilgrimage  to Purushottam  kshetra.  Finally,  when  the king in his utter frustration  would  try to 
end his life after not being able to have a divine glimpse of Neelmadhav, the most gracious  lord 
will appear  in his dream  and instru ct him to get constructed  four wooden  idols  of Jagannath, 
Balbhadra, Subhadra and Sudarshan  chakra.  
 
 
 
 
 Having accomplished his mission, Vidyapati proceeded on his return journey and once again  he 
visited  Purushottam  kshetra,  which  fell on the way.  He picked  up a garland,  which  had been 
offered to Neelmadhav by some deity. Finally, when he reached Malwa he found  king 
Indradyumna  eagerly  waiting  for him. After  presenting  the garland  to the king,  he narrated  his 
experiences he had at Purushottam kshetra --' O kin g! Lord Jagannath's idol is made of  Neelmani 
diamond  and is very ancient.  Even  the deities  have  deep  regards  and undiluted  reverence  for 
Lord  Jagannath  and are frequent  visitors  to Purushottam  Kshetra.  The garland,  which  I have 
given  you, was in fact had been offered  to Lord  Jagannath  by the deities - these  flowers  do not 
wither  and have  fragrance  lasting  for eternity.  Purushottam  kshetra  remains  untouched  by old 
age, sorrow or disease and gives salvation to anybody, who goes on a pilgrimage over  there.'  
   
 
INDRADYUMNA LEAVES FOR  PURUSHOTTAM 
KSHETRA  
Indradyumna had been waiting for this moment for a long time - the moment when he would  get 
a chance to go on a pilgrimage to Purushottam kshetra. Revealing his great plan to Vidyapati,  he 
said--' Now,  the time has finally  come  for me to go on a pilgrimage  to Purushottam  kshetra.  I 
also intend  to develop  that holy place  as a prominent  place  of pilgrimage.  I would  shift my 
subject  to that holy place  and perform  one hundred  Ashwamedha  yagyas  once  I reach  there.  I 
also intend to devote rest of my life in the worship of Lord  Jagannath.'  
 
While the conversation was going on, the ever wandering Sage Narada, arrived there  and 
informed Indradyumna how pleased were the deities after learning of his holy intention  of 
developin g Purushottam kshetra into a major place of pilgrimage. Narada also dwelt on length  on 
the virtues of Jagannath's worship. Indradyumna, thinking that Narada might prove to be of  great 
help during the course of pilgrimage because of his vast travelling expe rience, requested him  to 
accompany him to Purushottam kshetra. Narada readily agreed to accompany the king and  said--' 
O king!  I shall  reveal  to you the importance  of all the holy places  that we come  across  in the 
course of our  pilgrimage.'  
 
Finally,  king Indradyumna  left for Purushottam  kshetra  followed  by a large  procession,  that 
consisted  of his subject,  all the ministers  and army  officers.  The entourage  touched  the bank  of 
river  Mahanadi  by evening.  Deciding  to take rest and spend  the night  there,  king Indradyumna 
first took his bath and then worshipped Lord Jagannath. After the king had taken his bath, all  the 
rest of the people also took their bath and then everybody sat down to have their dinner. After  the 
meal  was over,  while  Indradyumna  was busy  discussing  with his ministers  on the future  course 
of action, somebody came with the news that the king of Utkal  had  arrived.  Indradyumna 
ordered  the messenger  to bring  the esteemed  guest  with all the honour  and respect.  The king of 
Utkal arrived and broke  a disturbing news -- 'Indradyumna, I am afraid your intention of having  a 
divine glimpse of Lord Jagannath is not going to fructify as lord Neelmadhav has  presently 
concealed  himself  beneath  a huge  heap  of sand caused  by a ferocious  sandstorm.  The fallout  of 
this inauspicious incident has been extremely adverse on my kingdom -- as my people  are 
experiencing acute  famine.  
 
Indradyumna was shocked, especially the thought of not getting a chance to have a  divine 
glimpse of lord Neelmadhav made him dejected - he saw all his efforts going in vain. But,  Narada 
consoled  him by saying  --'Don't  worry!  Lord  Neelmadhav  is extremely  merciful  and he will 
certainly give you an opportunity to have his divine  glimpse.'  
   
 
INDRADYUMNA REACHES  'EKAMRACHHETRA'  
Continuing with the tale of Indradyumna, sage Jaimini told all the sages --'Next  morning, 
Indradyumna  and his entourage  crossed  Mahanadi  on boats  and reached  Ekamrachhetra  where 
they worshipped  lord Purushottam.  After  that they worshipped  on their onwards  journey  and 
reached K otishwar Mahalaya where they worshipped lord Tribhuneshwar with  appropriate 
rituals. Lord Tribhuneshwar appeared after becoming pleased and blessed Indradyumna that  his 
wish of seeing lord Jagannath was soon going to be fulfilled. Lord Tribhuneshwar then  instructed 
Narada --' O great soul! After reaching Purushottam kshetra, help Indradyumna perform  one 
hundred yagyas as per the instructions given by Lord Brahma. I along with goddess Durga,  dwell 
at the entrance of  conch  shaped Purushottam kshetra. Althoug h, presently lord  Jagannath    has 
concealed himself beneath a heap of sand yet very soon he is going to manifest  himself. 
Indradyumna  should  get constructed  a magnificent  temple  of Lord  Jagannath  at the same  place, 
where  once  existed  his idol and presen tly which  is hidden  beneath  the heap  of sand.  Later  on, 
Vishwakarma would then carve out four idols from a single piece of wood, which  would 
subsequently be installed by Lord Brahma himself. Finally, Indradyumna's wish of seeing  Lord 
Jagannath would get  fulfilled.  
 
Narada  assured  Lord  Tribhuneshwar  that all his instructions  would  be followed  in letter  and 
spirit. The procession then left for the place indicated by Lord  Tribhuneshwar.  
   
 
INDRADYUMNA EULOGIZES LORD  NEELMADHAV  
After reaching the temple of Neelk anth-Mahadev, all of them worshipped Mahadev and  Durga. 
They then visited the temple of Lord Nrisimha, situated under a sandalwood tree at the  foothills 
of Neelachal mountain.King Indradyumna was anxiously waiting for the moment he would  have 
a divine glim pse of lord Jagannath. He requested Narada to take him to the place  where 
Jagannath had hidden himself beneath the heap of sand. Narada took him near a Banyan tree  and 
said--' Look at this huge Banyan tree that is two yojans in height and whose trunk is sp read in  the 
area of one yojan.  To the north  of this Banyan  tree and to the north  of Nrisimha  temple  lies the 
place  where  Lord  Neelmadhav  used to have  his dwelling  sometime  ago but who has presently 
concealed himself. Now, the time is not very far when you would see Lord Jagannath with  your 
mortal  eyes.'  
 
Indradyumna bowed in reverence to the place where Lord Jagannath was supposed to  remanifest 
himself in the near future. He eulogized the lord as if he were already present there and this  was 
true as Jaganna th's idol was indeed present there albeit hidden beneath heaps of sand. He  prayed - 
-'O lord! You are the one in whom every living creature ultimately takes refuge. My only wish  is 
to be able to see your idol, which  is presently  hidden  beneath  heaps  of sand.' Hardly  had 
Indradyumna  finished  his prayer  when  he heard  a heavenly  voice --'O king!  Do not worry!  The 
day is not far when  you would  see me with your mortal  eyes.  You just need  to follow  Narada's 
instructions and your wish will be  fulfilled.  
   
 
NARADA INST ALLS THE IDOL OF  NRISIMHA  
Narada  told Indradyumna --'Now,  we should  install  an idol of Lord  Nrisimha  near Neelkanth's 
temple for this is the very place where you will be performing one thousand Ashwamedh  Yagyas 
in the days to come.  So, your first priority  should  be to get constructed  a magnificent  temple  of 
Lord  Nrisimha.  I plan to stay here for five more  days as Vishwakarma  will be needing  my help 
in carving out the idol of Lord  Nrisihma.'  
 
Leaving  Narada  alone  near the Neelkanth  temple,  Indradyumna  went  near the sandalwood  tree, 
which was at a little distance from the temple, and was surprised to find Sughat - Vishwakarma's 
son waiting  for him. He requested  Sughat  to construct  a grand  temple  with its main  entrance 
facing  west.  Sughat  constructed  the temple  within four days.  On the fifth day, Narada  arrived 
there with an idol of Lord Nrisimha, which had been carved out by Vishwakarma. An  auspicious  
day was chosen  for installing  the idol. After  the idol had been  installed,  every  body  including 
king Indradyumna , Narada as well as the people accompanying the procession worshipped  Lord 
Narsimha.  
   
 
INDRADYUMNA PERFORMS ASHWAMEDHA  YAGYAS  
Sages, who had been listening to the tale narrated by Jaimini with rapt attention till then  asked -- 
'What did Indradyumna next do a fter the idol of Lord Nrisimha had been  installed?'  
 
Sage  Jaimini  replied --'After  the idol of Lord  Nrisimha  had been  installed,  Indradyumna  began 
making preparations for Ashwamedha yagya. He sent invitations to all the deities,  learned 
brahmins and sages.  When everybody arrived, he made a special request to Indra to  remain 
present  at the oblation  site till the completion  of one thousand  Ashwamedha  yagyas.  Indra 
assured Indradyumna of his full cooperation and advised him to go ahead with his plan  of 
accompl ishing  one thousand  Ashwamedha  yagyas.  Finally,  Indradyumna  performed  the first 
yagya under the supervision of learned priests. This way, he was able to successfully  accomplish 
nine hundred  and ninety  nine yagyas  without  any problem.  Finally,  when  the last Ashwamedha 
yagya  was being  performed,  Indradyumna  had a divine  glimpse  of Lord  Vishnu  while  he was 
engrossed  in his meditation.  Indradyumna  narrated  his experience  to Narada  to which  he got a 
reply that it was a good omen, which proved that the king was g oing to see Lord Jagannath  with 
his mortal  eyes.'  
   
 
JAGANNATH IDOL IS CARVED  OUT  
After the rituals of final yagya ended, Narada advised Indradyumna to perform the rituals  of 
'Purnahuti' to mark the end of Yagya ceremony. Narada then went on to say --' A tree  is 
considered  to be the partial  incarnation  (Ansha  avatar)  of Lord  Vishnu  for each of his hair that 
falls on the earth gets transformed into a tree.' Narada, then pointing towards a tree told 
Indradyumna -- 'The almighty Lord has manifested himself in the form of this tree. Now,  you 
should make preparations to get this tree installed on the great altar inside the  temple.'  
 
The tree to which  Narada  had pointed  was unique  in the sense  that it had only four branches  on 
it. Indradyumna, following the instructio ns ordered his men to uproot the said tree and  then 
install it on the 'Mahavedi' inside the temple. But, at the same time he was wondering as to  who 
would carve out the four idols of Jagannath, Balbhadra, Subhadra and Sudarshan  chakra. 
Suddenly, a heavenly  voice was heard --' Lord Vishnu would manifest himself on the sacred  altar 
on his own.  An old carpenter,  who is standing  among  you, should  be sent inside  the temple 
premise.  The main  door of the temple  should  then be shut and nobody  should  try to enter  the 
temple  till the idols  are ready.  One more  thing  to be kept in mind  is that all of you should  keep 
on beating drums so that nobody hears the sound emanating from the carving of the  idols. 
Anybody, who hears this sound, is doomed to become deaf. Similarly, anybody who tries to  see 
the act of idols being made shall loose his power of  sight.'  
 
Indradyumna  made  elaborate  arrangements  as per the instructions  given  by the heavenly  voice. 
The old carpenter  was sent inside  and the main  door of the temple  shut.  On the fifteenth  day, 
Lord Jagannath manifested himself along with Balbhadra, Subhadra and Sudarshan chakra.  Once 
again heavenly voice was heard which said --'O king! Get all the four idols coloured on the  basis 
of the complexion  of the respective  deities.  The colour  of Jagannath's  idol should  be dark blue 
similar  to that of dark clouds.  Similarly,  the idol of Balbhadra  should  be coloured  in white  just 
like his fair complexion.  The colour  of goddess  Subhadra's  idol should  be reddish  just like the 
rising  Sun. Sudarshan  chakra  should  be painted  deep  red. Either  the descendants  of Vishvavasu 
or your royal priest are entitled to participate in the consecration ceremony of the idols in  future 
events.'  
 
Indradyumna,  once  again  following  the instructions,  got the idols  coloured  in the way specified 
by the heavenly  voice.  After  that, all the four idols  were  adorned  with beautiful  apparels  and 
ornaments.  Now,  they really  looked  divine  in their new looks.  Looking  at the divine  idols  of 
Jagannath, Indradyumna went into tran ce. Seeing his condition, Narada advised not to waste  time 
and seek any boon  from  Lord  Jagannath  because  the sole purpose  for which  Jagannath  had 
manifested  himself  was to bless  him and to fulfill  his wish.  Indradyumna  immediately  realized 
what  Narada  mean t to say. He eulogized  Lord  Jagannath  in the following  way--'O Jagannath! 
Help me out from the sorrows of this world. I don't aspire for anything  else.'  
 
Subsequently,  Narada  and the whole  entourage,  which  had come  along  with king Indradyumna 
worshipped  Lord Jagannath,  Balbhadra,  Subhadra  and Sudarshan  chakra.  Lord  Jagannath  was 
worshipped amidst the chanting of Dwadashakshar mantra while Jagannath was worshipped  with 
Purusha sukta. Similarly, Subhadra and Sudarshan chakra were worshipped amidst the  chanti ng 
of Devisutra  and vedic  verses  respectively.  Finally,  donations  were  made  to the brahmins  and 
everybody was sent off with  respect.  
 CONSECRATION OF THE  IDOLS  
King Indradyumna was anxious to get performed the rituals of consecration as soon as  possible, 
so he asked  Narada --'I am not aware  of the proper  rituals  that are employed  in the consecration 
of an idol. I need  your help in this regard.'  Narada  then made  a list of articles  required  for the 
consecration  of idols  and instructed  Indradyumna  to make  arran gements  for all those  items.  He 
also instructed the king to get constructed a grand palace for Lord Brahma, who was supposed  to 
arrive shortly to perform the consecration ceremony. Narada said --'Get constructed three  chariots 
for all the three deities. The  chariot meant for Lord Jagannath should have a mast on its top  with 
the figure of Garuda on it. Similarly, Balbhadra's chariot should have a mast with a  plough 
drawn  on it whereas  Subhadra's  chariot  should  have  a mast  with a beautiful  lotus  drawn  on it. 
The number  of horses  pulling  the chariots  of Jagannath,  Balbhadra  and Subhadra  should  be 
Sixteen, fourteen and twelve  respectively.'  
 
It did not take much  time to construct  the three  chariots  as per the instructions  given  by Narada. 
Very soon lord Brahma a rrived there, accompanied by all the deities, to perform the  consecration 
of the four idols.  On seeing  Lord  Brahma,  Indradyumna's  joys knew  no bounds  and he paid his 
obeisance to the creator. Lord Brahma said --' See how fortunate you are. All the deities a nd sages 
have come here to help you in your  cause.'  
Lord Brahma then performed the rituals of consecration on the auspicious day of ashtami of  the 
bright half of the Hindu month Vaishakh. The day was Thursday and the Nakshatra was  Pushya.  
   
 
RATH  YATRA  
Dwel ling on length  about  the auspicious  days on which  Rath  Yatra  should  be taken  out, sage 
Jaimini  told the assembled  sages --'The combination  of 'Teej'  falling  in the month  of Vaishakh 
(bright  half)  and Rohini  nakshatra,  is considered  to be extremely  auspiciou s. A king should  get 
constructed three chariots on the above mentioned day. The entire path along which the  chariots 
as well as the procession  is supposed  to pass should  be decorated  with beautiful  flowers  and 
banners.  On the second  day of the bright  half of the Hindu  month -Ashadh,  all the three  deities 
are worshipped and subsequently installed on their respective chariots, which are then pulled  by 
the devotees.  The procession  then passes  through  the major  routes  of the city so that people  can 
pay their obeisance.  After  reaching  Gundicha  Nagar,  the procession  should  stay there  for seven 
days on the bank  of Bindu  teerth.  On the eighth  day, all the chariots  should  begin  their return 
journey. This famous Rath yatra lasts for nine  days.  
   
 
SOME PROMINENT PLACES OF  PILGRIMAGE  
Once, Sage Shaunak asked Sutji about the means, which enabled human beings to  attain 
salvation in Kali  yuga.  
 
Sutji recounted a tale -- 'Once, Kartikeya had posed the same question to Lord  Shiva. 
Emphasizing  on the importance  of pilgrimages,  Lord Shiva  had told him that in Kali yuga 
anybody could attain salvation by going on pilgrimage to holy places. Giving names of  some 
prominent holy places and rivers, Lord Shiva had told Kartikeya that some of them were  capable 
of fulfilling any wish of a m an, while some gave salvation. The names of some prominent  rivers 
Lord Shiva had given were Ganga, Godavari, Narmada, Tapti, Yamuna, Kshipra,  Gautami, 
Kaushiki, Kaveri, Tamraparni, Chandrabhaga, Sindhu, Gandaki, Sarswati, etc. According  to 
Shiva  all these  rivers  were  not only capable  of fulfilling  any wish  of a man but also giving 
salvation. Naming some prominent holy places, Lord Shiva had told Kartikeya that  Ayodhya, 
Dwarka, Kashi, Mathura, Avanti, Kurukshetra, Ramteerth, Kanchi, Purushottam  kshetra, 
Pushkar kshetra,  Varaha  kshetra  and Badrikashram  were  capable  of liberating  a man from  the 
sorrows of this  world.'  
 
Lord Shiva had told Kartikeya -- 'Anybody who goes on a pilgrimage to Ayodhya  becomes 
absolved of all his sins. Lord Hari dwells at Dwarka and d oes not abandon it even for a  moment. 
A devotee, who takes a holy dip in river Gomti and then pays obeisance to Lord Krishna,  attains 
salvation even if he is ignorant. In the same manner, one who takes a bath in the  holy 
Panchganga at Varanasi, becomes fre e from the cycles of birth and death. Anybody, who goes  on 
a pilgrimage  to Kashi  and pays obeisance  to Lord  Vishwanath,  is freed  from  all the bondage  of 
this world.  Great  importance  has been  attached  to the performance  of 'tarpan'  at Vishramteerth 
and anyb ody who performs  the rituals  of tarpan  with sesame  seeds  and water,  his ancestors  are 
freed  from  the tortures  of the hell. Taking  a holy dip in Kotiteerth  at Avantipuri,  in the Hindu 
month  of Vaishakh  and worshipping  Lord  Mahakaleshwar  too absolves  a man of all his sins. 
Donating gold either at Kurukshetra or Ramteerth, on a solar eclipse day, helps a  man  in 
attaining salvation. Going on a pilgrimage to Purushottam kshetra and worshipping  Lord 
Jagannath after taking a holy dip in Markandeya sarovar, besto ws incomparable  virtues. 
Badrinath, the dwelling place of Lord Vishnu, is considered to be the supreme place  of 
pilgrimage and even its remembrance is capable of giving salvation. Virtues attained by  the 
performance  of various  deeds  (tapa,  yoga,  samadhi),  appear  to be insignificant  as compared  to 
virtues attained by going on a pilgrimage to  Badrikashram.  
   
 
THE MAJESTY OF  BADRIKSHETRA  
Kartikeya  asked  Lord  Shiva --'How  did this sacrosanct  place  originate?  Who  is the presiding 
deity of this  place?'  
 
Lord  Shiva  replied --'Badrikashram  is an eternal  city and Lord  Narayan  is its presiding  deity.  A 
mere  sight  of Badrikashram  is enough  to free a man from  all the bondage  of life. There  are 
numerous other holy places situated in the vicinity, Kedarnath being one of  them. ' 
 
To emphasize the significance of Badrikashram, Lord Shiva narrated the following tale  to 
Kartikeya --'In Satya  yuga,  Lord  Vishnu  existed  in his physical  form  at Badrikashram  for the 
benediction of human beings. But, in Treta yuga, only sages had the pri vilege of perceiving  him 
with the help of yoga. At the advent of Dwapar things changed drastically and Lord Vishnu  just 
disappeared  from  Badrikashram.  Deities  became  worried  and asked  Lord  Brahma  about  the 
reason  that made  Lord  Vishnu  disappear.  Even  lord Brahma  had no answer  to this question. 
Thinking  that Lord  Vishnu  must  have  gone  to Ksheer  sagar -his eternal  abode,  all the deities  led 
by Brahma went there. They eulogized Vishnu, who emerged from the Ksheer Sagar. But,  none 
of the deities except lord Brah ma could see him. Lord Vishnu told Brahma that the main  reason 
why he disappeared from Badrikashram was the flawed intelligence and arrogance of the  deities. 
Brahma  informed  the deities  whatever  Vishnu  had told him. All the deities  were  ashamed  of 
themselv es and returned to heaven with long faces. Feeling pity on the deities, I  (Shiva) 
disguised myself as a sanyasi and carried Lord Vishnu's idol from Naradateerth to  Badrikashram 
and installed  it over there  to uplift  the sagging  morale  of the deities.  This is how Lord  Vishnu 
once again graced Badrikashram with his presence. Even a grain of 'prasad' had at Badrikashram 
is enough to liberate a man from all his  sins.'  
   
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF HINDU MONTH  'KARTIK'  
Once,  on being  asked  by some  sages  about  the significa nce of the Hindu  month - Kartik,  Sutji 
narrated  the following  tale-- 'Once,  Narada  had asked  Lord  Brahma  the same  question.  At that 
time Lord Brahma had revealed to Narada that 'Kartik' was supreme among all the months just  as 
Lord Vishnu is supreme among a ll the deities and Badrikashram is the crown of all the places  of 
pilgrimage. According to Brahma all these three would have greater significance in Kali yuga  as 
compared  to any other  yuga.  Kartik  is very dear to Lord  Vishnu  and any virtuous  deed  done 
during this month never goes without being rewarded. One important characteristic of this  month 
is that all the deities live in the proximity of human beings for the entire period of the month  and 
accept everything that is offered to them. Penance done in this  month or donations made   during  
this month  is believed  to give Imperishable  virtues.  There  is a special  significance  of donating 
food grains during this month. Similarly, worshipping Shaligram during this month also  has 
great  significance.  Observing  austerities  during  this month  or worshipping  Lord  Vishnu  with 
appropriate  rituals  liberates  one's  ancestors  from  the tortures  of the hell. Worshipping  Lord 
Vishnu with petals of lotus helps him to become absolved of all the sins committed in  his 
previous  many births.  Worshipping  Lord  Vishnu  with tulsi leaves  helps  one in getting  cured  of 
incurable  diseases.  
   
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF 'HOLY DIPS' IN  MARGASHIRSH  
Continuing  with the description  of the significance  of various  months,  Sutji  said-- 'Once,  while 
Lord  Vishn u was engrossed  in his 'yoganidra'  at Shwetdweepa,  Lord  Brahma  arrived  there  and 
requested  him to describe  the importance  of Margashirsh.  Lord  Vishnu  had told him that a 
devotee aspiring for unification with him, must observes austerities during this  month . 
Describing the proper method of observing austerities Lord Vishnu had said that one should  get 
up early in the morning and after performing the ritualistic 'achaman', he should remember me  by 
chanting my one thousand names. Next, he should take his bath according to the  rituals 
mentioned in the scriptures, as follows -- He should remove some soil from near the roots of  tulsi 
plant  and pluck  few tulsi leaves.  Holding  both the things  in his hand,  he should  chant  either 
Gayatri  mantra  or the mantra,  'Om Namo  Narayanay',  so that they become  sanctified.  While 
taking  his bath,  it is a must  to eulogize  Ganga  in the following  way- 'O Ganga!  Though  have 
manifested  from  Vishnu's  feet and hence  called  Vaishnavi.  Myself  being  a devotee  of Lord 
Vishnu, you should protec t me from all the possible sins I am likely to commit in my whole  life.' 
A devotee  should  say this prayer  for seven  times  and take the same  number  of holy dips in the 
river. He should then put on tidy clothes and perform 'tarpan' in the names of all the de ities sages 
as well as  ancestors.  
   
 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CHARITY MADE  IN 
'VAISHAKH'  
Continuing with his tales, Sutji said --' Once, king Ambarish asked Narada about the reason  why 
Lord Vishnu had special liking for the Hindu month -Vaishakh. Narada's answer wa s that 
Vaishakh  had been  given  special  privilege  by Lord  Brahma  himself  and is believed  to fulfill  all 
the wishes  of a man.  No other  month  is as dear to Lord  Vishnu  as Vaishakh.  The sin raises  its 
ugly head only till a devotee has bathed before sunrise in the month of Vaishakh but once he  has 
taken his bath all his sins just disappears. This is also the period when all the deities are  believed 
to dwell  in all the rivers,  ponds,  lakes,  apart  from  the holy rivers.  Great  significance  has been 
attached to doing  charitable deeds in this month, especially providing water to thirsty.  Similarly, 
donating certain articles like umbrella, fans, shoes, all have their own importance. One who  gets 
constructed  an inn for the comfort  of the travelers  and provides  water  to them attains 
imperishable  virtues.  No charitable  deed  can ever match  the virtue  of donating  food grains  and 
one who accomplishes this great act can be aptly called a 'Pita'  (Father).  
   
 
AYODHYAPURI  
Once,  on being  asked  by sage Bhardwaj  and few others  about  the grandeur  of Ayodhya,  Sutji 
replied --'Ayodhya, a sacrosanct city is based on the bank of river Saryu. It is the very city  where 
the famous king Ikshavaku ruled once upon a time. The term Ayodhya means unconquerable  and 
consists of three root letters: a - symbolizing Brahma, y -symbolizing Vishnu and  dh-symbolizing 
Rudra. It is a place where Lord Vishnu has his abode for eternity and does not leave it even for  a 
moment. According to the scriptures Ayodhya is based on Sudarshan chakra. It is well  expanded 
in the radius of one yojan. Its eastern boundary stretches up to one yojan from a place  called 
'Sahastradhan'. Similarly, the western front stretches up to one yojan from a place called  'Sama', 
the southern  up to one yojan  from  the bank  of Saryu  and its north ern boundary  up to one yojan 
starting  from  the bank  of river  Tamsa.  In ancient  times,  a brahmin  named  Vishnu  Sharma  had 
performed an austere penance at Ayodhya. Lord Vishnu had appeared after becoming pleased  by 
him and had created  a holy place  by digging  up the earth  with his Sudarshan  chakra.  Anybody, 
who takes a holy dip in Chakrateerth becomes absolved of all his  sins. 
   
 
III. BRAHMA  KHAND  
 
RAMESHWAR  KSHETRA  
Once,  Shaunak  and few other  sages  asked  Sutji  as to how could  a man become  free from  the 
bondage of th e world. They also inquired whether there was an existence of any such holy  place 
capable of liberating a man from heinous of  sin. 
 
Sutji  replied --'Ramteerth  is supreme  among  all the places  of pilgrimage.  A mere  sight  of this 
holy place is enough to free a  man from the bondage of this mortal world. Going on a  pilgrimage 
to Rameshwar  gives  virtues  similar  to what  is attained  by performing  all the yagyas.  One,  who 
takes  a holy dip at Setu Rameshwar,  attains  to Vishnu  loka.  Merely  by sleeping  at the sea shore 
of Rameshwar  a man gets absolved  of heinous  of sins like brahmhatya,  etc. A man is blessed  if 
his remains  are consigned  to the holy waters  at Rameshwar  after his death.  Scriptures  say that 
five types of sins are as grave as the sin of  brahmahatya -- 
 
1. One, w ho criticizes  sages  
 
2. A selfish person who cooks food only for  himself,  
 
3. One who destroys well laid path making it difficult for people to tread  upon,  
 
4. One who accepts food from a 'chandal'  and 
 
5. One who sells food grains  to a chandal.  But, all these  just disappears  once  the sinner  reaches 
Rameshwar.  
 
   
 
SETU  BANDH  
All the sages  were  curious  to know  about  the holy places  in the vicinity  of Rameshwar.  Sutji 
replied --Sri Ram  replied  went  into exile  accompanied  by Sita, his consort  and his younger  
brother,  Lakshma n. Ravan,  the demon  king who ruled  over Lanka  deceitfully  abducted  Sita. 
Subsequently, Sri Ram befriended Sugreev and killed Bali, who harboured enemity against  him. 
Sugriva  sent monkeys  in all directions  to find out where  Sita had been  kept by Ravan.  Later on 
Sri Ram reached Mahendra Parvat accompanied by Lakshman, Hanuman, Sugriva,  Jambavan, 
Nal and may more brave warriors. They stayed for a brief period at Chakrateerth,  where 
Vibhishan came to see Sri Ram. Eventually Vibhishan was nominated the king of a ll the  demons 
by Sri Ram to the great displeasure of his brother  Ravan.  
 
Sri Ram  and his army  faced  an uphill  task of reaching  Lanka  for they had to cross  the ocean, 
which lay as a great barrier between them and their destination. Samudra (ocean) revealed  to Sri 
Ram  that Nala  had divine  powers  and whatever  he would  throw  in the Ocean  would  not sink 
down  but keep  on floating.  Nala  tried to check  the authenticity  of Samudra's  statement  by 
throwing  a huge  rock into the ocean,  as he himself  was not aware  of his powers.  To the sheer 
amazement  of everybody  present  there  the rock started  floating  on the surface  of the ocean 
instead  of sinking  down.  All the rest of the monkeys  tried to emulate  Nala's  feat by throwing 
huge  rocks  into the ocean  and to their own surpr ise found  that the rocks  did not sink.  This was 
how a bridge was built and across the ocean which made it possible for Sri Ram and his army  to 
cross  the ocean.  Then  length  of Setu Rameshwar  Bandh  is hundred  yojan  and it is ten yojan 
broad.  There  are many  holy places  situated  on the bridge  prominent  among  which  are Chakra - 
teerth, Pap -vinashan teerth, Sita -sarovar, Mangal -teerth, Amrit -watika, Brahma -kund,  Hanumat - 
kund, Agastya -teerth, Ram -teerth, Lakshman -teerth, Jaya -teerth, Lakshmi -teerth,  Agni -teerth, 
Shiv-teerth, Shankh -teerth, Yamuna -teerth, Ganga -teerth, Koti -teerth, Manas -teerth  and 
Dhanushkoti  teerth.  
   
 
RAMESHWAR  LINGA  
Describing  how Sri Ram  had installed  Rameshwar  Linga,  Sutji  said--' After  killing  Ravan,  Sri 
Ram  enthroned  Vibhishan  as the king of Lanka.  While  returning  to Ayodhya  he made  a brief 
stop at Gandhamadan  mountain.  Since  the thought  of having  killed  a brahmin  (Ravan)  kept on 
tormenting him, he decided to atone for his sins. So, he installed the idol of Rameshwar linga  at 
Rameshwar setu. Ra meshwar Linga is so sacrosanct that all the holy places, sages and  ancestors 
are believed to exist within the temple premise of Maheshwar Linga. Being installed by Sri  Ram 
himself, this particular linga has special significance attached to it. One who goes  on  a 
pilgrimage  to this holy place  is certain  to attain  salvation  even  if he were  a 'Mlechha'  (born  in a 
low caste).  
   
 
DHARMARANYA  KSHETRA  
Once,  Sage  Vyasa  went  to meet  Yudhisthira,  who requested  him to describe  the significance  of 
Dharmaranya  kshetra.  
 
Sage Vyasa  replied -- 'O king!  Once,  Dharmaraj -Yudhisthira  did an austere  penance  to please 
Lord Shiva. As usual, Indra became scarred because he thought that Dharmaraj was  doing 
penance  with the intention  of acquiring  Indraloka.  He and other  deities  went  to seek the help of 
Lord Brahma, who did not have any clue. So, all of them went to Kailash mountain to seek  Lord  
Shiva's  help.  Since  Shiva  was aware  of Dharma's  motive,  he explained  to the deities  that there 
was nothing to worry about. But, Indra was not satisfied and the thought of loosing his  kingdom 
continued to torment  him. 
 
Indra  then instructed  a beautiful  Apsara  named  Vardhini  to go to the place  where  Dharma  was 
doing  penance  and disturb  him by corrupting  his thoughts.  Vardhini  went  to the place  where 
Dharma was engrossed in his penance and was successful in disturbing him. When  Dharma 
opened  his eyes he found  a beautiful  Apsara  in front  of him. Vardhini  asked  Dharma --'O Lord! 
What is the objective with which you are doing such an austere penance? Be ing an  embodiment 
of virtuosity  yourself,  you prevail  in the whole  world.  So, in a sense  you already  the lord of the 
world - what else do you  need?'  
 
Dharma  told Vardhini  that he was doing  penance  with the objective  of having  a divine  glimpse 
of Lord  Shiva . Vardhini  informed  him that Indra  was scarred  of losing  his kingdom  and hence 
had sent her to disturb  his penance.  Dharma  was pleased  by her truthfulness  and wanted  to 
reward  her for that. Vardhini  expressed  her desire  of having  her abode  in Indraloka  for eternity 
and also of having  a place  of pilgrimage  named  on her. Dharma  blessed  her after which  she 
returned to  Indraloka.  
 
Dharma  once  again  engrossed  himself  in penance.  Ultimately,  Lord  Shiva  became  pleased  and 
appeared  before  him. 'Ask for any boon  and it shall  be bestowed  to you',  said Lord  Shiva. 
Dharmaraj  replied  -'O lord!  I want  this place  to be named  after me. I also request  you to grace 
this place by your presence.' Lord Shiva blessed him and fulfilled both his wishes. This was  how 
Dharmakshetra  got its name.  Subsequently,  Lord  Shiva  appeared  in the form  of Dharmeshwar 
linga in accordance with the second wish of Dharmaraj. After his penance was  over,  Dharma 
also had created a holy reservoir over there which is believed to absolve a man of all his  sins. 
   
 
LOSS OF MORAL VALUES IN  KALIYUGA  
On being  asked  by Yudhisthira  about  the life-style  of people  in Kali yuga,  sage Vyasa  replied -- 
'There  will be a widespread  prevalence  of sinful  deeds  and lack of moral  values  in Kali yuga. 
People  would  become  untru thful  and would  become  critical  of revered  sages.  Moral  values 
would decline to such an extent their minds would be preoccupied by nothing else  but  the 
thought of sex. In Kali yuga women will feel most insecure and even her near and dear  ones 
would  become  untrustworthy  - men belonging  to their own gotras  would  try to exploit  her. 
Brahmins would be criticized because of their inappropriate conduct. They would  become 
arrogant, would start trading their knowledge and would not follow the teachings of the  Veda s. 
 
Similarly, Kshatriyas would become cowards and a mere reference of battle would be enough  to 
scare  them.  Majority  of people  would  indulge  in immoral  deeds  like gambling  and consume 
variety of intoxication. They would always look out for an opportunity to grab other's wealth  by 
deceitful means. Married women would not fulfill their obligation towards their husbands.  Cows 
would give lesser milk and trees would bear fewer fruits. Young girls would become pregnant  at 
the raw age of eleven years. Brahmins, b y their conduct would undermine the importance of  holy 
places and would indulge in excessive eating and drinking. In Kali yuga, people would not   give 
any importance to caste system. Kings would loose their kingdoms and Mlechhas would  become 
the rulers. Treachery, enemity and disrespect towards elders would become the norms of the  day. 
   
 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CHATURMASYA  VRAT  
Once,  on being  asked  by Narada  about  the importance  of Chaturmasya,  Lord  Brahma  said-- 
'Chaturmasya  is the period  of four months  durin g which  Lord  Vishnu  is believed  to take rest in 
Ksheer -Sagar.  So quite  naturally,  all the oceans,  rivers  and ponds  are believed  to attain  divinity 
due to the presence  of Lord  Vishnu  in Ksheer -Sagar  during  this period.  This is the reason  why 
great importanc e has been attached to taking holy bath during this period. A devotee,  who 
observes austerities related with Lord Vishnu during these four months, becomes absolved of  all 
his sins. All the deities  are believed  to dwell  within  Lord  Vishnu  during  this period . Going  on 
pilgrimage to holy places and taking holy dips in rivers bestow indescribable  virtues.  
 
A devotee must not forget to perform the rituals of 'Tarpan' after taking his daily bath. He  should 
also observe abstinence and avoid indulging in sensual pl easures during this period of  four 
months. There is special significance of making donations during this period, especially  donating 
food-grains.  
   
 
IMPORTANCE OF ABSTINENCE  DURING 
CHATURMAS  
Continuing  with the importance  of austerities  observed  during  Chat urmas,  Lord  Brahma  said-- 
'Human -beings are bundle of desires and long for worldly things. So, there is a great  importance 
of abstinence  and forsaking  things,  which  one is very fond of. One who relinquishes  his most 
favourite thing during this period gets the same thing in abundance in the next world.  A 
householder, who renounces his family life for the sake of his devotion during this  period, 
becomes free from the tortures of recurring births and deaths. Similarly, relinquishing the use  of 
chilly in one's food during this period helps him to acquire great fortune. Renouncing silk  cloths 
during  this period  gives  imperishable  joy. One should  avoid  wearing  black  cloths  during  this 
period. Combing and shaving are prohibited during this  period.  
 
A devotee should  worship Lord Vishnu on the auspicious day of Kark Sankranti. Normally  black 
plums are offered to Lord Vishnu while worshipping. Celibacy is believed to be the best  austerity 
and anybody  who observes  it during  the period  of chaturmas,  never  experiences  sorrow in his 
life. 
   
 
RITUALS PERTAINING TO SHODASH  UPACHAR  
Once, on being asked by Narada about the proper methods of performing Shodash  upachar 
rituals, Lord Brahma said --'In normal circumstances, when Lord Vishnu is worshipped  by 
employing the rituals of S hodashopachar it is considered as 'Tapa'. But, when the same rituals  of 
shodashopachar  are employed  to worship  Lord  Vishnu  during  chaturmas,  it is considered  as 
'Mahatapa'. In the same manner, all the austerities that are observed during Chaturmas  attain 
greater  importance.  
 
Lord Brahma then went on to elucidate the proper method of performing the rituals  of 
'Shodashopachar' --' "A particular  'mahasukta'  of Yajurveda  consisting  of sixteen  ' richas  are 
chanted  while  worshipping  Lord  Vishnu.  Similarly  richas  like 'sahastra -sheersha  purushah'  and 
fifteen others are considered to be most appropriate for the worship of almighty Vishnu. First  of 
all, a devotee  should  perform  the ritual  of 'nyas'  by mentally  associating  all the sixteen  richas 
with different organs of the body as per the instructions given in the smritis. The same rituals  of 
'nyas'  are then performed  on the idol of lord Vishnu  or Shaligram.  After  that an invocation  is 
made  to Lord  Vishnu  by chanting  the first richa  of Purush  sukta --'Sahashtra  sheersh a Purushah' 
with a slight  modification  i.e. by adding  'om' in the beginning  of the mantra.  Similarly,  Lord 
Vishnu  and other  'Parshads'  should  be installed  at the place  of worship  by chanting  the second 
richa - 'Purush  evedam'.  With  the chanting  of third  richa, Lord  Vishnu's  lotus  feet are washed 
after which  'ardhya'  is offered  with the holy water  collected  from  all the seven  seas and other 
holy rivers. Subsequently, the ritual of 'achaman' is performed amidst the chanting of fifth  richa. 
The ritual  of abluti on is then performed  in which  the idol of Lord  Vishnu  is bathed  amidst  the 
chanting  of the sixth  richa.  The idol is adorned  with beautiful  apparels  amidst  the chanting  of 
seventh  richa.  
 
Similarly,  a sacred  thread  is offered  to Lord  Vishnu  amidst  the chan ting of eighth  richa  while 
sandalwood paste is smeared on the idol amidst the chanting of ninth richa. Subsequently,  amidst 
the chanting of tenth, eleventh, twelfth and thirteen richas, flowers, incense, lighted lamp  and 
naivedya are offered to the deity r espectively. Naivedya should consist of cereals.  While 
performing 'arti' the fourteenth richa should be chanted. A devotee should then  circumambulate 
around the idol amidst the chanting of fifteenth richa. Imagining himself as an inseparable part  of 
lord V ishnu, he should meditate amidst the chanting of the sixteenth  richa."  
   
 
IV. KASHI  KHAND  
VIDHYACHAL OBSTRUCTS THE PATH OF  SURYA  
 
Once, Sage Vyasa narrated the following tale to all the assembled sages -- 'Once,  while 
wandering  about,  sage Narada  arrived  at Vindhyachal  mountain.  He was received  with great 
honour and respect by Vindhyachal mountain. But, when the time arrived for Narada to take  his 
leave, he took a deep sigh, which made Vindhyachal extremely perplexed and he asked Narada  if 
anything was wrong.  Narada replied --' Your rival -Meru mountain is superior to you in  every 
respect  and this is the fact I am lamenting  about.  My deep  sigh is just the indication  of my 
worried state of  mind.'  
 
Vindhyachal mountain was filled with inferiority complex and start ed waiting for an  opportunity 
when he could prove his superiority to Meru mountain. He thought --' Perhaps Narada was  right 
for even Lord Surya has great respect for Meru's might and this is the reason why  he 
circumambulates  my adversary.  If I am able to beat Meru  in height  then may be Lord  Surya 
would start circumambulating me and this way I shall prove my superiority to  Meru.'  
Now,  Vindhyachal  started  increasing  his height  and in a short  time its peaks  became  invisible. 
The fallout  of this amazing  inciden t proved  to be quite  catastrophic  for the world  because  even 
Lord Surya was left stranded at a particular point in the horizon. As a result, one part of the  earth 
became  too hot for any life to exist.  Similarly,  the other  half of the earth  became  unbearabl y 
cold. The time became still and everything went haywire in the  world.  
 
All the deities  became  extremely  worried  and went  to Lord  Brahma  to seek his help.  Lord 
Brahma  advised  them  to go to Kashi  and seek help from  sage Agastya.  Deities  were  pleased  at 
their good fortune of getting a chance to visit Kashi. Deities, after reaching Kashi paid a visit  to 
'Manikarnika teerth' and took their bath. Subsequently, they went to Vishwanath temple  and 
worshipped Lord Vishwanath. At last, they reached the hermitage of Agastya where he was  busy 
worshipping  a self made  Shivalinga.  The entire  hermitage  was crowded  with young  pupils  of 
Agastya.  After  the pleasantries  having  been  exchanged,  sage Agastaya  asked  the deities  about 
the purpose of their  visit.  
   
 
AGASTYA ORDERS VIN DHYA TO DIMINISH ITS  SIZE  
When  Agastya  learnt  of the problem  created  by Vindhyachal,  he agreed  to help the deities 
despite  fully  aware  of the fact that once  he left Kashi  it would  not be possible  for him to see his 
dearest Kashi once again at least in his  present birth. Before leaving for Vindhyachal, he  sought 
permission from Lord Bhairav. He then reached the place where Vindhyachal had obstructed the 
path of Surya. Lopamudra, his wife accompanied  him. 
 
When  Vindhyachal  found  Agastya  starring  angrily  at him he became  scarred  and immediately 
minimized  his size. Sage  Agastya  was pleased  that his objective  had been  achieved  without 
making  any effort  but he knew  quite  well that once  he left the place  Vindhyachal  would  regain 
his mammoth  size. So he decided  to do something  so that Vindhyachal  could  not obstruct  the 
path of Surya.  He worked  out a plan according  to which  he instructed  Vindhyachal  to wait for 
him until he returned  after accomplishing  his pilgrimage.  Vindhyachal  agreed  assuming  that 
Agastya would re turn in a short  time.  
 
Vindhyachal thanked his good fortune of escaping Agastya's wrath, which could otherwise  have 
threatened his very existence. Sage Agastya then went away never to  return and  Vindhyachal 
kept on waiting  for his arrival.  This way,  the path being  cleared,  Surya  was once  again  able to 
move freely on its orbit without any problem and as a result normalcy returned to the  world.  
 
On the other hand, Agastya who was not at all happy leaving his dearest Kashi was desperate  to 
get there  back  as soon as possible.  But, he knew  that his wish  was going  to remain  unfulfilled. 
While wandering about, he reached Kolapur where he worshipped goddess Mahalakshmi.  When 
goddess  Mahalakshmi  appeared,  he asked  her whether  he would  ever be able to reach  Kashi  in 
his present  life. Goddess  Mahalakshmi  replied --'Your  wishes  will be fulfilled  in the coming 
nineteenth dwapar, when you would incarnate as Vyasa and would contribute a great deal in  the 
propagation of the Vedas and Puranas. There is a sacrosanct place of K artikeya not very far  from 
here.  Go there  and pay your obeisance  to Lord  Kartikeya  and he would  unravel  the mysterious 
aspects of Kashi to  you.'  
Sage Agastya and his wife Lopamudra then went to the mountain called Sri Shail,  where 
Kartikeya lived at that  time.  
   
 
KASHI -THE SACROSANCT PLACE OF  PILGRIMAGE  
After travelling for sometime, both of them arrived near Sri Shail mountain. Pointing his  finger 
towards  the mountain,  Agastya  told his wife--'One,  who has a good  fortune  of seeing  the peaks 
of this mountain , never takes a second  birth.'  
 
Lopamudra replied in amazement --' If the sight of this mountain was capable of giving  salvation 
then why do you long for  Kashi?'  
 
Sage  Agastya  then went  on to clarify  that there  were  many  other  holy places  capable  of giving 
salvation.  Prayag  is one such place.  It is capable  of bestowing  all the four 'Purusharth'  to man- 
Dharma,  Artha,  Kama,  and Moksha.  Apart  from  Prayag,  there  are many  more  holy places  like 
Naimisharanya, Kurukshetra, Gangadwar, Avanti, Ayodhya, Mathura, Dwar ka, Badrikashram, 
Purushottam  kshetra  which  are capable  of giving  salvation  to a man.  But none  of these  places 
can match Kashi because Kashi is  incomparable.  
   
 
LORD KARTIKEYA DESCRIBES THE MAJESTY  OF 
KASHI  
Sage  Agastya  and his wife Lopamudra  circumambulate d Sri Shail  Mountain  and climbed  up 
Lohit mountain where they found Lord Kartikeya. Both of them eulogized Kartikeya by  singing 
Vedic hymns in his praise. Lord Kartikeya was extremely pleased by their devotion and said - 'O 
revered  sage!  You can understand  Kashi's  importance  by the fact that, though  I am capable  of 
reaching  any place  according  to my wish  but still, here I am doing  this austere  penance  for the 
attainment of Kashi. I must confess that I have not been successful in my efforts till date. If  any 
body  thinks  that he can attain  to kashi  just by performing  austerities  than he is totally  wrong. 
Kashi can never be attained to until and unless one has the blessing of Lord Mahadeva. And  one 
who is fortunate  enough  to have  reached  Kashi  must  under  no circumstances  leave  it till he is 
alive. O Agastya! You are blessed because you had the good fortune of residing at Kashi.  Please 
allow me to touch your body, which has acquired holiness due to its proximity to Kashi.'  Having 
said this, Kartikeya  touched  diffe rent parts  of Agastya's  body  as if he were  touching  the sacred 
soil of  Kashi.'  
   
 
THE ORIGIN OF  KASHI  
Sage  Agastya  asked  Lord  Kartikeya  how the sacrosanct  place,  Kashi  came  into being.  He also 
asked how Kashi became famous as a place capable of giving salvat ion to a  man.  
 
Lord  Kartikeya  revealed  to Agastya  that once  Parvati  had asked  Lord  Shiva  the same  question. 
Lord  Shiva  had told her-- ' At the time of deluge  when  every  thing  had submerged  in the ocean 
and darkness prevailed everywhere, only Brahman, the e mbodiment of truth existed at that   time 
and nothing else. Brahman, the absolute truth is indescribable and inexpressible. No name can  be 
attributed to Him. He is the absolute truth, the ultimate knowledge, the infinite, the  omnipresent 
and the eternal b liss. Though basically formless He attained a form on account of His own  wish. 
That form  is none  other  than me. Later  on I created  Prakriti  from  my body.  All three  of us 
(Shiva, Parvati and Kashi) manifested simultaneously by the grace of 'Adi Purusha'  (The 
Almighty  God).'  
 
Continuing with the tale of Kashi's greatness, Kartikeya told Agastya - ' There is no holy place  as 
dear to Lord Shiva as Kashi, which is not abandoned by him as well as his consort -Parvati  even 
at the time of deluge.  Lord  Shiva  named  this holy place - Ananda  van, because  it gave  immense 
joy to him. Subsequently,  Lord  Shiva  and goddess  Jagdamba  put a glance  on the left portion  of 
their respective  bodies  as the result  of which  a divine  entity  manifested  himself  who was none 
other than Lord V ishnu and who was named Purushottam by Lord Shiva. Lord Shiva  after 
blessing  Purushottam  went  away.  Later  on, Lord  Vishnu  created  a divine  reservoir  with his 
sudarshan chakra and filled it up with his sweat. He then engaged himself in an austere  penance. 
Lord Shiva  once  again  appeared  along  with Parvati  and blessed  Vishnu  by saying - ' This holy 
place  will become  famously  known  as Manikarnika  because  this is the very place  where  I had 
once lost my diamond  ear-ring.'  
 
Lord  Vishnu  made  a request  to Shiva  -- 'May this place  fulfill  the wishes  of those  who seek 
salvation. Since it is blessed with your eternal presence hence its another name would be  Kashi.'  
 
Lord  Shiva  assured  Vishnu  by saying - 'This  sacrosanct  place  is very dear to me and no event 
takes  place  here against  my wish.  Even  if a person  living  here happens  to be a sinner  he has 
nothing  to fear because  I protect  him. One who lives  far from  Kashi  but remembers  it with 
reverence becomes absolved of all his  sins.'  
 
There  is a magnificent  Shiva -linga  at Kashi famously  known  as Kashi  Vishwanath.  Here  is 
situated  one of the twelve  Jyotirlingas.  Just as the Sun is visible  in the whole  world  despite  its 
presence at a particular point in the horizon, in the same manner Kashi has its  influence 
throughout the leng th and breadth of the  world.  
   
 
V. AVANTI KSHETRA KHAND 
SANATKUMAR GLORIFIES MAHAKAL  TERTH  
Once,  goddess  Parvati  requested  Shiva  to describe  the significance  of Mahakal  teerth.  Lord Shiva  
replied - "Once,  Sanatkumar - one of the manasputras  of Lord Brahma  had gone to his father's  abode,  
situated  at a place  near Meru  mountain.  Sage  Vyasa  arrived  there  and asked  him the same  question.  
Sanatkumar  had revealed  to him that  all kinds  of sins loosed  their evil influence  at Mahakal  teerth.  He had 
also told him that  it was called  'Peetha'  because  Matrikas  had their abode  over there.  Anybody,  who is 
fortunate  of leaving  his mortal  body  at this holy-place,  is freed  from the  vicious  cycles  of birth and death."  
This place is very dear to Lord Shiva and is also called by various  other names like  Ekamrak -van, 
Mahakal -van and  Vimukti -kshetra.  
   
 
KAPAL  MOCHAN  
Once, Lord Shiva arrived at Mahakal forest with a skull in his hand. All the trees and  vegetation 
were delighted to find him in their midst. They requested lord Shiva to remain their forever.  Lord 
Shiva told them that it was not possible for him to stay there forever but on being requested  once 
again agreed to stay there for at least a year. After one year, when the time for departure came  he 
released the skull from his hand as a  memorial.  
 
When Lord Brahma came to know of this incident, he instructed all the deities to reach  Mahakal 
forest  without  wasting  any time so that a grand  yagya  could  be performed  at the place  where 
Shiva had left the skull. All the deities went to the sai d place and worshipped Lord Shiva  by 
employing the rituals of Pashupat vrata, which Lord Brahma had taught them.  Lord  Shiva 
became  pleased  by their devotion  and said-- ' Perhaps  you all are not aware  that there  was a 
specific objective behind my act of re leasing the skull from my hand. This act of mine was  done 
to protect  your lives  but it seems  you are unaware  of its significance.  In a way,  all of you have 
already received my blessings in advance for your deep devotion. What else do you wish  for?' 
 
Deiti es were amazed by Shiva's statements and were wondering what Shiva was trying  to 
convey.  So, they requested  Shiva  to unravel  the mystery  so that they could  understand  what  he 
meant to say. Lord Shiva told them - 'The followers of Maya were planning to kill you while  you 
were busy doing penance but no one of you was aware of their evil motive. I came to know  about 
this in my deep  state of meditation  and dropped  the skull  from  my hand.  As soon  as the skull 
touched  the ground  a thunderous  sound  was made  as the result  of which  all the demons  were 
killed  instantaneously.'  
 
All the deities  thanked  Lord  Shiva  for protecting  their lives.  In course  of time this particular 
place became famous as Kapal mochan temple and is presently situated in  Ujjain.  
   
 
VARIOUS NAMES OF  UJJAINIPURI  
Once, Sage Vyasa requested Sanatkumar to reveal why Ujjainipuri was known by various  names 
like Kanakshringa, Kushasthali Avanti and  Padmavati.  
 
Sanatkumar  replied -- 'Once,  Lord  Brahma  and Lord  Shiva  arrived  at Ujjainipuri  in search  of 
Lord  Vishnu,  who had disappeared  from  his abode.  To their pleasant  surprise  they found  Lord 
Vishnu  staying  there.  Both  of them  requested  Vishnu  to allow  them  to stay at Ujjainipuri  and 
said- ' O Lord!  When  did you create  such a magnificent  place  with golden  mount ain peaks? 
Allow us to live in this beautiful city for we can not live in your  separation.'  
 
Lord  Vishnu  requested  Brahma  to make  his abode  in the northern  part of the city while  Shiva 
was told to make  southern  part as his abode.  Lord  Vishnu  then told them - ' Since  you have 
referred  to this place  as a city of golden  mountain  peaks  therefore  from  now onwards  it would 
become famous as 'Kanchan Shringa' (golden  peaks)'.  
 
Sanatkumar then went on to explain why Ujjainipuri was also called Kusha sthali -' Having 
created the world, Lord Brahma requested Lord Vishnu to nurture it. Lord Vishnu agreed on  the 
condition  that Lord  Brahma  provided  him a pious  place  on the earth  from  where  he could 
perform his duty. Brahma then picked up a handful of kusha grass and threw d own on the   earth.  
This way Lord  Vishnu  performed  his duty as the nurturer  of the world  sitting  on the seat of 
Kusha grass. This is the reason why this place came to be known as Kusha  sthali.'  
 
Sanatkumar  then described  how Ujjainipuri  also came  to be known as Avanti  puri-' Once,  after 
being defeated by the demons, deities fled to Meru mountain. Later on they went to Lord  Brahma 
and sought  his help.  Lord  Brahma  took all the deities  to Lord  Vishnu.  Hardly  had they reached 
the abode  of Vishnu  and offered  their obeisance,  then they heard  a heavenly  voice - 'There  is a 
sacrosanct place called Kushasthali in the forest of Mahakal van. This holy place is graced by  the 
presence  of Lord  Mahadeva.  Go there  and engage  yourself  in austerities  and you will certainly 
become the master of the heaven once  again.'  
 
Subsequently, all the deities went to a place called Paishachmochan situated in Kushasthali and 
engaged themselves in various austerities. As prophesized by Vishnu, the deities indeed  defeated 
the demons  and became the ruler  of heaven.  The term 'Avan'  means  'the protector'  and since  it 
had protected the deities hence it became famous as  Avanti.  
 
Sanatkumar also described how Kushasthali also came to be known as Ujjaini -- 'Once, a  demon 
named Tripur did an austere  penance to please Lord Brahma. When Brahma appeared  he 
expressed his wish of becoming immortal. Lord Brahma fulfilled his wish as the result of  which 
Tripur  became  arrogant  and started  tormenting  the deities.  The deities  sought  the help of Lord 
Shiva, who  assured them that he would kill the demon. Subsequently, Lord Shiva did kill  Tripur 
with his most  lethal  weapon  'pashupat  ashtra'  after a fierce  battle.  The place  where  this incident 
took place  became  famous  as Ujjaini  because  of the fierce  battle  fought  between  Shiva  and 
Tripur.  
 
 
 
 Continuing  with the tale which  described  the reason  why Ujjainipuri  also came  to be known  as 
Padmavati, Sanatkumar told Vyasa --'During the time of ocean churning ambrosia had  also 
emerged from the ocean bed along with many other valuable things. The demons wanted to  drink 
ambrosia  so that they could  become  immortal  but the deities  were  against  this idea.  Very  soon, 
the arguments turned into a major dispute and both the sides started quarrelling.  Narada 
requested Lord Vishnu to do  something in this regard. Lord Vishnu disguised himself as  a 
beautiful lady and was successful in infatuating the demons. Finally, he started giving  ambrosia 
to the deities  who after drinking  it became  immortal.  A demon  named  Rahu  was sitting  in the 
rows of the deities after changing his guise. Lord Vishnu was unable to recognize Rahu and gave 
some ambrosia to him mistaking him to be a deity. But, hardly had Rahu gulped down  Ambrosia 
and before it could reach down his throat, Vishnu severed his head. Rahu' s head  became 
immortal  as the result  of ambrosia's  influence.  This incident  had taken  place  at Mahakal  forest. 
Later  on all the deities  distributed  the whole  wealth,  which  had emerged  from  the ocean  among 
themselves. This is the reason why Ujjainipuri came  to be known as Padmavati because Padma  is 
another name of Goddess  Lakshmi.  
   
 
THE GRANDEUR OF  AVANTIPURI  
Sanatkumar says -'Once, Parvati requested Lord Shiva to explain why Avantipuri was  considered 
so holy by the devotees.  Lord  Shiva  told her that it was so because  there  were  numerous  holy 
places situated over there. Lord Shiva had told her -- 'There are four holy rivers flowing   through  
the different  regions  of Avantipuri - Kshipra,  Divya -nav, Neelganga  and Gandhavati.  There  are 
temples belonging to eighty four Shivalingas, eight Bhairavas, eleven Rudras, Twelve  Adityas, 
six Ganeshas and twenty four goddesses. Not only this there are also temples of Lord Vishnu  and 
Brahma.  Avantipuri  is spread  in the radius  of one yojan.  There  are temples  belonging  to ten 
different incarnations of Lord Vishnu - Vasudev, Anant, Balaram, Janardan, Narayan,  Hrishikesh, 
Varaha, Dharnidhar, Vaman and Lord Vishnu himself taking rest on Sheshnag. Apart from  these 
there are many other holy places situated at Avantipuri, which enhances  its sanctity and  holiness.  
   
 
THE DESCENT OF NARMADA  
Explaining  the reason  why Narmada  had to descend  down  to earth,  Sutji  narrated  a tale to the 
assembled sages -- 'Once, Sage Markandeya was taking rest at the bank of river Narmada  where 
Yudhisthira  accomp anied  by Draupadi  arrived  there.  Yudhisthira  curiously  asked  Markandeya 
about  the reason  he had chosen  the bank  of Narmada  as his resting  place  when  there  were  so 
many  other  holy places  of greater  significance.  Sage  Markandeya  recounted  a tale, which  said 
how some sages had requested king Pururva to bring down river Narmada to the earth so that  the 
whole world becomes liberated from its sins. Describing the holiness of Narmada, sages had  told 
Pururava - ' The holy Narmada is capable of liberating the whole w orld from its sin. So,  you 
should  find means  so that Narmada  descends  down  to earth.'  Later  on, Pururva  did an austere 
penance  to please  Shiva.  When  Lord  Shiva  appeared  before  him, Pururva  expressed  his wish. 
Shiva  instructed  Narmada  to descend  down  to earth but she told him that she needed  a base for 
that to happen.  Lord  Shiva  then instructed  Paryank - the son of Vindhyachal  mountain  to hold 
Narmada  while  she descended  down  to earth.  Prayank  agreed  to do that and this was how 
Narmada came down on earth. Ini tially, the whole world was flooded with the waters  of 
Narmada  but at the request  of the deities  she minimized  her size. Narmada  blessed  Pururva  and 
instructed  him to perform  the rituals  of tarpan  in the name  of his ancestors  so that they became 
liberated from their sins. Pururva complied and thus by performing tarpan liberated all  his 
ancestors.'  
 
Having finished his tale, Markandeya told Yudhisthira that one who takes a holy dip in  Narmada 
attains virtues similar to that of performing Ashwamedh  yagya.  
   
 
NARMADA MARRIES  PURUKUTSU  
Markandeya  said--'O Yudhisthira!  King  Purutkutsu  was Samudra  in his previous  birth  and had 
been  cursed  by Brahma.  The descent  of Narmada  on earth  made  the deities  extremely  delighted 
and they requested  Narmada  to give them  the privi lege of experiencing  her divine  touch.  But, 
Narmada  refused  to give them  that privilege  on the pretext  that she was still unmarried  and it 
would not be proper for her to do so. All the deities then requested her to become the consort  of 
Purukutsu  to which  she agreed.  This way,  Narmada  married  Purutkusu.  After  getting  married, 
Purutkutsu  requested  her to liberate  his ancestors  so that they could  attain  to heaven.  Narmada 
readily obliged and this way Purutkutsu contributed in his ancestors' departure to  heave n.' 
   
 
MANU RECEIVES A BOON FROM  NARMADA  
Markandeya said --'Manu ruled over Ayodhya during Swayambhuva manvantar. One day,  while 
he was going  to sleep,  he heard  a peculiar  sound,  as if numerous  small  bells  were  ringing.  He 
was perplexed and could not ascerta in the cause of that sound so he asked sage Vashishtha  about 
this. Sage Vashishtha made a revelation by which Manu was startled. Sage Vashishtha told  him-- 
'There  is a holy place  called  Tripuri  situated  at the bank  of river  Narmada.  The sound  that you 
heard last night emanated from the small bells attached to number of aircraft kept on the roofs of 
the residences  of such people  who are virtuous.  O king!  Only  Narmada  is capable  of giving 
salvation to lowly of  sinners.'  
 
Manu was highly impressed and decided to go to Tripuri along with his whole clan. All of  them 
took holy dips in the Narmada and became liberated from all their sins. Manu performed a  grand 
yagya at the bank of Narmada to which all the sages and hermits were invited. Narmada  became 
pleased by h is devotion and expressed her willingness to fulfill any wish that Manu  desired.  
 
Manu  requested  her help in bringing  down  Ganga  and other  holy rivers  to earth.  Narmada 
blessed him and said -- 'In the first half of Treta yuga, one of your descendants named  Bhagirath 
would accomplish this great feat of bringing down holy Ganga to earth. In the second half of  the 
same era other holy rivers like Kalindi, Saraswati, Sarayu, and Mahabhaga would also  manifest 
themselves.  ' 
   
 
JAMDAGNI RECEIVES  KAMDHENU  
Markandeya t old Yudhisthira -- 'Sage Jamdagni was a great devotee of Shiva and he lived  in 
Narmadapur. He spent his day chanting mantras in the praise of Lord Shiva. Once, he  performed 
an austere  penance,  which  lasted  for a month.  Ultimately,  Shiva  manifested  himself  from the 
Siddheshwar Linga and appeared before him. Lord Shiva asked Jamdagni to ask for any thing  he 
wished for. Jamdagni expressed his desire to have Kamdhenu so that he could perform his  rituals 
and other religious obligations without any problem. Lord S hiva blessed Jamdagni  and 
disappeared. The next moment, Jamdagni found Kamdhenu standing in front of his  hermitage.  
 
Now,  Jamdagni  got everything  that he wished  for. This way,  he was a happy  and contented  life 
until one fateful day when he was killed by a greedy king named Kartaveerya, who  subsequently 
took Kamdhenu  along  with him. While  the greedy  king was still on his way,  Kamdhenu  cursed 
him that very soon not only he but the whole caste of Kshatriya would be liquidated  by 
Parshuram, Jamdagni's son, as p unishment for having committed such a ghastly sin of killing  an 
innocent sage. After cursing Kartaveerya, Kamdhenu went to her original abode, the  heaven. 
Later on, when Parshuram learnt of his father's slaying, he liquidated Kartaveerya and the  whole 
caste of Kshatriya as had been prophesized by  Kamdhenu.  
   
 
DESCRIPTION OF  HELL  
Yudhisthira requested Markandeya to describe what a sinner had to go through in Yamaloka  and 
also that what kind of a person should be considered as the most ghastly  sinner.  
Markande ya replied:  'Donating  food to needy  people  is an extremely  virtuous  deed  and there  is 
no virtuous deed greater than this. A person who donates cereals can be aptly called  'Annadata' - 
one who provides food. One who has never donated cereals in his lifetime is definite to go to  hell 
and has to tread an arduous path leading to it that is ridden with prickly thorns, pointed nails  and 
other sharp objects. The entire path leading to hell is extremely dark and covered with large  pits. 
The path is also covered with  unbearably hot sand spilled all over the place. The sinner  is 
forcibly taken by the Yamdoots despite their reluctance. The sinners repent for the sins they  have 
committed but it is of no use to them, as they will have to reap the fruits of their evil deed s. They  
have  to undergo  all sorts  of painful  experience - they are forced  to pass through  fire and pits full 
of filth.  
 
Those  sinners  who have  atoned  for their sins are not treated  so harshly  by the Yamdoots.  After 
they appear before Yamraj, Chitragupta re minds them of all the sins they had  committed. 
Thereafter,  Yamraj  orders  his attendants  to purify  the sinners  by putting  them  into the ocean  of 
the Hell. There are Twenty -eight types of hells - Atighora, Raudra, Ghortama,  Dukhjanani, 
Ghorrupa, Tarantara, Bh ayanaka, Kalratri, Ghatotkata, Chanda, Mahachanda,  Chndakolahala, 
Prachanda,  Varagnika,  Jaghanya,  Avaraloma,  Bhishni,  Nayika,  Karala,  Vikarala,  Vajravinshti, 
Asta, Panchkona, Sudirgha, Parivartula, Saptabhauma, Ashtabhauma and Deerghamaya. Each  of 
the latt er hell is more horrific than the former. Sinners have to undergo unbearable pain  and 
sufferings  in the hell. They  are tied up by very hot iron chains  and hanged  down  from  trees. 
Yamdoots  attach  hot and heavy  iron balls  to their feet and thrash  them  with hot iron rods.  They 
are then put into wells  of filth.  The tongue  of a liar is rooted  out with brute  force  and a person, 
who shows  disrespect  to his elders  and teachers,  his mouth  is filled  with hot sands  and boiling 
oil. Similarly  immoral  women,  who do not fulfill  their obligation  towards  their husbands,  are 
thrown  into a horrific  hell named  Lohakumbh.  O Yudhisthira!  A man's  life is too short  and 
uncertain.  One is not sure when  his final call would  come.  So, one should  try to lead a virtuous 
life to the best  of his  ability.'  
   
 
VI. NAGAR KHAND  
 
TRISHANKU CURSED BY VASHISHTHA'S  SONS  
Sutji  once  narrated  the following  tale to the assembled  sages - In ancient  times  there  lived  a 
mighty king named Trishanku. He belonged to Suryavanshi dynasty. One day, he asked  Sage 
Vash ishtha whether there was any such Yagya by performing which, he would be entitled to  go 
to heaven  with his physical  form.  Sage  Vashishtha  laughed  at his naive  query  and told him that 
there  was no such Yagya  by performing  which  a man could  go to the heaven  with his mortal 
body.  But, Trishanku  was not satisfied  by Vashishtha's  answer  and so he went  to ask the same 
question to Vashishtha's sons who were one hundred in number. But even they corroborated  their 
father's statement. Trishanku got infuriated and thr eatened them that he would appoint  somebody 
else as his royal priest to get the same yagya performed as they all lacked the  required 
knowledge and competence. Vashishtha's sons also got angry and cursed him to become  a 
'chandal' (a low caste person). The next moment Trishanku indeed became a 'chandal' and was  so 
much  ashamed  of himself  that he decided  to go to the forest  after relinquishing  his throne.  He 
called his son -Harishchandra and narrated the whole tale of his misery. Before going to  the 
forest h e appointed Harishchandra as his  successor.  
One day, while  wandering  in the forest,  Trishanku  met Sage  Vishwamitra  and narrated  his 
miserable tale to him. Since Vishwamitra was a competitor of Vashishtha, he took it as a  golden 
opportunity  to prove  his superiority  to his adversary.  So, he assured  Trishanku  that he had the 
requisite  power  to send anybody  to heaven  and said- ' I shall  help you perform  a grand  yagya, 
which  would  allow  you to attain  to the heaven  with your mortal  body.  But before  that you will 
have to go on a pilgrimage so that you become pure once again.' Both Vishwamitra  and 
Trishanku  set out on a pilgrimage  and reached  'Arbudachal'  where  they met sage Markandeya. 
After  the pleasantries  were  over,  Markandeya  asked  Vishwamitra  about  Trishanku,  who was 
standing  quietly.  Vishwamitra  revealed  everything  to Markandeya  and said - I had taken  a vow 
not to take rest until Trishanku got absolved of the evil influence of the curse given  by 
Vashishtha's  sons'.  I have  not achieved  success  in my objective  till date,  so I have  decided  to 
renounce the  world.  
 
Seeing Vishwamitra in such desperation, Markandeya consoled him and instructed him to go  to 
Hatkeshwar  where  taking  a holy dip in Patal  Ganga  would  purify  Trishanku  and solve  all his 
problems.Both  Vishw amitra  and Trishanku  reached  'Hatkeshwar'  and bathed  in the holy Patal 
Ganga. To his pleasant surprise, Trishanku found that he had indeed become purified and all  the 
lowly qualities had vanished within no time. Vishwamitra was delighted as the first condi tion for 
Trishanku's departure to Heaven had been met. He decided to go to Brahma loka to request  Lord 
Brahma  to be present  at the Yagya  which  was to be performed  for the success  of Trishanku's 
departure  to heaven.  But before  leaving,  he instructed  Trishan ku to make  all the necessary 
preparations before his  return.  
 
After reaching Brahma loka, Vishwamitra narrated the whole story to Lord Brahma  and 
requested him to grace the Yagya by his presence. Lord Brahma told him that it was  just 
impossible for any mo rtal to attain to heaven in his physical form but he added that if  Trishanku 
performed the rituals diligently then he would certainly attain to heaven after his  death. 
Vishwamitra did not like Brahma's words and challenged him that no power on earth could  stop 
him from sending Trishanku to  Heaven.  
 VISHWAMITRA COMMENCES NEW  CREATION  
Vishwamitra then instructed Trishanku to make preparation for the Yagya. After everything  was 
ready,  Vishwamitra  initiated  Trishanku  into the rituals  of Yagya.  Trishanku  made  offerings  in 
the sacrificial fire at the instruction of Vishwamitra. The deities readily accepted all the  offerings 
that were  made  to them.  This way,  the yagya  continued  for twelve  long years  but still there  was 
no sign of Vishwamitra's desire of sending Tri shanku to heaven getting fulfilled.  Trishanku 
became dejected and told him about his decision to renounce everything and spend rest of his  life 
doing  penance  as chances  of attaining  to heaven  appeared  impossible.  He was also sure that 
Vashishtha's  sons would make  fun of him if he went  back  to his kingdom  without  achieving  his 
objective. But, Vishwamitra consoled him and said --'No power on earth can stop you from  going 
to heaven with your physical form. You just need to have some patience and your desire wil l be 
certainly  fulfilled.'  
 
Vishwamitra  decided  to please  Lord  Shiva  as he was convinced  that Shiva  was the only deity 
who could  help  him  achieve his  goal.  He eulogized Shiva by singing hymns  of praise in    his 
name. At last, Shiva appeared before him and expressed his desire of fulfilling any wish  of 
Vishwamitra.  Vishwamitra  requested  Shiva  to bestow  on him the power  of creation  just like 
Brahma  had. Lord  Shiva  blessed  him and disappeared.Now,  Vishwamitra  was eager  to test his 
powers so he began cr eating different things. He created Sun, Moon, Stars, Oceans, Rivers, so  on 
and so forth.  In a short  time the whole  world  was filled  by his creations  resulting  into chaos  all 
over.  As the result  of his creations,  every  natural  thing  became  double  in number - one that had 
already been created by Brahma and the second created by Vishwamitra. Now there existed  two 
suns,  two moons,  so on and so forth.  Vishwamitra's  amazing  deeds  had catastrophic  fallout  on 
the natural course of  events.  
 
Deities  were  scarred  and rushed  to seek the help of Lord  Brahma.  They  told Brahma  that if 
Vishwamitra was not stopped the whole world was doomed to destruction. Lord  Brahma 
appeared before Vishwamitra and ordered to stop doing creations. Vishwamitra told him that  he 
was ready  to do that if Brahma  helped  Trishanku  attain  to heaven  with his mortal  body.  Seeing 
no other option, Brahma accepted Vishwamitra's condition. This way, Vishwamitra was able  to 
send Trishanku physically to heaven with the help of Lord  Brahma.  
   
 
 
 
VII. PRABHAS  KHAND  
 
DESCRIPTION OF PURANAS AND  UP-PURANAS  
Once, while describing the origin of Puranas, Sutji told the sages who had assembled  at 
Naimisharanya --'Lord Shiva had first revealed the contents of Skanda Purana to Parvati  at 
Kailash  Mountain.  Lord  Brahma  and few other deities  were  also present  there  at the time when 
Shiva was narrating the tale. Subsequently, Parvati narrated this tale to Skanda, Skanda to  Nandi 
and Nandi to sages like Sanak, etc. and finally Sanak narrated it to Vyasa. Now I am going to  tell 
you t he same tale which Vyasa had narrated to  me.' 
 
Sutji  began  by saying -' During  ancient  times,  Lord  Brahma  once  did a very austere  penance 
resulting  into the manifestation  of all the four Vedas.  Later  on, all the eighteen  Puranas  too 
appeared from his mouth.  These eighteen Puranas were - Brahma Purana, Vishnu Purana,  Shiva 
Purana, Bhagawat Purana, Bhavishya Purana, Narada Purana, Markandeya Purana, Agni  Purana, 
Brahma  vaivarta  Purana,  Linga  Purana,  Padma  Purana,  Varaha  Purana,  Skanda  Purana,  Vaman 
Purana, Kurm a Purana, Matsya Purana, Garuda Purana and Vayu Purana. Apart from  these 
eighteen main Puranas, there are also similar number of secondary Puranas known as  Up- 
Puranas. These Up -Puranas are - Sanatkumar, Narsimha, Skand, Shiva Dharma,  Durvasa, 
Narada, Kapi l, Manu, Ushana, Brahmand, Varun, Kalika, Maheshwar, Samb, Saura,  Parashar, 
Marich and  Bhargava.'  
 
Sutji  then went  on to describe  the other  features  of each Purana -' Brahma  Purana  contains  ten 
thousand shlokas in it whereas Padma Purana contains fifty -five thousand shlokas.  Similarly, 
there are twenty -three thousand shlokas in Vishnu Purana. Vayu Purana contains the tales  related 
with Lord  Shiva  and it contains  twenty -four thousand  shlokas  in it. Similarly  the remaining 
Puranas like Bhagawat, Narada, Markan deya, Agni, Bhavishya, Brhmavaivarta, Linga,   Varaha,  
Skanda, Vaman, Kurma, Matsya, Garuda and Brahmanda Purana contain 18,000, 25,000,  9,000, 
16,000,  14,500,  18,000,  11,000,  24,000,  81,100,  10,000,  17,000,  14,000,  18,000,  and 12,200  
shlokas  respectively .' 
 
Sutji  told the sages  that all the Up-Puranas  owe their origin  to the main  Puranas  which  are 
eighteen  in number.  He also revealed  to them  that they could  be categorized  into three  main 
types - Satvik, Rajas and Tamas. Satvik Puranas contain the tales of Lord Vishnu while  Rajas 
Puranas  contain  the tales of Brahma  and Tamas  Puranas  contain  the tales of Agni  and Rudra. 
One of the chief  characteristics  of Puranas  is that each of them  is divided  into five sections - 
'Sarg' (Description of how creation began), ' Pratisarga', 'Vansh' (Description of  prominent 
dynasties), 'Manvantar', and 'Vanshanucharit' (Tales related with the descendants of the  famous 
sages).  
   
 
PRABHAS  TERTH  
On being  asked  by the sages  about  the prominent  places  of pilgrimage,  Sutji  named  many  holy 
places  but according  to him Prabhas  Teerth  was the crown  of all the places  of pilgrimage  and 
was incomparable. Recounting a tale when Parvati had once asked Lord Shiva the same  question, 
Sutji said -- 'At that time Shiva had told Parvati that Prabhas Ksh etra was supreme among all  the 
holy places  and capable  of liberating  a man from  all his sins. He had also told her that due to 
prevalence  of sins in Kaliyuga  people  would  not attain  virtues  despite  going  on pilgrimages. 
Shiva  had also told her that this was the reason  why he had created  numerous  holy places  and 
kept them secret so the holiness of these places remained intact. I have manifested myself in  the 
form  of a divine  Shivalinga  at Prabhas  kshetra.  The whole  universe  has originated  from  it and 
merges  into it ultimately  at the time of deluge.  The Shivalinga  is called  Somanath  and very few 
people  are aware  of it's existence.  This Shivalinga  continue  to exist  since  it's manifestation  in a 
particular kalpa named Bhairav long ago. Unfortunately, people of K ali yuga under the  influence 
of all pervading  ignorance  would  fail to recognize  the importance  of holy places.  Such  people 
would try to demean the value of holy places and make fun of those people who go  on 
pilgrimages.  Being  blinded  by their superficial  intelligence  they would  try to find faults  with 
rituals  and religion.  Such  would  be the condition  of the mortals  in Kali yuga  that they would 
criticize  everything  that is religious  and spiritual  in nature.  How  can one expect  from  these 
unfortunate  people  of Kali yuga  to understand  the significance  of Prabhas  kshetra  and which  is 
revered even by  me?' 
 
Parvati,  who had been  listening  to the tale with rapt attention,  became  even  more  curious  to 
know  about  Prabhas  kshetra.  So she requested  Lord  Shiva  to shed more light on the other 
important aspects of this sacrosanct place. Lord Shiva, continuing with his description of  Prabhas 
kshetra,  said- ' This sacrosanct  place  has temples  of three  deities  on its three  sides.  To its east is 
situated  a grand  temple  of Surya  Narayan  while  there  is a magnificent  temple  of Madhav  to it's 
west.  In the same  way there  is a beautiful  temple  of goddess  Bhavani  to the north  of Prabhas 
kshetra  and towards  it's south  lies the ocean.  This holy place  is spread  in the area of five yojans 
and is divided  in three  major  areas - Maheshwar,  Vaishnav  and Brahma.  There  are about  one 
crore  temples  related  with different  deities  in Vaishnav  and Brahma  kshetras  while  Maheshwar 
kshetra contains one and half crore temples. As the name implies, each area  has been named  after 
one God forming  the Trinity.  Anybody  who has the good  fortune  of living  in the central  part of 
Prabhas  kshetra  becomes  absolved  of all his sins even  if he has committed  most  abhorrent  sins. 
The significance  of this holy place  can be understood  by the fact that a man born there  does not 
take a second birth and attains salvation. One whom scholars of the Vedas call 'Kalagni Rudra'  is 
famously known as Bhairav in Prabhas  kshetra.  
   
 
SOMNATH  LINGA  
Emphasizing  on the significance  of Someshwa r Linga  and its deep  association  with the Vedas, 
Lord Shiva told Parvati -'The divine Someshwar Linga exists since time immemorial and  will 
remain  for eternity.  This revelation  descended  on me while  I was engrossed  in a deep  state of 
meditation. Someshwar L inga has deep association with the Vedas and it enhances their  sanctity 
by establishing itself in each of them at different periods of time during the day. During  morning 
time Someshwar  Linga  establishes  itself  in the Rigveda,  during  noon  in the Yajurveda,  during 
afternoon in the Samaveda and during evening time it establishes itself in Atharva  veda.  
   
 
DIFFERENT NAMES OF  SOMNATH  
Parvati  curiously  asked  Lord  Shiva  about  the reason  why Somnath  was known  by so many 
different names. Lord Shiva said - 'Since the time this divine linga first manifested itself very  few 
blessed souls had the knowledge of it's existence. Brahma has a life span of one kalpa at the  end 
of which even he ceases to exist giving way to his successor, a new Brahma. In the same  manner 
this divine linga  acquires  a new name  at the end of each kalpa.  The present  kalpa  is seventh  in 
order  as six kalpas  have  already  passed.  The name  of the present  Brahma  is Shatanand  and this 
divine linga is presently famous by the name of Somnath. Similarly it was  famous as  Mrityunjay 
during  the time of Brahma  named  Virinchi.  During  second  kalpa  this linga  was famous  as 
Kalagnirudra  and the name  of Brahma  was Padmabhu.  The third  kalpa  had Swayambhu  as 
Brahma and the linga was famous as Amritesh. The name of the fou rth Brahma was  Parmeshthi 
in fourth  kalpa  and the linga  was famous  as Annamay.  In the same  way the names  of the fifth 
and sixth  Brahma  were  Surajyeshtha  and Hemagarbha  respectively  and the names  of the linga 
during their periods were Kritiwas and Bhairav N ath respectively.'  
 
Lord Shiva also revealed to Parvati that the next kalpa - eighth in order would have  Chaturmukh 
as Brahma and the divine linga would be known as Pran Nath.Goddess Parvati then asked  Shiva 
about  the exact  location  of the linga  in Prabhas  Kshetra.  Lord  Shiva  told her that the sacrosanct 
place of Prabhas Kshetra was situated between the plains of two rivers Vajrini and  Nyankumati. 
He also told her that the eternal  linga  was not very far from  the sea coast.  Dwelling  at length 
about  the good  fortunes  of those  living  in Prabhas  kshetra,  Lord  Shiva  told her- ' Anybody  who 
does not abandon  this holy place  despite  his hardships  and troubles  is certain  to attain  to my 
abode. One who has the good fortune of dying at Prabhas kshetra attains salvation.  There will  be 
prevalence  of sins in Kali yuga.  As a result  of this people  would  experience  all sorts  of hurdles 
and problems  in their lives.  To minimize  their sorrows  and to lessen  their miseries,  I have 
personally  instructed  Ganesh  not to abandon  this place even  for a moment.  Of all the lingas 
present on the earth, Somnath is specially dear to  me.' 
   
 
SIDDHESHWAR LINGA AND SIDDHA  LINGA  
Describing the reason why this sacrosanct place was named Prabhas, Lord Shiva told Parvati -- 'I 
dwell  in the entire  area stretching  between  the ocean  in the south  and river  Kaureshwari.  Being 
situated  at the western  coast,  this entire  area is radiated  by Surya's  light for a relatively  longer 
period  of time and hence  it has been  named  'Prabhas'  meaning  luster.  This is the reason why 
there is situated a grand temple of Lord Surya in Prabhas Kshetra. Not far from this Surya  temple 
is situated a magnificent temple of Lord Siddheshwar, which was famously known  as 
Jaigishavyeshwar in ancient  times.'  
 
Lord Shiva then went on to desc ribe why Siddheshwar was called Jaigishavyeshwar  during 
ancient times -' There lived a sage named Jaigishavya in previous kalpa. He used to daily  worship 
a Shivalinga named Mahoday, which had manifested on its own. Keeping in view  Shiva's 
fondness  for ashes , he used to smear  it on his body  hoping  to please  his deity.  Not only this he 
even  slept  on ashes.  He thus led an extremely  austere  life. At last he was able to please  Lord 
Mahoday by his devotion. When Lord Mahoday appeared before him and expressed  his 
willingness to fulfill anything he wished but Jaigishavya wanted nothing but total devotion in  his 
deity (Mahoday). Lord Mahoday blessed him with immortality and said - ' There  would  be 
nobody  as powerful  as you. Your  feats  achieved  in spiritual  things  will be unmatched  and you 
would  become  famous  as 'Yogacharya'  or teacher  of Yoga.  One who regularly  worships  this 
particular linga which you have been worshipping with such deep devotion till now is certain  to 
get absolved of all his sins.' Having blessed Yaig ishavya thus, Lord Mahoday disappeared  from 
his sight.  After  this incident,  Mahoday  Linga  also came  to be known  as Yaigishavyeshwar.  In 
course  of time,  when  the Kaliyuga  of that Kalpa  arrived,  some  sages  named  'Balkhilyas'  had 
gone  to the same  place  and worshipped  Lord  Mahoday.  Similarly,  many  more  sages  went  there 
and attained  'siddhi'  or accomplishment.  This is how this linga  came  to be known  as 
'Siddheshwar'  (the lord of all accomplishments).  There  are many  holy places  in the vicinity  like 
Siddha Linga, which was installed by lord Surya. Anybody who worships this linga on  the 
auspicious day of trayodashi of the bright half of the Hindu month Chaitra attains virtues  similar 
to the accomplishment of 'Pundareek  Yagya'.  
   
 
CHANDRA DEVA EULOGIZES  SHIVA  
Parvati  asked Lord  Shiva  about  the reason  Chandra  Deva  had to install  a Shivalinga  at Prabhas 
Kshetra. Lord Shiva replied that Daksha had got married twenty seven of his daughters  to 
Chandra Deva. Chandra Deva was very attached to Rohini, who was one of them and  neglected 
others. When Daksha came to know about this he cursed Chandra Deva as the result of which  he 
lost his luster and started waning day by day. The worried Chandra Deva did an austere  penance 
for thousand  of years  to please  Lord  Shiva.  At last Lord  Shiva became  pleased  and appeared 
before him. Subsequently, Chandra Deva got a divine Shivalinga installed by Brahma  and 
worshipped it for thousand of years. Lord Shiva appeared once again and expressed  his 
willingness to fulfill any wish Chandra Deva express ed. Chandra Deva requested Lord Shiva  to 
dwell  in the very Shivalinga  he had been  worshipping  till then.  Lord  Shiva  revealed  to him that 
there  was no question  of dwelling  in the Shivalinga  as he had never  abandoned  it in the first 
place.  Chandra  Deva  had regained  his luster  on account  of his arduous  penance.  Lord  Shiva 
blessed  him and said- 'Since  you have  regained  your luster  (Prabha)  by dint of your austere 
penance,  this holy place  will become  famous  as 'Prabhas  Kshetra'.  This linga  would  be named 
upon yo u and become famous as Somnath  Linga.'  
Having  blessed  Chandra  Deva  thus,  Lord  Shiva  disappeared.  Later  on Chandra  Deva  instructed 
Vishwakarma to build a magnificent temple at the sight. He also built a city nearby so that all  the 
priests who were supposed  to supervise the rituals of worship could live  there.  
   
 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF GETTING ONE'S  HEAD 
TONSURED  
Dwelling on length about the significance of getting one's head tonsured at holy places,  Lord 
Shiva told Parvati - 'A man should get his head tonsured wh enever he gets an opportunity to  visit 
a holy place  because  hair are believed  to contain  all the sins he has committed.  There  is a holy 
place  called  Padma  teerth,  not far from  Somnath  temple.  A devotee  should  first get his hair 
removed at Somnath teerth an d then immerse them at Padma teerth. This way he  becomes 
absolved of all his sins. Women should have a symbolical cut of their hair. It is necessary  to 
perform  the rituals  of tarpan  in the names  of ancestors  after the head  tonsuring  ceremony. 
According to the scriptures, an ocean is considered holy and nobody should its holy water in  an 
impure state. While bathing a devotee should chant the following  mantra -- 
 
'Om namo Vishnu guptaya Vishnu rupaya  namah; 
Sannidhye bhava devesh sagare  lavanambhasi.'  
There  are about  five crore  Shivalingas  submerged  in the ocean  near Somnath.  There  are also 
other holy places situated nearby like Agnikunda, Padma sarovar  etc. 
   
 
THE EMERGENCE OF SARASWATI IN  PRABHAS 
KSHETRA  
On being  asked  by Parvati  about  the emergence  of river  Saraswati  at Prabhas  Kshetra,  Lord 
Shiva narrated the following tale to her -'The holy Sarswati flowing in Prabhas kshetra constitutes 
of five different  streams  - Harini,  Vajrini,  Nyanku,  Kapila  and Saraswati.  Lord  Vishnu  once 
instructed Saraswati to carry ' Badwanal' (Submarine fire) and dump it in the ocean near  Prabhas 
kshetra. After taking permission from Lord Brahma, her father Saraswati flew towards  her 
destination.  Ganga  became  sad at her departure  so she asked  her as to how could  she have  a 
glimpse  of her now that she was going  to such a distant  place.  Saraswati  consoled  Ganga  by 
saying  that she would  be able to see her whenever  she looked  eastwards.  The swift  currents  of 
Saraswati  penetrated  the earth  and reached  Patal  Loka  carrying  Badwanal  along  with her. She 
continued to move beneath the ground towards her destination. As she reached Prabhas  Kashetra, 
four learned  sages,  who were  well versed  in Vedas  arrived  there  and invoked  Saraswati  to give 
them the privilege of separate bath by dividing herself i n four different  streams.  
 
The names of these sages were Hiranya, Vajra, Nyanku and Kapil. While Saraswati was about  to 
comply with their request, suddenly Samudra arrived there and he too expressed the same  wish. 
Thus  Saraswati  divided  herself  into five different  streams - Harini,  Vajrini,  Nyanku,  Kapila  and 
Saraswati.  Eventually,  when  Saraswati  reached  near  the  ocean,  Badwanal  whom  she    was 
carrying was surprised to see the high tides rising in the ocean. He thought that the Samudra was 
fright ened  of his fury so he asked  Saraswati -- 'Why  is the ocean  scarred  of me?' Saraswati 
inflated  his ego by saying  that who would  not be scarred  of him. Badwanal  was pleased  and 
wanted  to grant  her a boon.  Saraswati  remembered  Lord  Vishnu,  who instantly  gave  his divine 
appearance in her heart. She narrated the whole story and sought his advise. Lord Vishnu  advised 
her to ask Badwanal to make his appearance small like the eye of a needle. Saraswati,  following 
the advise  of Lord  Vishnu  asked  Badwanal  to become  small like a needle  and keep  sucking  the 
ocean. Subsequently, Saraswati summoned Samudra and told him to accept Badwanal to  which 
he agreed. This way Samudra devoured Badwanal, who continues to suck the water of the  ocean 
even today as per the instructions given by Saraswati. It is believed that tides are nothing but  the 
manifestation of Badwanal's exhalations. This was how Saraswati emerged in Prabhas  kshetra.  
   
 
PRABHAS -THE ABODE OF TRINITY  GODDESSES  
Lord Shiva revealed to goddesses Parvati that Prabhas ks hetra boasted of possessing many  more 
Shivalingas  apart  from  the famous  Somnath  Shivalinga.  He also gave  names  of some  of the 
prominent Shivalingas situated over there and said -- 'To the North -East of Somnath temple  is 
situated a grand temple of Lord Sarve shvar Deva, who is also famously known as  Siddheshwar. 
The reason behind this is that Shivalinga over there had been installed by the  'siddhas' 
(accomplished  ones)  in ancient  times.  People  who are desirous  of acquiring  siddhis  throng  this 
holy place  and engage  themselves  in austere  penance.  To the east of Siddheshwar  temple  is 
situated one more temple called Kapileshwar. It has been named after Sage Kapil, who  had 
installed the Shivalinga over there. A Shivalinga named Gandharveshwar is also situated  nearby . 
This particular  Shivalinga  had been  installed  by a gandharva  named  Dhanvahan.  To the east of 
Gandharveshwar temple is situated Vimaleshwar temple. It is believed that anybody  suffering 
from tuberculosis gets cured after he worships in that temple. Dhande shwar Linga was  installed 
by Kuber, who was bestowed with the lordship of wealth on account of his austere  penance.'  
 
Lord Shiva told Parvati that there were also temples of three goddesses in Prabhas Kshetra  apart 
from Shiva temples. These three goddesses  were Mangla, Vishalakshi and Chatwar  representing 
the three types of power -will power, power of action and power of knowledge. Lord Shiva  said-- 
'The pilgrimage to Prabhas kshetra is believed to be incomplete until and unless these  three 
goddesses have be en worshipped. Goddess Mangla represents the power of Lord  Brahma 
(Brahma shakti) while goddess Vishalakshi that of Lord Vishnu. Goddess Chatwar represents  my 
power.  Goddess  Mangla  holds  the privilege  of getting  worshipped  first. During  ancient  times 
Chand rama  did an austere  penance  for thousand  of years  and all the deities  including  Lord 
Brahma  had gone  there  to witness  his amazing  feat. At that time goddess  Mangla  had blessed 
them and this was how she got her  name.'  
 
Lord Shiva then went on to describe ho w goddess Vishalakshi got her name -' A fierce battle  had 
taken place between the deities and demons during Chakshus manvantar. Lord Vishnu fought 
along with the deities and helped them in defeating the demons. Demons fled towards the  south 
but were  chased  by the deities.  Realizing  that it was not easy to annihilate  the demons,  Lord 
Vishnu remembered goddess Mahamaya and sought her help. Mahamaya appeared instantly  and 
looked  at Lord  Vishnu  with her large  eyes.  This is how she got her name.  In the present  kalpa 
she is also known  as Lalitoma.  To the south  of Vishalakshi  temple  is situated  the temple  of 
goddess Chatwarpriya. Goddess Chatwarpriya is the saviour of people living in that  area. 
Anybody  who worships  her on the auspicious  day of Mahanavami  with appropriate  rituals  is 
blessed.  
   
 
DWARKA MAHATMYA: SAGES' QUERIES  TO 
PRAHLAD  
Once,  few sages  asked  Sutji  about  the means  by which  Lord  Vishnu  could  be realized  in Kali 
yuga - the era dominated by sin and decaying moral  values.  
 
Sutji started by describing how Lo rd Vishnu on seeing the prevalence of sin in Dwapar yuga  had 
to take incarnation  as Krishna  to liberate  the world  from  the sinners.  He also described  in detail 
all the incidents  culminating  into the killings  of many  cruel  demons  -Kaliya  serpent,  Chanur, 
Shishupal and ogress like Putna. He gave in depth description of the events leading to the war  of 
Mahabharata and how the infighting among the mighty Yadavas led to their destruction. He  told 
them how a fowler mistook Krishna's feet to be a deer and killed  him. 
 
Sutji  also told the assembled  sages  how the magnificent  city of Dwarka  had been  submerged  in 
the ocean ultimately. He revealed to them that the passing away of Krishna marked the advent  of 
Kali yuga  and the situation  became  even  worse.  On finding  how difficult  it was to realize  lord 
Vishnu  in the Kali yuga - the era dominated  by sin, some  prominent  sages  decided  to seek Lord 
Brahma's  help in this regard.  After  reaching  Brahma  loka,  they eulogized  Brahma  and received 
his blessings. Lord Brahma told them  to go to Patal loka and meet Prahlad, the supreme  devotee 
of Lord Vishnu who according to Lord Brahma was in a better position to help  them.  
 
All the sages  went  to Patal  loka as per the instructions  given  by Lord  Brahma.  There  they not 
only found Prahlad but also the most charitable king -Bali. After the pleasantries were  exchanged, 
they came  to the real issue  and said-- 'We are very much  distressed  by the prevailing  situation 
where  it appears  that the evil forces  have  overshadowed  the virtuous  ones.  The ways shown  by 
the Vedas  are no longer  in practice  and the Brahmins  are being  tormented  by the Shudras,  who 
have  become  the rulers.  We have  come  with a request  and a desire  to know  whether  there  was 
any possibility  of realizing  Lord  Vishnu  in this dark era of 'Kali'.  If yes then where  can we find 
Lord  Vishnu?'  
   
 
THE SANCTITY OF  DWARKAPURI  
Prahlad, being an ardent devotee of Vishnu himself, understood quite well, the desperation  with 
which  a devotee  seeks  his Lord.  So he told them -- 'By the grace  of Almighty  Vishnu, I am 
revealing  to you the name  of that sacred  place  which  has remained  a secret  till now.  Kushasthal 
Puri is a divine  city situated  on the western  coast.  Nearby  is the place  where  river  Gomti  meets 
the ocean  and at this convergent  point  is situated  the sacrosanct  city called  Dwarawati  Puri, 
where  you can find Lord  Vishnu  in all his glory  of sixteen  kalas.  Blessed  be the Dwarka  Puri, 
which The almighty Vishnu has chosen as his abode and where he dwells in his  glorious 
Chaturbhuj form. This is the very p lace, which even liberates the most fallen sinner from all  his 
sins. There is a famous temple of Lord Trivikram at the bank of river Gomti and not far from  this 
temple is a divine pond. Anybody desirous of salvation must bathe in this pond for  the 
fulfil lment of his wish. It is believed that before leaving for heaven, Lord Krishna had  transferred 
all his divine powers into the Trivikram idol. So, there is no place as holy as Dwarka and if  you 
are desirous of having a divine glimpse of Lord Krishna then yo u must visit  Dwarka.'  
 
All the sages thanked Prahlad for sharing his secrets with them because nobody else  except 
Prahlad  was aware  of the fact that Lord  Vishnu  had given  Dwarka  the privilege  of being  his 
abode.  These  revelations  made  them  more  curious  about Dwarka,  so they requested  Prahlad  to 
disclose how the holy Gomti descended down to  Dwarka.  
 
Prahlad began by describing the virtues of going on a pilgrimage to Dwarka -- 'The mere 
resolution  of going  on a pilgrimage  to Dwarka  is enough  to liberate  one's  ancestors  from  the 
tortures of the hells. Each step that a devotee takes towards Dwarka gives virtues similar to  what 
is attained by performing Ashwamedh Yagya. One who encourages others to go on a  pilgrimage 
to Dwarka certainly goes to Vishnu  Dham.'  
 
Prahlad then switched  over to the second  part of the sages'  question  and said- 'There  is an 
interesting tale describing how Sage Vashishtha had brought down Gomti from the heaven  to 
earth.  At the time of deluge  when  the whole  world  had submerged  in water,  a lotus flower 
manifested from Lord Vishnu's navel on which was seated Brahma. Lord Vishnu instructed  him 
to perform  his duty as a creator  to which  Brahma  agreed.  First of all Brahma  created  his ten 
manasputras  (Sanak,  Sanandan,etc.)  and sought  their help in increasing  the population  of the 
world by becoming householders. But, all of them were extremely virtuous and did not show  any 
inclination towards getting married. Ultimately all of them went to the western coast  and 
engaged themselves in austere penance.  Their penance continued for a number of years  after 
which 'Sudarshan chakra' appeared before them. As all of them looked up in bewilderment,  they 
heard a heavenly voice -- 'O sons of Brahma! Very soon the almighty Vishnu is  going  to 
manifest himself. The  'Chakra' you are seeing is his. You all must perform the rituals of  'ardhya' 
in the name of Lord Vishnu to show your reverence towards him.' All the Manasputras  eulogized 
Sudarshan -Chakra  with deep  devotion.  All of them  wished  that there  were  a holy river , with 
whose water they could perform the rituals of ardhya. But to their utter dismay there was no  such 
holy river nearby. They then remembered Lord Brahma, who immediately understood what  they 
desired. Lord Brahma instructed Ganga by saying - ' Ganga! Go to the earth, where you would  be 
known  as Gomti.  Sage  Vashishtha  will lead you to your destination.  Just follow  him like a 
daughter follows her  father.'  
 
 Finally, when sage Vashishtha followed by Gomti reached their destination, all the  Manasputras 
were  delighted.  They  eulogized  Ganga  and expressed  their gratitude  to Vashishtha  for bringing 
Ganga  on earth.  All of them  thanked  Vashishtha  by saying - 'Since  you have  brought  Gomti  on 
earth,  you would  be considered  as her father.'  They  offered  'ardhya'  to Gomti  and subsequently 
eulogized Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu appeared after being pleased and blessed them - ' Your 
unflinching  devotion  in me has pleased  me no bound.  Since  you did this penance  with the 
objective  of Moksha  (salvation),  this place  would  become  famou s as Moksha  Dayak  (giver  of 
salvation). This sacrosanct place would also be called Chakra teerth because of  Sudarshan 
Chakra,  who informed  you all of my manifestation  at Dwarka  Puri.  I assure  you that I won't 
abandon this sacrosanct place even for a  moment .' 
This way,  all the Manasputras  were  finally  successful  in their objective  of offering  ardhya  to 
Lord Vishnu with the holy water of Gomti. At last, Gomti having fulfilled her mission for  which 
she had descended  down  to Earth  merged  with the ocean.  Lord  Vishnu  disappeared  from  there 
and Manasputras continued to live  there.  
 
 
 