Exhortation to Students
When clouds gather in the high skies, they are usually ac-companied by lightning. In the same manner, wherever there is edu-cation, it should be accompanied by wisdom. We have to recognisesuch an association as an essential truth. Many things, like the full-ness of life and all that is purposeful in this world, have been in-volved in problems of education. Because we do not see these thingsclearly and they appear to us tarnished to a large extent, whatever isgood in education is being hidden from us. Every thinking individualconcerned with education is today faced with a large number ofproblems; problems that have been agitating the minds of studentsand of teachers. It is the duty of everyone to see that these problemsare solved and the right solutions are put into the hearts of youngpeople, and thereby infuse a sense of the Divine in their minds. Be-cause good qualities like sacrifice, forbearance, truth and love havebeen somewhat pushed to the background, the society is sufferingfrom various ills. It is the sacred duty of good education not only torectify such ills and give proper shape and form to society, but alsoto rid the minds and hearts of people as well, of all evils.In our educational methods of today, we are attaching greatimportance to giving voluminous books and the information con-tained in these voluminous books to the students. We are not mak-ing an effort to improve the ideas and ideologies of the students. Bytheir acquaintance with these books, the students are filling theirheads with the contents of such books to the fullest capacity andwithout any discrimination. They are not utilising properly the matterthat is going into their heads. It has been mentioned earlier thismorning that the present educational system in our country is re-sulting in our students taking in quite an amount of information andthat they are not converting this information into useful knowledgeand wisdom. But I feel that our students lack the discriminating ca-2Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972pacity by which they can absorb only good information. If they doso, they can also convert it into useful knowledge. We are no doubtkeeping in mind today the ideals and the goals of good education,but that is not enough. We should also make an effort to put theminto practice.Keeping aside, for one moment, the educational system itself,I have to state that in the name of education many new habits, manynew cultures and many new ideas are being injected into the mindsof our children. As a result, the parents are not able to lift their headswith honour in the society around them. Fathers and mothers, whohave sons and daughters who are students and are part of the con-temporary educational system, know that the children are behaving insuch a manner as to create problems in the house. The parents oftenwonder how these problems can be tackled and how their childrencan be handled. These sons and daughters are not able to developsufficient confidence in themselves. Their fathers and mothers won-der what their future is going to be. Today man’s ideas are taking anextraordinary and crooked shape because there is a certain amountof distortion in their minds caused by their running after westerncivilisation and western notions. As a result, they attach great impor-tance to temporary gains and transient successes. Life is not thattransient or that trivial as to be played with. It should not be barteredfor achieving wrong and distorted aims. Students should attach moreimportance and sanctity to life than they do now. The minds andhearts of students are tender, sweet, soft and gentle. If at this age,when their hearts are still tender and gentle, they cannot take in thevalues of life, they will not be able to take them in later. The essentialreason for this lies in the way fathers and mothers are looking aftertheir children and in the ideas they are giving to their children. In theambition and desire of the parents that their children should havefreedom and that they should rise to high positions in their lives,they are giving them freedom without telling them how dangerousfreedom could be if not utilised properly.Summer Showers in Brindavan 19723The end of wisdom is freedom.The end of culture is perfection.The end of knowledge is love.The end of education is character.There is a desire on the part of all of us to acquire these fourqualities, namely, wisdom, culture, knowledge, and education, andreach their ends, namely, freedom, perfection, love, and character. Butstudents should realise that if these qualities are not properly utilised,then they cannot call themselves students. As students and futurecitizens of this country, you have the responsibility for shaping thefuture of this country. Put your hearts in the right path by listeningattentively to the more experienced men. Then you will be in a posi-tion to enlighten others and proclaim the ancient glory and culture ofthis land to the whole world. I have no doubt that after this summercourse, you will be able to proclaim proudly the sacredness of theculture of this land of ours and of the values contained therein. Youmay be thinking that there are only about three hundred studentsfrom this vast country of India attending this course, and you may bewondering how such a small number can do anything to rectify andalter the terrifying phases which life in this country has assumed.My dear students!There may be hundreds and thousands of sepoys and jawansto be trained, but there will be only a small number of teachers totrain them. These are the commanders and leaders. Taking this ex-ample, even though there are thousands of students in this country,you, as leaders, must get the training you require to train the manythousands of others in the country. This is the idea with which youmust go through the summer course. This is the first summer courseyou are attending; and I hope and bless you that after you have gonethrough it, you will acquire the virtues of leadership. Those of youwho are here have to acquire, by going through these classes, a cer-tain amount of strength and character. With this strength, you will be4Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972able to lead your country. In this world most of you wish to do somenoble and difficult work. All those who wish to participate in suchwork have to accept leadership and responsibility. Those studentswho today feel that it is good to accept such a responsibility are theones who will do well in the future.If we cannot recognise our duties, we will not be able to rec-tify our methods. Take the example of a leader who is very muchaddicted to drinking. How can he propagate the virtue of keepingaway from drink? How can he preach prohibition? In the same man-ner, how can such teachers and students who succumb to evils, dogood to and improve society? If we want to accept the responsibilityof telling others to rectify their faults, then the first thing to do is torectify our own faults and change our own lives so that there are nomore faults left in us. So the right thing to do is to cleanse our ownhearts and then move to the area around you, say your own village.After purifying the people of the village, then you can move to thedistrict; after purifying the district, you can move to the state and af-ter purifying the state you can become a leader in your country. Ifyou want to become a leader without these prior acts, then you willbe disappointed and you cannot be a leader. It is only when we un-derstand and recognise the responsibility and the duty of a citizen,will we be able to change the methods of education and infuse intothose methods, love and peace which are the essential qualities of agood citizen.For students and other members of society, education shouldbe a kind of social ideal. It should constitute a bridge on which youshould walk to reach your goal. If this bridge of education is notbuilt with sufficient strength, it will be harmful to the individual. Thestudents should take the road of reorganisation and endow educationwith the strength it needs. By developing prejudicial attitudes andmaintaining attachments, we are not going to derive happiness fromour actions. It is only by developing a correct vision of things thatwe will be able to derive happiness. Today’s education is aimed atgiving those who go through it an amount of temporary happiness,Summer Showers in Brindavan 19725temporary beauty and temporary pleasure. The conduct of studentsof today is not controlled in any manner.Principles of education that do not connect the students withtheir parents will bring unhappiness to all of us in the future. One ofthe essential facets of Indian culture is to recognise the mother andfather as equivalent of God. If we do not deserve the love of ourmother and of our father, from whom else can we ask for such af-fection? We should therefore develop attitudes by which we canpromote such love and respect. It is only when you are able to re-spect your parents, will your children respect you, in future, whenyou become fathers and mothers. In every action of ours and inevery thought of ours, there is a reflection and an echo. If in yourfuture, you aspire to, and want, some happiness, pleasure and peace,you must practise certain principles at the present time. You mustpractise these principles now to bring peace and contentment foryourself in the later stages of your life. Indian culture is constitutedof certain rituals and certain practices that have been handed down tous through the ages. Today, students regard these rituals, some ofwhich are the essence of Indian culture, as being foolish. They thinkthat they are very clever and that these rituals are meaningless.Today many scientists of great reputation are inventinggadgets and flying to the moon. They are spending so much moneyon such things, but they do not have peace of mind. Leaders andmen who are at the top of society feel that they have everything.Alas! they do not have any peace of mind. Why is this so? We haveto enquire and find an answer for this. One can count stars and fly tothe moon. But if one cannot look into the inside of one’s self, howcan he find happiness? Our culture and traditions are such that theyenable you to know who you are and help you to understand your-self. The first thing to have is self-confidence, after which, alone, youwill get self-satisfaction. Once you have got self-satisfaction, thenyou must acquire the virtue of self-sacrifice and after self-sacrifice,alone, you come to self-realisation. Thus, to achieve self-realisation,self-confidence is the most important thing. In all these four attrib-6Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972utes, namely, self-confidence, self-satisfaction, self-sacrifice, andself-realisation, the one common word is self. To understand the self,you must find out from experienced people what they know about it.From today, for a whole period of one month, to enable you to findout the meaning of this self, we have invited a large number of peo-ple who have experienced this self to tell you what it means.It is possible during this one month, there may be certain in-conveniences you have to put up with. The food and comfort maynot suit you. You have to bear up with all this and bear it with pleas-ure, because such a training is essential in your lives. This disciplineis, in fact, the first step in self-realisation. The reason why I havecalled this the first step during your training is that today there are alarge number of people who cannot put up with difficulties and in-conveniences, and yet, wish to achieve bigger and more subtle things.This study and discipline, to which you will submit your-selves, willlead you to happiness and bliss. If you cannot put up with small dif-ficulties, how will you be shaping into people who are to rectify so-cial evils? Some day or other difficulties are going to come yourway. So also sorrow and great inconveniences are going to comeyour way. It is much better to stand firm and know what those diffi-culties are when you are young. Then you will be able to withstandsuch difficulties in your later lives with some ease. In this summercourse, you must take various difficulties you come across as part ofyour education and put up with them cheerfully. Some people dophysical exercises to keep their bodies strong. While doing suchexercises, you feel tired and experience discomfort; but after the ex-ercises are over, you get the strength for your muscles. There is nodoubt that all the difficulties and obstacles you may come across willbe the necessary exercises to give you happiness in your later lives.Dear students!This is your house, and in the one month you are going tospend in this house, you must acquire the necessary wisdom andknowledge and then communicate this knowledge to your friendsSummer Showers in Brindavan 19727and to the society in which you live and thereby proclaim the great-ness and glory of our culture.There is one other matter: According to our rules, we givegreat importance to silence and cleanliness. If you should talk, youmay do so softly and in a controlled manner. Do not go out of thecampus and move freely. These are the tools with which you shouldgive shape to your future lives. We are used to regarding summer asa month of holidays. This is not correct. Those students who arehere should not regard this as a month of holidays but should regardit as one of holy days. The manner of spending our holy days is notby eating sweets but by filling your minds and hearts with matterspertaining to the Divine. Try to imbibe all the things that variousteachers are going to tell you. It is not enough to imbibe what istaught, but you must also put into practice the sayings of thoseteachers.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 82. Vedic Truths Belong tothe Whole WorldAlthough born in the human race, and enveloped by humanenvironment, alas, men have forgotten the essential qualities of thehuman race. Amongst all the animals and amongst all the livingthings that are born, the birth of a human being is a very unique one.To be able to earn the gift of being born as a man is an extraordinar-ily difficult thing. Having attained that gift from the hands of Godand having succeeded in being born as a man, if you do not makefull use of such a gift, you will be committing a great sin. We mustrealise that being born as a man in this birth is the result of havingattained and acquired the punya, or the fruit of many good deeds thatwe had done in several previous births.This body is like a boat. Our life is like a river and we haveto cross that river and reach our destination. Our destination is thedestination of Divinity. Our life, the present one, is one of living inthe contemporary world. In this process of our trying to cross theriver of life and reach the destination of Divinity, the boat that wehave to use, namely, our body, has to be safe-guarded and takengreat care of. This boat should not develop leaks en route. Weshould believe that all these students who assembled here today arereally good, strong and new boats that do not have any chance ofdeveloping leaks. If we do not make an attempt to use the boats asthey are right now, good as they are and without leakages, or, in thealternative, we postpone and try to use these same boats after theyhave become older and developed leaks, then our lives are sure to besubjected to some kind of difficulties and harm. This body has gotthe name Deha, which it has acquired because the name signifies thatthe body has been essentially made of elements resulting in its ulti-Summer Showers in Brindavan 19729mately going to be destroyed. The temporariness or the transientnature of this body is contained in the very name that has been givento it.Further, the indestructible, Divine strength which has comeinto this destructible body has been called man’s soul or the humanspirit. Because the body contains this indestructible Divine spirit, thelive body has also been called “man.” In the very word Manava,which stands for man, we are able to see the Divinity that is presentin man. Manava, the word thatstands for man, has got three sylla-bles. The first one ‘Ma’ stands for ajnana or ignorance, absence ofknowledge. The second one ‘Na’ stands for the desire that igno-rance and absence of knowledge should disappear. The third one‘Va’ conveys the injunction that one should conduct oneself in amanner so as to remove ignorance. Our ignorance is equivalent to orsynonymous with death. Thus there is no meaning in our attributingignorance to man. Today, we do this forgetting the immortal soul inman and attaching importance to what is temporary and transientaround us and not giving the necessary attention to what is Divine inus. This is bringing some kind of shame and disrepute on humanqualities themselves. That which proclaims the natural form of man,that which makes evident to others the true nature of man, is calledVedantha.Today, in the morning, some ideas about Indian culture andIndian traditions were given to you in the very first lecture. You werealso told the meaning of spirituality. You learnt about the essence ofall the religions of the world. Two aspects of this essence were indi-cated to you. One is philosophy, the other is our having to gothrough the spiritual path. From what was said about these two as-pects, namely, philosophy and the spiritual path; I have got the im-pression that you have understood that philosophy, because it repre-sents the qualities of the head, and spirituality, because it representsthe qualities of the heart, are somewhat antagonistic and unrelated toeach other. It is not possible that either of these things can dissociateitself from or ignore the other. If there is no heart, there is no use10Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972having the head. Even if one has the head, there is no use for it ifthere is no heart. Therefore, if in our lives we do not have either ofthese two, namely, the head or the heart, life will become completelyuseless. It is the first essential requirement that through our head weshould make all the necessary enquiries relating to philosophy. Afterwe have made the necessary enquiries with the head, we should at-tempt to reach the heart. That is our spiritual path. The first one con-cerns itself with the information and the second one with the trans-formation. If we do not gather the information, it is not possible toachieve transformation.Some people, belonging to some regions of the world, havebeen making attempts to gather the essence that is contained in allthe religions of the world. They are not only attempting to gather theessence of all the religions but also the essence that is contained inall the cultures of the different countries of the world. They are thenattempting to reconcile them. When we make the necessary enquiriesabout the religions of other countries, it becomes evident to us thatall those religions have been established by wise people, as a resultof their own experience. The fact is that those religions have beenestablished by human beings, however wise and saintly they mayhave been. But the religion of this country is not something that hasbeen established by man. It has been established by God. The onereligion or the essence of all religions of this country is not related toanything that has come out of the experience of man. It has not comeas a result of any effort on the part of man. In essence, it has comeout of God Himself; and that is why it is called the religion of Ve-das. He who established man’s religion in this country, He whogave the guidelines for man’s religion in this country, is not man;but He is the man of all men, that is, God, Himself. Vedas are veryold, have no describable origin and are timeless. Vedas do not needsupport from any quarter as they support themselves. In fact Vedasare God’s breath and the Vedic religion, which has been establishedin India, originated in God’s breath. Thus it is that God’s religion isthe religion of India. Of all the religions of the entire world, it ap-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197211pears to us that the Indian religion, the religion that has been at theback of the Indian mind, is the life-breath and is the stream that isflowing through all the religions of this world. The religions of othercountries are certainly as sacred and sanctified but for only a certainlimited time. On the other hand, the religion of this country issomething which has had no beginning and will have no end.Although some religions of the rest of the world show us aslightly different path and differ from each other in the matter of de-tail and sometimes seem to differ somewhat, only apparently, in thematter of their destination, we have to accept and believe that the es-sential content of all these religions is one and the same and that re-lates to the Divine Atma. Although the human body is made of manydifferent organs, we do realise that the heart is the essential basis andsupport for all these organs. It supplies the life blood to all other or-gans. In the same manner, we certainly see many different religionsall round the world; but we have to accept that the Indian viewpoint islike the heart which supplies the life blood to all other religions inthe world. You may have some doubts when I describe the situationin this manner. The doubts are somewhat of this nature: Why is itthat great saints, great men of religion were born only in India, andthe Vedas them-selves were born in India? Why is it that these Ve-das and people who expounded them were not born in other coun-tries? God is present everywhere. God is omnipresent. Therefore,Vedas, which simply constitute the breath of God, are also omni-present and should there-fore be everywhere. The sounds of Vedas,the essence of Vedas, the fragrance of Vedas are indeed to be foundall over the world. Here is a small example. When did we find outthat the earth has got the power to attract? When a Western scientistby name Newton through his experiment, through his intelligenceand through his work, discovered that there is an attracting powercalled gravitation, natural to the earth. From that day, we started be-lieving that earth has the power to attract. But did not the earth havethe power to attract before Newton? The phenomenon of gravitationsurely could not have had a separate beginning. In fact, ever since12Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972earth came into existence, it should have had the power to attract. Inthe same manner, as one single Western individual, by name New-ton, after his efforts and after his research, has uncovered the exist-ing fact that earth has the power to attract, so also the fact that theVedas are the life-breath which were given to us by God was some-thing which had been uncovered and found out by the efforts of In-dian saints. Just as there is an amount of truth in the statement thatNewton, by his effort and by his research, has discovered that earthhas the power to attract, exactly the same amount of truth is alsocontained in the statement that Indian saints and citizens of India, bytheir efforts and by their research, have discovered that the Vedasand sounds of the Vedas and the inner meanings that are containedin the Vedas are God-given. In the same manner, intelligent people,belonging to one particular country discovering something relatingto Nature and people belonging to another country discovering againsomething else relating to the external world, are on the same footingas intelligent people in this country discovering something spiritual.This practice of citizens of each country discovering something newand presenting their discoveries to the rest of the world has been atime-honoured phenomenon all the world over. We should really notutilise this situation to regard either the philosophy of a particularcountry or the spiritual path adopted by that country as being dis-tinctive and the monopoly of that country. Such truths really belongto the whole world.The difference that man creates in the notions that we de-velop about philosophy and spiritual paths are only creations of hismind. They are, therefore causing difficulties at times. Spiritualityand philosophy are two things which are closely related to each otherand which follow each other. This is something that we should ac-cept and believe in. We should not look for differences betweenthese two and regard one of them as the head and the other as theheart.Here is a small example: On one tree, we see a large numberof different fruits. Those fruits are not reaching out to us as soon asSummer Showers in Brindavan 197213we see them. When we see them, our mind persuades us andprompts us to go near the fruits. As soon as we go near the fruits,there is a temptation to have those fruits. We then bend down andour hands pick up a stone. As soon as we take the stone in the hand,our shoulder will make us throw the stone at the fruits. Then the fruitfalls to the ground and the hand takes the fruit and hands it over tothe mouth. This fruit gradually reaches the stomach. We now ask,what is responsible for this act of the fruit having reached your di-gestive organs? Can we decide whether it is the hand or it is theshoulder that is responsible or is it the stone or is it the mind that isresponsible or, ultimately, is it the fruit itself that is responsible? It isthe combination and the combined effort of all these various individ-ual items that has resulted in the one final act of the fruit reachingyour digestive organs.Thus it is only when we are able to coordinate the essence ofall the religions, the goals of all the religions and also the contents ofthe various philosophies of different people and look at them as onecontaining the Divine spirit, that we can get rid of our doubts andsatisfy our hunger for peace by grasping the one Divine truth. If onetakes all these religions, whether it is Hinduism, or the Parsi religionor Buddhism or Christian religion or Islam and, if one takes parts ofthem and experiences those parts, there is no doubt that he derives acertain amount of joy. But that does not mean that we have to give upany one of them or take any one only. You have to recognise that inall of them there is a common factor that relates to the oneness ofDivinity, the Atma and that recognition alone will be the completerealisation and utilisation of these different religions.Our ability to comprehend and acquire complete knowledgeis defective and has in many cases disappeared. That is the reasonwhy when we look at a religion, we do not comprehend the whole ofit, but we take a bit of it and form an opinion. Many of you may haveheard the story of a number of blind men reaching an elephant andtouching it. One blind man who happens to touch the trunk of theelephant gets the feeling that it is like a big root of a big tree; and14Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972therefore, he thinks that the elephant is like the root of a tree. An-other blind man just happens to touch one of the legs and he feelsthat it is like a pillar and concludes that an elephant is like a pillar.Another blind man happens to touch the ear of the elephant and hethinks that it is like a big fan and so concludes that the elephant is inthe shape of a big fan. Another blind man touches the stomach or thetummy of the elephant and thinks that it is a huge wall and concludesthat an elephant looks like a big wall. Thus each one of these people,having touched only a part of the elephant, comes to the conclusionbased on the impression which that part has created, that the elephantlooks like that particular part. They amongst themselves are not ableto realise that it is the combination of all these individual parts thatreally constitutes the elephant. Thus, when people of different coun-tries look at any world religion, they see only parts of it; and likewhat the blind people have thought of the elephant, each one wholooks only at a part of a world religion thinks that that religion isonly that part. Each one for himself is not able to get a comprehen-sive picture. We have to realise that the real religion is a combinationof all the individual components, which each one of them is gettingat. We have to believe that this religion is in essence like sacredprema or love. Yesterday I told you that there is only one religionand that is the religion of LOVE.In one of the talks this morning, the words, knowledge andwisdom, were mentioned. It was said that there is a great differencebetween knowledge and wisdom. Knowledge is something which isrelated only to the head. It is possible that by conducting some en-quiries and by working with some special types of machines, onecan reach an important position in the matter of acquiring knowl-edge. One has to say that to some extent, this is simply book knowl-edge. Just by such an acquisition, our capacity to comprehend truthis not going to improve. What we call knowledge is the essence ofall sciences. Wisdom, on the other hand, is something which we ac-quire as a result of practice. Knowledge acquired from books differsvery much from knowledge acquired from experience. Wisdom isSummer Showers in Brindavan 197215acquired by experience. This tells us something about the very sweetnature of our life. But knowledge that we have acquired from booksenables you only to experience and understand the phraseology, thegrouping of the words, the subtle way in which ideas are being con-veyed by keeping words in different places. But it cannot take youbeyond that.In order that you may clearly understand these things, let ustake the case of a very large ocean. If we take water from that oceanand put it in our mouth, we will get the taste of its being very salty. Ifthe same salt water is converted into water vapour by the heat of thesun, constituted into clouds and then comes back as rain on the earth,that water will be very sweet. Whether it is the water that is flowingin the river after the rain or the water that is taken directly from theocean, it is the same water. But we should ask where the change hastaken place as a result of which this sweetness has come. This issamskara or purification. This can be compared to wisdom born outof experience. It is only when we take the matter that is contained inthe ocean of books or scriptures and use our buddhi, the intelligence,which can be compared to the sun’s heat and convert it into clouds,which can be compared to prema or love, then only, like the waterthat results after the rain, our knowledge will be sweet and this willbe called wisdom. In every effort and in every thing that we do,cleansing or purification is very essential. From time immemorial,our Indian traditions have been attaching great importance to thispractice of purification.In no human endeavour can we bypass this process of puri-fication. I wish to cite another small example. Every student has awatch on his hand. When you take this watch and put it in fire, youwill find that the whole of it is reduced to metal or metallic ash. Allof it will fetch in the market only a few naya paise. But as long as itremains as a watch, it will fetch you anything like a few hundred ru-pees. Are we paying this few hundred rupees for the metal that iscontained in the watch? Or are we paying that amount for the purifi-cation and the transformation that have been given to the metal be-16Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972fore giving it the shape of a watch? The payment of a few hundredrupees is obviously towards the transformation that has been givento the metal from which the bolts, nuts, wheels, the springs and allthe components of the watch have been made. It is not being paid forthe metal or the steel that has gone into making these bolts and nuts.It is therefore not possible to assign any high value to the many dif-ferent individuals and different shapes that you see in human beings.If you really want to assess human beings and assign values, youhave to see and assess how these different persons are behaving,what their character is, what changes have come about in them afterbirth and what are the paths which they are following.If, therefore, one wishes to change himself to being really aman, in other words, if he wishes to be like a human being, there is aneed to take great care about the way in which one behaves. The re-spect that Indians are going to get for themselves as groups and as aNation is not going to come either through the wealth or the propertythat they possess or through the positions of authority that they maybe occupying. Such respect will come only through the character thatthey develop and the behaviour they exhibit.Take the case of Ravana. We know from our mythology thatat the time when Ravana lived, there was no other individual who hadaccess to property and wealth any more than Ravana had. Ravanahad all the position which one could command. He had all the au-thority that one could have. In spite of that, the fact that Ravana wassubjected to great difficulties towards the end and that he lost his lifein battle is noteworthy. We should compare this with what happenedto Rama. Rama intentionally and willingly gave up all his property;he gave up his kingdom, and he went into the forest for severalyears. Ultimately, he was given the honour of having maintaineddharma in this country. From this difference between Ravana, whohad all the property, position and authority and Rama who willinglygave up all the property, position and authority, we should concludethat we cannot attach any importance to either property, position orauthority. We can only attach importance to character and to the pur-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197217suit of right conduct. Thus we conclude that money comes and goeswhereas morality comes and grows. It is only in this context that weoften say, “Dharmo rakshathi rakshitaha.” This simply means thatthose of us who safeguard dharma will be safeguarded in turn bydharma. This is the essence of Indian culture. But how to knowwhat is right? How to know what is righteous conduct? This issomething that you all will know later as days go by.The issues relating to the statements that God is omnipresentand that God is omniscient, will have to be gone into in some detail.In this context, we should know that for human life, support essen-tially comes from the five senses. These five senses are called sabda,sparsa, rupa, rasa, gandha. We have also the five material elements.They are the earth, water, fire, air and sky. We have to enquire andask where these five elements are and what is it that comes out of thecombination of these five elements. We have further to ask howthese material elements are connected with sabda, sparsa, rupa,rasa, gandha. We have to note that those five sensations, or sensesof perception, are present in their totality only in the earth. They arenot present as all five in water, or in fire or in the air or in the sky.Because all these five sense perceptions are contained in the earth,that becomes rather heavy and that is the reason why the earth is ableto stay as a massive body in one place.The second element is water. In water, you will find that oneof these senses has disappeared and that is the smell. We do notsmell water but we have the sabda, sparsa, rupa and rasa in it. Be-cause out of the five qualities, one, namely the smell has disappeared;we have the other four, that is the sound, the touch, the shape and thetaste. These four are contained in water. So, water is not so heavyand hard as the earth. It is able to move out a little more freely thanthe earth can.The third element is fire. In this, one more quality has disap-peared. Neither rasa nor gandha can be attributed to fire. We haveonly the sound, the touch and the shape exhibited by fire. Therefore,18Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972it has become lighter than either the earth or the water and it is ableto go higher and higher, and more freely. The fourth one is air. In air, there are only two qualities left,and those are sabda and sparsa, the sound and the touch. The shape,taste and smell have all disappeared and they are no longer qualitiesof air. So it has become very light. Air is able to move more freelyand go wherever it wants to go.The fifth element is the sky. The only quality that the sky hasis sabda or sound. All the other four qualities have disappeared andthis is the reason why we find that the sky is present everywhere.God is beyond and above all these five senses of perception. He hasnone of the five qualities or attributes of matter. Therefore, He islighter than all these five elements and He is present everywhere. Itdoes not matter whether you look at this description from a spiritualangle or from a scientific angle; the truth of the statement that hasnow been made will have to be accepted by everyone. That is whyGod is described as, “Anoraniyaan, Mahato Mahiyaan.” Thisstatement means that God is like an infinitesimal being amongst theinfinitely small ones. God is like an infinite being amongst the infi-nitely large ones.Gopikas, who have had considerable experience of Divinity,had at one time been singing the praise of the Lord describing Hisqualities and His greatness in the following terms, “How can wefind You, You are present in all the 84 lakhs of different kinds ofliving things and You are like an infinitesimally small one when wethink of infinitesimally small things. You are like an infinitely largeone when we think of infinitely large things. You are Infinite andYou have endowed us with minds which cannot know and even getan estimate of Yourself who is present everywhere, in small things aswell as in big things. Thus You have given us this ignorance and wewould like to call You a thief, a person who has done somethingwhich has put us in difficulty.” He has also been described as one who has stolen their ownchitta or their heart. This is a matter that is of extraordinary interestSummer Showers in Brindavan 197219in that the Gopikas, who had not any spiritual practice, who had notread any Sastras, who had not undergone any sacrifice or experienceof a Divine nature had been able to bind down the Divine one tothemselves. The one single effort involved related to prema or loveand that is all. To know the Lord of the Universe, to understand Himand to be able to get closer to Him, there is no need to read all thetext books. The one thing that you should practice and that youshould have in your heart is prema. But because the ancient rishiswho lived in this country had handed over to us the sacred textswhich are full of meaning, it is our responsibility, it is the responsi-bility of all Indians, to read them, to try and understand them. Weshould also put into practice what is contained in them and hand overall the essence and the good things to the rest of the world.There is a story about Sankara that after having read and un-derstood all the Sastras, the Upanishads and the Vedas, while hewas going to Benares he found that in an out of the way place, apoor man in a poor hut was reciting Vyakarana or grammar. Oneyoung student of Sankara went to the hut and tried to peep through ahole in the wall and wanted to convey or teach something to this per-son who was reciting grammar. He addressed this grammarian bycalling him moodhamathe or an ignoramus and said, “You mustrealise that you should now perform bhajan, or the name of the Lordshould be repeated by you. Your time for that is right now. Do notwait till the end of your life.” It is necessary for us to understandthat it is very much more sacred and sanctifying to fill our heartswith prema than to fill our heads with all kinds of books on spiritualmatters. Today, India’s culture is becoming weaker and weaker. Forthat reason, the students from various parts of this country, who aregoing to be our future citizens, are brought here into these classes,which we have organised. Through the experienced teachers andtheir lecturers, we are giving you the contents of not simply one text,but all the Vedas, the Upanishads and all our scriptures. So far asyou are concerned, it is essential that you should develop the feelingof prema, which is the highest experience proclaimed by the Vedas20Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972and the other texts that the teachers are giving you. I bless you, afterhaving this experience, to go back and to grow into good citizens ofIndia and re-establish the glory and the shining ancient path of thiscountry.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 213. Nature of the Human MindJust as one who wants to live in this world should first be-come human, one who wants to learn Brahma Vidya, should firstbecome a spiritualist. The human body is composed of all the fiveelements, and the soul in it has no binding of any particular kind. Ifyou introspect on this matter, you will find that the soul inside thebody is the real essence of it. In common parlance, when we live inthe rented house, we say that we pay a rent. We may query if we paythe rent to the house or to the owner of the house. The answer is ob-vious. But in regard to spiritual matters, we do not seem to botherabout such questions. The human body is like a rented house. Anindividual is living in that rented house. The individual has really topay the rent to the owner of the house, namely God. He should notpay the rent to the body. In truth, God is the owner of the house inwhich we live, as He owns the body.This house of man should be regarded as something throughwhich we should acquire knowledge and wisdom. Spiritual knowl-edge tells us that the Divine dwells in this body, although we regardthe body itself as a destructible thing. We also call it a kshetra, aplace where something is living. These notions arise on account ofthe fact that something permanent is inside the destructible humanbody. This morning, two ideas have been dealt with, namely, the de-structibility and the indestructibility. We should know the connec-tion that exists between those two concepts. All that you see in thisworld is destructible. In fact, all living beings that you see aroundyou are destructible. The only indestructible thing is jiva, or the soulthat is contained in the living beings that you see. If you want to un-derstand this with ease, then you have to accept and believe that everything that undergoes a change, every thing that transforms from timeto time is a destructible thing. The human body is associated with thestages of transformation. These six are birth, growth, change, evolu-22Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972tion, death and destruction. Because the body is passing through allthese phases and because the body is not a permanent one, we areattributing to it the quality of destruction or destructibility.The difference between destructibility and indestructibility issomething which is very fine, which is very small. If there is no de-struction, then we will not be able to comprehend what it is that ispermanent or indestructible. On the other hand, if there is no perma-nency or indestructibility, then we will not understand what it is thatgets destroyed. Sometimes these aspects will convey to you a lessonthat they are related to each other; in fact, related to each other soclosely that one cannot be separated from the other. This is what iscontained in the 13th chapter of the Bhagavad Gita where thekshetra and kshetrajna, that is the place and the one who lives in theplace, have been dealt with. In very clear language, the relationshipbetween the abode and the one who lives in the abode has been ex-plained. We have to make an enquiry and ask if the realisation of theself or the soul is the final achievement. That is not the end of theenquiry. Of course, by such an enquiry, we understand what is thedestructible part of man and what is the indestructible part of him.But there is something that is neither the body nor the soul. Thissomething is what may be called the Purushothama, and it tran-scends both these things. We can take it that we have reached thegoal of our practice only when we have been able to realise this Pu-rushothama.There is a small example for this. A servant, in order to findhis master in a dark room, enters the house and goes into the darkroom. In the dark room, with his hand he tries to touch and feel eve-rything that is contained therein. As he moves about in the darkroom and as he tries to feel and touch various objects, maybe on oneoccasion he would touch a chair and then he would say, no this isnot my master. Then he may touch a bench and he would say, nothis is not my master. He may then touch some kind of a box, thenhe would say, no this is not my master. This kind of enquiry willlead him through various situations by which he would say, this isSummer Showers in Brindavan 197223not my master, this is not my master and he would exhaust all that hecan feel inside the room. In this manner and while making such asearch, he will go and touch a cot. After he has touched the cot, hewill touch the feet and then he will say, now I have found my master.It is not right that he should feel happy, satisfied and contented assoon as he touches the feet and as soon as he thinks he has foundhis master. His objective will be fully achieved only after he goesfurther, goes nearer the master and is able to recognise and take him-self closer to the master.In this body, which can be compared to a house, all the de-sires, which come through the various organs that are parts of thebody, may be compared to the darkness in the house. In this darkhouse, that aspect which we may call the individual is going roundlike the servant in a dark room searching for the soul or the Lord.The first thing that this individual does is to touch and feel the or-gans of the body. After that he feels the presence of the mind. Afterthat he feels the presence of intelligence. Through this intelligence,which can be compared to the cot that the servant touched as a firststep to finding his master, he is able to find the feet of his master. Inthis analogy and in this spiritual path, what we have to find is theexistence of these four aspects, the soul, the intelligence, the mindand the sense organs.The soul, the intelligence, the mind and the sense organs havebeen mentioned this morning, but it has been made out that, for theorgans, the mind is the master; for the mind, intelligence is the mas-ter; and for the intelligence, soul is the master. Thus, if we want toreach the soul through the process of climbing from the organs tointelligence, then to the mind and then to the soul, it is going to be avery difficult task. If we make a deeper examination and go into thematter with some care, we will find that all that is related to these fourdifferent aspects is just one and that one aspect is the Atma, or thesoul.I may cite another example, which is slightly of a differentkind. Let us take the case of milk. At first we are looking at milk.24Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972After that, in order to satisfy our taste, we are changing milk intocurds. After that, we are going to churn these curds and take somebutter out of it. When we take the butter out of the curds, what is re-maining is what we call buttermilk. So what is left after all thesechanges, which looks somewhat trivial is the buttermilk. That shouldbe compared to our sense organs. What is left is apparently uselessas all the essence has been removed by way of butter and so on andthat may be compared to the sensory organs. Mind can be comparedto the curds. That which we call butter can be compared to intelli-gence. Because curds, butter and buttermilk have all come from thefirst source, the milk, we would compare milk to our soul. Now, weshould enquire into how important these sense organs, or the but-termilk, are and how far through these senses, can we go in realisingthe original source, that is, the soul or the milk. The mind and theintelligence are associated with various organs. We have to considerin detail what distorted picture we are getting of the source, namelythe soul, as a result of such an association.There is one other example. We fill a cup with some verygood fruit juice. The cup is only serving the function of containingthe fruit juice but does not know the taste of the fruit juice. Then weput a straw inside the cup and suck the fruit juice. The fruit juice isflowing freely through the straw. Even the straw does not get a tasteof the fruit juice. When the fruit juice reaches the tongue, the tongueis able to realise its sweetness. But the tongue also is not experienc-ing the taste of the fruit juice. The tongue, without experiencing thetaste of the fruit juice, is handing it on to your digestive organs. Inthe same manner we are putting the fruit juice of the Divine feelingin the body, which can be compared to the cup. Our senses are to becompared to the straws. Neither the body, which is the cup, is en-joying the taste of Divinity nor are the straws, the senses, enjoyingthe taste of Divinity. But the intelligence, which can be compared tothe tongue, is able to make some kind of an enquiry and decide thatthis is like this and so on. But like the tongue, which did not experi-ence the taste of the fruit juice, the intelligence also serves only toSummer Showers in Brindavan 197225discriminate and know the taste but it does not experience the taste.As the tongue has handed on the juice to the digestive organs, soalso the intelligence hands on this feeling to the soul. It is in thiscontext that we refer to intelligence as something that cannot solveour problem any more than the sense organs can. That which cannotbe understood, which cannot be realised either with the sense organsor with the intelligence, is the Atma Thathwa or the nature of thesoul.It is only when we are able to turn our sense organs, ourmind and our intelligence along the right path will we be able to gosomewhat closer to realising what this soul is and what the perma-nence inside the body is. However, in order completely to realisethat, we have to go only through something that is similar to Atma.Atma is something which is beyond or which is above the sense per-ceptions. It follows that sense perceptions, because they are belowAtma in status, can never reach or realise Atma.In that context, we talk of two different disciplines, one isphysics and the other is philosophy. That is also the reason whywhere physics ends and is not able to move any further, philosophystarts. In order that you may understand and you may realise thisaspect of Atma, you have to do some exercises and you have to gothrough some practices. If you want to do that through your senseperceptions, through your mind and through your intelligence or, inthe analogy, if you want to convert milk into curds, curds into butter,butter into buttermilk, naturally you have to adopt some accepted andstandard procedures and you have to apply them in the proper man-ner. If you do not know the procedures of converting them or if youdo not apply those procedures properly, you cannot convert milkinto curd or curds into butter or butter into buttermilk. In every act ofours, we should not forget the goal or what our destination is. In thisanalogy, the original source is milk and everything else—curds, but-ter and buttermilk—are only things that have come out of the source,namely the milk, by some kind of change that has been introduced.26Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972There is a saying that mind is the mirror of one’s inner be-ing. So what comes from within ourselves, what emanates from theinner being, is the mind itself when it is reflected properly. That isalso the intelligence and that also represents the aspect of actions thatwe do. There cannot be anything either by way of mind or by way ofintelligence or by way of our actions which comes from outside. Allthese come from within our body.To those of you who are new and who have come here forthe first time, it is necessary to convey in a full manner what the sig-nificance of all this is; and, there-fore, I am going to give you anothersomewhat familiar example, which some of you may have heard ear-lier. This thing I have in my hand is a piece of cloth. All of you ac-cept that it is a piece of cloth. But in my view, this is not a piece ofcloth. This is a bundle of threads. If you look at it from anotherpoint of view, this is not even a bundle of threads but it is just somecotton. Cotton, thread and cloth, all these three are basically thesame. So, in a similar manner, the sense organs, the mind and theintelligence are all going to unite into one; and we will have a situa-tion when we have to refer to just one and the same thing. Just ascurd, butter and buttermilk have all come from one and the samesource, what you have in your mind as the basis, the foundation or asthe source is simply the original from which all the transformationshave come. If we now decide to do something by which we want tomake this cloth disappear, some of you may wish to set fire to it andthe cloth will disappear. But that process is not the right one.On the other hand, if we can pull out all the threads one byone, one thread after another, then the cloth will disappear. So if wemake a proper and detailed enquiry and ask ourselves what is likethe cloth and what are like the threads, we get the answer that themind is like the cloth, desires are like the threads. By the desires, likethe threads, coming together, we constitute the mind, which you maycall the cloth. If you want to make the mind or the cloth disappearthen you have to pull out, as you had pulled out the threads one byone, all the desires, one desire after another. So, because we are fill-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197227ing the mind, in fact, we are constituting the mind by putting togethera large number of desires, a variety of desires; that mind made up ofso many desires is giving us a lot of trouble. On the other hand, ifwe do not harbour these desires, we do not constitute the mind. Thatis not going to trouble us at all.Many of you have travelled in the railways and have seen inthe railway compartments the saying that, “less luggage makes travelmore comfortable.” In one sense, our life is a long journey. Thislong journey, because we are accumulating a lot of luggage in theform of many desires, becomes somewhat troublesome. When wecan diminish this luggage, consisting of desires, then to some extentour journey of life is going to be less troublesome.This process of diminishing the luggage or shedding yourdesires as you go up in the journey of life is referred to in the lan-guage of Vedantha as vairagya. Vairagya does not mean abandon-ing the house, leaving your surroundings, leaving your wife, leavingyour children and living in a forest. That is not vairagya. When westay in the house, stay in the midst of our duties and perform ourduties which we have to perform, having our minds free from desiresand attachments to those duties, regarding all that we do as our ac-tions for God’s pleasure, that would be called proper vairagya. Thisis what is referred to as performing all the duties that you have toperform as being performed for God’s pleasure. These are not beingperformed for your pleasure. The realisation that whatever you do isin the name of God and for God’s pleasure, will eliminate all losses,difficulties and troubles to you during your life.By definition, your Vedas give you knowledge about every-thing. This word has come from the root ‘Vith’ which means knowl-edge. Many persons, even amongst those belonging to this country,ask questions and have doubts about who has written these Vedas,what the significance of Vedas is and what they teach and what theycontain. It is a pity that these doubts arise in the minds of many In-dians as well. To get at the origin of these Vedas, it has to be saidthat sacred rishis, the seers of this country, when they performed28Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972penance and when they made enquiries about God’s nature, per-ceived them through various sounds that reached them. These Vedasare the products solely of hearing by the seers of the various Divinesounds. They are not the result of either study or of reading or writ-ing books. Because these have been received through the act ofhearing sounds, these are also called Sruthi. For such a thing, whichis known by hearing, there is no other Pramana. You cannot quotesomething else as an authority to prove the authenticity of Vedas asthey have been just heard through sounds. This is like the breath, theinhalation and the exhalation of the breath of God, Himself. To re-gard such a sacred gift secured by the grace of God, as some kind oftext that dictates to us procedures and conduct, is not correct.Today, if a scholar can write ten lines, then he would go allout to show his own name as the writer of those ten lines. He woulduse all kinds of devices, like the copyright law and so on, to be ableto establish that he has been the author of those ten lines. But in thecase of the Vedas, which are endless and which have no limitation oftime, their author, God, has never exhibited himself anywhere in theVedas as the author thereof. A total personality and a complete indi-vidual, who could hand over what the Vedas contain and also give tous the enormous amount of bliss that they have been able to give, hasneither a name nor a shape. What is the strength of one who hasneither a name nor a shape and yet could give us such bliss as iscontained in the Vedas? God has given us, in His grace, these Vedasin order to enable us to understand the significance of the world, tounderstand the significance of human life and also to understand theSpirit of the Divine.At the time when they first came out, there was an endlessnumber of Vedas, but after centuries and at the present time, we arefinding only four different Vedas. Of these four, the first one is RigVeda. Because small stanzas or small mantras have been put to-gether, they constitute Rig Veda. That is how it got its name. ThisVeda, in addition to giving us these small stanzas and importantstatements like “Sathyam Vada”—speak the Truth—“DharmamSummer Showers in Brindavan 197229Chara”—act in a righteous manner—also contains various ritualsand procedures which ultimately go to keep the society in-tact.The second one is Yajur Veda, which has been helping us tomaintain our duties. It tells us how we have to conduct ourselves inaddition to looking after the integrity of the society. The third one, the Sama Veda, is something that is more im-portant than any other one. In Sama Veda, the main theme is music.In addition, in some places in Sama Veda, the essence of Rig Vedaand Yajur Veda has also been mentioned.The fourth and the last one is the Atharvana Veda. TheAtharvana Veda has not only taken into account the three Vedaswhich have been mentioned earlier but has concentrated on telling ushow man, in his daily life, should take care of the various thingswhich he has to do: how he has to take care of his children, his fam-ily, his elders and how he can make them survive and be happy. Inaddition, this has also taught us some special disciplines likeGokarna and Gajakarna.Such sacred texts and sacred scriptures, which are intendedto turn man’s life and man’s outlook toward God, are being ne-glected by some of us in this country. We are giving up the ritualsthat have been enjoined on us in the Vedas. Moreover, we are alsoquestioning the authenticity of those Vedas. We are asking, who isthe author of these things? And we are regarding them as uselessand with no specific purpose for us. Even if we feel that we do notknow who is the author of these Vedas, we should not give up ourduties. Here is a small example. You may ask a question, looking atthis electric current as to who is its author or who found this electriccurrent and from whom it has come. The answer to such questions isnot something everyone will be able to give. Just because we do notknow the author of this current are we going to deny the usage of thecurrent to ourselves? So also, although all of us do not know theauthorship of the Vedas, it would be proper for us to follow thepaths and the duties that have been prescribed in these Vedas. It isby such a process that we will derive happiness.30Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972The people who teach and who convey the ideals and ideolo-gies that are contained in the Vedas are referred to as the Mahar-ishis. It is only when we are able to understand and accept the idealsthat have been put forward by the Maharishis and incorporate theminto our lives, that we can really see who these Maharishis are andwhat their thinking is and what their views are. These experiencedMaharishis are like the people who are controlling and who own theelectric current. If we can follow them, if we can accept what theyhave taught us, and if we can take to the paths that have been indi-cated by them; verily, as we get light out of the electric current, wewill also get bliss and happiness from our conduct. Therefore, youyoung people, young students, boys and girls, should understandwhat Indian culture is, what is contained in our sacred texts like theRamayana, the Mahabharatha and all the Puranas.Not only should you understand, but also strive hard to putthose things into practice and act up to them. It is only when you dothat, will you realise the sacredness of human life and then you willderive the necessary happiness and pleasure. I am also hoping thatyou should prepare yourselves in future to under-stand the contentsof these Vedas, what they convey and what the detailed principlesinvolved in each one of them are. These will be taught to you in theclasses that will come ahead by very many experienced scholars.When they teach you these contents, I am hoping that you will listento them with the necessary care and the necessary devotion. Youngstudents who spend their lives in a carefree manner and who try tosatisfy various desires of theirs will find it somewhat difficult to un-derstand and follow Vedanta.This afternoon there were some classes on Vedanta; and inthe report that was presented by one of the girls, it was stated thatwhat was taught was somewhat above your heads. But because youfeel that there is something that has gone above your heads whichyou have not been able to understand, you should not lose hope, youshould not feel disheartened. You should make an attempt and withall humility, you should again approach the teacher when he teachesSummer Showers in Brindavan 197231you Vedanta and try to understand, with care and devotion, what hasbeen said.When you begin your education, you start with learning thealphabets “A, B, C, D.” Naturally, at that time there will be somedifficulty and you feel that you are not able to understand morewords. But just for that reason, are you giving up education? So byeffort, by care and by working hard, we must bring ourselves to aposition from where we can understand. That part of the educationthat enables you to understand yourself and to realise yourself isgood education. That which is mere learning for just making a livingor getting a salary for the sake of your living is not good education.If I have to tell you briefly what Vedanta is, I should say that it isthat which tells you about yourself. So make an attempt to under-stand yourself and make an attempt to see who you are. Do notmake an attempt to find out who the others are, or what they are. Donot also make an attempt, before knowing yourself, to find out whatthe world is. There is no use your trying to understand others orwhat the world is without first knowing yourself.In daily life, we are always saying, this is my body, this is mymind, this is my intelligence and these are my organs. All the timeyou are saying so, have you ever, at any time, made an attempt to findout who you are, before saying this is mine and that is mine? Is it notafter you have found out who you are, that you get the capacity orthe right to say that this body belongs to you? So long as you feelthat all these things are yours, you are implying that you are some-thing separate from the body, mind and so on. If I call this my towel,I imply that if the occasion arises I can throw the towel away andstay myself separately and apart from the towel. So if you say this isyour body, then you arrogate to yourself the power to throw awaythe body and remain separately and apart from the body. You are notthe body. When you say that it is your mind, you are not the mind.So what is it in you that is neither the body nor the mind nor the in-telligence nor the sense organs belonging to you? That which ex-32Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972poses and expounds the true shape of yourself and furnishes an an-swer to this question is Vedanta.It is to find the true nature of self that a young boy Nachiketawent to Yama and asked him many questions. He was not deterredat all by the temptations that Yama put before him by granting himseveral boons. He was firm and asked questions to find out what thisreal self is. In those days, this young boy, Nachiketa, with the inten-tion of finding out the nature of his true self, put himself to severaldifficulties and was not content until he got what he wanted. Asagainst that, today we have forgotten what the nature of that true selfis, and we are occupying ourselves in fulfilling various desires. Weare involving ourselves in undesirable situations and bringing shameand disrepute on our country, which had such glorious traditions.No, it shall not be like that.You young students who have come here and who are par-ticipating in this summer school must make up your minds to estab-lish Sanathana Dharma, to follow the paths that have been shownby our texts and Vedas, to be disciplined and to proclaim by youractions to the rest of the world the greatness of your country andyour own determination. You should demonstrate to the world thatyou are the soldiers and the torchbearers of bliss and of peace ofwhich we have been proud. You should behave in such a manner thatyou will become the leaders in the areas into which you go. Youshould never allow these ideas to go out of your minds or out ofyour hearts. I hope and I bless you that you will be able to do allthis.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 334. What the Upanishads Teach UsThe juice that is contained in the fruit is not enjoyed by thetree which bears the fruit. The honey that is contained in the flowersis not enjoyed by the creepers which bear the flowers. Those beauti-ful sayings which are contained in the textbooks and scriptures arenot enjoyed by the books themselves. The beauty that is contained innature is not enjoyed by Nature herself. How can the writer whodeals with the material world enjoy the spiritual bliss that is con-tained therein?In our society and in our civilisation, Indians have always de-scribed the Lord with great affection, love and delight by the nameMadhava. The word Madhava contains three syllables in it. Theseare Ma, Dha and Va. Ma can be interpreted to mean Maya or illu-sion. Ma can also be interpreted to mean Prakruthi or nature. Macan also stand for Lakshmi or the Goddess of Wealth. Dhava meanshusband. One who is the husband or the owner of Maya or Prak-ruthi or Lakshmi, is Madhava. He is also the Paramatma. SuchParamatma is full of bliss. The Jivatma or the jiva, who is subordi-nate to nature, cannot become one with bliss. Paramatma is inde-pendent. He is free, whereas jiva is dependent and depends onsomething else. Thus, if we want to enjoy supreme bliss, this can bedone only when we look at and identify ourselves with and under-stand the supreme attitude. We should subordinate ourselves andidentify ourselves with Madhava or the husband of Lakshmi. Oth-erwise, to imagine that we are having supreme bliss is only an illu-sion. It is a bhranthi. So long as we are connected with nature, wecannot have supreme bliss. We should not really become despon-dent and give up hope but have to make enquiries as to what are thepaths, what are the methods, what is it that we have to do, in order tounderstand and reach this sacred and Divine Purusha or the DivineAtma.34Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972The answers to the questions, “where can we find the su-preme Atma? How can we get to the supreme Atma? How can weunderstand the same?” are contained in the Bhagavad Gita and inall other texts of that kind. Once, Arjuna while talking in affectionateterms and in a friendly manner to Lord Krishna, asked where theLord was staying those days. He said, “I do wish to find you. Iwould like to get from you the permanent address where you stay,the address of your headquarters. I do not require the address ofyour branch offices, as it is possible that you will not stay in thebranches all the time.” The answer to this has been: “Yes, my per-manent address is: care of all the living things.”There is another example, which Droupadi has nicely handedto us. Droupadi, after she had gone through all her troubles andtribulations, was sitting and talking to Krishna on one occasion in apleasant mood. She addressed Krishna as her dear brother andasked: “What is the matter? I remember having been in great diffi-culties and having called you with the fullness of my heart andbegged you to come and save me. But you came late. You nevercame in time. Can you now explain to me what stood in the way ofyour coming in proper time?” Krishna then asked Droupadi: “Yousay you addressed me and called me. May I know in what manneryou called me and how you addressed me?” Then she replied, “Yes,I said, hai Krishna, hai Dwarakavasa.” The Lord replied, “You ad-dressed me as Dwarakavasa. Where is Dwaraka and where isHastinapura, to which place I had to come? That was a long distance.If only you had addressed me as Hridayavasi or as one who is liv-ing in your own heart, I would have appeared immediately. Becauseof the manner of your addressing I had to travel all the way fromDwaraka to Hastinapura and how could I have come in time fromsuch a long distance?”In this way, all the utterances of God only demonstrate to usHis closeness to us. The Upanishads also demonstrate exactly thiscloseness of God to us. What does it mean? Close to whom? It im-plies our going close to God or Paramatma. What is the conse-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197235quence of our going close to Paramatma? I will give you a smallexample and thereafter go into the Upanishads. We have an air-conditioner inside the house. When we are close to the air-conditioner, naturally it will exhilarate us to some extent. The exter-nal heat is at a distance from you, and the airconditioner gives yousome happiness and pleasure. In the same manner, in winter, we goand sit near a fire. Then the heat of the fire will remove the cold thatis troubling you and will give you some amount of comfort and ease.So what the air conditioner is doing is to remove the heat that is in usand give us comfort. Similarly, what the fire is doing is to remove thetroublesome cold that is near you and give you some comfort bygiving the heat. In the same manner, when we go closer to God, whatHe is doing is to remove all the material desires which are in us,make them go farther away from us and give us the comfort of get-ting rid of those material desires. The jiva, which is surrounded andencompassed by the five elements, is being retrieved from the bond-age that is caused by the five elements. This can be referred to asKaivalya. That which establishes such a Kaivalya, that which givesyou the Kaivalya and shows the path by which you can reachKaivalya, is simply equivalent to getting relief from bondage to thefive elements. This is what the Upanishads do.When an individual, whom we do not know, comes close tous and wants to get acquainted with us, the first questions that wegenerally ask of such a new individual are: Where are you comingfrom and who are you? What is the business you have with me? Inthe same way, those of you students who have come here for the firsttime and who are not acquainted with Upanishads have to ask of theUpanishads the questions, who are you and where do you comefrom and what good can you do for us? What good can we do foryou? If we ask such questions, the Upanishads will reply to us thatthey are such as have been repeated many times by the maharishisand seers of this country and also that they are the essence of whatGod’s breath has given to us in the form of the Vedas.36Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972In our Vedas there are three parts; Upasana Khanda, JnanaKhanda and Karma Khanda. The same three parts are also con-tained in the Upanishads. These Upanishads have been tellingman, what it is that he should do, what it is that he should not do;what paths, if adopted, will lead to good, what paths if adopted willlead him to bad, and so on. When we go deeply into the contents ofthe Upanishads and when we understand their inner meaning, thenour own life will look to us like a happy dream. It will lead you to asituation when you will not again want to be attached to this life.The Upanishads have come out of the Vedas. For example,out of the Yajur Veda has come the Easavasya Upanishad. Thisrelates to the path that has been termed as the Jnana Khanda. In thisthere are 18 mantras. Out of these 18 mantras, the first two are con-cerned with moksha. The other sixteen mantras teach us about vari-ous other matters into which it would be possible for us to go a littlelater.The next Upanishad is the Keno Upanishad and it hasarisen from Sama Veda. There is an alternative name for the KenoUpanishad and that is Thalavakaro Upanishad. These Upanishadshave got names which signify their meanings and those names aregenerally such that they commence with the first word of the Upani-shad itself. All the Upanishads have come to us with the sole pur-pose of leading man to God. They have not come with the purposeof binding him with any specific rules or giving trouble to him in hislife. It is only when every Indian is able to see the inner meaning andcontents of the texts that they can give him real happiness.This morning the nature of the Bhagavad Gita was explainedto you in a very lucid manner. However, just by reading and repeat-ing the text of the Bhagavad Gita you are not going to get any help.On the other hand, it is by assimilating the essence and enjoying itthat you will be able to derive the much-needed benefit. It is onlywhen we are able to picture in our minds how Arjuna and Krishnawere seated when the Bhagavad Gita was being preached by the lat-ter, when we are able to picture other details such as, what kind ofSummer Showers in Brindavan 197237clothes they were wearing, what were the horses that were tied to thechariot and how was the chariot made and so on; and when we areable to picture the details of the entire situation will we be able to getthe essence of the Bhagavad Gita. In this situation, there is a chariot,there is one who is charioting it or the charioteer, there is one who issitting in the chariot and is being led, then there are the horses thatare leading the chariot and then there are the reins, which are con-trolling the horses. All these things together constitute one full pic-ture of the chariot. But where was this chariot taken? It was takenright into the midst of two fighting armies. When we make properenquiry as to what this chariot is, where it has gone, what the twoarmies are, who the charioteer is, who the horses are and what eachdetail is in this whole situation, it is only then that we will be able tounderstand the fullness of this picture, which is only a picture of lifeand all the significance of everything that is contained in life. This is what the Gita teaches us in a simple and easy way.The chariot is the body. The jiva is Arjuna. The Atma is Krishna.The reins are the mind. Our sense organs are the horses. The wholepicture has to be interpreted by saying that Krishna, who representsthe Atma, is leading the chariot which represents the body, into themiddle of two armies, the horses being our sense organs and thereins which control the sense organs simply standing for the mind.The body is being led into the midst of two armies by Atma, which isKrishna. The two fighting armies can be looked at as Iha and Para,that is this world and the other world or good and bad, or Atma andAnatma, or what is temporary and what is indestructible, and so on.The body is being led to face these antagonistic situations, whichrepresent the two armies.We should forget that the battle of Mahabharatha wasfought in Kurukshetra. That may be an historical fact, but we shouldregard the battle of Mahabharatha as something that has beenfought between the Kauravas and the Pandavas. Kauravas representthe bad qualities. Pandavas represent the good qualities. The fightthat is said to have gone on in Kurukshetra is actually going on38Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972every day in our hearts. The fight is between the bad qualities in uswith the good qualities in us.The citizens of Bharath should not simply regard themselvesas belonging to a country that was once ruled by Bharatha. The wordBharatha simply means one who takes his pleasure in Divinity. Thatmeans all citizens of this country should have their pleasure andhappiness fixed in God. Thus, it is no use our simply reading andtaking into our own heads the various good statements and the goodrules that are contained in the Upanishads or in the Vedas. It is es-sential that, after reading those good principles, we relate and applythem to our own life.The first stanza in the Bhagavad Gita begins by saying“Dharma Kshetra Kurukshetre.” Normally, and in common par-lance, we are interpreting these words as referring to the place Ku-rukshetra which was the seat of the rulers, Kauravas. Kauravas gotthat name because they had descended from King Kuru. We are alsoregarding it as the Dharma Kshetra where the Kauravas and Pan-davas fought with each other for establishing Dharma.If we examine carefully and take the proper meaning of theword kuru, it is not what has been said a little while ago. It simplymeans food. But we have also a meaning by which we can equatefood to Brahma. What lives by food is the human body. The life inthe human body depends upon food. There is another meaning here,which becomes evident if we note that the life in the body dependsupon food and that it should be utilised for the purpose of estab-lishing and following dharma or right conduct. Because we are us-ing food merely to give growth to the body and in that process ne-glecting the one that lives in the body, we are doing something quitewrong.We have been given this body by God for the sole purposeof utilising it to recognise what is contained in this body, namely, thesoul. The body has not been given to us to let it grow and growenormously on the food that is fed to it and all the time neglect andforget the soul. Today ninety-nine out of a hundred people are onlySummer Showers in Brindavan 197239looking after the body and its happiness, looking after the growth ofthe body. All the time, they are considering what position this bodycan get in the surrounding environment. They are not devoting anypart of their time to make some enquiry and understand and takecare of the soul that resides inside this body. Like a tree which doesnot bear fruit, like a fruit which has no juice in it, like an animalwhich has no intelligence, like a cow which does not yield milk, whatis the use of your being born if you do not understand the purposefor which you are born? What is the purpose of effort that does notresult in your knowing what you are and in recognising the commonelement that is contained in the eighty-four lakhs of living species.In this effort, some crooked qualities that are contained inman’s behaviour sometimes lead to strange results. If you forgetGod and if you do any work unmindful of Him, it is not going togive you happiness nor is it going to give any prosperity to thecountry. It is in this context and against this background that youhave been told this morning that the many distortions and the manycrooked ways that have entered into the otherwise pure pursuit ofscience have brought about undesirable results. We will have tomake some effort by which we can check and we can balance theway in which we are going along such crooked paths.When this study of nature and acquisition of knowledge,which we call science, originally started, it did start with the belief inGod. With such belief in God, all the efforts that they had made atthat time, in order to acquire knowledge about the world, were useful.They did in fact help in imparting stability to the social structure, ingiving some amount of prosperity to the world and in giving happi-ness to the people. However, for some years in the past, these people,who have been following such distorted paths, began to develop in-dividual aspirations in their own minds, were ambitious and wantedto get a name for themselves or for the country to which they be-longed. Thus, they forgot the real goal, the goal of acquiring knowl-edge. Such a personal ambition on their part, amounting to ego and40Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972greed, resulted in their forgetting the presence of God and the ulti-mate purpose of their enquiries. They have fallen into evil paths.Science today has given up treading the paths that are likelyto yield results useful to people. On the other hand, scientists aretaking to paths which will be harmful to people. They have also beentaking to paths that create some difficulties and conflicts in the peo-ple. Because they have abandoned useful paths and have taken toharmful and dangerous paths, it has also resulted in their forgettingthe presence of God. In whatever field it may be, if an individual isworking so that ego gets hold of him, then it will not only land himinto a dangerous position but will also create considerable difficul-ties for him. Ego works on the stature of a man as the rays of themorning sun work on his shadow. In the morning, on account of therays of the sun, our shadow will be a very long one. As the sun goeshigher in the sky, the length of the shadow caused by the sun’s rayswill become smaller and smaller. In the same way, the stature of anegoist is something that has to go down and down as time goes on.Humility, on the other hand, works on your stature in a man-ner that can be compared to the effect of the midday sun’s rays onyour shadow. The shadow in the afternoon will be small. As the sungoes down and down, as the evening comes on, the shadow that wasquite small in the beginning, becomes larger and larger. Therefore,humility is good and indicates the path that is good for one’s life.Humility and obedience, although they look as if they are tiny thingsthat do not confer on you any large powers, will really give you en-riched and increased pleasure and happiness as time goes on. Youngpeople should learn to be obedient to elders. You should also learnto have faith in good things. You should also learn to have humility.I wish you all to acquire these three qualities, obedience, faith andhumility.As students who have come here to learn and acquire sacredknowledge, you should adopt the right paths and the right methods.In addition to what these experienced persons are going to tell youabout the contents of the Upanishads, you will learn as days go on,Summer Showers in Brindavan 197241what the proper relationship that should obtain between a teacher andthe taught is. Moreover, you must also realise that you, as students,should accept the position that there is much that you do not knowand you are sitting at the feet of a Guru. What the Guru knows hasto be communicated to the student who does not know. The commu-nication that is the process of education, should be followed andgone through along the appropriate and accepted paths with greatcare, with great confidence in, and respect for, the teacher.In the olden days, when Vedas were being taught to the stu-dents by the teachers, after they had completed their studies and thestudents were about to be sent to their homes, the teachers used tobless them. They never blessed them in terms such as, “you livelong, you have plenty of wealth, you have plenty of prosperity,” andso on. That was not the kind of blessing the Guru gave when thestudent was sent home after completing the study of Vedas. Theblessing they gave consisted of only two injunctions: one was Sath-yam Vada —speak the truth— the second was Dharmam Chara—conduct yourself according to the righteous principles. But today,teachers, after completing imparting education to their students, blessthem by calling upon them not to forget to send them presents andso on.For you students, it is a very important matter that youshould introspect and ask yourselves from what high and noble ped-estal and status our ancient education in this country has descendedand at what low level and in what shameful situation it is today. Oureducation used to cover the most sacred paths, namely, knowingAtma and what was related to everything that is Divine. That was in-tended to fill your hearts with something that is sweet and take youto immortality. Today, as a result of the new education which we aregetting, we seem to think that there is no God; we do not seem todevelop any respect for our parents; we do not seem to develop anyrespect for our teachers. Not only do we have no fear of God, weseem to be simply reducing our lives to the lives of animals, movingfar away from the lives of human beings.42Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972Today we are all considering that what we see with our owneyes, prathyaksha, is the only thing we can accept as True. Anythingthat we do not directly see, we are not willing to accept as authentic.In the development of such a belief and in insisting on wanting tosee everything before we can accept it, there are several pitfalls. Ac-cepting as evidence only the things that you can see or hear or tasteor you can generally experience through your senses of perceptionis a very dangerous thing. The fact that you will not be able to reachunhesitatingly the truth in this manner has been established and hasbeen explained to you in a very nice manner when the Charvakaphilosophy was expounded to you. The Charvakas have takenprathyaksha as the sole authority. This cannot be proper evidence.This is because a situation will come when our five sense percep-tions will not be so healthy as they are at the moment. They can ac-quire ill health. A situation can come by which these sense organscan change. How can we, under such circumstances, say that what-ever experiences you get through these sense organs, which willchange and which can be unhealthy, are sure to be true? To give asweet to a person who is suffering from malaria, and ask him to putit into his mouth, furnishes a small example. He thinks that it is bitterbecause of his malaria fever, and he will proclaim that the sweet thatyou have given him is bitter. Is this true? However much he may ar-gue and quote the prathyaksha as his authority, it cannot be thetruth. He will go on saying, I have tasted it, it is bitter. He can go onarguing, but simply the basis for the illusion is in him. It is the feverthat is in him. The fault is not in the sweet. It is only when you areable to remove all the fault in him, which in this case is the fever inhim, the sweet will taste as sweet, as really it is.Let us take another example. You take a healthy student whohas got good vision and you ask him what are all the colours he seesaround him. He will at once describe that he is seeing several coloursand distinguish them. On the other hand, if you choose a studentwho is suffering from jaundice, and if you ask him what are all thecolours he sees around him, his reply will be, I see only yellow col-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197243our all over. He will further argue that he is seeing only yellow col-our. This is something that is a direct experience of eyes and there-fore must be true because he is relying on an authority which we callprathyaksha. But we have also to enquire if these situations are go-ing to last permanently or if there will be some changes in them. Wefind these are only diseases. They are not natural and will not last allthe time.So also in the Charvaka philosophy, the saying, “There is noGod,” is a view caused by a temporary disease. Even in this, youwill see that what he is saying at first is “There is.” “No God”comes later on. However much you may try to deny, truth will al-ways come out. In fact, the divine strength in man’s heart will alwaysbe pushing him to proclaim the truth. This is inevitable, irrespectiveof who the person is. As time goes on, he will have to recognise thedivine truth and in time, he will develop faith in God.A disbeliever will say there is no God. Another man who hasgone a step further in his disbelief, will say more emphatically “Godis no where.” In this assertion, “God is no where,” there are fourwords. By a small transposition of the letter “w” from the begin-ning of the word “where” to the end of the word “no,” you willchange this into “God is now here.” In this illustration, a littlemovement of the position of one letter to the left means “God isnow here.” A movement of the same letter to the right means “Godis no where.” This is the result of a small change in the position ofone letter. No new words have come. Words that were there have notgone. It is because of our distorted ideas, helped by the bad envi-ronment and helped by our own ignorance, that we are denying thetruth. We are disbelieving in God, and we are bringing disrepute onour own sacred lives. Science does not take on itself the establish-ment of the pramana or say that what we see alone is truth. It doesnot ask you not to believe in anything you do not see. Scientists, onaccount of some selfish aspirations and with a view to acquire certainadvantages for themselves, have introduced into their methodology adisbelief in God. You should not accept such rules and say that44Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972nothing can be truth unless you are able to have prathyaksha as yourauthority.In what you may regard as prathyaksha or what you want tosee in all those things, it is only an illusion to think that you actuallyand directly see the reality and truth. Here is a small example forthis. A son, whose age is 25 years, has been spending some time andliving with his mother who attained the age of sixty years. For 25years of his life, the son has been looking at his mother, has beenaddressing her as dear mother and has been enjoying the presence ofan affectionate mother. But after sixty years of her age, her time wasover. She abandoned her body and life had fled. The son has thebody of the mother near him. Sitting next to the body, he was suf-fering agony and was saying, “Mother, have you gone away,”“Mother, have you left me alone,” “Mother who is going to giveme the guidance here-after.” There is something here that we have tolook into with great care. He says, “Mother, you have left me andgone away.” Who is it that has left him and gone away? For 25years he has been addressing that body as “mother” and speakingto her as “mother.” If that body is the mother and if this man issaying, “Mother, you have left me and gone away,” then there is aninconsistency. The body is still there. So what has gone away is hisreal mother. The body that is still there is not his real mother. Thusthe true mother is the life that has left and gone away. So long as thetrue mother that was the life was residing in that temporary and non-permanent body, he was calling the body as his mother. But themoment the permanent life has left, he without any hesitation willcremate that body, which was till then being regarded by him as hismother.As long as life is present, we are to some extent enjoying andappreciating the bodily relationship of either a mother or a father or abrother or a sister or a wife and so on. But once life has fled, then wewill realise that all the relationship that we were enjoying was only abodily relationship and has no value. That anything that has beenpermanent is true only in respect of the Divine soul that is containedSummer Showers in Brindavan 197245in the body, and not the body itself, becomes very clear. Therefore,the one who is a true relation to us, the one who is a true friend to us,the one who is a true guide to us, can only be God and none others.All other relationships are like passing clouds, which come and go.The permanent and eternal truth of God should be your ultimate aim.Other things that look like truths are not permanent truths.They are not eternal truths. You should give them up. You should fillyour hearts with prema. That is the only way in which you can reachthe eternal truth of God. You should work with a determination to fillyour hearts with prema and reach this goal. Through the one monthof courses that you will have here you should acquire the capacity torecognise the permanent truth. I hope and bless you that you goback to your places and infuse this determination into others andthereby influence a larger number of people to appreciate Indianculture and bring glory to Indian beliefs.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 465. The Nature of TruthIn the heart of every individual there is the Kalpa Vriksha orthe tree that gives you all that you want. Around this Kalpa Vriksha,there is a growth of weeds; and, by your efforts, if you can removeall these weeds, then the Kalpa Vriksha, or the sacred tree, will be-come evident. The texts which traditionally belong to Indians are allintended to teach the inner meanings of all the sacred sayings, to putthe outside world in its proper perspective and to make men realisetheir own individuality. God is not only capable of curing the ordi-narily understood external diseases, but He also undertakes the set-ting right of all bad qualities that enter into the inner life of an indi-vidual. We generally make an attempt to cure various diseases byexternally applying medicines. There are other kinds of diseases, tocure which, we take medicines internally. There are still other kindsof diseases which require not only external application of medicinebut also its internal administration. Today, you all have joined a hospital that is connected withthe Divine. For all your diseases, there is a necessity of not only ap-plying medicines externally but also of taking some medicines inter-nally. Although, as the equivalent of external application of medi-cines, we undergo certain practices and certain sadhanas, we alsohave to realise the inner meaning of such sadhanas and such prac-tices. It is the realisation of the inner meaning of such practices thatconstitutes the medicine that you take internally.The Gita, which is really the essence of all the Upanishads,teaches us how life has to be handled internally. It is in the 32ndstanza of the sixth chapter of the Gita that we are told how this inter-nal cleansing or purification should be effected. Good qualities likekindness, compassion, prema, sacrifice, qualify a man to be called adevotee or a Jnani, or one who has attained Vairagya, or detachmentfrom the external world. But till then, till the individual attains theseSummer Showers in Brindavan 197247good qualities, he remains a person only in that name and does notbecome one who has had any experience of these things. That thesegood qualities should be shown only in limited circumstances withcertain restrictions, while for example, you are engaged either in pujaor in bhajan or in devotion, is not the right attitude. That when youcome out of your puja, you may forget about these good qualitiesand begin to develop hatred instead of love, to develop lust and angerinstead of compassion and forbearance are not the attitudes that ourdevotees should develop. It is only when we can adhere to the obser-vance of these good qualities both outside and inside and put themconstantly into practice, that we will feel some happiness. There isthe necessity of your observing and accepting such qualities likepeace and forbearance always. By putting them into practice alwaysyou will deserve the title Sathatham yoginaha—you are always ayogi.Today one does not become a yogi all the time. In the morn-ing you are like a yogi. In the afternoon you are like a bhogi—that isone who eats and enjoys. In the evening you are like a rogi or a sickperson who gets the disease after eating. How can something thatchanges in all the three parts of the day be of any lasting value? Thatis why our Upanishads, in the task of seeking truth, are telling ushow we can get happiness throughout the day and every day.We have the story in our mythology about the churning ofthe ocean of milk with the Manthara Parvatha, a certain hill; andhow many things like diamonds, like the Kalpa Vriksha, the tree thatfulfils all your desires; like the Kama Dhenu, or the cow that givesyou all that you want, amritha, the immortal nectar, and many otherprecious things were got from it. In the same way, in modern times,we are churning the ocean of our life. By churning our life and bychurning the bowels of the earth on which we live, we get manyqualities and many things that we require, such as food, gems, and soon. If we look into the inner meaning of the parable or of our his-tory, we note that there is a hill called Manthara and by putting thishill inside the ocean we churn it with the Rakshasas, or the bad48Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972qualities, on one side and the Devatas, or the good qualities, on theother side. Out of the ocean have come some good things and somebad things. This is the meaning of the story. You may ask if thisstory has also got an inner meaning.You should understand that there is not one single story inthe whole history of our culture, which has not got an inner meaningin addition to an outer meaning. It has been explained that viveka orwisdom is the source from which these things come. The body hasbeen established as the vessel. Our intelligence has been put into thisbody as the hill with which you churn. The essence of Vedanta hasbeen taken as the milk in this story. In this churning, the right sideand the left side have been equated to ida and pingala. Ida and pin-gala are the two nerves and these have been taken as the ropes forchurning. Taking the name of the Lord, the churning or the sadhanahas to go on. Out of such churning arises what may be called thedivine butter. Therefore, if today we keep the good qualities on oneside and the bad qualities on the other side, if we realise that ourideas are to be constituted into these churning nerves, the ida and thepingala, if we regard our own body as the vessel in which the milk iscontained and we apply the sadhana or the practice, then surely wewill reach the Divine.If I have to give you an illustration of what has been said inthe modern context, I may refer you to the game of football, wheresome children are on one side and others are on the other side. Therewill be say, six children playing on one side and six on the otherside. They have a ball put in the centre. This ball will be hit by theplayers who play on one side and the players who play on the otherside. Not only will they have two fixed boundaries, two limits, oneither side but also a rule that the game should be played within thelimits which have been accepted on both sides. Today, in the world,every man and every woman is continuously playing football duringhis life. Our heart is the football ground. It is not the physical heartbut the spiritual heart. In this playground of our spiritual heart, onone side are the arishadvargas or the six bad qualities. These sixSummer Showers in Brindavan 197249bad qualities are kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, and matsarya.That is lust, anger, greed, attachment, arrogance and jealousy. On theother side are the six other players, sathya, dharma, shanthi, premaalong with two others ahimsa and poornathwa, that is, nonviolenceand fullness. These two contestants are having the ball, which is life,right between them. The good people are hitting the ball and the badpeople are also hitting the ball. But the situation now is that we arenot able to decide who is going to get the victory. The bad people arehaving physical strength and the good people are having divinestrength.We also have to ask ourselves, while this game of football isgoing on in the field of the heart, what the two limits are, the bounda-ries which we talked of beyond which the ball should not be hit?They are the Dharma Vidya and the Brahma Vidya. That is, the edu-cation relating to our conduct in this world and the education relatingto our conduct in the other world. These two are the limits withinwhich the ball has to be kept. If during the play, we hit the ball suchthat it goes out of these two boundaries that we have established, wewould only be scoring a fault as we will send the ball outside thelimits of the court.The essence of all the Vedas, what is being taught by all theVedas, comes from within man. It is not coming from anywhere out-side. In the context of our belief that God is omnipresent, that God ispresent in front of you, inside you and outside you, there is no needfor you to give any special importance to what comes from outside.You will have to believe that everything is contained within yourself.On account of ignorance, on account of some illusion and also dueto some of your actions in past births, you are thinking that there issomething which is coming from outside into yourself which has gotsome sanctity. This is not correct. It is only when you are able toovercome this ignorance, it is only when you are able to throw awaythis illusion that there is something sacred which is coming fromoutside, then alone can you realise your own real nature.50Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972There is a small example for this. A dog got hold of a drybone and put it in its mouth with the intention of eating it. Howevermuch the dog tried to eat the dry bone, it was not able to get any es-sence or juice out of that. In its desire to get something out of thatdry bone, it bit hard with its teeth. The sharp portion of the dry bonecut into the soft mouth of the dog. Immediately, blood started flow-ing out of the mouth of the dog. The dog then thought that, at last,out of the bone was coming some juice, some blood, and it startedsucking its own blood with great pleasure. The dog was not awarethe blood had come from within itself. When you look at this story,you will realise that we are also more or less in the same position. Solong as we remain in this ignorance, it means we are like dogs. If we succeed in throwing out this illusion or maya, then weshall be aware of our divinity. The one who realises his true self isGod. The one who does not realise his true self and who is in theillusion of believing that he is something else than his true self, thathe has to get something sacred from the external world, will be en-tangled in great many difficulties. We will have to conclude thatmaya or illusion is not something that is our property. Maya issomething that belongs to God. You have to get round maya only bythe grace of God. Maya is something which by the consequences ofyour own Janma samskara—what you have done in your previousbirths—can make itself look like a thing quite different from what itactually is. In fact, just by the result of an illusion on your part, it cancreate a considerable amount of fear and terror.There is a small example. After this discourse is over, youwill be trying to go to the shed in which you are staying. On the waythere is something like a crooked rope. As soon as you see this rope,a fear comes that there is some snake there. The moment that theidea of the snake comes into your mind, your body goes far awayfrom this particular rope. Not only does the body move as far aspossible from that rope, but all the sense organs will start trembling.This will also give rise to a certain amount of desire in you by whichyou begin to make an enquiry. This will show itself, as in the ex-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197251ample, by your searching for a torch light. As soon as you bring atorch light and turn it on the rope, then you will learn that it is not asnake. The moment you learn that it is not a snake, then a largeamount of courage comes from nowhere and you will go very closeto this rope. But the snake which was imagined to be there has notgone away anywhere. The rope, which is really there, did not comethere from anywhere else. The fact is that there is a rope and that itwas mistaken for a snake. Later when you had brought the light, yourealised that it was not a snake and that it was a rope.All these changes are simply the result of the fear and the il-lusion that has been caused in your mind. So it is the attitude of themind that can cause such an illusion. This is being referred to by theword maya. You may ask, how long will this trouble, this illusionthat is being called maya, last. It will last only so long as you are notable to understand what the divine nature is. So, if in the very firstinstance, we try to understand the meaning of the Divine, then wewill not be subjected to either these troubles or these doubts.You may be getting some doubts as to whether we can get ananswer to these questions through the study of either the Upani-shads or the Gita or the Vedanta. By studying these texts you willonly understand their subject matter. But just by reading them nei-ther the maya nor the ignorance is going to leave you, nor are yougoing to move any closer to divine things. These books are all likeguideposts. The guideposts only tell you that such and such a townis situated in such and such a direction, that another town is situatedin another direction, and so on. The actual walking has got to bedone by you if you want to reach a particular town.So, also, if you are only going to read the texts and if youfeel that by reading texts you have not been able to reach the desti-nation, then that is also wrong. You should make an attempt to putinto practice what you have learnt from the books. There is no doubtwhatsoever that you will then reach the destination that has been in-dicated in those texts. By spreading the news of the existence oflight in the world, is darkness going to be dispelled? Will the poverty52Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972of an extremely poor man disappear by that man just thinking aboutmoney? Will the hunger of a hungry man be relieved if he just hearsabout the sweets that have been prepared? Will the disease of a manbe cured, if he just hears about some medicine that can cure him? So,also, it is only when you put things that you have learnt from thetexts into practice, is there a possibility of your enjoying and under-standing the meaning of the Divine.You are told that we have to recognise the existence of thethree states: that is, the waking state, the dreaming state and the deepsleep state. In the waking state, we are able to utilise the five senseperceptions. We are also able to acquire some results and put theminto practice and enjoy something out of that. We also have learntthat in the dreaming state, there is only the mind that is functioning.The five sense perceptions are not functioning. In the waking state, itis not simply the five sense perceptions that are functioning; but as aresult of the environment, of the time and of the individuals aroundus, we are able to understand something much more than these senseperceptions can tell us.There is a small example for this. We get an idea that wewant to go from here to Madras. Are we going to Madras immedi-ately we get the idea? No, we have to fix the right time. At that time,we have to go to the Whitefield station. We have to purchase a ticketand reach the Bangalore City station, then buy a ticket to Madras andget into a train, travel all the night till the next morning, and it is onlythen that you are reaching Madras. In this process, all four elements—the idea, the time, the reason, and the act of going— have all cometogether and this would be regarded as one unit. In the dream state,not only are all the five sense organs absent but, these additionalthings, namely, the time, the reasoning, the person who is doing areall absent.Let us take another example. You are sleeping in the night inBrindavan. You are dreaming and your dream is about your havinggone to witness a cinema in Delhi. In this dream, if you had felt thatyou had gone to Delhi and that you had witnessed a cinema and alsoSummer Showers in Brindavan 197253witnessed a number of people in Delhi, we have to ask ourselves thequestions: When did you travel to Delhi? How did you go? Did yougo by a plane or did you go by a train? Where was the time? Whereis the person who is doing this act and where is the action itself?None of these exist in the dream state. Further, if you ask the per-sons, whom you had met in your dream, the next day, whether youhad met them in Delhi, they would deny having had anything to dowith you. They would say that they had not been to Delhi at all. Thisis not so in the waking state.If you do something in the waking state, then all the otherthings, like the time, like travelling, like action, are all present there.But they are not present in your dream state. In this description, weare thinking that what we see and what we do in the waking state aretrue. On the other hand, in common parlance, we are thinking thatwhat we see and what we do in the dream are not real, and that isonly an illusion. But in Vedantic parlance, neither what you see inthe waking state nor what you see in the dream state is real. This is amatter to which you should give some attention and enquire withsome care. Then you will get a glimpse of the nature of truth. Solong as you have the feeling in your mind that you are in a wakingstate and so long as you know that the five sense perceptions areworking, you get the belief that what you see is true.Now you are all sitting here, you are looking at me, you arelistening to me. It means that your eyes are functioning, and you areseeing me. It means that your ears are functioning, and you are lis-tening to what I say. Not only that, but the mind is also able to takeall that comes to you through the eyes and through the ears, and theheart is able to enjoy all that you are seeing and hearing. You canargue that this is not an untruth and say that you have seen it withyour own eyes and you have heard with your own ears. You may saythat you experienced it with your heart, and you can thus argue andsay that this is true. But after you have had your dinner, after youhave gone to your places and you have gone to sleep, then you get adream. In that dream you go back to your village. What you had54Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972seen in the evening and in the day has nothing to do with what isbeing seen by you during your dream. In that dream, you are feelingthat you are really experiencing your village, your friends, yourhouse in your village, and so on. When you get up in the morning,you do not remember either your village or your house. You think allthat was a dream, and you do not attach any importance to it.At the time of your dream, what you saw was true. Whenyou were awake, what you saw when you were awake was true.Which of the two is really true? Is what you have seen in your wak-ing state true? The truth of what you have seen in the waking statedoes not exist in your dream. The truth of what you have seen inyour dream does not exist in your waking state. What you have seenin the day is not contained in the night dream. What you have seenin the night is not contained in the day dream. Both are untrue. Buthowever, you are present in both. The truth is only yourself. Whatyou saw in the day is the day dream and is not true. What you sawin the night is the night dream and is not true. Your self, which hasbeen the witness in both places, is the truth. What is changing,namely, what you have seen in the dream or what you have seen inthe waking state, cannot be true. There is another supporting argu-ment for this.You may ask, how is it that what we see during the wakingstate is also being described as a kind of dream? How can it be? It isall right if it is on one day or on two days. We are living throughseveral years, fifty years, sixty years, and all that we see during thesefifty or sixty years in our waking state, cannot be a dream. I will givewhat you sometimes experience in your dreams as an answer to thisquestion. One has had a dream. In that dream, he saw that he wasjust then born. In that dream he found that after he was born, he hadgrown into a child, he had become an adult, he had entered theclasses in Whitefield, he had gone through all the summer courses,gone back home, got married, got a child, the child had grown and hegot that child also married; and that son after his marriage got an-other son who becomes his grandson and all these were seen by himSummer Showers in Brindavan 197255in the dream. So, in the waking state if he was to have been born andif he was to have reached a stage when he could have claimed agrandson, he must at least have spent 40 to 50 years. In the dream,the events that he was born, that he had grown, that he had a grand-son and that he could play with his grandson, which would havetaken at least an experience of 50 years in the waking state, had allbeen handed to you in that one dream. The experience relates to 50years; but if you see the actual time of the dream, it was only twominutes.If we make an enquiry and ask, where is this experience of50 years and where is this time of two minutes, we will get the an-swer that the time of two minutes relates to the scale which is appli-cable to the waking state whereas the experience of 50 years relatesto the time that is applicable to the scale of dreaming state. So whatwas equivalent to two minutes of time in the waking state was 50years of experience in the dream state. What prevents us from ac-cepting 50 years of experience in the waking state as equivalent totwo minutes of experience in the dream state? We should not think,therefore, that because we are experiencing all this over a long periodof 50 years in the waking state, this is not a dream.Thus, in the scale of time, which belongs to God, or, in thecircumstances and environment, which is of the Divine, the standardsand the scales of time that we are used to in our ordinary life do notapply. There is no point in taking the prescriptions, which we areaccustomed to in the matter of time and space in our normal life, intothe Divine world. All that becomes irrelevant.You may get another doubt. You may ask a question that ifwhat we are seeing is all a dream and if all our waking state actionsare to be treated as a dream, then why should we do these things atall. Why should we do any sadhana, or bhajan, etc., in order to at-tain moksha, if all this pertains to the dream state? Even in the dreamstate, some kinds of dreams have the capacity to wake you up imme-diately and push you into the waking state. For example, if in adream you see a lion chasing you, because of such a dreadful dream56Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972you are suddenly forced to get up and you are in the waking state.Thus what has happened in the dream state has enabled you to getinto the waking state. In the same manner, in the waking state also ifyou regard it as one dream, then a situation may arise when, by thegrace of God, you are quickly pushed from the waking state into thestate of jnana. Just as for the dreaming state, this is a waking state, ifyou believe the waking state also to be a kind of a dreaming state,then the jnana state is a waking state for this dreaming state. That iswhy all the seers and rishis have told us to Awake and Arise andcome to the state of realisation. The Upanishads are also preachingthat we should Awake and Arise and approach a state of realisation.We should now ask ourselves, what is this sleep from which weshould awake? This sleep is not the ordinary kind of sleep. This isthe sleep of ignorance.Therefore, the things that are contained in our Upanishadsand the pathways that the Upanishads have been indicating to us areto be well understood by you and you have to put them into practice.The contents of the Mandokya Upanishad tell you that OM is justone word. This is by its appearance a small word but it contains verydeep and important ideas. In the text of Mandokya Upanishad, thereare only 12 mantras. These 12 mantras contain the essence of allthe Vedas. Although they do not tell the way in which you have to doyour Karma Khanda, they tell you in an excellent manner the as-pects of Brahman.This Upanishad, more than any other, contains all the im-portant issues and these will be taught to you in future classes. Evenif we are not able to read the Vedas, this Upanishad alone shows usthe path for liberation. Thus, the one and only Upanishad that canoffer to us the knowledge of oneness or Adwaitha is the MandokyaUpanishad.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 576. ‘Kama’ and ‘Krodha’The Jiva resides in the world. God resides in the heart. Thereis always an interplay which goes on be-tween one and the other.People cry when they are born. People cry when they die. People cryeven between birth and death for various things. We have, however,to ask, do people cry for obtaining real knowledge about the ulti-mate? Do they cry for the grace of God? Do they cry for under-standing and realising God? In life, it is the desire of every humanbeing to enjoy peace and happiness. But have we made an effort toknow the real reason for lack of peace and happiness in our lives?Such lack of peace and lack of happiness can only be relieved whenwe know what we ought to know, when we forget what we ought toforget, when we reach the destination we ought to reach. In this, thereare three main steps which will lead us to the knowledge of whatshould be known. There is a necessity for asking once more thequestions: What is it that we should forget? What is it that weshould know? What is it that we should reach? The answers are, wehave to forget the aspect of jiva. We should know what our true selfis. We have to reach Godhood. It is these three aspects that are beingdescribed to us by the three words jiva, Easwara and Prakruthi. It isto enable us and to let us know and understand the aspects and at-tributes of these three that the Upanishads exist. What has beencalled the Bhautika refers to the aspect of the body, what has beencalled the Daivika refers to the aspect of Atma or the soul and whathas been referred to as the Adhyatmika refers to the aspect of jiva.What relates to the jiva is responsible for bondage. What relates tothe Atma is for releasing everything that is in the nature of a bond-age. The Jiva Thathwa binds itself whereas the Atma Thathwa re-leases everything. Atma Thathwa should be our basis.You are not one person but three, namely, the one you thinkyou are, the one others think you are and the one you really are. If58Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972we are able to guide our lives, bearing these three aspects in mind,then it will be possible to some extent to get the Atma Thathwa intoour lives. From time immemorial, great idealists, torch bearers andseers, have been teaching in our sacred country. It is because of thestrength of Kali, who is now the ruling deity, such people who havebeen able to show us good paths are becoming more and more dis-tant to us. We, in our turn, are getting ourselves attached to the mate-rial notions and pushing ourselves away from the spiritual path. It iseasy to drive away people, but it is very hard to lead and make themfollow you. Today, those who can lead and those who shall show theway are becoming fewer and fewer. By your good fortune and byyour good deeds, you are getting these excellent opportunities oflistening to experienced people who have lived good lives. They willbe handing to you good ideas; and if you are able to absorb themfirmly in your hearts, with devotion, there is going to be very consid-erable improvement in you.It is known to every individual that it is the way of the worldthat people are after riches, after food grains, after precious metalslike silver and gold, and so on. But truly, these are not our wealth,these are not our happiness and these are not the things that shouldbe regarded as signifying our prosperity. Our good conduct is ourtrue wealth. The Divine knowledge is the true riches that we shouldhave. Proper action and proper conduct are our prosperity. It is onlywhen we realise that these good qualities are what we should acquireas our riches and not the worldly pleasures, will we be justifyingwhat has been told to you in the morning that, “Janthoonam nara-janma durlabham.” That means that amongst all the animals, to beborn as a man is extraordinarily difficult. Therefore, you should givegreat attention to cultivating good conduct and good behaviourthroughout your life. To be able to sleep, to be able to eat and to beafraid whenever there is fear are all common to man and to animals.These qualities do not distinguish a man from an animal. The onlydistinguishing feature that marks out man is that he has intelligenceSummer Showers in Brindavan 197259or buddhi; and if man does not use his intelligence properly, he isjust like an animal.Some of you may be wondering why man has also been in-cluded amongst the category of animals. We should not understandthe word animal as referring only to non-human animals. This wordhas its root in jan. Whatever is born is a janthu. Everything that isborn from a mother’s womb is called a jan or a janthu. Since man isalso born from a mother, it is appropriate from the point of classifi-cation, that he should be regarded as one of the animals. Man shouldbe taken as having got that name because he has been born from amother like all the animals.In what you have been hearing, the philosophy of non-dualism or adwaitha is one of the most important things. Sankarastated that Brahman is Truth and that the world is a mithya. If wetake this statement consisting of two halves and try to prove thatwhat you see in the world is all unreal, you will be wasting yourtime. On the other hand, we should also take the statement that theentire world is covered or is contained by Vishnu. If we put thesetwo statements together, then the enquiry will proceed on properlines. But these two statements look as if they are contradicting eachother. On the one side, we say that the entire world is only a mani-festation of the Lord. You should note here that when Sankara saidBrahma Sathyam, he did not say that the world is asathya or untrue.He used a special word mithya. So we have to know the meaning ofthe word mithya. The word mithya should be explained by sayingthat it means neither “true” nor “untrue”. It is something betweentruth and untruth. It is really true-untrue, sad-asath. What we areseeing around us, with our own eyes, gives us the impression thatthey are all true. But what we think is true, in the next moment van-ishes and we don’t see it, and when we don’t see it, the same thingthat we thought was true, we now think is untrue. What was not seensome time ago comes back. Then what we thought was untrue ap-pears to us as true. Thus you see that some of it appears as true andwhen that disappears, the same thing appears as untrue. Therefore,60Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972we have to describe this world neither as true nor as untrue but bothas true and untrue. The appropriate Sanskrit word is sadasath.In these manifestations that are partly true and partly untrue,there is one which is of a permanent nature and which we shouldrecognise. There may be many amongst those who have assembledhere who are used to going to cinemas. When you go there, the firstthing you see is a screen. We cannot see or look at that blank screenfor any length of time with pleasure. We will become impatient, andwe will be looking back at the projector and at all other places fromwhere the pictures have to come. After some time, some of the pic-tures come and they exhibit themselves on the screen. They aremoving away from the screen. Some of those that have gone awayfrom the screen are not just going away permanently. They arecoming back again and again to the screen. Therefore, the comingand the going of these pictures in a repetitive manner is a sort ofmanifestation. When we say that the world is mithya, you have totake the world not as the inanimate part of it but as the whole of itrepresenting the conglomeration of all the living beings. They are allundergoing the cycle of being born and then dying and going out. Atany instant of time, a large number of people are coming in by beingborn and going out by dying. Therefore, this coming in and goingout into this world should be compared with the pictures coming inand going out on the screen. That is the mithya, which we have tounderstand as the characteristic of the world.But we have to make an enquiry as to what is it that supportsthese pictures that come and go. On the screen they come, and fromthe screen they go. If the screen is not there, it is not possible foryou to see any of this coming and going. When the pictures actuallycome there, where is the screen? You don’t see it separately. It is partand parcel of the picture. So, you should realise that the permanentlyexisting screen, the true screen gets mixed up and combines with thetransient or coming and going pictures. Then only will you under-stand that what is true is the screen and what is not true are the pic-tures. The screen is not coming and going. Here, the permanentSummer Showers in Brindavan 197261screen should be compared to the permanent basis or the support forthe entire world and that is the Brahman. That permanent basis,Brahman, when it gets mixed up and combines with these imperma-nent or transient people who come and go, then you get the pictureof the world like the picture you see in cinema. That is why we say,“Sarvam Vishnu mayam jagath.” This process, by which the un-true or transient pictures and the true and the somewhat permanentscreen are together combining and giving you an impression of per-manence, may be called the Vishnu maya of the jagath. The wordVishnu here should not be understood to refer to an individualwearing his insignia like the Sankha, Chakra and so on. The wordVishnu here stands for omnipresence.Sankara recognised that in the mithya or in this mixture oftruth and untruth, there is truth. That is how, when he said, “BrahmaSathyam, jagath mithya,” he recognised that there is truth in thisworld and that aspect of truth has to be conveyed and has to betaught to people. That is the reason why he made an effort to estab-lish four peethas all round this country, the main purpose of whichwas to convey the truthful contents of this statement and to giveknowledge and wisdom to all the people concerned. By Divine grace,these four peethas have been serving as a fort-like wall around ourcountry. Unfortunately, as time went on, we allowed this fort to be-come dilapidated. Through the walls have come what are called themethods of “Western civilisation”. As a result of that, we have ne-glected our own culture, and we have forgotten our ancient traditions,and today we are behaving like animals. Thus, it is very essential thatwe should recall to our mind the sacredness of the Indian culture, theway of life which Indian culture has taught us and recognise thatthere is a oneness in all the manifold teachings on life. We shouldput them into practice and teach it to others.In our culture, we have been taught to examine and enquireand say, “Oh, this is not what I am seeking, this is not what I amseeking.” Thereby we give up all that is transient in the world andfix our attention ultimately on that permanent Divine soul. And this62Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972is what our Vedanta has been teaching us as the right path. When webegin to follow it, at the elementary stages, we ask ourselves thequestions: “Am I the body? Am I the mind? Am I the AnthaKarana?” There is no better process of realising ourselves than tomake this kind of enquiry. If you have the belief that you are thebody, then what is the meaning of the statement we generally make,namely, “my body”? Who is the “my” and who is the “body”?When you say “my body,” it means that “my” is something sepa-rate and distinct from the body. Again when you say “my mind,” itmeans that “my” is separate from “mind.” In the same manner, weare enjoying and we are experiencing all these things by saying“these are mine.” We are not saying separately “I”. It is onlywhen you make a proper enquiry about this “I” and realise that the“I” is neither the body nor the mind, you would have steadfastly putyourself in the philosophy of non-dualism. The teachings of Ve-danta take you through the statements “this is not I,” “this is notI,” “this is not I” until you are able to realise what the “I” is.When Rama, along with Lakshmana and Sita, was moving inthe forest and talking to several rishis, there used to be congrega-tions where the women used to sit on one side and the rishis used tosit on the other side and discussions used to take place. In the placewhere all the women were sitting, Sita also joined them. Rama andLakshmana, because they were living in the forest and because theywere wearing clothes appropriate to the forest were also looking likethe rishis. However between the two, Rama was showing a certainamount of divine Light.In the place where Sita was sitting, some of the women wentto her and asked, “Have you come alone or have you come alongwith your husband as well?” She replied that her husband too hadcome. With the women wanting to see and find out who her husbandwas, they were asking her many questions. Sita, a sacred womangiven to righteous conduct all her life, would not get up when all theRishis were present and say, “Here is my husband,” by way of in-troduction. She would not do that; and knowing what was passingSummer Showers in Brindavan 197263through Sita’s mind and recognising her reluctance to get up andpoint to her husband, one of the women asked Sita by pointing atone of the men, “Is that person your husband?” She then replied inthe negative by just nodding her head. Another woman came andasked her, “Is that person whose hair is tied up in knots your hus-band?” She again nodded her head in the negative. In this way,when many women came and asked Sita, pointing at the wrong per-son and asking the question, “Is that your husband?” she was nod-ding her head to indicate a negative reply. When Rama who was sit-ting there was actually pointed out, Sita said neither “yes” nor“no”. She simply exhibited a significant, happy and pleasant smile.Our Vedanta teaches us something which is exactly similarto this story. If you point at the wrong thing and if that is not the su-preme reality, then you say “no”. Anything that is shown and is notthe right thing should call forth the comment, “this is not that,”“this is not that,” and so on. When you put your finger on supremereality, the Brahman, then you are in supreme bliss and happiness.Such is the nature of Vedanta that we are able to give today to you,young students, with pure and unwavering hearts. I am glad that youare attempting to acquire the good things of our culture and theteachings we are giving you.You are also being told a few things about maya. Just as ourown shadow will always accompany us and will not separate fromus, so also maya will always accompany God and will not separatefrom Him. There is a very good illustration of this fact in the Rama-yana. At the time Rama, accompanied by Lakshmana and Sita, wasmoving in the forest, because the forest was a thick one and therewere no wide roads and they could only follow a narrow path; theway they were walking was such that Rama was going in front, im-mediately behind him was Sita, and Lakshmana came behind Sita. Inthis way, all the three, Rama, Sita and Lakshmana were moving for-ward along a narrow path. In order to be able to recognise and un-derstand this situation, you hold up your three fingers. The first fin-ger represents Rama, God, or Paramatma. The second finger imme-64Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972diately behind represents Sita or maya. The last finger in this row ofthree, represents Lakshmana or the jiva.Paramatma, maya, and jiva, these three are going along in anarrow path in the wild forest of life. After a little while, Lakshmana,whom we have symbolised as jiva, has got the desire and the ambi-tion to have a look at God or Paramatma. What is it that he has todo in order to fulfil his desire? There are only two ways of lookingat Rama or getting his darshan. One is for Sita, who is in between,to move away a little and let Lakshmana have the darshan of Rama.Alternatively, if Sita insists on staying where she is, Lakshmana hasto move aside a little. To get Sita to move away, he may have to pushher out from the place where she is standing, but then he will be of-fending Rama. So what Lakshmana did was to pray to Sita in allhumility and ask her to give him a chance of having darshan ofRama. Sita, in all her graciousness and in all her kindness, said,“Yes, certainly you can have the darshan of Rama,” and juststepped out a little. So if you get angry with maya, and if you wantto use force and your own strength on maya and push her out of herplace and then have the darshan of the Lord, you will not succeed.Maya then will become angry and will play tricks with you. Not onlythat, God will not allow such a thing to be done. The only way, there-fore, to fulfil your ambition is to recognise that maya is the insepa-rable shadow of God Himself and pray in all humility and ask for anopportunity by which maya will stand aside.You have been told by some of the lecturers that we are born,and are getting entangled in the cycle of birth and death on accountof some actions we may have done or out of ignorance. Moreover,after we are born, we get all kinds of desires. The getting of thesedesires and harbouring them has been called kama, and when thesedesires are not fulfilled to the extent you want them to be fulfilled,then you become angry. That has been called krodha. These twoqualities, kama and krodha, the desire and the anger, are responsiblefor all our troubles and sorrows.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197265In these aspects, the Ramayana has given us a very good les-son. When we read the Ramayana, we should ask ourselves thequestion, what is the reason and who is responsible for sendingRama into exile in the forest? In replying to such a question, somepeople put the blame on Kaikeyi, some people put the blame on thefoolish father, Dasaratha, some people put the blame on Manthara,who was the attendant, and so on. But when we read the appropriatesections of the Ramayana and try to examine the basis for this par-ticular act in the Ramayana, we will find that in some sections it hasbeen said that Rama, when he was a very young child, was playingwith a ball and that ball fell on this ugly-looking attendant Manthara,who accompanied Kaikeyi. From that day Manthara entertainedsome hatred and jealousy toward Rama. In addition to this, becauseManthara was an attendant who came with Kaikeyi from the King-dom of Kekaya, from where Kaikeyi came, it so happened that shewas not very happy with, or friendly to the sons of other queens. Shewas only attached to the son of Kaikeyi. Because she could not doanything when the ball, which was hit by Rama came and hit her onthe back, which was an ugly hunchback, she was letting the hatredgrow inside herself. She was waiting to take revenge at the appropri-ate time. This is the normal worldly explanation for things; but forthese things to happen, the original root cause is Rama’s own wish.When the time came for putting Rama on the throne, then she foundthe opportunity, and she schemed and did everything, by which shecould achieve what she wanted to, by sending Rama to the forest.When Rama, along with Lakshmana and Sita, was spendinghis time in exile on the Chitrakuta mountain, it so happened thatSurpanakha came and saw Rama and wanted to marry him. For thisbad desire of hers, Lakshmana gave her an appropriate punishment.Then she went back to Ravana and did all that was necessary to in-cite Ravana to go and get hold of Sita, who was leading a life of de-votion to her husband. Although the Ramayana is a very large book,an extensive epic, you will find that these two names, Manthara andSurpanakha, who really have a considerable responsibility, have not66Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972been shown in any extensive manner anywhere in the epic. They ap-pear only in one or two insignificant places. But these two, althoughthey appear very insignificant in the totality of the story, determinethe whole story of the Ramayana. For Rama, who used to live inAyodhya, to go to the forest, for Sita, who used to live in the forestwith her husband Rama, to go to Lanka, Ravana’s place—the re-sponsibility for these two happenings rests on Manthara and Sur-panakha.Having stated that for the whole of the Ramayana, Mantharaand Surpanakha are responsible, we have to recognise that these twoare not just individuals. Surpanakha signifies desires with attach-ment. Manthara signifies anger with vengeance. These two representkama and krodha. Kama and krodha or lust and anger are responsi-ble for all kinds of difficult experiences which we have in our lives.But how are we to conquer these desires? How are we to get the up-per hand over these desires? So long as we live in this world thereare bound to be desires, but we should not really become so despon-dent that we give up the attempt to conquer these desires. You maydesire many things. You may experience many things you had de-sired; but if you are able to treat your desires as well as your experi-ences to be such as arising in the name of God, then there will besome amount of happiness. When we only worship nature and whenwe want to enjoy all that we see around us in the world and do notthink of God and forget about the existence of the Divine, we are notgoing to be happy at all.The Ramayana contains an illustration of what can be gainedfrom sacrifice and what can be lost through desire. Because Ramastarted to go to the forest, Sita prayed in many different ways, usingmany arguments to get his consent to go with him to the forest. Shesacrificed all her happiness, she sacrificed her bodily comfort andshe gave up everything by way of worldly pleasures. Thus shesought, by giving up all desires or kama, to be with Rama. For Sita,who sacrificed everything, all her happiness and all her riches and allher worldly pleasures, unhappily there came a moment when she wasSummer Showers in Brindavan 197267attracted by a golden deer. The moment her sacrifice had turned intoher attraction to this golden deer, Rama became distant from her.The Ramayana is a text that contains such sacred innermeanings for every little episode in it. But the Ramayana, at times,got misinterpreted by various people as an ordinary story wheresome bad man took away the wife of another person and that thisperson tried to get back his wife and that it is the story of a familyquarrel involving women, and so on. That kind of feeling about theRamayana is not only wrong, but is also born out of ignorance.When we realise that the Ramayana is a sacred text that containsseveral lessons for us and shows us the way to reach the Divine, thenonly will we understand its full significance. Whether it be theUpanishads, or the Ramayana, or the Bharatha, or the Bhagavatha,you find in them such stories which have invaluable and sacred innermeanings. Just by reading the words and getting a superficialmeaning, you are not realising the inner meanings contained in thesesacred texts. In order that you may understand the inner meaning,you should come in contact with the experienced people who arenow teaching you, and benefit from their experience and their schol-arship. You should then put into practice what you learn. You willthen know the value of our traditions.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 687. ‘Purusha’ and ‘Prakruthi’Who are the friends? Who are the enemies? Who is God?Who is the devotee? Who is the writer? Who is the author? Who isthe Guru and who is the student? What is it that we have known?What is it that we have not known? Is what we have not known lessor more than what we have known? If what we do not know is con-siderable, is there anything wrong in calling man a “Vanara”?Dear Readers:While in the entire creation there are many things that manhas to know, any learned man to whom you may go or any of theSastras or the Upanishads that you wish to consult will tell you thatthe first thing amongst all that you should know is about your self.We know that all Sastras only teach us matters relating in some wayor other to the soul. None of them teach things which have no con-cern whatsoever with the soul. When we go into this question “Whoam I?” with some care, we find that the same question is coming upin the Bhagavad Gita. In every place, Krishna has been preachingthat in every thing it is He that is present. Each one of you may say,“I am Rama, I am Krishna, I am Ranganna, I am Anil, I am Sunil,”and so on and so on. When you say these things you are putting theletter “I” right in front and after stating that, then you add the namethat has been given to you. It may be Rama or Krishna. Thus, this“I” is as broad and as widespread as the sky. It is demonstrating tous the infinite quality of this “I”. If we can understand the realmeaning of this “I”, then we will have understood the contents of allthe Sastras.When we say “Ekam Eva Adwaithiyam,” the reference is tothis one and only, one without a second. So also is OM. This onesound OM is telling us that it is identical with Brahman. The soundof OM, the Pranava, represents the entire content of the Brahman.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197269This sound OM is a combination of three Syllables: “AH,” “OO”and “MA”. The isolated sound “AH” cannot be the OM, the iso-lated sound “OO” cannot be the OM. Similarly, the isolated sound“MA” cannot be the OM. “AH” is something that is connectedwith the awareness. The same is also being called Viswa. The nextsound “OO” is somewhat a subtle one. This has some inner sig-nificance and is being considered as his thaijasa. One will have tosay that this is not only subtle but has some relationship with thedream state. Now the sound “MA” is causal. It is connected withthe cause and effect and is related in some way with deep sleep. Thisis also being called by another name Prajna. Pranava or Omkara isin the place where these three names Viswa, Thaijasa and Prajnacome together and combine. If we are desirous of getting to knowwhat is behind this Pranava or Omkara, we will have to make anattempt to get Viswa into Thaijasa and to get Thaijasa into Prajna.It is only by combining these three in that manner can we really get adarshan of Atma, the soul, the divine part of the human being. Whenthe sound “Ah” joins with the sound “Oo” and when the sound“Oo” joins with the sound “Ma” we can get the complete sound ofOM. In the same way it is only when we are able to combine thethree states, the waking state, the dream state, and the deep sleepstate, or combine the gross aspect, the subtle aspect and the causalaspect of the body into one, we have a chance of getting a glimpse ofthe divine soul.For the creation of this entire world, the main roots aresounds. If there is no sound, there is no world. If there is no sound,there is no creation. Thus, if the young people who belong to themodern world raise a succession of questions like “Where is God?Is there God? Where is He to be seen?” I get the feeling that theyare only displaying a large amount of ignorance. Does this youngman who asks a question like that not realise that the answer to hisquestion is contained in the question itself? What is the question?The question is, “Is there God or is there no God?” The fact thatthe word God is contained in the question asked, namely, “Is there70Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972God?” is proof that there is God. If there is no God, then the word“God” would not have come into existence. Can any of you give aname of something that does not exist?This morning, some explanation of the two words Purushaand Prakruthi was given to you. Purusha stands for a large numberof different persons. Prakruthi stands for a wide variety of manifes-tations of the world. You have been taught that just as the mani-festations of the material world are very many, so also the manifesta-tions of the Purusha or the soul are manifold. But if we really en-quire into this from the point of view of the meaning that we areaiming at, then Purusha can be only one. He cannot be many. ThePurusha or the soul is simply the manifestation of the Divine. Onthe other hand, the manifestation of matter, of the material things, isthis world. This Prakruthi, or the world, is something that is filledwith all the five elements. All these are destructible. They are not per-manent. But what is clear, what is clean, what is indestructible andwhat is effulgent and shining, is only one and that is the soul or Pu-rusha. Our Sruthis have described this soul as something that hasno attributes, as something which is superior, as something which iseternal and permanent, as something which does not change at all.All these have come from one, the Self.In the questions that were formulated yesterday by the stu-dents, there was one question: “How does creation go on?” In thatcontext, there is one question that I want to ask and that is, “How doyou get a dream?” Can anyone give a reply to this question? Forgetting a dream, the cause is your sleep. If there is no sleep, youwon’t get a dream. Just as for a dream, the sleep is the cause, so alsofor creation, what is called maya is the cause. For maya there is nobeginning and there is no end. Thus, this creation, or the world yousee around you, is something that is related to maya. Maya alwaysloves the soul, loves the Purusha. It wants to be with Him, wants toreach God. So also the creation wants to reach God all the time. So,sometimes in some Puranas, it is said that Purusha has attachedhimself to the world. In the material world, although many shapesSummer Showers in Brindavan 197271come about and although we may make a distinction between menand women with many different names, while this distinction can bemade in Prakruthi, so far as Purusha is concerned there can be nosuch distinction.Here is an example. In Anantapur, we have established acollege for girls. In that college, on an occasion such as a collegeday, they will be having a drama. On that day, when they enact adrama, one girl plays the role of a Maharaja. Another girl acts thepart of a Maharani. The one who puts on the part of a Maharaja hasa moustache, puts on a dhothi, a crown, and all the insignia that makeup the Maharaja. While the audience is forming the idea that one girlis looking like a Maharaja and that another girl is looking like a Ma-harani, so far as the particular girl who has put on the part of theMaharaja is concerned, she will always think that she is a girl andthat she belongs to the girls’ college. She will never think that she isa Maharaja.In the same manner, this world is like a girls’ college. Here,in this world, in the drama of our life on the stage of this world, weare putting on the part of many appearances. Just because you haveput on a part, you cannot become man. In the aspects of either thesefive elements or the five kosas or the five thathwas, all these peopleare equal and there is no difference. Therefore, when you talk ofmanhood, what you have to regard as man, as Purusha, is thestrength, the energy of Purusha that is contained in him. Thus it isby the co-existence and by the combination of these two, the soul, orthe Purusha, and the Prakruthi or the world of matter, that creationis going on.For such creation, there will have to be some one who is re-sponsible. We have seen the mud in the tank. We are also seeing thewater in the river. Water alone from the river will not enable you tomake a pot or a pan. The mud alone from the tank will not enableyou to make a pot or a pan. It is the combination of water and mudthat will enable you to create either a pot or a pan. Simply by thecombination of water and mud, the pot or the pan is not going to be72Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972ready. There has to be a potter who will prepare the pots and pans.Such a potter is God. The energy or the power is the water. Prak-ruthi or nature is the mud. The combination of these two things arethe human bodies. These pots and pans of human beings some dayor other will have to fall down and have to break. Because these hu-man bodies are pots and pans, and have been constructed, have beencreated in time, therefore, they must be destroyed also in time. Thetransformation or the changes that will come about for such pots andpans should not disturb us to any extent. But immersed in our igno-rance, we are simply feeling that these pots are ours, these pans areyours, and so on. We are not really able to understand what the sig-nificance of these pots or pans is.I will give a small example to show to you the amount of ig-norance we are enveloped in when we look at this natural world. Ablind man has got a child. Being blind he has not got the fortune tosee that child with his eyes. Even if the blind man is not able to seehis child, he knows that it is his child and he will be spending a lot ofeffort in making the child happy. In the same way, like the blindman, we think and get into an illusion that the Prakruthi or the natu-ral world has come out of us. Although we are not able to see thereality of the Prakruthi, we develop some kind of affection, like theblind man, who although he is unable to see the child and recognisethe child, is calling her his child.To establish and to know the true nature of God, there areeight different paths. The first one is concerned with Sabda orsound. The second one is concerned with motion or movement. Thethird one is concerned with brightness or light, and so on in thismanner, there are eight different paths. That is the reason why wehave created what is called ashtanga yoga which means the eightfoldpaths or practices. These eight ways, by eight different kinds ofpractices, can take one to the destination of the Divine. They havebeen named to you as Yama, Niyama, Asana, and so on. Thesethings refer to various kinds of practices.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197273In another example, there is a light. By the breeze, you willfind that the light moves a little, hither and thither. It will also havesome smoke. If some water falls on the light then it makes a crack-ling noise. If there is a lot of breeze, then the light itself will be ex-tinguished. There are so many changes in the lamp. But there is nochange at all in the light that is coming from this lamp. To anyonewho may come here, the lamp is handing on its brightness. In thesame manner, God, who has no attributes, is handing his pure efful-gence to every one, irrespective of who he is. Because this aspect ofGod, which has no attributes, goes and enters some other abode likethe body, or Divinity gets joined to something else, there the differ-ences appear. But the original Divine thing is one and the same anddoes not change at all.I must tell you the difference between these three aspects: thebodily aspect, the soul aspect and the divine aspect. A potter, in orderthat he may make his pots and pans, goes to a tank and takes themud out of the tank, thereby creating a big deep pit. He would takethe mud by creating the pit and taking clay out of the tank. He re-moves that mud and brings it in a cart to his house. In this way, be-cause every day he is bringing mud from the tank and putting it infront of his house, there is a big mound or heap that has beenformed. It means one has to go down the ditch or the depression inthe tank. In front of the house, one has to climb up the heap or themound. The mud from the pit in the tank is the same as the mud inthe mound in front of the house. The potter takes some mud andgoes on preparing every day some pots, some vessels, some pans,and so on. Gradually, as he makes the pots, the mud that filled themound goes on slowly diminishing in volume. The potter is prepar-ing pots and he is putting them in fire and hardening them and isselling them to various people. Before the pots have been made andsold, when he puts water on the mud that is in the mound that watergets into the mud and mixes with it. On the other hand, after makingthe pot, if you put water into the pot that is made out of the mud, thatwater is not absorbed. It remains as water inside the pot. Wherefrom74Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972has this change or this transformation come? The mud which wasgot from the tank or the mound or which went into the making of thepot is all the same. But it has taken the shape in one case of the pot,in another case of the mound and in another case of the pit. For thedepression, for the mound and for the pot, the root cause is mud.But, in the course of time, this pot is going to break. In the course oftime, the mound in front of the potter’s house will become smallerand smaller. But the mud remains all the time as mud.By some desires and by some actions of our parents andalso by the sankalpa or the wish of God, this body, the human bodywhich we may call the pot, comes into existence. This life, jiva, canbe compared to the mud in the mound, which goes on diminishingtime after time. The body is the dehatma. This is going to be de-stroyed. This mud or the basic constituent of the human body is theParamatma. All these human bodies, in time, are going to be de-stroyed and converted back into mud. When they die, all that is go-ing to go to its original place from which it has emanated. Like thepots and pans which have come from mud, and in course of time af-ter usage they break and go back to mud, so also we have to acceptthat the contents of all these human bodies which have come fromthe primary spirit, after they have been used and destroyed, will againreturn to the source.At this stage, we have to make an enquiry and ask: What is itthat is born? What do you mean by, “I was born?” What was bornwas the body. If we make the enquiry, “What existed before wewere born?” then if it did exist, there is no question of its beingborn. Suppose we take the view that it did not exist at all. If it did notexist, where is the question of something that did not exist and doesnot exist being born? How are we to find this out? How do we getthe knowledge of what is this “I”? What is the way by which onecan understand this question also, we should ask ourselves. Thosetexts that tell us and teach us answers to these questions are calledUpanishads and Sastras. To know myself, you may ask, whyshould I go and hanker after what is contained in the Upanishads.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197275To know myself, why should I go and seek knowledge from thosewho are experienced elders. Such ego is not desirable and youshould give it up.It is not possible to understand yourself, without seeking itfrom experienced people, and without seeking it from the Upani-shads, and without practising what these texts teach. If you have thecup, if you have the oil, and also if you have the wick, are you goingto get the brightness of a lamp? Somebody has to light up this wick.You have the flowers, you have the needle, and you have the thread.Will it become a garland of its own accord? There must be someonewho will put these flowers together. You have gold. You have dia-monds. Will ornaments come into existence on their own? Someonehas to make them. You have intelligence. You have education. Butare you going to realise the nature of Self?There is a small example. We write all the letters A, B, C, D,on the board. We do know how those letters sound. If the teachersimply writes those letters on the board, even if your intelligence isvery high, if you are not told what sound is to be associated witheach one of those letters, it will remain something which you cannotlearn by yourself. However intelligent you may be, someone who isa teacher has to tell you what sound has to be associated with eachone of those letters. Only then can you learn the sound appropriateto each letter. Of course, in this world, we are seeing the five organs,the five kosas (sheaths), the five elements and even the Atma or thesoul, we are able to realise and see. But those that have to tell youwhat the paths are which you have to adopt in order that you mayrealise fully the meaning of these things, are our Sastras. So we saythat Sastras are time-honoured, old and ancient.God is one who had no beginning and will have no end.Thus, if the newcomer wants to know what the one without an endand without a beginning is, you have to go and ask the Sastras to tellyou the method of knowing. If you go to a new place, you generallymeet with people called guides, whose duty is to tell you all aboutthat new place. If you have gone there for the first time, you are a76Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972new person to that place. That place has been there all the time. Theone who tells you about the place which has been there for all time,that guide will be referred to as the Purathana or the ancient. Howlong will this new man who has gone there remain new? So long asthe ancient person who is there, who is telling the newcomer all thethings needed and so long as you do not know them, you remain anew man. But when you have learnt through the guide who has beenthere for a long time, then you become experienced and you can un-derstand the nature of Santhana or this eternity. This understandinghas also been called the understanding of Brahman, the eternal. He,Himself, becomes the Brahman. So if you want to understand thefull significance of this Sanathana, or the eternal truth, the way to doit is to join these Purathanas, those who have been there for sometime, like the Sastras; and through them and with their help you un-derstand the nature of this Divine and you yourself join the Divineby that process.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 778. Lessons fromthe Bhagavad GitaBhakthi or devotion is the only path for reaching the Divinedestination. Bhakthi is the only panacea for all the ills of this world.Bhakthi is the only method for making you realise the truth. I believethat there will be scarcely any Indian who has not read through thetext of the Bhagavad Gita; that there would be none who has notheard and is not aware of the Bhagavad Gita. The Bhagavad Gitameans “The Song of God,” words that have come to us as Hisflowers, as His prasad. Vyasa has woven these flowers, the words ofGod, into a beautiful garland and has gifted it to us.The Bhagavad Gita consists essentially of three parts,namely, Karma Khanda, Upasana Khanda and Jnana Khanda.These are also being referred to as the six-chapter contents in eachcase. Through these three parts, the Bhagavad Gita has been teach-ing us various spiritual aspects, such as bhakthi or devotion, jnana orknowledge and yoga or meditation, and so on and so forth. But theBhagavad Gita, in addition to these, has really also given us thegreat saying, “THATH THWAM ASI” meaning “That Thou Art”.This is the essence or the keynote of the Bhagavad Gita. The firstsix chapters teach us about the jiva or soul that resides in this bodyand, through that, the nature of jiva. The next six chapters, whileteaching us the path of bhakthi, also show us the nature and contentof what we call Thath or “THAT”. The last six chapters, while giv-ing us the content and the meaning of the third word Asi also tell usabout how to realise the identity of the self, the Jivatma, with“THAT” the Paramatma and also teach us to give up things, howto sacrifice and reach Moksha or liberation. If we study the Bha-gavad Gita in the proper way and enquire into its contents, we willunderstand the true nature of the saying “THATH THWAM ASI.”78Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972This morning how the concept of surrender or saranagathihas been described in the Bhagavad Gita has been conveyed to you.It appears to me that the real meaning of the word saranagathi orsurrender has not been properly understood. Our elders, by thestudy of many scriptures and texts, have conveyed to us the mean-ing. Despite this, we get the impression that the word surrendermeans putting at the disposal of God our body, our mind, all ourpowers and all that we have. We take it that “placing these beforeGod” is the true meaning of the word surrender. This is not the cor-rect and proper meaning of the word. Our body is not in our controlat all. Our body, under some circumstances, is posing to us severalproblems. Under such circumstances, when the body is not underour control, it is not understandable how we can say that we will takesuch a body and surrender it to God.When we look at the mind, it is even worse. It leads us tomany distorted meanings. While we are not only not in control ofour mind even for one moment, we are even slaves to our mind andwe foolishly enjoy the mind’s wanderings. Under such circum-stances, to say that you are surrendering your mind to God is some-thing quite un-understandable. When you have to struggle so muchto control your own mind, even for a short while; and when your at-tempts in this direction are often futile, to take such a mind and put itat the feet of God and say that, “I am surrendering my mind toyou,” seems to me to be ridiculous. Let us take the case of yourvarious organs. When the situation is that the mind, which is theruler, which is the controller of all your organs, is in such a condi-tion, what is the point in talking about the organs and surrenderingall your organs to God.So, when you say that you are surrendering to God yourthought, your word, your deed, it is simply a kind of trivial satisfac-tion to yourself. This cannot represent the truth and the meaning ofthe word surrender. God also never wants you to surrender, andhand over to him, everything that you own. In fact, God has neverasked for such a thing. If you make a proper attempt to understandSummer Showers in Brindavan 197279the true meaning of the word saranagathi or surrender, you will un-derstand that saranagathi really relates to another aspect and itshould be interpreted in the background and context of Divinityonly. Only when you accept and when you believe that the Divine ispresent in every human being and in every living thing, that Divinityis omnipresent can you understand the meaning of surrendering inthought, word, and deed and you will also become one with God.There is some justification for your talking of saranagathi or sur-render when you are in full control of your mind, your words andyour body. As soon as you are able to recognise the aspects of theomnipresence and the omnipotence of God, the feeling of ego, thefeeling that there is an “I”, which is a distinct thing, will disappear.In other words, when we try to understand the meaning ofthe word saranagathi or surrender, you will note that, in the begin-ning, Arjuna started asking questions of Lord Krishna, thinking thathe is using his own intelligence, his own capacity of enquiry and hisown ability of distinguishing right from wrong. He is thinking thathe is using his own strength. Because he relied heavily upon his ownpowers and thought that his own powers were capable of excellingand exceeding God’s powers, he landed himself into a difficulty andwas not in a position to decide what he should do and what heshould not do. As soon as Arjuna found it not possible to go aheador even to go back; in fact, when all his actions came to a stop, thenhe turned to Lord Krishna and said: “I will take your orders, I amnot in a position to decide what I should do. I am ready to obey youand carry out whatever you want me to do and I will do so with myfull heart.” Thus he surrendered his thought, word, action, and all,entirely to God. Such surrender is the lesson of the Bhagavad Gita.It is not correct to say that even this is complete surrender. Asituation has arisen when he is ready to take whatever order Godgives and obey it implicitly. In this situation, the position is that Godgives orders and another individual is willing to execute them. Inother words, there is a duality here, in that the one who gives the or-der is God and the one who wishes to execute them is man. As long80Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972as there is this distinction in the mind of the individual, between Godon the one hand and “I” of the individual on the other hand, thiscannot be accepted as complete surrender. There is bliss and happi-ness in unity. There is no bliss and happiness in duality. So whenyou are looking at the word surrender or saranagathi, in commonparlance, in the ordinary way of doing routine things and interpret itby telling yourself that God has given you the order, God has toldyou what to do and you will accept that and will follow that, thismeaning of surrender is right only in a limited sense.There is one other thing which we have to recognise and takenote of. We know that Krishna and Arjuna were living together forwell over eighty years, were meeting each other very often and talk-ing to each other like friends. But at no time in those eighty oddyears did Lord Krishna ever try to teach anything of the BhagavadGita to Arjuna. It was only after eighty years of their living togetherand that, too, in the battlefield, and that again under some special cir-cumstances, that the Lord wanted to give him the contents of theBhagavad Gita and give Arjuna a position of authority and compe-tence from where he could do something. We have to enquire intothe meaning of all these things. In the Bhagavad Gita, He has alsotaught that we have to recognise what is called adhikara, or worthyof being entrusted with a task. He has also taught us that unless oneacquires the qualification, merit and worth, there is no point inteaching the Bhagavad Gita to him. Conveying the contents of theGita to someone who does not deserve it and who has not yet ac-quired that merit has no meaning. We know that it is only the hun-gry man who has the right to ask for food. It is only the man whohas the money that has the right to spend that money. It is only theman that is poor and needy and deserving of charity, that is to begiven such help. In this way, each individual gets the right to dosomething. The recognition of this right or qualification, before ac-tion is initiated, is an aspect which is contained in the BhagavadGita. The Lord has shown in the Gita that you could preach onlyafter recognising the merit or qualification and worthiness of the re-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197281cipient. It is explicit that there is no point in teaching such a goodthing to one who has no belief. You must see whether he has faithand belief or not. You must also see that the recipient has fear of sinand reverence for God. Unless he has these qualities, the recipienthas no right to receive the good and great teaching that is containedin the Bhagavad Gita. Not only that, your teaching may become ir-relevant if you go and teach one who has not got these qualities.It is God’s word that if you have devotion to God, He willlook after all your future. He will look after all the welfare that is dueto you. So declared the Lord in the Gita. But when would this be?He said that this would be done provided the devotee spends all histime in the thought of God, provided he accepts God to be all per-vading and as present in every being. The Lord never said that Hewill look after the welfare of a devotee all the time, in spite of thedevotee spending only a little while, now and then, in thought of Godand even if he goes on doing all kinds of evil and harmful things inthe name of God. There are three things which one should keep inmind, namely, “I will not think of anything else except God; I willnot do anything else without the permission of God and I will havemy attention completely fixed in God.” It is only when you acceptand put into practice these three things, that the Lord will look afteryour welfare. Today, we are not bothering about the injunctionswhich God has given us; but instead, we are arguing with God andasking Him why He is not looking after our welfare and our safety.By simply reading and repeating the text of the Bhagavad Gita, bymerely thinking about the contents of the text, we are not going toget any benefit out of it. It is only by understanding the meaning ofthe text, by ruminating over the meaning in your mind and digestingit completely and making it part and parcel of your life, can you getthe benefit out of it.You have been told about the path of monkey and the path ofcat. The relationship between the baby monkey and its mother mon-key is such that no matter where the mother goes, no matter even ifthe mother is jumping hither and thither, the baby holds fast and82Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972clings safely to the mother, going wherever the mother goes. Thechild has implicit faith in the mother. In this way, just like the youngmonkey clinging to the mother under all conditions and under allcircumstances, we should attach ourselves to God under all condi-tions and under all circumstances. That is the kind of behaviour weshould accept. In this, there is no responsibility of any kind on thepart of the mother monkey. The entire responsibility for its conductrests on the young one. On the other hand, when we come to see thelife of a cat and the kitten, the mother cat takes the entire responsibil-ity for taking the kitten from place to place and looking after it. Thiswas explained to you with a view to convey to you the meaning ofsaranagathi. There is a significance here, which we can see; that ifyou stay where you are, then God Himself will take the responsibil-ity of looking after you.While the two paths, the path that has been described in thecontext of a monkey and the path that has been described in thecontext of a cat, seem to be all right in common parlance and so faras ordinary persons are concerned in their daily life, they are not soin the case of a person who is devoted and who wants to know thereal inner meaning of Atma or the Soul. Such a person will have tofind a path which is different from these two and superior to thesetwo.To give you the meaning and the character of this devotion,Vivekananda had a good example. Every person wants and desiresthat he should get moksha or liberation, that he should attain thatplace of moksha. We may say that liberation is synonymous withfreedom. When we desire freedom, it implies that at the moment weare in some kind of bondage. What is that bondage? The bondage isin our own family, in our own home, in which we are tied up andentangled. Your own affection for your people is the bondage. Thatis the chain which has bound you. This is what you may call affec-tion with some kind of an attachment. When you are tied up with thechain, the chain of affection and attachment to the family, there aretwo ways by which you can free yourself from this chain. One waySummer Showers in Brindavan 197283is to get the strength by which to break the chain. There is a secondway and that is to make yourself tiny, smaller and smaller so thatyou can just slip and get out of the chain which is binding you.With the exception of these two alternatives, if you want toreach freedom and if you want to get out of the chain, there is noway of doing it. These two can be described as bhakthi, or the devo-tional path, and jnana, or the path of knowledge. Bhakthi or devotionmeans you recognise that there is a master, that you have to putyourself in a humble position and be subservient to the master. Youalso recognise that your conduct should be such that you please Himand get His grace. This is the procedure for bhakthi. This is referredto as an attitude of daasoham, or behaviour that, by implication, pro-claims, “I am your servant.” When you are bound by a chain,within that chain if you can tell yourself daasoham, daasoham, thatmeans you are humble, you are developing humility, your ego is be-coming less and less. It shrinks you so much as your humilitygrows that you can slip and get out of the chain. The other path,which is the path of jnana, is the way of getting out of the chain bytelling yourself Shivoham, Shivoham; I am Siva, I am Siva —thatmeans you are expanding, becoming bigger, finally you become sobig that you can break the chain and get out. So, to break the chainand free yourself, one is the path of jnana and the other is the pathof bhakthi.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 849. The Path of BhakthiThe word bhakthi is sometimes also known as prema orlove. To this word prema, we attribute many different meanings. Weare also inferring for ourselves many different meanings. Sometimesa meaning for the word prema is given by describing it as, synony-mous with kama. This creates an impression in your minds thatprema and kama, to some extent, mean the same thing. Althoughprema and kama may look synonymous, we have to recognise thatthe experience of the path, the ways and methods of prema on theone hand, and the experience of the path, the ways and methods ofkama, on the other hand, are different from each other. Kama is ty-ing you up in bondage. Prema is bestowing on you happiness.Prema is a pure quality whereas kama is an impure quality.We should make an enquiry as to the reason for kama be-coming impure and the reason for prema remaining pure. The waterthat flows and keeps flowing remains pure. The water that is stag-nant and does not flow becomes impure. A stage will come wheneven worms can breed and thrive in stagnant water. In the samemanner, prema, which moves, flows from one heart to another, fromone place to another, from one person to another, ultimately reachesthe destination which is called the Grace of God; such prema ispure. But the kind of prema or love which gets tied up to one indi-vidual by saying “Oh! he belongs to me, he is mine,” does not flowbut gets tied up to one individual. Such prema will be called kama orwill be prema with an attachment to that particular individual. Thatkind of prema, which has a limitation, which is narrow and is con-fined to one place, cannot be called prema in the real sense.Although both prema and kama look synonymous in a lim-ited sense, they are being experienced in different ways and by dif-ferent processes. Prema that has got this feature or that is confinedto one or a few persons will land you in difficulties, sometime orSummer Showers in Brindavan 197285other. For instance, we have a rose plant. On the plant there are somerose flowers, but right below the rose flowers, you also have gotsome thorns. When you are seeking only the roses, then you do nothave to touch the thorns. But because there are thorns, you are notgoing to give up asking for the roses. Our life is like a rose plant.On one side there are flowers, there are roses which give us the hap-piness and which give us the fragrance. On the other side, immedi-ately below the roses, there are also the difficulties, the thorns. It isthe same relationship that exists between the roses and the thorns.This is also the relationship which exists between prema and kama.Love is a flower; Lust is a thorn. Prema can be truly called premaonly when it recognises the Divinity and only when it realises thatwe should love the Divine. That kind of prema alone can deserve tobe described as true prema.What is the special quality or what is the position of author-ity or merit by which Arjuna deserved to be taught the Gita by theLord? Arjuna’s brother Dharmaraja had all the good qualities; infact, he had many more good qualities than Arjuna. Then how didArjuna get the right to get the teachings from the Lord? Why did notDharmaraja get the right to get that teaching? If we are taking intoconsideration the physical strength, then we should remember thatthere is another brother, Bheema, who has much greater physicalstrength than Arjuna. While on one side, there is a brother, Dhar-maraja, who is intellectually far superior, and on the other side thereis another brother, Bheema, far superior in physical strength; howdid Arjuna acquire this right, in spite of the fact that he was arguingand himself raising questions? Even if we wish to ignore these twobrothers, assuming that they do not deserve it, in spite of theirstrength and power, what about Bhishma who can be regarded asone who has no equal in the matter of his spiritual knowledge?Bhishma was a great person, highly mature and vastly experienced.Why is it that Bhishma also did not have the right to get the Lord’steachings? Arjuna himself had this doubt.86Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972At one time, when the battle was all over, Arjuna himselfasked the question of Krishna. Krishna replied in a very quiet andcasual way: “Let us take your elder brother, Dharmaraja, yes, he is avery good person, he has got many good qualities, but look at him,he never had any forethought. He is having an afterthought, he isfeeling now after the whole thing is over and asking himself why heentered this battle. He is asking himself why we killed so many peo-ple. This is a kind of feeling that has come to him as an after-thought. This after-thought, by which one feels the guilt of some ac-tion after it is over, is the nature of man. Everybody will feel guiltyand sorry after the thing is over. Such human quality is characteristicof Dharmaraja and therefore he does not deserve to be taught theGita. If we consider the case of Bhishma, the great experiencedscholar, valiant son of Ganga, he is in a very different situation. Onthe one hand, he realises and states that righteousness or Dharma ison the side of Pandavas. On the other hand, contrary to what he hasbeen saying, he is the head and the chief of the Army of Kauravas.This is a contradiction and a paradox in his life. Thus in Bhishma’scase, what he says is one thing and what he does is a different thing.Thus he is riding a chariot with horses running in different direc-tions. He does not deserve to be taught the Gita.Let us take the case of Arjuna. He had the forethought, all thesuffering and all the miseries that are likely to accrue if he foughtthis war, were thought of even before he commenced the war. Heasked the question, why do I kill all my relations and all my elders?He said that he would rather go out and beg for his food than ask forthe kingdom after killing all these people. He further said that apartfrom the kingdom that he would get if he won this war, even if hewas promised heaven itself if he won the war, he would not be will-ing to enter the war and kill all his relations. He would rather give upboth. He prayed to Krishna to get him out of this mess. Thus, Ar-juna gave up all desires and prepared to sacrifice all the pleasures ofthis world and the other world and he surrendered completely to theSummer Showers in Brindavan 197287Lord. We can recognise in him a person who deserves to be taughtthe Gita.What earned for Arjuna the right to be taught by the Lord isthe fact that he stood in complete and total surrender and was pre-pared to take whatever instructions the Lord would give. It is to sucha person and under such circumstances that one can give the sacredmeaning of the Sastras or the sacred significance of the Divine. Eve-ryone will have to deserve this, earn this by good conduct, by goodbehaviour and by doing good things. Whether you are in difficultiesor in joyous circumstances, whether you are in pain or pleasure, it isonly when you have faith in God and accept Him as your very life-breath, will you be in a position to derive real peace and happiness.Our own conduct is responsible for, and is the cause of, all ourpleasures and pains. We cannot say that God is causing us eitherpleasure or pain. He is only a witness. For our pains and for ourpleasures, for our sorrows and for our joys, our own actions are re-sponsible. If we spend our life with good ideas, with good conductand good deeds, then we do not have to ask anybody to give us hap-piness. That will come of its own accord as a result of our gooddeeds.I will give you another example of what comes out of thegood qualities and virtues that the Pandavas had. The two armieswere standing poised against each other in the battlefield. In the cen-tre, Arjuna was standing; on both sides these armies are ready forbattle. In a few minutes, each one will raise his own individual warcry. In this circumstance and in such a perilous situation, Dhar-maraja, who was standing on his chariot, removed his armour, re-moved all the shields, removed his shoes, and got down from thechariot to walk right into the centre of the enemy’s army. The peoplewho were in the Kaurava army looked at Dharmaraja, who waswalking toward them in this unprotected manner, and raised a cry ofjoy, thinking that Dharmaraja was walking to them already in a spiritof weakness and defeat and wanting to surrender to them. No oneunderstood why Dharmaraja undertook to walk barefooted into the88Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972army of the enemy. There was one person who understood it, andthat was Krishna. On one side, Bheema was very much upset withthe behaviour of his brother. He was wondering why his brother wasdoing like that at that critical moment, and he got very angry and ex-cited. On the other side, Arjuna was also feeling very much upset.He was looking at Lord Krishna in his chariot and his eyes were liketwo balls of fire. But Krishna just signaled to both these people andtold them, “Look here! You have been following your brother ineverything all your life; it is good for you to follow him and acceptwhat he does even at this moment.”The eldest brother Dharmaraja was showing a path that theycould not understand. He had given up his armour, and when thebrothers turned to Krishna, the latter gave them the advice that theytoo should follow their brother. Though they could not make any-thing out of it, with a view to following the brother, all of them laidaside their armour and began to walk barefooted behind Dharmaraja.Looking at this sight, the Pandava army also lost heart, and they be-gan to feel despondent. But there was confidence and faith in thePandava army that Dharmaraja was not the man who would do any-thing without an appropriate reason for it. When all were looking onat Dharmaraja, he straight went to Bhishma, the old warrior. Hetouched his feet, made obeisance to him and addressed him: “Sire,we, who had lost our father, had been looked after by you like yourown children. It was your love and care that nourished, nurtured, andbrought us up. You are a person who has been everything to us andhas been a father to us! Please give us the permission to enter thewar today. You are in the place of our father; you are equal to ourfather. It is not possible to fight with one who is in the place of ourfather, unless you, yourself, give us permission. Unless you bless us,we cannot fight with you.”Bhishma, who listened to these words of Dharmaraja, wasvery much moved and was astonished that even at such a criticaltime, even under such difficult conditions, Dharmaraja was notswerving from the righteous path and was behaving in the mostSummer Showers in Brindavan 197289faultless manner. Bhishma was so much moved by the situation thathe lovingly caressed Dharmaraja all over the body and praised hisstrict adherence to righteous behaviour and said: “Yes, you will bevictorious.”Then Dharmaraja went to his guru, Drona. He touchedDrona’s feet and said, “It is the greatest sin to fight against one’sown guru. However, if I have to fight, it is only after getting yourpermission that I can fight with you. Please give us permission toenter the battlefield.” At the conduct of Dharmaraja, Drona’s heartmelted. He was deeply touched. Drona felt so much that he even re-vealed the secret of his life to Dharmaraja and told him how he couldbe put to death.The moral of it all is that if we shape our conduct and chooseour path in consonance with propriety and truth, then they in turnwill not only protect us but will even show us ways of winning vic-tory. Just because it happens that the time was critical or that the timewas one with difficulties or you happen to be in the midst of sor-rows, for that reason you should not deviate from the moral path,you should not swerve from truth. Even if it is going to lead you todefeat, you must adhere to the correct path. Just because you want toavoid defeat and get victory, you should not deviate from the rightpath and take the wrong path. Even if we are doing a small thing, wemust enquire into whether it is right or wrong. It need not be a bigthing to call for such an enquiry. Leaving the right path and resortingto the wrong path will put you completely out of the game. Even ifyou are going to be defeated, provided you accept and follow theright path, you will have a chance of joining the game once again. Ifyou swerve from the correct course and if you play a foul game, thenyou will create a situation by which you will have no place in futurein any of the games.You may have committed, knowingly or unknowingly, somewrong. Having committed a wrong, to go and tell an untruth wouldnot be the right thing. On the other hand, having committed a wrong,if you go and tell the truth to your father or mother or guru, you will90Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972be getting their grace. On the other hand, with a view to cover up thewrong that you have done either knowingly or unknowingly, if youwant to hide it from your father or mother or guru, then you willsimply harm yourself for all the future.The first thing, therefore, to do is to acquire confidence inyourself. Today, a situation has arisen when self-confidence hascompletely disappeared amongst the students. An individual who hasno self-confidence cannot achieve victory in anything whatsoever. Itis only when you have self-confidence that you will attain self-satisfaction. When a small bird goes and perches on a small plant ora small branch of a tree, on account of the weight of the bird, thatbranch moves up and down. But the bird is not going to be upset bysuch a movement. What is the reason? The bird that is sitting on thebranch is not depending for its safety on the branch. It is dependingon its own wings. Even if the branch moves up and down or even ifthe branch breaks, because the bird is depending on its own wings, itcan fly away. It does not worry at all. Even the small bird that is sit-ting on the branch has got so much confidence in its own wings andin itself that it is fearless.On the other hand, a youth of today, who claims that he isvery well educated, who claims that he is highly clever, who claimsthat he has got all the good qualities, is having no confidence at all inhis own capacity. When he wants to do something, he gets into terri-ble doubt whether he should do it this way or that way. One who hasno confidence in himself, whom is he going to trust? His whole lifewill become a bundle of doubts. He is not going to blossom into acomplete, integrated and sound personality. Therefore, we shouldfollow the path by which we can get rid of doubts and not enter thepath by which we accumulate all the doubts in our hearts. So thatyou may get rid of all these doubts, you should cleanse your mindand your heart.In order to cleanse and achieve the purification of yourself,you have to control your sight, your tongue, and your senses tosome extent. As a prelude to your doing something wrong or some-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197291thing unworthy, there will have been an initial action by which youreyes must have seen something bad, or you must have heard somewords which had excited you to do something bad, or you must havegone through an experience which will have made your mind wanderand get excited. This is the way by which one becomes mad allthrough one’s life. If you, the youth of today, take great care thatyour sight does not become impure, that your hearing does not be-come impure, that your words do not become impure, then you willbe able to attain purity of mind and purity of thought.Today, we know that there is a material world in which thereare all kinds of material attractions. We think that because of the ex-istence of those attractions, we are having pleasure and happiness. Itis not so. So long as these material desires and material attractionsdo not reach your eyes, do not reach your ears and you do not par-ticipate in them, they cannot affect you in the least.I will give you a small example. Now you are standing here.Your ears are with you. Somebody behind the gate is talking aboutyou in a good way and praising you. Thus, some good talk aboutyou is outside the gate; your ears are here. As long as the ears areaway and not listening to what is being talked about you, there is nopleasure. In the same manner, if behind the gate somebody is talkingill about you, and you are not hearing it, there is no reaction, neitherelation or depression. It is only when this particular talk falls onyour ears, or when somebody comes and tells you that so and so hasspoken ill of you, that it is possible that you may have some reaction;you may become angry or you may be hurt to some extent. It is onlywhen the contact is established between the appropriate sensory or-gan and the action that we have been talking about that there can beany reaction and experience in our mind.The distortion that follows our thought is even more fearful.Many people may be raising doubts and may be saying: Oh! Swamiis calling a large number of experienced people, and a large numberof students are sitting and these experienced people are talking tothem. Just by these experts talking of their experiences and the stu-92Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972dents merely listening to them are the students going to improve?Are they going to change? This kind of talk will go on, these kindsof doubts are raised by many people. Ninety-nine out of 100 per-sons have such doubts. Of course, by talking, the mind can bechanged to a great extent. Because the whole world is filled withsound, sound can achieve many wonderful things. There is nothingin this world that cannot be achieved through sound.Here is a small example. One teacher, having about ten stu-dents, is teaching them some good things. To such an ashram cameone who had some position and power. This teacher did not go tothe door to welcome and receive him. The man who came there, be-cause he had some position and authority, felt somewhat hurt and hewent right into the class and asked the teacher, “Why is it youdidn’t care for me? You have not come and received me. What areyou doing?” The teacher said, “I am busy teaching the childrensome good things.” The person who came in asked: “Just becauseyou are teaching them some good things, are the hearts of these chil-dren going to be changed and become more sacred?” The teachertook some courage and said, “Yes, of course, there is every possibil-ity of their minds changing by my teaching.” The intruder said,“No, I cannot believe it,” and the teacher replied, “When you can-not believe it, it simply means that you have no faith in it. Because ofthat, I cannot give up teaching these boys some good things.” Thenthis person, who felt somewhat important, started arguing and saidthere is no possibility of changing a mind merely by words. Theteacher, who was clever and who had known these things, asked oneof the youngest boys to stand up. In the hearing of this visitor, theteacher told the young boy, “Look here my dear boy! You just gethold of the neck of this visitor and throw him out of the room.”Immediately on hearing these words, the visitor became completelyexcited, and his eyes turned red, and he was very angry and he cameto beat the teacher. Then the teacher asked, “Sir, what is the reasonfor your becoming so angry? We did not beat you, we did not throwyou out, the only thing that has excited you to this stage of anger areSummer Showers in Brindavan 197293the words which I conveyed to this young boy. You said that you donot believe in changing the mind by mere words. What is the reasonthese mere words that I uttered to this young boy changed yourmind so much that you got so excited! So, it is very wrong to saythat with mere words you cannot change the mind. With mere wordsyou can cause any excitement. With mere words you can cause anyamount of affection. With mere words you can earn the grace ofsomeone else.”So, if in this world you want to promote friendship, you cando so by using sweet words, by talking in a very sweet manner andby speaking about sacred things. On the other hand, if you use harshwords, if you use painful words, you are not going to promotefriendship in this world. I am hoping that you will be able to followthis path and use sweet words in all your conversations with others.You will notice that the eyes have only one capacity and that is to see,the ears have only one capacity and that is to hear. Similarly the nosehas only one capacity and that is to smell, the skin has only one ca-pacity and that is to touch and feel. But the tongue has got two ca-pacities; one is to feel and taste and the second one is to utter words.This double capacity of the tongue should enjoin on you that youshould take great care to control your tongue. With words alone, byusing sweet words you can melt the Divine and you can earn thegrace of the Divine. Bad sight should be avoided. All evil has to beavoided. By doing this, I am sure you will be able to earn the graceof the Lord and you will develop ideally in such a way that you willbe worthy citizens of this country.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 9410. MeditationThe Moslems pray in the name of Allah. The Jews pray inthe name of Jehovah, the Vaishnavites pray in the name of Phullab-jaksha, the Saivites pray in the name of Sambho. That one to whomprayers are offered in this manner, He is God and may He granthappiness and prosperity to everyone. God is One, though He is ad-dressed and prayed to by different groups of people in differentnames.Many of us use our education to earn a pittance just to fill atiny little stomach. What is the use of such education, when it cannotgive full and complete happiness to man? If man cannot show to hisfellow beings the way to reach the Divine, how shall he justify him-self? When man looks at the sun rising, he is elated and feels veryhappy. The same man when he looks at the sun setting will be look-ing forward to the next day and will cheer up with hope. But withthis process of sunrise and sunset, man does not quite realise that hislife span itself is continuously diminishing day by day. Every manwants to experience good, but he does not consider how he can im-prove himself, how he can change his heart so as to reach and ac-quire this experience of goodness. From the early days of one’s lifeand till the very end, every person is only asking questions like, whatis the profit that I can get out of this life? What is the pleasure that Ican get out of this life? What is the benefit that I can derive out of allthese? But he does not give any thought to another aspect of thesequestions such as: in what way can I be of use to the world? In whatway can I be of use to the society? What good can I do to peoplewith whom I come in contact? These questions he does not ask. Heis engaging himself and using his time only for his own pleasureSummer Showers in Brindavan 197295and his own profit. If we make a proper enquiry into this situationand try to understand it, we will come to the conclusion that man isalways ready to take and receive things for himself. It is a selfishattitude to life. He is not willing to give, hand over or contributesomething to others. But life is not a one-way traffic. Man should beprepared to give and take.Keeping such sacred duties and obligations of man in view,our Sastras have established and given to us four Purusharthas orgoals of life. These four duties of man are dharma, artha, kama, andmoksha. Almost every experienced and learned scholar will tell usthat among these four Purusharthas, the most important aim of ourlife, the ultimate goal of our life, in fact, the object on which weshould concentrate, is moksha or liberation. Then we ask ourselvesthis question: If moksha is the supreme and ultimate objective, whymention artha and kama also? It is not as if there is no meaning forthese two words, artha and kama. Moksha is the highest or exaltedgoal. That is our destination.In order that we may reach that exalted position which is ourdestination, we have to take recourse to something that should serveas a ladder. Since we want to go and climb up to that exalted place,this ladder will be of much help to us in that process. This ladder,which consists of various steps, must also have some support. Thissupport is the earth. That is sometimes also called Nature. Thus, weare making an attempt to have this ladder, consisting of two sidesand the steps, artha and kama, supported on the earth, which wehave called nature or dharma. By the help of this ladder, we want toclimb up and reach this exalted position of moksha. Support is theearth; destination is moksha; the earth, which is the support, is likedharma or our conduct. It is only when we take the support and ourdestination, dharma and moksha, as our primary objectives, the twointermediary steps —artha and kama— will be meaningful and willhave some significance to us. But if we neglect dharma and moksha,the basis and the goal, then artha and kama will become useless.96Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972Every individual who is born on this earth should to someextent understand the nature and the meaning of this world. Dharmaupholds this entire creation, and we should also follow dharma orrighteousness in our conduct. You have been told about the life storyof Rama in a very lucid way. What is life? What is it that we under-stand by it? We accept that man’s breath, what he breathes in andout is his life breath, and we regard that as his life. But what kind ofsound does this air, which is being breathed in and out, make? Whatis the inner meaning that is contained in the subtle sound we hear?Although we are breathing in and breathing out many times everyday, we are not stopping and trying to understand the meaning ofthis breathing in and breathing out nor even the significance of thenumber of times we breathe in and breathe out. Soham—that is theway we take the breath in and we leave it out. “So” stands for theword “THAT”, meaning God or Brahman. “So” therefore standsfor “GOD”. “Ham” means “I” or “Me”. Thus, when we breathein and when we breathe out, the sound that comes out means “So-ham”—“I AM GOD.” “I AM GOD.” In this sound, the one thatis all important is called pranava. From this one single sound calledpranava all other sounds are emanating. This situation is referred toby saying “Ekoham Bahusyam”—“Out of the ONE come many.”In our bhajan, we use a musical instrument called a harmo-nium. Sometimes other people also use other instruments like thepiano. What do we do with the harmonium? We fill air into the har-monium, that is all. But when we press one reed, we get one sound.When we press another reed, we get another sound. So out of onesubstance, namely, air, by pressing different reeds, we get differentsounds. The air that has been filled is only one. However, we arehearing a large number of different sounds. Wherefrom are all thesedifferent sounds coming? They are coming from one and the sameair that has been filled into the instrument. The basis, or the origin, isair; and that basis is like the sound Omkara. Out of this basic soundOmkara, we get so many different sounds. Those sounds are meretransformations of the shape of Omkara. It is only in this contextSummer Showers in Brindavan 197297that the maharishis addressed Rama by saying, “Ramo VigrahavanDharmaha”—which means Rama is the embodiment of dharma orrighteousness.Just as for this Omkara, there are three principal soundswhich go to make it up, namely A, U, M. Rama who is the embodi-ment of dharma, also has three supporting characters: Lakshmana,Bharatha, and Satrughna. The analogy is that Lakshmana, Bharatha,and Satrughna together make up Rama, the Embodiment of dharma.The sound A can be compared to Lakshmana, U to Bharatha, and Mto Satrughna. The combination of all these three is the Omkara, andthat is Rama Himself. So, we have to recognise the inner meaningthat Rama, who is no other than Omkara, took birth on this earth inorder to establish dharma or righteousness.When we try to understand the teaching of our Upanishads,we will learn that OM is “Ekaksharam Brahma” or OM is the onething that is the same as Brahman. “Ekam Eva AdwaithiyamBrahma”—Brahman is One and only One, and there is no secondto that One. When we think of our great seers and these great maha-vakyas, or great sayings, which have been taught by them, we willrealise that the entire world is adwaitha, one in which there is no du-alism. It is just One and only One. Even though those who followthe dualistic philosophy do not accept and agree with the truth ofnon-dualism or adwaitha, the philosophy of non-dualism does notsuffer from any special drawback. Some day or other, when properenquiry has been made, the dualistic philosophers, as well as every-one; in fact, whether he is a believer or non-believer, whether he is ayogi or whether he is one who is steeped in earthly wealth and pleas-ures, no matter who he is, will have to accept adwaitha as the truestphilosophy. When we go deep and make proper enquiries about theworld, you will realise that it really is One, there is no duality and thenon-dual One will make itself evident to you ultimately in this world.The appearance of plurality is something that is only a reflection ofour own illusion. This is also being referred to by the word igno-rance. The differences and distinctions and this plurality have started,98Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972in fact, from oneness. They have not started from the basis of plural-ity.In our Upanishads, we have the story of one individual whowas a very learned man and who was himself a guru. His name isUddalaka. He had a son by name Swetaketu. Swetaketu made sev-eral attempts to get his education at the feet of his own father, Udda-laka. But the father did not agree to such a procedure. The reason forthis is, as a son moves freely with his father, it is rather difficult forboth himself and the father to deal with and abide by the right disci-ple and guru relationship. The son will always have the idea that theteacher is his father and the concept of father and son will persist.This is because of the affection that obtains between the father andson. Where there is attachment, where there is affection and wherethere is a feeling of belonging, then there will be lenience; and it isnot possible to impart education in its fullest measure and with theright discipline. Because Uddalaka understood and realised that edu-cation cannot be complete and proper when there is a relationship ofattachment, he sent his son Swetaketu to another guru and desiredthat his son be taught and given proper education.Swetaketu, however, being young and inexperienced, mistookthis and interpreted it to himself wrongly. He got the feeling thatperhaps his father was not quite learned and had no competence toteach him and hence he was being sent to another guru for studies.For some years Swetaketu stayed in the Guru’s house and com-pleted all his education and came back to his father’s house withsome conceit of high learning. Noticing this, the father asked theson, “What is it that you have learnt? What are the various systemsthat you have learnt? Have you learnt about Brahman? Have youlearnt that particular branch of education which, if one has learnt, oneneed not have to learn anything else and will be knowing all?” Suchwere the questions put by the father. While the father was askingthese questions, the son was behaving in a rather queer way. He wasstill displaying superior airs and conceit as if he was far more edu-cated and learned than his father and that the latter would not under-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197299stand at all if he started telling what all he had learnt over those fewyears. The father could easily understand the false vanity and theimmature state of his son. The son was trying to show off, replyingto his father that God is like this, God is like that, and so on.Uddalaka felt that his son would not be able to grasp any-thing at all if he tried to tell him the Truth about Brahman in words.He thought it better to teach him by example. So he brought a potfilled with water. He brought also some sugar in his hand and heshowed the sugar to the son. After showing him the sugar, he put allthat sugar into the water in the pot. Then he stirred the sugar till itwas completely dissolved in the water and then looked at the son andasked him; “I brought the sugar with me and put it into the vessel.Can you tell me where in the vessel does the sugar lie now?” Theson looked into the vessel and, of course, did not find any sugar re-maining as such in the vessel. The father put a few drops of thecontents of the vessel from the bottom on the tongue of the son andasked, “How do you find the taste? You can take a drop from any-where within the vessel and taste it?” The son had to agree thatsugar was there now in every drop of the contents of the vessel andthat it was present everywhere in that vessel. Then the father ex-plained saying, “Just as you have now seen this sugar being presenteverywhere, so also Brahman assumes the form of a saguna, or onewho has attributes, and comes into this world and resides in everybeing, in everything that you see around you in this world. It is notpossible to see Him separately with your eyes, it is not possible toget hold of Him separately with your hands, but it is only possible tocognise Him by experiencing Him in the state of the world. Youcannot do anything more with your gross body than to experienceBrahman who is omnipresent and all pervading.”It is only after you have attained this rich experience that youwill be in a position to talk of adwaitha and give expression to thenature of God, His omnipresence, etc. It is only after such an experi-ence will you have any claim, right and authority to talk about theomnipresence of God. Otherwise, just with mere book knowledge, to100Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972prattle like a parrot about God and His omnipresence, as if you trulyknow all, is childish. Only after the non-dual experience of Divinity,can you talk of adwaitha or non-dualism. It is not possible in com-mon parlance, in ordinary work that you do around yourself in thematerial world, to teach or to expound adwaitha. When you put yourfinger in your mouth and take it out, you want to wash it with water.If there is so much difference between the limbs and the organs ofone individual, how are we going to expound unity and oneness ofthe entire world? That there is only one God in all the beings of theworld, in all the living things in the entire world, is something whichyou learn, which you can believe, in which you can build your faith,by listening to experienced people or by reading texts or by listeningto our Sastras, and so on. But unless yourself have experienced it,you cannot truly convey this to others.Taking the one truth that God is present in all the livingthings in the entire world, if we examine it, we will find an ocean ofdifference between one jiva and another in our experience and intheir external appearance. Take the case of an ant. If an ant comesnear you, you just push it away. If a snake comes near you, you getterribly afraid and you run away from it. The fact that you behave sodifferently towards these two living things shows that you are notable to experience the feeling that God is present and is the same inall living beings. How can we expound what we do not practise inour daily life? You should therefore not be merely content with usingwords and quotations to understand and explain adwaitha or non-dualism. You must make an attempt to experience this feeling. Oth-erwise there will be danger, too. It may land us in a situation that istotally contrary to what we are understanding by the term adwaitha.One individual who was always talking of adwaitha oncewent into a village. He went near a house and asked for alms. Thelady of the house came and told this individual, the scholar who wasasking for alms, “What is the point in my giving you uncookedrice? Why don’t you go and have a bath and come back? I can thengive you cooked food which you can eat.” This pandit, who wasSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972101well versed only in dialectics, in talking and in describing adwaithain words, said, “Govindethi sada snanam,” which means the mereutterance of the name Govinda is equivalent to having a bath. He saidthat he did not have to go and have a bath. The lady of the housethen replied, “Ramanamamruthams sada bhojanam,” whichmeans that just the thought of Rama and repeating that name isequivalent to having taken food always. So she asked him to pleasego away. If in truth the utterance of the name Govinda is equivalentto having his bath, why should that be not also equivalent to hishaving food? Thus, to depend only on these words to be argumenta-tive with these words and to understand only the word-meaning ofwhat adwaitha is, may lead you into very difficult situations. Theproper thing to do is at the beginning to accept a Saguna Brahman,that is a Form with some attributes, and so on, and through practiceand through sadhana, gradually get over the situation and reach andattain the adwaitic experience. For the Saguna, that is one with at-tributes, and for Sakara, that is one with a Form, there is always apredetermined place. So, at first, in that predetermined place and atthat fixed time you will have to take to it and derive the pleasure andbenefit.It is possible that you may be getting a doubt that while Godis present everywhere and anywhere, why should one go to a specificplace, or why should one go on pilgrimages and seek God only inthose specified places. When you have been able to imbibe the es-sence that is contained in the words which describe adwaitha andtransform them into your experience, then you do not have to go to aspecified place at all —you do not have to go anywhere at all. But aslong as you are content only with using words and just talking aboutadwaitha and you have no experience at all, it is necessary that youshould go to certain places. You have to make pilgrimages. Yes, forwhatever you call Saguna, for whatever you call Sakara, you areseeking some Form. There is a place and time for that. But once youhave got over this feeling, if you are seeking the Nirguna, the ONE102Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972without attributes, and the Nirakara, the one without Form, thenthere are no limitations of space or time.Let us take the case of a cow. Inside the cow right through,there is the blood that is flowing in its body. It is this blood that getsconverted into milk. We can infer that milk, in its essence, is presentall through the body of the cow. But if you get at the ear of the cowand twist it, are you going to get milk? Or if you get at the tail of thecow and twist it, are you going to get milk? If you want to get milk,you can do so but only from a specified place. So also while God isomnipresent and is everywhere, if you want to see Him, if you wantto realise Him, then you have also to choose a place and a time.In the teaching that Uddalaka gave to his son in the begin-ning, sugar did appear as if it had a specific shape. It was only bytaking sugar, which had a shape and which had some attributes, andputting it into water that it lost shape and its taste also to some ex-tent. Uddalaka could teach the nature of the shapeless, formless, at-tributeless thing by starting from sugar, which had a taste and hadshape.If you, as a young person, start your life by fixing a time anda form and begin your worship, and gradually by your practice youreach a stage when, out of that worship, you can just pick out a drop,a drop which has got a shape and taste, and so on, and put it into thelarge ocean, then the drop will mix with the large ocean that will ap-pear to you later on as one infinite thing. For this, I will give you anexample for what you initially experience as one which has an attrib-ute, which has a time and which has specific shape, as against whatyou experience later on, as one which has no shape, which is presenteverywhere and which is not bound by time. Let us take our owncongregation at present as the basis, I am now standing and talkingand you are listening to what I am talking. But I and all of you are allinside this pandal. You can listen to the talk that I am now giving forabout one hour. The time is one hour. Look at this place; it is a smallpandal, and it is contained in a vast area and all of you are alsogrouped together as a body. In all of you, I am also one and am inSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972103every one of you. After this, all of you, each one of you will go toyour own place or your own village. When you have gone back toyour village and at some moment when you think of what happenednow, you would say to yourselves that on such and such an eveningSwami was speaking to us, we were all sitting there and He wassaying the following things, and so on. At that instant when you rec-ollect it, then all of us, including myself, will have gone into you.Thus, this picture that has gone into your mind now will stand as apicture which is known to you all through your life. But this par-ticular discourse with a shape and with an attribute has given yousome experience and pleasure only for one hour. Because of the ex-perience and the pleasure that you have derived in one hour, lookingwith your eyes at the shape and hearing the discourse, this experi-ence is going to remain in your heart and in your mind for all yourlife. But if this did not happen for this one hour, if you had not wit-nessed all this, this will never have got imprinted in your memory.So you should not speak lightly of and should not neglect the Sa-guna and the Sakara aspect. You have to accept and take it and withthe help of that, reach the goal of Nirguna or Nirakara.This process is called Meditation or is referred to as dhyana.However, today in the world many people are teaching in many dif-ferent ways the meaning of the word dhyana. What is the meaningof dhyana? What is it that we are going to meditate about and who isgoing to do it? For what purpose are we going to meditate? Unlessthere is an object on which you could meditate, it is not possible tomeditate. Such an object on which you meditate or do dhyana is re-ferred to as dhyeya. Without the object of concentration, you cannotconcentrate. There is an object of meditation, but who is meditating?Therefore, there must be a third thing—dayatha, which is you. You,who would be called dhyatha, through the path of meditation ordhyana, have to reach and experience the object of meditation ordhyeya. These three are being referred to as three factors: one whoreceives the obeisance, one who gives the obeisance and the processof giving obeisance. When the man who meditates takes to the object104Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972of meditation and goes through the process of meditation, then allthese three, one who meditates, the one which is the object of medi-tation and the process of meditation—unite and coalesce into oneand only then you achieve oneness. The one who loves, the one whois being loved and the process of love, are three factors. In premaone who gives prema, one who receives prema, and the process ofprema; we should regard all these three as one, through which thePrema Thathwa, or the aspect of love, is flowing. Even if any one ofthese three is missing, it is not possible to realise the completeness.If two, the one who loves and the process of love are there and thereis no one to love, then it becomes useless. If the other two, the onewho loves and the one who can be loved are there, but if there is nolove between the two, then that becomes useless. On the other hand,there may be the process of love and there may be one who will beloved, but if there is nobody to love, then also it becomes useless. So,it is the oneness of all these three that will be referred to as dhyanaor meditation. In all these three, prema is present to the same extent.This is referred to by saying “Love is God”—“Live in Love.”There is a need for us to make a proper enquiry into this pathof meditation. This is a very good path to reach the Infinite. Al-though all these days you have been listening to what is contained inmany of our scriptures like the Upanishads, the Vedas, the Dar-sanas and Sastras, and so on, if you have not understood what ismeant by dhyana, the path by which to reach the destination, then allthese may remain as book knowledge and may create an allergy inyou. For dhyana, the time is important. This time that is important isreferred to as Brahma Muhurtha. You will have to choose whateverform you like for the purpose of meditation, and during the time in-terval called the Brahma Muhurtha, which is from 3 a.m. to 6 a.m.,you will have to meditate on that at the same time, every day. Thereare also some methods and disciplines for this. You should not ne-glect and feel that there is no need for such specific methods.There is a small example for this. We have planted a smallfruit tree. When it is a small plant, we want to protect it by giving itSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972105fences. When it is a young plant, why do we put fence around it andwhy do we try to protect it? It is because we feel that goat, sheep andsuch other animals will come and probably eat it up and destroy theplant. We want it to grow well and we keep a fence around it. Butwhen that plant has grown and become a big tree, then we remove allthat fencing. Why are we removing all the fence and protection atthat time? The meaning of removing this fence is that the very sameanimals, like goat, sheep and cattle, which would have eaten up anddestroyed the plant when it was tender, will then come and will seekshelter and shade which the big tree now provides. The practicewhich ultimately gives you moksha or liberation should, in the initialstages, be regarded as a plant. For this practice, the fence, which weshall call discipline, is absolutely necessary. The reason for this isthat bad company, bad ideas, bad associations and such other thingsmay come and may destroy this young plant of practice. In orderthat they may not come and may not destroy, we will have to acceptand observe discipline as the fence which will protect us. When thisyoung plant which is seeking moksha by dhyana, when it grows andbecomes a big tree, then even though such bad ideas, bad companyand bad thoughts come close to the person, the big tree is such thatall these visitors will only get pleasure and happiness out of that tree.They cannot do any harm to that tree.That is why when we commence dhyana and when we wantto be in meditation, we should try and put ourselves in what is calleda padmasana. For today’s padmasana, although there are not badqualities and bad thoughts in you, the type of trousers, the drainpipepants that you are wearing are coming as an obstacle for your sittingin padmasana. You should not sit on bare ground. You should siton either a wooden plank or on a mat or something like that. Notonly that, you should not sit on a bare wooden plank. You shouldspread a piece of cloth over it. In the beginning, you should attemptto make a start with a wooden plank that is above the ground at leastby half an inch. There are some reasons for taking a wooden plank.The reasons are that the earth has got the power of conduction and106Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972diffusion. When you sit in meditation, because through you ispassing the current of divine strength on account of your Dhyana,on account of the attraction which the earth has, you should not getdisturbed. Therefore you have got to have a plank. When we lay anelectric wire inside a house, we also have a specially constructed wirewhich is called the earth wire and which is put into the earth. Like-wise, we should regard our body as our house. While thus in thehouse of our body we are in the process of giving rise to and estab-lishing the divine current, we should take all precautions that are nec-essary by insulating ourselves from the earth and by preventing thepower or the strength in you from flowing away or dissipating intothe earth. That is why our ancients have taught us that we should siton a plank.The practice of getting up at 4:30 a.m., at the Brahma Mu-hurtha, is also a very good habit. You are young, and if while youare young, while your mind and body are still very sound and sturdy,if you do not start such good practices and get used to them at thisage, when you grow a little older, when your body becomes a littlemore infirm and stiff, it will not be possible for you then to do so. Itwill be very difficult for you to acquire this practice at a later age.Truly, this age of yours is such that it is quite possible to understandmany sacred things. If you grow older and start practices late, youmay not be able to get the happiness and benefit out of the practices.There are many people who think that they will do all this after theyretire. Before they retire, they always say “duty is God; work isworship” and they go on doing all kinds of work, taking all kinds ofjobs either under the Government or under some private agency. Butthis is not right. It is much better that you should do these thingsthen and there and not go on postponing. This has been told to us inthe Bhagavatha. When the servants or the attendants of Yama comeand pull you with a rope and ask you to move on, when they dragyou with their rope and ask you to be quick and go along as yourtime is over, your own relations will say, “Now there is no hope, putthis body outside the house” and your wife and children will simplySummer Showers in Brindavan 1972107cry and say, “Now it is all finished, there is no more hope.” Undersuch conditions, is it possible for you to utter the name of the Lordand offer your devotion to God? So at this young age, I am veryhopeful that you will understand the significance of dhyana and startdhyana and become an ideal example for the rest of the country.Before you take your padmasana and before you sit on thewooden plank, have a small jyothi, a candle light, in front of you. Youlook at that jyothi, the light, well with open eyes. After one minute,close your eyes; after you have closed the eyes, feel that the light thatyou had seen before closing your eyes, is in your heart. You get thefeeling that inside the lotus of your heart, right at the centre is thisparticular jyothi. If you are not able to picture the jyothi in the lotusof your heart and get that feeling, then open your eyes, look at thelight again; close your eyes and try to picture it inside your heartonce again. After that, you think of it and you picture to yourself, fixit in your mind and feel that particular jyothi is put in the centre ofthis lotus. After that, you take this jyothi from the centre of the heartand move it to each part of your body; bring it to your neck; fromthe neck bring it to your mouth; from the mouth bring it to yourhand; from the hand take it to your leg; from the leg take it to yourear; take it to your eyes; take it to your head; from the head bring itout all around you; when you have brought it out of your head, youimagine that you have taken this jyothi and given it to those who arerelated to you; those who are affectionate to you and your friends.Not only that, spread the light even amongst your enemies. Afterthat, you picture to yourself that you have taken this jyothi and givenit to all the birds, the beasts and everything around you.Where this jyothi or light has moved, there will be no dark-ness. It is in this context that all our Upanishads have said, “Tha-maso maa jyothir gamaya.” Since this jyothi has reached your eyes,you will no longer have any bad vision or bad sight. Because thisjyothi has gone to your ears, you will not hear evil. Because thisjyothi has reached your tongue, out of your tongue will no longercome any bad words. Since this jyothi has reached your head, evil108Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972thoughts should no longer go into your head nor will they arise inyou. Since the same jyothi has gone into your heart, bad ideasshould no longer enter your heart. Since the same jyothi has alsotouched your feet, your feet should no longer walk into bad places.Because to your hands, the same jyothi has reached, your hands willno longer engage themselves in bad acts. The word bad is synony-mous with darkness. In truth, if you have allowed this jyothi tospread everywhere, there is no room anywhere for this darkness orbad to persist. If, while engaged in such dhyana or meditation, youare still doing something bad, it simply means that this jyothi has notreached that particular organ which is doing bad.By this meditation, not only bad traits that are in you willhave been removed, but in their place noble and sacred ideas and sa-cred actions would have entered; not only that, you would be able toget the glorious Darshan of Easwara or you would experience ad-waitha, the experience of oneness, because the light that is in you ispresent in all human beings, because the light that is present in youis present in all the birds and animals—the light is everywhere. Byrealising this, you will also have established the truth of the saying,“Geetavakyam Idam Dharmam.” Some of you may get a doubtand say to yourselves, “Well, we like Rama, He is our God; we likeKrishna, He is our God; we like Swami, He is our God. Why shouldwe not take and meditate on one of these Forms? Why should wehave a light in front of us for meditation?” But a shape or a particu-lar form is not a permanent thing. That is a changing thing; that isalso a fleeting thing. It is not right that you should put your concen-tration on something that will change, which is not permanent. Youmust have something that does not change. That is why you have totake the jyothi. Having the jyothi which does not change, in yourmeditation you can certainly put into it, the rupa or form which youwant and which you want to pray to. There is nothing wrong in do-ing that. In this form or rupa, there is always a growth and decline.On the contrary, if we have a jyothi, or a light in one place, it does notmatter how many people may come and light up their lamps fromSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972109this one jyothi, this jyothi is not going to diminish or lose anything.This first jyothi, the source, is called the Akhanda Jyothi. Those whocome and light up their lamps are called jivan jyothies. So manyjivan jyothies, all of them have started from one single AkhandaJyothi only. By putting this jyothi in our hearts, in each individualjiva’s heart, the result of the meditation will be that this single jivanjyothi will go and merge itself in the Akhanda Jyothi and will teachyou the nature of adwaitha, or the oneness of this world and the en-tire creation.For this, a time, a process and a place are very essential. Theplace may change. Today you may be in Brindavan, tomorrow youmay be in Bangalore, the day after that, you may be in another placelike Madras. For this body, which is traveling from place to place, itis not possible always to have a fixed place for the purpose of medi-tation. Even if there is a change with regard to the place where youmeditate, you must take great care to see that the time at which youmeditate does not change. At the time that has been fixed for yourdhyana, if you, out of your heart, are willing to offer prema throughyour meditation, then surely at the appropriate time, God will comeand will receive your prema, and will give you all happiness. Whatyou have to give to God is prema. It must be prema coming fromwithin your heart. It must be at the appropriate time. So, if you giveheartfelt prema at the appropriate time, then God will certainly re-ceive it, and God will shower on you all happiness.You must also have heard that God is SATH CHITHANANDA (Sath-chith-ananda). I have now to tell you the meaningof BABA. BABA is B.A.B.A. The first B stands for Being; A standsfor Awareness; the third letter B stands for Bliss; the fourth letter Ais for Atman. The first B—BEING is SATH; the next letterA—AWARENESS is CHITH; Third letter B is BLISS orANANDA. The last letter, the fourth letter is ATMA, that meansSATH-CHITH-ANANDA is ATMA. You also know the meaning ofSATHYA; SATHYA is TRUTH. It is something that is unchangingduring all times. The word SAI has three sounds in it; SA, AA, YE.110Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972SA stands for the sacred and Divine; AAYEE means mother. In dif-ferent languages, we have for the mother, Aayee, Mayee and Thayee.Aayee means mother; Baba means father. SAI BABA is the Divinemother and father. SA AAYEE BABA—Divine mother and father. Inthe same way we use the letter SA for Divine, for mother we can usethe word AMBA, for father we can use the word SIVA, SA AMBASIVA (SAMBASIVA). SambaSiva or SAI BABA are exactly thesame, there is no difference between the two. Therefore, it becomesevident that this is “Siva Sakthi Atmaka Swarupa”. So, if you wantto taste and experience this Divinity, if you want to taste the nectar ofbliss, then from tomorrow you start on meditation. I am blessing youand I am hoping that you will be able to get the happiness and blissof Divinity by such practices.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 11111. Destiny and divine GraceThe Mahabharatha and the Ramayana, which are the mostprecious jewels of India, are like vast oceans. If we look at theseoceans from one side, we will have only a limited view; but if weclimb up a hill and have a look at them, we get a fuller view and abetter understanding of them. What we have to do is to delve intothem and try to explore and understand the treasures contained inthese big oceans. The Ramayana and the Mahabharatha are verysacred books, which will directly tell us about many things, espe-cially the ways in which we have to conduct ourselves. The Rama-yana and the Mahabharatha will help us in our daily life, like ourtwo eyes. We are not able to know the true value of these jewels, andwe think that the Mahabharatha is all about a battle between thesons of two brothers, and that the Ramayana is a story wherein ademon stole the wife of Rama and Rama won her back. It is not likethat. These two epics are like the heart and the head of India, and areas vital to India as the heart and the head are to a human body.In the lecture delivered to you this morning, you were toldthat, “Swa Dharmo Nidhanam Sreyaha, Para Dharmo Bhayaava-hah.” This means that in carrying out one’s own dharma, even ifone perishes, it is far better than taking to dharma not belonging tooneself. The latter path is beset with fear. We must try to first under-stand what dharma is. Then we can try to know what is our owndharma or swadharma. In the word swadharma, there are actuallytwo words, swa and dharma. First comes the swa, then comesdharma. These two are different words. They are not one word, butwe use the words together. swa means “I”; “I” means BrahmaThathwa. Therefore, by the word swa we have to mean Brahman orBrahma Thathwa. Dharma means right conduct. So swadharmameans the path of the Brahman or the path of the Supreme Being.That thing that comes straight out of our heart must be considered as112Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972dharma. Between dharma and sathya, there is yet another thing.The prompting that comes out of the heart or the feeling that ema-nates from the heart is called rutha. Rutha means the feelings andthe ideas. They are of paramount importance. They set out all theguidelines for action and have a determining influence. So the feel-ing that has been shaped in the heart, when it comes in the form ofspeech, is called sathya or rruth. If whatever is implied in thesewords is put into practice, that is called dharma. We can say thatdharma is that which is born from the heart, which is then expressedin the shape of words and then put into practice.Dharma is not a thing that can be determined by each andevery person, according to his whim. Some may say that the dharmathat comes out of one’s heart is one’s dharma; how can it becomethe dharma of God? So, in your heart—not the physical heart butthe spiritual heart—you must try to locate and cognise the AtmaThathwa. The word “I” belongs to Atma and never to the body.Thus, dharma is that which comes from our heart and which is to beput into practice by us. We try to put into practice according to theideals of our culture and try to live up to that ideal.The vyavaharika dharma, or dharma relating to the dailyroutine, will be changing from day to day. Those things that will bechanging from day to day are not real dharma. Dharma is notchangeable, it is eternal, it is immutable, it is truth. If it is changeable,why should we establish such a dharma? Should we act accordingto it? Rama has been described in the Ramayana by the statement“Ramo vigrahavaan dharmaha.” Rama is the embodiment ofdharma. Even though Rama had a physical body, the dharma thathe lived and set as example and established in the world for eternityis the eternal dharma and unchanging truth.All the things that begin with the word swa have been born inthe sanctity of our heart and they are not connected with the physicalworld. swadharma, swabhava, swechcha are words that begin withswa. When we think of these words, they will certainly tell us aboutour nature and about the Atma that is within ourselves. SwadharmaSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972113is the dharma of the Atma. Swabhava is the nature of the Atma. So,also, Swechcha means the freewill of the Atma. Swechcha, in ordi-nary usage, means freedom or liberty. We should not take it in theordinary sense. Swechcha means the will of the Atma. If we take it inthe true sense and follow it up, we will be much benefited by our ac-tion.Brahman is described as having the nature of wisdom. Thatis why it has been said that the end of wisdom is freedom. So, free-dom means jnana thathwa or the light of wisdom, but not the unre-strained way in which we try to live our lives in this world. There aremany things that we have to learn from our Puranas, our Ithihasas,our Vedas and from the sayings of elders. For everything, speech isthe authority. We are taking sabda or sound of the word as authorityor proof. For all the words, sathya or truth is the real basis.You might have heard that of all the mandalas or regions, theDhruva Mandala is the highest. We generally think that DhruvaMandala is a place where Dhruva, the son of Uthanapada, lives, butit is a mistake. Dhruva means Truth. So Dhruva Mandala means aregion that is higher than all the other mandalas. That is why thesaying has come that “Truth is God.” So to attain the Truth or theform of Truth, which is called the Parabrahman, we have to followthe truthful path, the path of truth. Whatever state we want to obtainwe have to follow the kind of path suited to it. So if we want to reachthe stage of Sathya but follow the path of falsehood, we can never goto the Sathya state. I shall give you a small example. When water isput in water, it will certainly get well mixed. There will be no diffi-culty. But when oil is put in water, they do not mix properly. Waterwill be separate and oil will be separate. Therefore when sathya ortruth is combined with sathya or truth, then it will be real sathya. Butif we mix untruth with truth, it will be just like trying to mix oil withwater.Many people have tried to comment upon our great Indianbooks and have expressed many contradictory and conflicting views.I shall cite here an example. Dayananda Saraswathi established what114Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972is called the Arya Samaj and gave certain ideas through that Samaj.Though what Dayananda Saraswathi gave us are really good ideas,in certain instances, they have some complex meanings also. On ac-count of this, many people discussed what Dayananda Saraswathi isalleged to have said and never tried to understand him in the rightspirit. From time immemorial, there has never been a dearth of criticsin our country. Because there are no competent people in India whocan denounce the critics and their criticism and oppose them, insome respects India has come to the present stage. There are Indianswho know what there is in the Vedas, Puranas, Ithihasas, and othertexts. They are rather indifferent and feel that there is no need tochallenge the ideas that have been expressed by people who are notreal scholars. But we should not be indifferent like that. If we leave asmall plant to take its own course, it will grow up into a big tree andsometimes it spreads its thorns also around it.Once, Dakshinamurthi wanted to teach the people the realspirit of God and also he wanted to enjoy himself. He took a tree ashis guru; he took a river as his guru, so also he took a stone as hisguru. He took nature as his preceptor and began to travel with joy.After some time, he reached the shore of an ocean. He sat on theshore and was contemplating. At that time a little dirt had fallen inthe ocean. The ocean became very furious and sent wave after waveto repel that dirt to the shore. Dakshinamurthi got angry with the sea.He said, “What is this? This dirt is a very small thing and the oceanis a very expansive one. Can it not contain this small piece of dirt initself? How selfish is this ocean?” Then he reflected that because theocean is to be respected, he should find out whether it wished to givehim some message. He felt he should not get angry with the oceanand prayerfully asked that he be given the reason for its action andthus make his heart and mind peaceful. Then the ocean spoke thus:“I am very expansive and very large and in me are born many, manyanimals and creatures. Therefore, I always wish that my form shouldbe very clean. If I give place to dirt, though it be very small, tomor-row it will make all my form unclean. Therefore, I did not want toSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972115give place to that little dirt and wanted to throw it back to the shore.”This, Dakshinamurthi compared to samsara or family. If, in thefamily, we give place to a mean idea or a mean quality, it will cer-tainly grow and will cover up and enmesh the whole family. There-fore, people leading a family life should try to see that not even asmall, mean quality enters it. Samsara does not refer to family lifealone. Our life itself is a samsara. So in this life, we should nevergive place to things that will mislead us or that will make us unclean.Indians should never go against any religion or any idea orany one’s feeling. Some people and some religions of other coun-tries tell us that all of us are the children of God, and so we must livepeacefully like brothers. Our religions have taught us the saying,“Easwara Sarvabhoothaanam,” or the Lord is in all the livingcreatures. Our culture teaches us that not only human beings but in-sects, animals and all living things should be treated equally, and allof them should try to live on a common basis. Indians worship theBodhi tree. The meaning of this worship is that even trees havesomething good in them, that they have fragrance that indicatesgood. We are worshipping animals also; some people worship thelion. It is called the vahana or the vehicle of Devi or Lalitamba. Weworship the cow. We worship all these because we think that godli-ness is not only in human beings but also in animals. So amonganimals, we select the best of them because we see God in them. In-dians worship even snakes that are considered to be very poisonousand harmful. To others it may seem ridiculous that we worship trees,animals and the poisonous snakes. However, it has a very significantmeaning that in all these things we see Godliness and treat all ofthem equally. So our real religion points to unity and not to diver-sity.Now I shall try to answer the doubts that have arisen in theminds of some of the students; because these doubts, if left unan-swered, grow bigger and will go on pestering you, with bad results.Therefore, I want to clear all your doubts. One student mentionedabout prarabhda karma and sanchita karma, the consequence of all116Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972our actions, and asked whether, with the grace of God, these can beovercome, especially the bad part of it. We should not try to worshipGod only for the sake of overcoming the consequence of all our ac-tions. If you worship him to get His grace, prarabhda, sanchita, andall other karma will become ineffective by themselves. Before tryingto rectify these things, first try to know what is prarabhda, what issanchita, and what is agami karma.Prarabhda karma is that which we are presently undergoingand experiencing. Sanchita means all the past karma. Agami refersto karma that will follow in future. Prarabhda is in between thesanchita and agami, and we are experiencing this prarabhda on ac-count of the previous sanchita karma. The result of what we do nowwill come in future.I shall give you a small example from our daily life. We havegot a store room in which we stock all our rice. We have already theold stock of rice in the store. What we have stored in the room iscalled sanchita. When we want to cook, we remove some rice fromthe store room and begin to cook it. What we bring from the storeroom for cooking today is called prarabhda. What we cook nowand what we eat today will pass out of our body tomorrow. Some-times what we eat may come out in the shape of a belch. Thereforewe cannot escape from prarabhda, we must experience it in this life.In the store room, there is only rice. When we bring it we will beable to convert it into many preparations. In this way, we can makethe rice into food, we can make it in the form of pulihora; we cancook it in the shape of chakrapongal; we can make from it idlies andalso dosas, and so on, all of which are names for different prepara-tions from rice. We never change the base, which is always rice. Youhave to start any preparation with rice only. Even though there issanchita, if you try to behave in a sathwik way, in a pious and goodway, you will be able to change even sanchita. You may say that inthe rice store, there are big stones. They are the results of our badactions. They are in the store mixed with rice. Before we cook, do wenot try to remove the stones from the rice? So it is quite necessarySummer Showers in Brindavan 1972117that when we experience sanchita, we can overcome the bad effectsto some extent, or a great extent, and make them clean, just as wemake the rice clean.Here is another example. Prarabhda can be compared to thedust that follows in the wake of a bus. When the bus is going, thedust also will be following it. So when the karma, which can becompared to the bus, is running, the prarabhda, which can be com-pared to the dust, will be pursuing it. When the bus stops and doesnot travel, then the dust comes and falls over it. But when the busdoes not stop and keeps on running, the dust will be only at a dis-tance. So when we are satisfactorily doing our daily duties withoutinterruption, the dust, or the prarabhda, will be at a distance and be-hind us without affecting us.You may ask how long can we travel in a bus? We have tostop somewhere. It is not so. This road is of three kinds; work, wor-ship and wisdom. This work is related to karma and dust will beonly there. You may take this as a village road. But if you pass somedistance, then you will have a better road, a tar road. When the tarroad comes, the dust will never fall on the bus. If you go still further,you shall reach the trunk road, the highway. So the road of karma iscalled the village road. bhakthi or worship is the town road or the tarroad. Wisdom is the highway wherein there is no possibility of thedust coming. When we are following only the path of karma, thisprarabhda will never come to an end. But if we do the karma in away that we perform all actions, for the pleasure and for the satisfac-tion of God, in worship and dedication to Him, no prarabhda willtrouble us.From the examples of Dhruva and Markandeya, we knowhow karma can be overcome. Markandeya’s parents were to have ason who would live only for sixteen years. But from the time of thebirth of the child, not only the child but also the parents were wor-shipping God in great devotion; and the effect is that they couldchange even the sankalpa of God, and, as a result, Markandeyacould live forever. There is this capacity of changing the sankalpa of118Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972even God by devotion. We need not be afraid of prarabhda or san-chita. If we think that the effect of the prarabhda karma is inescap-able, then what is the use of worshipping God? Even though pra-rabhda is there, the grace of God will certainly remove, to a largeextent, the bad effects from the prarabhda. Here is a small examplefor this. There is an injection bottle. It will be written on that, that themedicine inside can be used up to 1970. That bottle is there even inthe year 1972 and the medicine is also there in the bottle, but themedicine will have no power. It cannot serve its purpose. In the sameway, in our destiny there may be the medicine or prarabhda; but bythe grace of God we can weaken its effect, blunt its effect. Eventhough it is there, it cannot trouble us. We can become beneficiariesof God’s grace; we need not be afraid of either prarabhda or san-chita or agami. If God is pleased with our worship, He will certainlyannul the bad effects of prarabhda and sanchita. Therefore, themost important thing we have to try is to earn the grace of God, bywhich we can overcome all these bad effectsAnother question is what we hear of the Kali Yuga. We musttry to make the best of our present age only, and try to do goodthings and live happily in this world. Past is past, and it will nevercome again, and we are not sure of the future. Present is not perma-nent. It will be always changing and moving. That is why we say,“Be good, do good, see good—that is the way to God.” Try to begood, fill your heart with good and lead a good life, and the resultalso will be good. When one falls sick, it is not in any way useful tofeel sorry over it. After falling sick, it is necessary that we shouldsomehow try to take proper medicine and get over the sickness. In-stead of weeping over the disease we have got, it is better to try andget it cured and help the body to get well. So also instead of feelingsorry for the bad things that are happening in this Kali Yuga, wemust try always to be good and remove the bad from this world. Weare seeing many bad things and distractions among the studentsnowadays. You are all students, and you have to try to remove all ofthose distractions and bad things. Try to be good so that you maySummer Showers in Brindavan 1972119reap happiness as a result. Students should not give place to bad as-sociations and bad ideas. The right way of leading a good life in thisworld is the spiritual, moral and ethical way. We must care for thesethree paths: the spiritual, the moral and the dharmic. Where there islove, there is no room either for hatred or for disease. When there isno love, there will be hatred towards others and that hatred will de-velop into a big disease. Jealousy, anger, and ego are the biggest dis-eases. If you want to keep yourself aloof from these three diseases,you must try to love everybody.When one of the girl students spoke in the beginning, sheaddressed others as “friends”. This friendship may develop intoanything. Therefore, I asked her not to address others as friends. Inthe life of students today, this friendship is spreading along a blindpath and without restraint. So instead of considering others asfriends, if you consider them as sisters and brothers, we know thattowards sisters we shall never develop a bad feeling. Students musttry to consider one another as brothers and sisters, and not merefriends, because even in friendship, sometimes there are bad mean-ings and bad interpretations. When Swami Vivekananda introduceda new form of address at the Congress of Religions in Chicago, in-stead of addressing them as “Ladies and Gentlemen”, he addressedthem as “Brothers and Sisters”. It was quite new to the foreigners,and they were so much touched and moved by this gesture that theyapplauded him incessantly for fifteen minutes. Of course, nowadaystoo, we are addressing the audience as sisters and brothers, but thatfeeling is not there in our hearts even for the time we are on the plat-form. What we do not feel in our hearts should not be expressedoutwardly. We must give place to true feelings in our hearts and wemust try to practice good things in our life.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ Page 12012. Self-control and DetachmentAll religions teach us only good. We should try to under-stand this and follow them in practice. Today our programme beganwith Bharatha Natya. We should know that our very life is aBharatha Natya. The world is the platform for the Bharatha Natyaof our life. Each individual is one of the many actors. Maya is thethala. Maya will prompt this life to dance on the platform of theworld. This Narthaki, or the actress of maya, has got the capacity toattract certain scenes or dhrisyas. If maya has not exercised hercharm and spell on the minds of the people, man would not havecome to such a condition. God is inside our heart but maya distractsour attention with her play, and we miss the vision of God. To getover the spell cast on us by the actress maya, we have to do certainpractices and put in some effort. Just as if there are no accompani-ments, no dance will have that appeal and beauty, so also when mayais the actress, the song we have to sing as an accompaniment to hershould be suitable to the actress. If both of them differ and do notmatch, there will be disharmony and the dance will not be attractive.This maya can be given the name narthaki, or actress. The wordnarthaki contains three letters,  na rtha ki. If we read this word in thereverse manner—it becomes ki rtha na, so kirthana will be able tocontrol this actress or maya. We have to ask what kind of kirthana?Whose wealth is this narthaki? She is the property of God. Becausemaya or narthaki is the property of God, the kirthana or the songabout God will be very pleasant to her. Bhagawat kirthana or thesong about God will certainly give great pleasure to this narthaki.The hearing of God’s name alone is satkruthi or good tune,and nothing else is satkruthi. So, our sages and seers based their lifeand activities on satkruthi and oriented it toward union with the Su-preme soul. The stage thus reached can be called nivruthi. In orderto reach that stage of nivruthi, we have to put in much effort. WaterSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972121does not have any necessity for fish. But fish cannot live withoutwater. In the same way, there is no necessity of a disciple for a guru.But if a disciple does not have an acharya or a preceptor, he will findit very difficult. We are doing all these preparations of providing youwith the right type of teachers to make you understand what theUpanishads have said, what the epics like the Ramayana and theMahabharatha have taught, so that you may be able to get to thestate of nivruthi and also obtain peace and tranquility of mind andheart.You are having much of sravana, hearing or listening to.You have to consider well and try to know what you have heard andhow much of it you are going to put into practice. By merely hear-ing, your heart cannot attain a state of sanctity. You must think andcontemplate over it. This is called manana, and after manana comesnididhyasa. Only after nididhyasa is completed will you be able tohave the fruit and benefit of sravana or listening. Today, 99 percentof the people think that they have done their business by hearing,and they do not try to do manana and nididhyasa.Sravana or listening can be compared with the cooking thatis done in a kitchen. If we bring what is cooked to the dining roomand eat it, that can be compared to manana or contemplation. Aftereating, if we try to digest what we have eaten, that can be compared tonididhyasa. Only when all these three actions are done will what weeat give strength and nourishment to our body. Nowadays, every-thing is ready in the kitchen; but we are not able to bring it to thedining room, eat it and digest it. Without these, how can we get thestrength that is required? Knowledge of every kind is ever availablein the form of Vedas and Puranas. We are not trying to bring outwhat is said in those texts to our experience. The sole reason for thisis that we do not have a sincere desire for doing so.We must try to strengthen our mental capacity. The mind hasimmense potency and there is no other power that is equal to it. Themind itself is the sole cause for everything, either for bondage or forfreedom, for happiness as well as for misery, and for so many other122Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972things. A small example to illustrate this is in the story about Prah-lada and Hiranyakasipu. Prahlada is the son and Hiranyakasipu isthe father. We must try to know the distinction between the fatherand the son. Because Lord Narayana killed his brother, Hiranya-kasipu was very angry with him and he tried to search for Narayana;and when he could not see him anywhere, he told his son that Nara-yana or God is nowhere in this world. But Prahlada argued with hisfather and asserted that God Narayana is everywhere. He said, “Donot doubt, God is not only here but He is everywhere. Wherever yousearch for Him, He will be present there.” Then Hiranyakasipu toldhis son, “Mad boy, I have searched every place, there is no placewhich I have not searched, I have searched even the ocean, but Icould not find Him.” But Prahlada had complete faith and confi-dence in God and he told his father, “It is only a defect of your vi-sion and the malady of your mind if you could not find Him. Searchfor Him sincerely and with faith, you will be able to find Him.”Then the father asked, “Is he present in this pillar?” “Yes, He isthere without fail,” said the son. Then Hiranyakasipu broke the pil-lar. Instantaneously, God appeared in the form of “Nara-Hari”,half-lion and half-man. God was not found by Hiranyakasipu whenhe searched for Him everywhere, but He made Himself visible in thepillar when Prahlada told his father that God is everywhere. The rea-son is this: Hiranyakasipu never believed in his heart that there isGod, but Prahlada believed with great faith that God is there and thatHe is omnipresent. Therefore, according to the idea Hiranyakasipuhad, he could not find God; and according to the idea Prahlada had,he could find God everywhere.If we try to make our mind pure, then we shall be able to dis-cover anything and everything. In our sadhana, the first thing wehave to do is to deepen and steady our faith. God is all-pervadingand He is every-where, and so the Atma Thathwa that flows out ofour mind will be very near to God. Because God comes out of ourheart in the form of speech, we must try to make our speech as pureand as clean as possible. God is also in the form of Truth. So, what-Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972123ever we will be telling through our speech, God will be saying, “Letit be so!”There is a small story to illustrate this. A traveler was goingon his way. After going some distance, he was tired on account ofthe summer heat. By the side of the path, there was a big tree, and hewent there to take rest under the shade of that tree. When he wentinto that cool shade, he was overjoyed. Then he said to himself, “Iam able to find a very cool place; how fortunate will I be if I am ableto get a glass of cool water also here?” Instantaneously, a tumbler ofwater came down. After he drank that water he thought, “Now I havequenched my thirst, but how happy will I be if there is a good bedhere because this floor is hard and rough.” At once a big soft bedcame down. He then thought, “Even in my house I do not possesssuch a bed and such a pillow. If my wife comes here and sees, howhappy will she feel?” Immediately the wife also came. He saw herand he thought, “Is she my wife or is she a demon? Will she eatme?” No sooner had he said this when she ate him. The tree underthe shade of which he sat was kalpa vriksha. Kalpa vriksha is a treethat fulfils all desires. When the traveler sat under the kalpa vriksha,whatever good things he thought of, he got them instantly. But whenhe thought about bad things, bad things also came to him.This world is a part of kalpa vriksha. We are sitting underthe shade of this kalpa vriksha. If we think badly, bad happens to us;and if we think in a good manner, good happens to us. So when ourthoughts, when our contemplation, and when our deeds are pure, thekalpa vriksha of the world will be giving the good things desired byus. Both good and bad come only from our hearts. They never comefrom outside. That is why, at the outset, we have to make our heartsas pure as possible.All these sacred stories and texts will be preaching to us aninner meaning. When we read the story of Prahlada, we will bethinking that Prahlada is good and that Hiranyakasipu is an atheist.But we must also think about what happened to them. If we go deepinto the story, it will teach us that when we think in a good way, good124Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972things will happen to us; and if we think in a bad way, bad thingswill happen to us. So in this way for everything, the mind or oursankalpa, the desire, is the cause.In the morning, I told you about Gajendra Moksha and otherstories. Who is this Gajendra or the Lord of Elephants? Our storytells us that Gajendra was a king in his previous birth, and he tookthe form of an elephant on account of a curse pronounced on him bya sage. While he was going with the female elephants in the forest,he saw a lake. He wanted to take water from it; he went into the lakeand a crocodile caught his foot. This Gajendra in his previous birthwas a great king. King signifies another form of Atma. Atma is theKing and Paramatma is the kingmaker. So the individual, who isone with the state of Atma, has become an animal on account of thecurse given to him by a sage. When a king changed into an elephant,what does it mean? He let go of his Atma Drishti, or oneness withthe Atma, and degraded himself into the form of an animal. AtmaDrishti is just like the gait of a lion. When the lion is walking, it willbe always going straight, but will never try to look back. And jivadrishti is just like the gait of a sheep. The sheep will never gostraight. It will be afraid, and it will be always going with some fearin its mind. If we go with Atma Drishti, we shall be able to gostraight and get happiness. But if we fall from the Atma Drishti tojiva drishti, sometimes we may become like animals. Like the kingwho became an elephant, we may experience difficulties in life. Indaily life, also, if we happen to do a thing that is very bad, the eldersremark, “Why did you do this? Are you an animal?” It does notmean that we are real animals. But our behaviour in doing such anaction is just like that of an animal. This elephant had forgotten theAtma Thathwa and was leading a life of attachment, of falsehood,conceit and arrogance. This elephant is entering the forest of life.When it is wandering in the forest of life, it becomes thirsty. Whatkind of thirst is it? It is related to the enjoyment of the senses. Im-mediately, it sees a lake. What is that lake? It is full of worldly de-sires and that is called the samsara or family. He wants to enjoy theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972125pleasures of that samsara and he goes into that lake. He is too muchseized with desires, which never let one think over what he is doing.Therefore, he puts both his legs in the lake. At once a crocodile,which can be compared to mamakara, or attachment or ahamkara orego, catches hold of its leg. When it caught its leg, the elephant wasnot able to escape from it. He tried all means. The elephant foundthat its body had become very weak. Then it wanted to depend uponits mental capacity. It found that even the mental strength was alsoinsufficient and could not help. Then it thought only of divinestrength.Nowadays men are leading their lives just like that elephant.Man is depending entirely upon the strength of his body, upon thestrength of his intellect, upon the strength of his relations and uponthe strength of his learning. He is not counting and depending uponthe divine strength. When the elephant found that it lost all itsstrength, it thought that it should pray to God. Why did not the ele-phant pray to God for such a long time, and why did it try to pray toGod in the last moments only? We must try to find out the reasonfor both these. We are leading our lives entirely depending upon thestrength of the body and the strength of the mind. If one dependsentirely on these two strengths alone, he will not be able to get hap-piness. Even though he pretends to look happy outside, reallyspeaking, he has no laughter or happiness in his heart. The reason isthat the strength of the body and the strength of the mind are not ca-pable of giving any happiness or peace to man. When we dedicatethese two strengths to God, and if we think that everything dependsupon the grace of God, then we may get peace and happiness withthe grace and kindness of God.We read in the Bhagavatha story that when the elephantprayed, God sent his chakra which is called sudarshana chakra.We must try to know the inner meaning of the sudarshana. Sudar-shana is not merely a weapon or an instrument. When the elephanttried to turn his looks to God, the looks of God also were turned to-wards the elephant. su-darshana means good look. When the ele-126Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972phant tried to look toward God, the good looks of God also fellupon the elephant. That is why it is called sudarshana. I used to saywhen I was in Shirdi, “You look to me and I shall certainly look toyou.” When your looks fall on Me, My looks certainly will fall onyou. When the good looks of the elephant were directed towardGod, the kind looks of God were sent to save the elephant. When thekind look of God fell on the elephant, then it was able to get rid ofthe bondage.We have to think about the crocodile also. If the crocodile ison the ground, it will not have any strength. When it is in the water,its natural habitation, it will be very strong. So also, dharma willhold with all its strength, not in words but in practice. dharma pro-tects you when you practise it. Bhagavan said in the Gita,“Dharma-samsthapanaarthaaya sambhavami yuge yuge”—inevery yuga or age, I am taking birth for the sake of establishingdharma. In fact, dharma is eternal, and is present at all times, pre-sent, past and the future. What then is the necessity for establishingit? It simply means that people are not practising it, and Krishnawanted to restore or re-establish the practice of dharma.There are many things thatwe do not know and about whichwe will be having doubts. With faith and confidence and thinkingearnestly, we must try to clear those doubts and try to be happy. OurPuranas teach nothing but truth and things are explained so clearlythat no doubts need be left. These doubts come on account of thedistorted meanings we give to the words or sayings of the Puranas.I shall give you a small example to explain the relationship of jivawith other things in the world. A prince, son of a king, once went tothe forest in his princely attire. There was a sage in a hermitage. Hesaw this prince and asked him, “You appear to be a prince, whoseson are you?” The prince replied, “Our kingdom is Jitendriya Ra-jya, and I am the son of King Jitendriya.”The sage was much astonished. He asked himself in disbe-lief: “Is there a kingdom like Jitendriya? Is there a king by nameJitendriya? Perhaps he is only using words like this. I don’t thinkSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972127there is such a king living in this world.” Then the prince said, “Oh!sage, it is true, our kingdom is Jitendriya and all the people in ourkingdom are Jitendriyas; they have full control and mastery overtheir indriyas. Not only the people but every living being in thekingdom is a Jitendriya. The king is Jitendriya, and the king’s son,myself, am also a Jitendriya.”The sage was much astonished. He thought: “We sages aregoing through severe austerities and efforts for controlling oursenses and even then, we are not able to succeed; how can the king,the prince and the people of this kingdom control their senses?” Hewanted to test it. Then he said, “Oh! Prince, give me your princelydress and take my sanyasi dress yourself.” Because he was theprince of Jitendriya, he at once gave his dress to the sage. The sagethen brought the blood of an animal, poured that blood on the dressgiven to him by the prince and with that dress, went to the kingdomof Jitendriya. He entered the kingdom, and at the main gate, told thegatekeepers, “Your prince came to our forest; he was hunting in theforest and was killed by a beast. Therefore, I have taken his dressand have come here to show it to you as proof of the death of yourprince.” The gate keepers laughed at him and said, “So you havecome for this purpose?” With cheer on their faces, they sent him in.He went to the king. As soon as he went to the king and showedthose clothes to the king, he said, “Oh! King, your son was killed bya beast. I have brought his clothes.” The king also merely smiledand said, “Oh! He is not my son, nor am I his father. We are justlike birds on a tree that will come and rest themselves on the tree inthe evening and will fly away as soon as it is morning, each in itsown way. Likewise, on the tree of this samsara, all of us have cometo stay here for some time and the bird of my son has flown away.That is all to it.”The sage thought that perhaps the king, for some reason,might not have sufficient love for the son, and he wanted to show theclothes to the queen. He thought that because she is the mother, shewould certainly react with grief on seeing these clothes. He went to128Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972the queen and showed the clothes to her and told her, “Oh! mother,your son has been killed and he will not be returning.” Then thequeen also smiled and said, “All these jivas or living beings are pil-grims in the kshetra or karma. We have come on a pilgrimage tothis Karma Kshetra, and we are taking our rest in this choultry. Af-ter taking rest for some time, everybody will leave the choultry andgo his own way. In that way, we are all living in this choultry. Thereis, in fact, no relationship as father, mother, and son.”Then the sage thought that if he went to the wife of thatprince, she might certainly be stricken with grief because it is herhusband that was dead. He took the clothes to the wife of that princeand wept, showing those clothes to her. She said: “Swami, you wearthe dress of a sanyasi but the way of your weeping and crying ap-pears to be like that of an ordinary man. Will you please tell me whyyou are weeping?” Then he told her that her husband has beenkilled. She also smiled and said, “There is a tree in a forest and oneof its branches will be breaking and will fall in a stream. There isanother tree in that forest and the branch of that tree also will bebreaking and will fall in another stream. These two branches will goalong these two streams and they will come together in a big stream,will move together for a while and after some time they will get sepa-rated and each will drift in its own way. In the same manner, I am thebranch of a certain tree and my husband is the branch of anothertree. We have for some time come together and now we are sepa-rated. There is nothing to be astonished in this. For these brancheswhich are flowing in the stream of life, it is inevitable that they willhave samyoga, union, and viyoga or separation as well.” Then thesage thought that what the prince told him was entirely true and re-turned to his hermitage. He wanted still to test the mind of theprince; and as soon as he went to him, began to weep very loudly.The prince told him, “Sage, your way of weeping astonishes me.Will you please tell me the reason for your weeping?” Then thesage told him, “Prince; I went to your kingdom. Your king waskilled, your queen was killed, your wife was also killed; that is why ISummer Showers in Brindavan 1972129am weeping.” Then the prince taught a lesson to the sage by asking:“Who is the king? Who is the queen? Who is the princess? Theyare not related to me. The only king is Paramatma Himself. It is Hethat gave the kingdom to us, and it is He that has taken it away fromus. Therefore, I need not feel sorry for this. The only thing weshould take care of is to do good deeds in this life and try to get sal-vation. Therefore, I do not weep or feel sorry on account of the newsthat is brought by you.” Then he taught him that there is no mother,there is no father, there is no brother, and there is no spouse. Thereis a verse to this effect and he taught that verse to that sage. “MathaNasthi, Pitha Nasthi Nasthi Bandhu Sahodaraha; Thubhyam Nas-thi, Griham Nasthi, Thasmaat Jaagratha Jaagratha.”This life is just like a water bubble and we should not con-sider that this jiva has some relationship with other jivas. This bodyis a leather bag having nine holes—it is not a gem that has got greateffulgence. It will be giving out foul smell every moment—there isno good fragrance in it. So we have to clean this body every day andalso decorate it. In this body, there is God. If God goes out of thisbody, there is no body at all. This body is such that it will make evensacred things impious.I shall give you a small example. Once Narada went to GodNarayana. Narayana asked Narada, “You are always wandering inall the three worlds. Did you see any strange thing in this creation ofmine? Please tell me if you have seen such a thing at any time.”Then Narada said, “Lord you think that there is no mean thing or animpious thing in this world, but I have seen many impious thingsand also many mean things in this world. There is no place at all inthis world where they are not seen.” Then Narayana asked: “Isthere something unholy and mean in the creation that was done byme?” Narada replied, “Every day, every person as soon as he wakesup, will be excreting mala or reject matter. Is there anything moreunsacred than this?” Then Narayana said, “Oh! Narada, are youconsidering that as unsacred? No, it is not unsacred, it is good.”Then Narada said, “If I say that the excreta is sacred and also good,130Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972people will certainly admit me in a mental hospital.” Then Narayanaasked him, “You go and ask the excreta itself.” He had no otherwork and he was always wandering in the world and so uttering thename of Lord Narayana, he went to ask this question of that malaitself. When he was going near it, the excreta told him, “Oh! Narada,don’t come near me.” Then Narada thought that he should haveasked that foul matter to be at a distance but instead the foul matteritself was asking him to keep away. He felt that he was the son ofBrahma and was such a great sage that the foul matter treating himlike that was strange. From a distance, he addressed the excreta andsaid, “You are very dirty, what is the meaning in asking me to getaway from you?” Then he got the reply; “Last night I was in theshape of an apple, I was in the shape of a sweet, I was in the shape ofgood rice and I was in the shape of so many good things, but assoon as I entered the body of man, I got such a mean state. When Ientered man’s body only once, my state has become like this; if Ihave some relationship with man again, how meaner will be mystate?”The nature of this human body is like that; it will make im-pure anything, however good it is. We know even a flour mill be-haves better. If we put rice on the top of that, then rice flour willcome. If we put wheat on the top, wheat flour will come. If we pourany other kind of grain, the flour of that grain will come. But in themill of our body, if we put fruits, mala will be coming. If we putpickles in a jar, it will be preserved for at least one year, but if we putanything in this body, it will become dirty in less than twelve hours.Even in so dirty a body, there is a possibility of seeing pure Atma. Ifwe try sincerely, we shall be able to see in the impure body, the pureAtma or the Supreme Being. If we want to keep our jewels safely, weput them in an iron safe. The jewels that are put inside are very valu-able but the box is not as valuable as they are. If we put valuablejewels in a valuable box, thieves will take away the valuable box andthe jewels, also, along with it. So it is natural and also safe that valu-able jewels should be put in a box that is not very valuable. TheSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972131Atma is pure and very valuable. We are putting such a jewel in thisbox of a body, which is not very valuable. We must never forget thatwe have taken this box for the sake of protecting the jewel. We mustalways remember the main and only reason for which God gave usthis body. If there are no good ideas in the body, what is the use ofthis body? Even the thieves will throw off the box, after taking thejewels. We must always remember that this box, the body, is for thesake of the jewels, namely God and all the good qualities, divine vir-tues, associated with Him.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 13213. Sankara JayanthiIn the word Gita, there are two parts, “gi” and “ta”. “Gi”indicates sacrifice, and “ta” indicates spirituality. Therefore, thisbook Gita teaches us both sacrifice and the real nature of the soul. Ifwe understand the spirit of the Gita, we will know that it has taughtus that the most important trait of a human being should be sacrifice.The Gita has also taught us what kind of sacrifice it is. It should be“karma phala thyaga”, or sacrifice of the fruits of the deeds we do.The Gita never taught us that we should give up action. It has taughtus to do everything, undertake every action for the pleasure of God,and never desire for the fruits thereof.India has been the land of great sacrifices. India is also ayoga bhoomi, the land of yoga. On the east, there is the Bay of Ben-gal and on the west there is the Arabian Sea. The union or conflu-ence of these two seas is “The Hindu Maha Samudram” or the In-dian Ocean. The confluence symbolises the real meaning of thatword HINDU and teaches us the unity between the jiva and theBrahman. Those people who lived in India, leading an ideal life,must be considered as ideal jyothis or lights to all of us. While his-tory is very important and not useless, we should realise that realhistory is not that which teaches us about kings and the periodswhen they ruled, but that which teaches us about the real spirit ofIndia.Adhyatmika jivitha, or spiritual life, does not mean leavingthe homes and living in a solitary place. Spiritual life really meansthat everybody should think that all people are ONE and he, himself,is one with all. True spiritual life is that which teaches us Unity oroneness and makes us lead a life of selflessness and love. Instead offilling our minds with theories and subtleties of the sastras and ourhead with books and scriptures, it is better to fill our hearts with loveand spiritual aspirations. When we are able to fill our hearts with realSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972133love, then it will be possible for us to obtain tranquility of thoughtand peace of mind.Today in the world, we see many associations, institutionsand organisations. We must try to understand what an associationreally means. A mere group of people does not connote a samaja orassociation. The real meaning of samaja is equanimity and peacedue to a feeling of oneness. We must try to improve society byequanimity and by spreading the concept that all are equal. It is notpossible for us to visually see the samaja or the association. Samajais not a special form of the basic elements. The individuals that formthe society have got a form but not the society or the association. Wecan see the individuals that compose an association, but we cannotsee the association. If there is no individual, there is no association.In the same way, we are able to see the world but we are not able tosee the Lord of the world—Jagadeswara. If there is no Lord of theworld, there will have been no world at all. As the individual is animportant part and limb of society, so also God is an important andessential aspect of the world. He is the real basis of the Universe.In the present context, people must try first to improve them-selves and then the society and then their country. If the individualdoes not improve himself but tries to improve society, the attemptwill be a failure. We must first try to set right our home. Then wemust try to improve the village; afterward our district; next ourprovince, and next the whole country. We must go step by step likethis. But without knowing ourselves first, it will be meaningless at-tempting to improve society and the whole country. If we want toexperience the “Sath chith ananda,” we will be able to do so only insociety. It is madness to go to the forest and try to experience Sathchith ananda instead of improving our home and the society inwhich we are living. God is all-pervading; He is found in the heartsof all living beings. How can a heart that cannot love living fellowbeings love God? People will be, on the one hand, praying to Godand on the other, harming other people. This is not proper.134Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972In India, many great people were born to teach us the spiritof this love, and also to teach us the oneness of all the beings in thisworld. Among the people who propagated such lofty ideals, Sanka-racharya is one. We will not be showing real gratitude to Sankarach-arya if we merely treat this day as a festive day without trying to un-derstand what he said and what he taught. When we are able tofunction wholeheartedly according to his teachings, then only will webe celebrating his Jayanthi properly. If we do not try to know whathe taught, and if we do not try to lead a pattern of life according tohis teachings, if instead we content ourselves with sweets and feast-ing today, the day of Sankara Jayanthi, it will not be a proper cele-bration. All festival days of India are not meant for just ahara andvihara—food and enjoyment, but they are intended to turn one’smind to gaining knowledge of the Supreme Being. They have all aspiritual basis. On these festival days, we must try to know the fullmeaning of at least one saying said by such great men, and try to putit into practice. All the holidays that are generally given on such oc-casions, Jayanthis and sacred days, should not merely be consideredas holidays but as holy days. We must spend the time usefully andmake our life meaningful.We must try to imbibe the spirit of the country in which weare born. Is there a man who does not say, “This is my motherland!This is my mother tongue!” It is a great pity that sometimes Indiansthemselves do not have much faith in their precious culture! The landof India is like a beautiful garden. Just as the garden looks beautifulon account of many colourful flowers, so also India is beautiful inbeing full of great many religions. We see all the religions co-existing only in India. There is also a variety of races in India. Inspite of all the variations in races, the people of India lead their liveswith consciousness of the underlying unity, considering one anotheras brothers and sisters. It will not be possible for us to see such aunique country elsewhere. We must try to make our country pros-perous. Prosperity does not come from the sky, it does not comefrom anywhere else. It comes only from our endeavour.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972135The age in which you are now is very propitious. At this age,you must have an ideal and have the determination to strive for itsrealisation. You must have one aim, a destination or goal and try forits attainment. Man has been born in this world to achieve somethingsacred but not to spend his time in ahara, nidra, and bhaya or eat-ing, sleeping, and worrying with fear.Sankara demonstrated the real nature and value of our Indianculture through his own life. Sankara tried hard to earn the grace ofGod as it is said, “Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavati”—one who un-der-stands the supreme being will, himself, become the supreme be-ing. Sankaracharya was one like that. Among all the animals, the lifeof a human being is the greatest, and it is also not easily obtainable.When Sankara was a little boy, his father had to go to a neighbour-ing village on some important errand. In the house of Sankara, thereused to be daily worship and daily offering to God. His father usedto worship like that and he also used to offer naivedya to God andlater distribute the prasad to all the people who came there. On oneday, as the father went to the neighbouring village and, since themother was out of the house, the responsibility of worshipping Godand offering naivedya fell on Sankara’s shoulders. Sankara knewthe real meaning of the Vedic words, “Mathru Devo Bhava, PithruDevo Bhava.” When his father left the house, he told his son, “Mydear son, I am daily worshipping God and distributing naivedya toall the people. Likewise, in my absence, and in the absence of yourmother, you please try to do like that.” Sankara promised to do sowithout fail. He poured some milk in a cup, put it before the idol ofthe Goddess and prayed to her; “Mother! Take this milk that I amoffering.” Though he prayed for a long time, the Mother did nottake the milk, nor did She appear. He was very much disappointed.He said again, “Mother! Mother! you are daily taking the offeringsthat are given to you by my father. What sin have these hands ofmine committed that you are not accepting the offering that I amgiving to you?” He prayed to her earnestly from the innermostdepths of his heart. He was prepared to sacrifice even his life and136Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972told himself, “My father asked me to offer this milk to the Goddess,but I am not able to do so because the Goddess is not receiving theoffering which I made. It is better that I die.” He went out andbrought a big stone to kill himself. The Mother of the Universe isvery compassionate, and she was very much moved and touched bySankara’s sincerity and she at once appeared before him and drankthe milk that he offered. She drank the whole milk and placed theempty cup before him.The boy was very glad that the Mother of the Universe cameand drank the milk, but there was nothing in the cup to distribute toothers. He thought that his father would certainly ask for the naive-dya of the God after his return. He feared that the father may thinkthat he drank away all the milk and he may be angry with him.Therefore he prayed to the Goddess, “Goddess, give me at least adrop of milk so that I may be able to give it to my father.” But theGoddess did not come. He again sincerely continued to pray. TheGoddess was moved and she again appeared. Because she was notable to give the milk that she drank, she gave her own milk and filledthe cup. There is a belief that because Sankara tasted that Divinemilk, he was able to attain the highest learning, knowledge and wis-dom that is ever possible. So the essence of the Grace of the God-dess became the essence of the learning of Sankara. In order toplease his father, he tried hard and was able to get the Goddess ofthe Universe to manifest Herself before him. From this story, wemust learn to revere and obey the orders of our parents implicitlyand sincerely.Let us also remember his great love for his mother. He knewthat if he did not please his mother, he would not be successful in hissadhana. So, even though he desired to take sanyasa, he was notprepared to take it without the prior permission of his mother. Be-cause he was the only son, the mother also was not willing to permithim to take sanyasa. The sanyasa taken by Sankara is not like themonkship of today. By merely wearing a saffron-coloured robe, de-votion and detachment do not descend on a person. You know theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972137crocodile incident and how Sankara got his mother’s permission fortaking sanyasa. After Sankara came to the shore of the river, he toldhis mother, “Mother, it is not a real crocodile that caught me in thewaters, but it is the crocodile of samsara or family that caught me.”Sankara used his skill and his intelligence, but never did he do athing without the permission of his parents.We do various actions now and then, but they are not some-times appropriate to the time and situation. When the iron is red hot,if you beat it with a hammer, you can mould it as you want and it willyield to you. But when it becomes black and also cold even though avery strong man comes and beats it, it will not yield. Thus, our ac-tions should be appropriate to the time and situation and always befor the right purpose and in the right direction. Now, your age is theright age for doing anything. You must know that you are beingtrained to become the future citizens of India and also the future sol-diers in the moral and spiritual army of India. These summer classeshave been started to protect India from all dangers and in all ways.Now I shall describe to you a beautiful incident from the lifeof Sankaracharya. One day, when he was in Benares, he was return-ing from the river through a narrow lane, and a person who was con-sidered to be an untouchable was coming opposite to him. Sankaraasked him to move away and keep at a distance so that he, a Brah-min, could move on unpolluted. Then that untouchable askedSankara, “Are you asking the body to keep at a distance? If that isso, one body, which is jada or inert, is asking another inert body, andit has no authority to do so. If you are asking the soul to keep awayat a distance, the soul that is in me is the same as the soul or Atmathat is in you. Therefore, the same Atma cannot ask itself to moveaway from itself and be aloof.” Then Sankara thought, “This so-called untouchable is one who knows what is real Atma and what isreal anatma, what is kshetra and what is kshetrajna, and I must re-spect him.” So saying, he prostrated before the “untouchable”. Theuntouchable was none other than Lord Viswanatha Himself. He thenappeared in His true Form to Sankara. Let one be a Brahmin or be-138Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972long to any caste, if he knows well the Adwaitha Thathwa, then hehas true spiritual enlightenment.Different religions may look different and their paths maylook different, but the goal is only one. The clothes that differentpeople wear may be different, but the material with which the clothesare made is one. The ornaments may be different but the gold out ofwhich they are made is only one. The colours of different cows maybe different but the milk that they all give is only one. The darsha-nas or philosophies may be different, but the God about whom theyspeak is only one. The flowers may be different but the offering willbe the same. People delude themselves into ignorance of the basictruth. They create for themselves an illusion of plurality, build upwalls of difference among themselves and plunge into suffering andgrief. One must try to get the source of knowledge and realise thebasic unity of all creation. That will make our life sacred and mean-ingful.We have a mistaken notion that some people belong to usand others do not. You first try to know yourself. The attempt toknow yourself is called sankhya jnana. And tarka jnana is that bywhich we know what the “I” is and wherefrom this “I” has come.Living steadily in the state of “I”, if a person tries to know the truth,that state is called amanaska. So every individual should try to knowand attain the state of complete amanaska.Today, we are celebrating the Jayanthi of Sankaracharya, theJayanthi of Ramanujacharya, the Jayanthi of Madhvacharya and theJayanthi of several other great men as well. We are thinking that allthese names are different. Today is not only Sankara’s Jayanthi butit is the Jayanthi of Ramanuja also. Instead of knowing the onenessand unity in all such philosophies, we think that they are differentand thereby promote hatred. There is really no room for any differ-ences on the subject of God.If the Vaishnavites and Saivites do not like each other, it isonly because of their ignorance of the underlying inner truth. Theyouth of today should try to know that unity. They should not giveSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972139room for differences or distinctions. I shall give you an example forthis oneness or unity. We think that the God Siva has got the dama-ruka or the drum in one hand and trisula in the other hand and wevisualise His Form in that way. Similarly, in one hand of Vishnu,there is the chakra and in the other hand, there is the sankha orconch. Sankha represents sound. Chakra represents time. Vishnuhas taken the symbols of sound and time in both his hands. In thecase of Siva, damaruka, or the drum, represents sound, and trisula is“Tri-Kala the symbol of time: past, present, and future. WhatVishnu has in his hands is sound and time. Similarly what Siva hasin his hands is also sound and time. Where, then, is the differencebetween them? The difference is in Form and Name only, but theenergy or power is the same. Even in the Quoran and in the Bible,just as in the Vedas, the principle of adwaitha alone has been taught.In our Upanishads, it has been stated that Easwara is everywhereand that the world is pervaded by God in every place and in everyatom. You read something similar in the Bible, wherein it has beenstated that, “All world is one, my dear son, be good to everyone.” Itis only on account of our pride and ego, we create differences amongourselves and we make our lives miserable and unhappy.When we celebrate Sankara Jayanthi, we must know whatSankara taught us and try to put all he said into practice. Eventhough some things appear to be lifeless, when they come and com-bine with ourselves in life, they will also become most important andsignificant. For instance, we cook vegetables and eat them. We boilrice and eat it. By cooking, the life principle is removed from thevegetables and rice. When they are cooked, we think that they havebecome jadas or lifeless, but when they go into our body, they willturn into chaithanya and give us vitality and strength.Today, you have been told that there are three truths: pra-thibhasika sathya, vyavaharika sathya and paramarthika sathya.Truth is only one and it is never threefold. We only think that it is ofthree kinds. I shall give you examples for these three kinds to makeit clear that this classification is superficial. Prathibhasika sathya140Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972has neither basis nor any existence. It is our illusion. When there istwilight, a little light and a little darkness, we come by a rope andmistake it to be a snake. Really speaking, there is no snake there.The snake is only in our mind and the thing that is really there isonly the rope. This is prathibhasika sathya. If we stand before amirror, we see our reflection in it. When we move away, the reflec-tion vanishes. Therefore, the reflection is not true. When the originalobject is there, then only we will see the reflection. Here there is onebasis, namely, the original thing. Without the original, there is noreflection. This is an illustration of vyavaharika sathya. On the otherhand, paramarthika sathya is an Entity that is present everywhereand at all times. This is the true and eternal Reality.Here is an example. There is a silver cup in our hand. Wegive this to a goldsmith and ask him to prepare a plate. After sometime, we give this plate to the goldsmith and ask him to prepare abox. First it is in the shape of a cup, then it is in the shape of a plate,then it is in the shape of a box. Here the form and the name havechanged but silver never changes. We are giving value to silver andnot to the form and the name. We are giving only wages for prepar-ing the objects. This is an illustration of the paramarthika sathya.All these multiple forms we notice in the world are just like variouscups, plates and tumblers. The Atma of silver, the core in all theforms, is only one. It does not change.There are many bulbs with many different voltages and dif-ferent colours. But in all these bulbs with different voltages and dif-ferent colours, there is only one current. Even though we see manyforms, many names, many races, many creeds and many castes inthis world, we must know that the God that is present in all of them,the inner being, is in reality only one. Our students should try to getsuch sama drishti and samabhava.The youth of today, whether they are at home, or in the col-lege or in society, should not give room for bad ideas in their hearts.They must try to lead a moral, spiritual, peaceful and happy life. Stu-dents go to the college on some vehicle, either on a bicycle or on aSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972141car, these days. The parents will be very anxious until their childrencome back home safely. What is the reason? Is it due to the busytraffic? No. Because there is a tendency to see evil, there is a possi-bility of many accidents. When you are going on a bicycle, you musttry to see the road, you should not see this side, or that side, look forcinema posters or something else. If you do that, accidents do hap-pen. So when you are doing a certain thing, you should observe thediscipline related to that. You should never turn your eyes to otherthings. Because you are very young, there are many things that youhave to practise in your daily life. If you treat others unfairly or ridi-cule them, they will feel greatly pained. You must know that if otherstreat you in the same way, you will feel greatly pained. If you look ata sister of someone with a bad idea, the brother of that sister willcertainly be pained in his heart. If somebody looks at your sisterwith a bad idea, you also feel very bad in your heart. If you think ofthese two things, you will know how you should behave towardsothers.We do not see these days paapa bheethi or daiva pree-thi—fear of sin and love of God—anywhere. With fear of sin andlove of God, we must try to lead our lives in a disciplined way. Thiswill give us all happiness. We must try to respect our parents first. Ifyou respect your parents now, your children will know and will cer-tainly respect their parents, you and your wife. “Mathru DevoBhava, Pithru Devo Bhava, Acharya Devo Bhava, Athithi DevoBhava,” are injunctions given to us in our traditions. After the wor-ship of these four, mother, father, teacher, and guest, comes the wor-ship of God. You may ask me, “Why did they put God in the lastplace? Why did they not put Him in the first place?” God is thesame to all; and every one has got the same claim toward God, but toan individual, his parents are the real authority. God is the creator ofall, and for an individual his parents are the creators.Lord Easwara and Goddess Parvathi are the creators of thisworld. Here is a beautiful story acclaiming the supremacy of motherand father over all else. The first son of Easwara and Parvathi is Ga-142Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972napathi or Vighneswara. The second son is Subrahmanyeswara.They told them: “Sons, you must go round the world and whoevercomes first will receive a special prize. As soon as Subrahmanyes-wara heard this, he got up on his vahana, the peacock. The peacockis a big bird and it can fly in the air also. Subrahmanyeswara is asmall child and so he could go round the world on his peacock veryeasily. Vighneswara is huge in size and his vahana, the mouse, isvery small. It is very difficult for him to go round the world. So hewas not prepared for this journey. He sat near his parents. Themother used to ask him why he was not going round the world. Heused to say “I shall go, I shall go.” Subrahmanyeswara went roundthe world and was returning. Ganapathi saw him at a distance andimmediately went round his parents and said that he had gone roundthe world. The father said, “Subrahmanyeswara has gone round theworld. You have gone only round us.” Therefore, I think Subrah-manyeswara is greater than you.” Then, Vighneswara said, “When Iwent round the parents, I had gone round the world, because it is theparents who have given me this body. On account of this body, Ihave been able to see this world. Therefore the parents are the worldfor me; and when I have gone round the parents, it means that I havegone round the world.” The Lord was much pleased and gave himthe name Ganesha, the Lord of Ganas. If children try to please theirparents, then they will be pleasing God as well.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ Page 14314. Customs and CharacterBy holding a sword, does a man become a great warrior? Byholding a veena, will he become a great musician? By holding a pen,will he become a great writer? By holding a bow and arrow, will hebecome a great archer? Even though the ladle is in the sweet, it can-not experience its flavour. Can frogs that move around the lotuses inthe water, enjoy the honey in the lotuses? Can a stone on which san-dalwood paste is made, experience the fragrance of the sandalwoodpieces? Can a blind man see his beauty in a mirror? These are situa-tions over which we should ponder.The mighty Himalayas are in the north of India, Indiansshould compare these mountains to sathya, dharma, and ahimsa.We must consider sathya, dharma, and ahimsa as manifestingthemselves to us in the form of silvery mountains. The great Ganges,which is considered sacred, takes its birth on this mountain. Theculture of India is just like the stream of the Ganges. There is no im-purity in Indian culture. We see that even Indians are trying to ex-terminate Indian culture. This is not possible. Those ignorant people,who want to do such a thing, can be compared to those who want tomake the Ganges run dry. Just as the Ganges can never become dry,so also Indian culture can never be rooted out.While Indian culture can be compared to the Ganges, thedeeds we do can be compared to the sacred Yamuna. Saraswathi, thethird river, is the spiritual stream that flows in our lives like blood inour bodies. We see that the blood of the Indians is the Saraswathiriver, the deeds of Indians is just like the Yamuna and their culturallife is like the Ganga. The combination of these three rivers is thecountry of India. We cannot say that an Indian is a combination ofjust flesh and blood or a combination of earth and water. We shouldregard an Indian as the combination of the three rivers Ganges, Ya-muna and Saraswathi. Many Indians are trying to go in an improper144Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972way because they are not aware of the sacred stream flowing in theminternally. This stream is full of knowledge. Saraswathi does notrepresent only literature but also is the Goddess who gives us perfectbliss or ananda. She will root out the impurity in man and make himsacred and pious. This Saraswathi will establish the Atma Thathwa,and is the stream connecting man with God. We must consider heras the stream flowing internally and never as the stream flowing ex-ternally.Man today lives a life from which sacredness, modesty andall other good qualities have disappeared. Though he has some goodqualities, he does not make any use of them. There are good booksin India, the Ramayana and the Mahabharatha, which teach us ourculture. The Ramayana is a version of our daily life and it gives usextreme bliss. It proclaims how members in a family should behavetowards one another and towards society. The Ramayana has threealternative names and these are “The Killing of Ravana”, “TheStory of Sita”, and “Srimad Ramayana”.We must know why these names have been given to theRamayana and the meaning in each case. It is called Srimad Rama-yana because it describes the qualities of Sri Rama. Sita is an idealwoman possessing all the qualities that an Indian woman shouldpossess, such as chastity, purity and so on. Because the Ramayanadescribes all these qualities perfectly, it is called “The Story OfSita”. Sita is the embodiment of all the dharmas that are found inthe world. She is called Bhoojata, daughter of the Goddess of earthand she has the qualities of her mother. The main characteristics ofSita are chastity, patience and virtue. When necessity arises, she isalso able to teach Rama the path of dharma. As an illustration ofthis, we may consider the situation when Rama said to Sita: “Youare very delicate and cannot face the conditions in the forest. I shallreturn soon and I request you to stay in Ayodhya and take care ofyour mother-in-law and father-in-law.” Prior to that, Rama went tohis mother and told her that he was going into the forest for fourteenyears to vindicate the promises of his father and asked her to giveSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972145him her blessings. The mother then said that she could not leave himfor a moment and she too would follow him into the forest. Ramataught some principles of dharma even to his mother saying,“Mother, father is old. Stay and serve him. I am going into the for-est for his sake and will be back after fourteen years. Serve my fa-ther who is like a God to us. To you, your husband is greater thaneveryone else and must be looked after. While I am away, look afterhis health.” Recalling this, Sita said, “You have taught some princi-ples of dharma to your mother and you have asked her to stay andlook after her husband. Does not the same apply to me, your wife?Should I not follow you and serve my husband? Looking after one’shusband is as important to Kausalya as it is to me. Husband is Godto a wife. I consider you as God and I must follow you to the for-est.” Rama tried then to pacify her in another way. He said, “Youmay be able to bear all the conditions in the forest but if you comewith us, you will be a great responsibility on our shoulders becausethe forest is full of wild animals and we will have to protect you aswell as ourselves. Stay at home and do not cause us trouble.” Sitareplied, “You say that there are many cruel animals in the forest andthe most cruel animal amongst them is the lion, the king of beasts.When the lion of my husband is with me, how can other animalsharm me?” He said, “Even if there are no animals that may harmyou, I will have to leave you at times to go and get something to eat.If at that time, some harm comes to you, it will be very difficult forme or my brother to protect you.” At once, Sita replied, “Rama, youare a great warrior, a great hero and a very capable person. This factwas proved when you broke the bow of God Siva. I know yourabilities fully. The words you spoke to me just now are not befittingyour dignity. If Rama is not able to protect one person, how will heprotect the whole world? Even to protect you from such infamy, Ishould follow you into the forest.”Rama could not say much more. He quietly said to her, “Mymother will be stricken with grief at my going away. It would bebetter if you stay behind and console her.” Sita then said, “You are146Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972Rama and I am Sita. You are the moon and I am the moonlight. Ifthe moon is in the forest how can moonlight be in Ayodhya? Wherethere is moon, moonlight will always be there.” Rama could not re-ply. Rama tried to tell her to stay in Ayodhya but Sita did not listento those words. She said pitiably, “Rama, I am very young. You willbe away for fourteen years while your brothers enjoy the companyof their wives, and the maids of the palace enjoy the company oftheir husbands. Seeing this, I will get jealous and bad ideas will formin my mind. To rid me of such thoughts, take me with you.” Thereis no possibility of such bad thoughts ever entering Sita’s mind.Rama said, “Your heart is pure, your character is perfect and I knowthat such bad ideas will never enter your heart.” She then fell at hisfeet and said: “You are going into the forest where there will bemany thorns on the way. Because my mother is the goddess of theearth, she will be very kind to me. I can request her to let you gohappily on your way. At least for this take me with you.” I have nar-rated this sequence of incidents leading to Sita falling at the feet ofRama because Rama’s heart melted only when she fell at his feet.A similar situation also occurs in the Mahabharatha. Arjunaargued with Krishna and put many logical ideas before him. Duringthat time, Krishna did not teach him the sacred Gita. Only after hesurrendered completely, did he teach Arjuna the Gita. If you want tomake some jewellery and do not give the goldsmith any gold, then hewill not be able to make anything. If you give him the gold and tellhim not to melt, beat and hammer it, he will still not be able to makeanything out of the gold. If we offer the gold of our minds to Godand tell him not to interfere with it, how can God prepare the jewel ofpeace? If you allow Him to do whatever He wants, then He will pre-pare the ornament of peace for you.If you, in any seriousness, ask what is yours here, you willget the answer that nothing really belongs to you. You are under themistaken idea that one thing or another is yours, but this is incorrect.If this body is yours and some limb is ill, why can you not rectifythe sickness? When you are not able to rectify a small defect in yourSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972147body, is it yours? If the mind is yours and if you can put it undercontrol, why does it act like a monkey? Why do you think that thisworld is yours? If it is yours, how does it move without your per-mission? Life is not yours.We think that the world is binding us, but the world is life-less. It is desire that binds us. Those who catch monkeys prepare apot with a small opening in it and fill it with some sweet. The mon-key who desires the food, will put his hand inside the pot and take abig handful of the food. Then the monkey becomes unable to drawhis hand out through the opening. Only on releasing the grip on thefood will the monkey be able to take his hand out. It is his desire forthe food that has bound his hands. This wide world is like that potand our samsaras or the families are like the narrow top. Our de-sires are the sweets in the pot. Man puts his hand in the pot and getsbound. When he sheds his desires, he will be able to live in theworld freely. To get freedom, the first thing to do is to sacrifice. Inphilosophical terms, this is called renunciation.If any man possesses dharma along with wealth, power, andriches, there is none greater than him. However learned we may be, ifwe have no morality, we shall become the brothers of Ravana. Be-cause he left the path of dharma, he had to fight the monkeys who inthe end killed him. When he was about to die, his wife, Mandodari,came to him and said to Rama, “I am not sorry that Ravana has diedand been separated from me, but I wonder at the fact that such agreat man, possessing such great strength had been killed by themonkeys. This must be because my husband gave himself up to baddesires and he had to fall.” When bad ideas, which are like seeds inour hearts, are not removed, they will grow into big trees. Only he,who does not succumb to desires, will obtain the state of Brahman.We come to the same conclusion in the story of theKauravas. They had greater wealth and a larger army compared tothe Pandavas. Because they did not follow the path of dharma, theywaged war on the Pandavas, who had many good qualities. Whateverkinds of strength we have, if we do not have the strength of dharma,148Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972all is futile. Real strength is Daiva Bala and Dharma Bala, thestrength that comes from God and from dharma. The Pandavaswere prepared to sacrifice their lives in the pursuit of righteousness.Where dharma is, God is and where God is, there will be victory.Where God is not, it is impossible to gain success.The customs and manners that go with Indian culture makeus respected and there is no need to abandon them. Young people,with their peculiar dress imitating the westerners, appear just likeclowns. There is nothing wrong in wearing rich and beautiful cloth-ing, but they should be in harmony with our Indian culture and besuch as will create respect for our country. Some bush shirts aremade of cloth used for furniture, bed sheets, and so on. When menwalk with such bush shirts, even animals will be afraid. If little boyswear such clothes, there is some meaning. Indians must be very care-ful about the way they dress and the fashions they adopt. Indianstraditionally look at the forehead of a baby when it is born, and if itis very broad, they presume the child is very fortunate. They thinkthat God writes the future on the forehead. But people now try tocover their foreheads with their hair. This is not beautiful either.Some people close one eye with their hair. This is not proper either.We must be able to look well and see things in a proper way. Oursight is drushti and srishti, or creation, is our drushti. Drushti isalso called knowledge. We are ruining our knowledge with the mis-taken idea that what we do makes us very beautiful. Among the stu-dents here, there are no such people; but I should ask that when yougo out of here, you should never do such things. Protect your re-spect and honour.Wherever you walk, never walk in the middle of the road.Nowadays young people walk abreast on the road, thus blocking theroad and obstructing the vehicles. Follow the rules of traffic and be-have in such a way that you do not inconvenience others. Studentsare prone to go on strike meaninglessly. Students going out of heremust never partake in strikes. For what purpose do you admit your-selves into a college? Follow that purpose first. If you take part inSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972149strikes, the teaching course, which is generally two years, stretchesover to five, thus wasting the money your parents send you. In thename of strikes, people throw stones on buses and hit innocent per-sons also. This is not right. We have established this summer courseto put an end to such agitations so far as you are concerned. Youshould behave properly in future. The guru is Brahma, Vishnu, Eas-wara and even Parabrahma. We must go to the preceptors who edu-cate us in a humble manner. Please your gurus and they will blessyou and you will become good. Do not follow these ideals simplybecause I ask you to do so. You must ponder over them and getthem firmly fixed in your minds. I am only reminding you how tobehave in future.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 15015. The Perishable and the ImperishableIt is difficult to understand properly and fully the multifac-eted Indian culture which, in some ways, is the source of all the re-ligions of the world. Many people have tried to explain the unique-ness of Indian culture, but they were able to explain or express onlywhat little they could comprehend with their limited knowledge.They were not able to portray satisfactorily and fully the spirit ofIndian culture. Indian culture is born of intuitive wisdom. It is notconnected with futile things such as the objects of the material world.Indian culture can be compared to the kalpa vriksha, the tree thatgives all one wants. Approaching it with reverence, and in the spiritof earnest enquiry alone, will enable you to comprehend it.It will be deplorable if we, having been born as Indians, call-ing ourselves Indians and esteemed by others as sons of India, arenot able to understand the inner meaning and the real significance ofIndian culture. Just as the elephant does not know its own strength,so we Indians today have become unaware of our own strength. In-dians have become weak by imitation and by running after wrongtraditions. They are not able to follow and tread the true path. Whenwe have gold in our Indian scriptures, why hanker after other basematerials and superficial values? What is found in the Mahabha-ratha may be found in all other religions and scriptures, but what isnot found in the Mahabharatha cannot be found anywhere else. Wegenerally find the cheap preparations of our neighbours much moretasteful than the rich delicacies made in our own homes. This trendis more prevalent among modern students. We must try to revitaliseand resuscitate Indian culture, Indian dharma and Indian religion.The present educational system is not at all giving the right andproper direction. This is the main reason for the decadence amongstudents. Students should not be content with reading only theirtextbooks. They should also read books written by great men ofSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972151wisdom. Reading such scriptures whenever they get time is also akind of sadhana. This is wanting among the students, primarily be-cause of lack of acquaintance with our sacred scriptures like theRamayana, the Mahabharatha, and the Bhagavatha.There was a good Queen by name Meenavati. She had a sonby name Gopichand. When Gopichand was a boy of ten years, themaids were giving him an oil bath scented with perfumes, makinghim sit on a stool and telling him various worldly things. Meenavatisaw this through the doors of her apartments. Seeing them whilingaway time in futile talks and pleasantries, she felt sorry. She came tothe place where Gopichand was being bathed and stood there withtears flowing from her eyes. The son asked, “Mother, why are youcrying?” She was silent. The son again asked for the reason. Themother said, “The only thing left of your grandfather, forefathers,and your father, who enjoyed all these physical pleasures, is onehandful of ash; we do not see them any more; at least you should bewise and try to enjoy the eternal bliss of the jiva instead of enjoyingthese worldly pleasures connected with the body. The great Harish-chandra who always spoke the truth—did he not die and leave thisworld? Could Nala, who ruled the entire earth, take a portion of theearth with him? Did Mandhata, who was a gem among kings, takeaway treasures with him? Does Rama, who built the sethu or bridgeacross the ocean, remain on the earth now? No one has taken theseearthly treasures or achievements with him. Do you hope to take thiskingdom and pleasures with you? We must experience only theeternal bliss with the jiva and not the worldly things. We must per-form good actions with the body and must have good promptings bythe mind. It is only such things that please God and draw forth HisGrace.”Whatever things we do with this body, we are leading to arebirth of this body. Any actions, good or bad, can be compared toseeds. In order not to sow such seeds, we should do all actions with-out desire. All actions should be done, in and only for the pleasureof God. If you sweep a place, think that you are doing that for152Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972cleaning the heart, the shrine of God. When you help or harm others,think that you are doing it to yourselves. Then you will never letyourself harm anyone else.Students must forget two things. Firstly, you must forgetwhatever help you have done to others. Secondly, you must forgetwhatever harm others have done to you. Because, when you remem-ber the harm done by others to you, you always plan to take revenge.When you do not remember this, you will not do any harm. If youremember the help rendered by you to someone, you will be lookingforward to the reward. On the contrary, there are two things that youmust always remember. One is that God is One, and the other thatdeath is One. In whatever manner you may look at them, these twoare the eternal truths. If you do not want to go to a marriage, you cancancel the engagement. Similarly, if you do not want to go to a cin-ema, you can postpone it for the next day. But the last journey, thejourney to your death, can neither be cancelled nor postponed. Wemake preparations when we want to go for a marriage or a cinema.What preparations are we making for the final journey?There are three friends for us in this world. You may your-self determine who is important of the three. The Kauravas thoughtthey had the support of great warriors like Karna and great teacherslike Drona. They never depended on themselves. Depending on thestrength of these people, they harassed the Pandavas. In the sameway, thinking that we have these three friends with us, we behave in areckless manner. On account of this recklessness, we are doingmany improper and wrong things. When we do something we arenot supposed to do, we are liable to punishment. Sometimes we aredragged to the court to receive the punishment. Generally, we go tothe first friend to win the court case. We ask him to be a witness. Hesays, “I will sit at home and give evidence but I will not come to thecourt.” Thinking that this friend is not the right one, we go to thesecond friend and ask him to be a witness and help. This friend says,“I will come up to the court, but not inside.” Then we go to the thirdfriend and that friend says, “I will come wherever you want me toSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972153come. Even if you go to jail, I will come along with you.” Of thesethree, the true friend, of course, is only the third one.We have kept two friends for this life. The first one is wealthand the second one is the relative. Meritorious deeds that we performconstitute the third friend. When we die and ask our friends to ac-company us, the first friend, namely, wealth, will say, “No, I will stayat home, I am not going to come with you.” When the dead body istaken to the burial ground, the wealth stocked does not follow thebody. The second friend, the relative, says, “I will come only up tothe court—only up to the burial ground. From there you should goon your own.” But the good deeds that you do go with you. Theygo with you inside the court to bear witness. They accompany youbeyond the cremation ground. Therefore, the good deeds alone thatyou do with a pure heart will be your true escort and not your wealthor your relatives. The reason why great men preach that we performgood deeds and lead a pure life is because the good deeds alone willbe our ultimate succour. They are the only things that protect us,even as the eyelids protect the eyes.King Harischandra, who gave his life for truth, became aguard at the burial ground. He saw the body of a wealthy man beingbrought in a big decorated carriage to the cremation ground. Theyput the body on the pyre, lit the fire, and went away. The only personleft was Harischandra. He watched it for a while. While the bodywas burning, when the fire touched the sushumna nadi, the bodystarted rising up. To prevent this happening, usually a heavy woodenpiece is put on the stomach. When life in the sushumna nadi evapo-rates and leaves the body, the body again falls back. Harischandrabegan musing on the rising and sinking back of the body. He won-dered whether the corpse got up to see if any of his beloved relativesare around and seeing that no one was there, slept again.Imagining that this world, which is full of maya, is para-mount and permanent, we develop attachments to wife and son. Butfinally, neither wife nor son will follow us. As long as there is life inthe body, we feel every one and every thing is ours. When life has154Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972ebbed out of the body, we cast it into fire without any considerationwhatsoever. What sort of relationship we have with this body is to bethought over and enquired into; wealth is so dear to us that we worrylest we lose it or part with it. After putting the body in fire, the rela-tives think only of the insurance policies he had and whether he hadleft enough property for them or not. Therefore, there is no relation-ship between this body of yours and any one else. Whatever deedsyou do with the body relate to the body only and not to the jiva.Here is a small example to illustrate the relationship betweenthe body and the jiva. When we go on a good tar road, our shadowfalls on dirt that is in the side drain. Even if you go on a beautifulroad, the shadow may fall on dirty things. But the dirt does not clingto the shadow. You must try to tread the right path, but should notfall in the dirt along with the shadow. You must learn to do goodthings with the body; you should contemplate about good thingswith your mind. Cultivate good thoughts and perform good deeds.Sometimes, people ask: Yes, we should learn to love everyone, butwhat should be done if the other party hates us in spite of our lovingthem so much? Why should you be bothered whether others recip-rocate your love or not? Your duty is to see that you do not swervefrom the right path. If you also hate, how can you claim that you arestill good? You must also endeavour to see that others act in thesame manner. If you want to delve deep and experience true love,you leave all bodily considerations, cultivate the Atma drishti. Thenyou will have the right vision. The same Atma exists in all. Youshould see everyone with Atma drishti, but not differentiate them bylooking at attributes such as height, weight, and status. I will give anexample with myself as the basis: I love everyone—I love even thosewho do not love me. I do not ask whether they are loving me or not.We must see whether our love is pure or not. Hatred has no place atall in me. People who do not want me also come to me when needarises and bend before me.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 15516. Worship your ParentsThe honour of a nation depends upon the morality of thatnation. A nation without morality will be doomed. Mere listening toand knowing about the nature of Indian culture will not be reward-ing. It has to be reflected in one’s conduct. The prestige of an indi-vidual depends upon the purity of the individual. When the individ-ual reforms himself and undergoes the process of samskara, or pu-rification, then only will he be able to truly recognise the greatness ofour culture. Individuals make the society. A village depends upon thecondition of the society, and the state depends upon several suchvillages. A country or a nation is an assembly of such states. Thewelfare of the nation thus depends ultimately upon the quality andnature of the individual. Therefore, reforming the individual is ofprimary importance. Reforming the individual has two aspects: first,weeding out evil thoughts and bad habits within him, and second,cultivation of good habits. Students must put into practice these twothings: doing away with evil habits and cultivating good habits intheir place.The future of the country depends upon the conduct andcharacter of the students. Students may be described as the veryroots of the nation. Therefore we must pour the water of Divyasakthior the divine force into the very roots. Students may also be com-pared to the creepers bearing flowers. If we allow these creepers togrow as they please, they grow in a wild and disorderly mannerwithout beauty and symmetry. Therefore, we must prune eachcreeper so that its shape may be beautiful and it may not grow in awild fashion without any beauty. The beauty of life depends uponour good habits. The period of student-days is sacred and most im-portant in life. The students must be disciplined in their minds andhabits and must fill their minds with pure thoughts and try to enforceand put into practice all those good thoughts in their day-to-day ac-156Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972tivities. The intention of organising this summer course is not simplyto transmit information that is given by the scholars who are deliv-ering the lectures. More important than giving information is thetransformation that we wish to bring about. If you are not trans-formed, all this will be just a waste of time and energy and nothingbut trouble to elders. By cultivating a spiritual outlook right fromthis stage, it will be possible, when you grow old, that you will beable to spend your time and your life in a very calm, quiet, peacefuland happy manner. This is the right period when you should fillyour mind with thoughts about your own future, about the future ofthe country and about the future of the race and that of the nation,and with things of such profound importance. If you do not attemptto move in the right direction now, even while your body is strongand your faculties and powers are good, it will not at all be possiblefor you to do so at a later stage when your body grows old and fa-tigued, when the mind has lost its alertness and all your powers havedried up and withered away.The scholars and pundits who are delivering these lecturesmay be very learned, very experienced, very old but they can onlypoint direction; they cannot do the walking for you. The walkingmust be done by you. You must proceed along the path that is indi-cated. These elders may be compared to guide posts. They can sim-ply point out that if you go along a particular way, you will reach thisdestination, and that if you go along another way, you will reach an-other destination, and so on, but they cannot tread the path for you.If you look at the conditions today, the Government is not in a po-sition to introduce reform in the lives of the people, because the kindof reform needed is not there in the rulers themselves, and the peopleare not in a position to infuse that kind of enthusiasm in the rulers.I shall clarify to you the relationship that obtains between thepeople and the government with the help of a little analogy. A smallsnake has caught a big frog. The snake is trying its best to devourthe frog and the frog is trying its best to escape from the snake. Thefrog cannot emancipate itself from the snake, and the snake is not inSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972157a position to devour the frog. As a result of this struggle, the rewardor the final achievement is only exhaustion for both. Either the Gov-ernment must have the capacity to educate and reform the people orthe people must have the capacity to educate the Government. Un-fortunately, both the Government as well as the people are lackingthis power, very badly. Both are getting exhausted. Therefore, youwho are the future hope of this country, should give the needed lead-ership for the people as well as the Government.The dignitaries, high officials and great scholars who havedelivered these lectures, you must remember, were also students likeyou, at one time. Those who were students a few years ago have to-day become teachers and guides, and you who are the students oftoday also will become teachers and guides of tomorrow. Some ofyou who are students of today, may in future become even leadersand preachers. It is necessary today for every one of you to examinewhy you are getting educated. Is it for the sake of understanding thetruth of life or is it simply to get some job and a salary? True educa-tion is that which enables you to stand on your feet. Therefore, try todevelop self-confidence and try to improve your character throughthe processes of samskara or purification. You must develop culturethat is moral, spiritual and ethical. You must cultivate an independentapproach.You must develop the habit of taking pains and undergoingany amount of trouble in order to discharge your duties satisfactorilyand correctly. You must be ready to lay down your life for the wel-fare of the country and for the welfare of the nation. Today we findmany individuals who exploit others for their own happiness. Werarely come across an individual who sacrifices himself for the sakeof others’ welfare. Therefore, one man must suffer in order that tenpeople may be happy. We should not cultivate the habit of subject-ing ten people to unhappiness just for the benefit of a single individ-ual.We must consider here quantity versus quality. If the actionis bad, you are not justified in suffering for the happiness of ten158Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972people. If ten people are working for something noble, then there isevery justification for you to sacrifice your own happiness and tosupport them with your endeavour. At times it becomes necessary toanalyse matters deeper. Though there may be thousands of bad peo-ple, one good man would be able to control these thousands of badpeople and this control is possible only through the power of love.We should never join the mob in a blind manner, without discrimi-nation and reason. There is such a tendency among the students. Ifthey feel that one student has been insulted, then they all support himin a blind way. They must consider whether that student really de-serves support and whether he was right or wrong. If we are able toset right that one student when he is in the wrong, the institutionwould be benefited. On the other hand, if you blindly support onestudent, who is definitely in the wrong, then the prestige of the insti-tution will be damaged.We must help a good cause, and we must never support abad cause. Sometimes you may want something good and reason-able. Then you may represent it to the officer in charge. When youapproach a higher authority, you must always adopt an attitude ofhumility. When you make a proper representation, in the right spiritand with proper humility, the officer will be pleased to grant it. Onthe other hand, if you commit a blunder and show an attitude of defi-ance, naturally the man in power will be antagonistic toward you.Therefore, every student must be a vidyarthi in the full sense;namely, one who seeks education and not one who seeks fulfilmentof his desires. Vidya is enriched by vinaya or humility. True educa-tion is judged from the cultivation of good character and good con-duct, and not merely from the acquisition of degrees. Education doesnot mean ignoring the sacrifices made by your parents at home. Itdoes not mean at all that you should move about luxuriouslydressed, displeasing your elders, disregarding all those who are moreknowledgeable than you. That is not education at all. Your parentswill always feel happy when they find you endowed with good char-acter.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972159Several parents undergo many privations and sacrifices forthe sake of the future of their children. Several fathers and motherseven starve themselves in order to provide education for their chil-dren. So, an education that does not teach the right attitude that astudent should adopt toward his parents, who undergo so much suf-fering, is not education at all. One should even call it bad education.The words of Indian wisdom, “Sathyam vada, dharmam chara(Speak the truth, do the right thing)”, and the injunctions of ourculture, “Mathru Devo bhava, pithru Devo bhava (worship yourmother as God, worship your Father as God)”, deserve to be pre-served in the caskets of our hearts like precious gems.North Indians and people from Maharashtra are very familiarwith the story of Pundalik. Pundalik was an ideal son who spent allhis time in the service of his venerable parents. When the parentshad fever or other discomfort, Pundalik used to serve them, attend onthem, touch their feet and do all sorts of service for them. Todaywhen the mother is laid up with high fever, the son, not caring for thecondition of the mother, runs to film show. Mother is the goddesswho has given us this blood, this body and this individuality and,there-fore, she deserves all consideration and worship. By dis-regarding the mother, we shall never be able to prosper in life, andwe shall never be able to become good in life.When Pundalik was serving his mother, Panduranga camethere. Pundalik was pressing the feet of his mother and he did notcare to look at Panduranga. In the meantime Tukaram, his guru, alsocame there. Tukaram asked, “My dear Pundalik, do you know whohas come? It is God Panduranga! You are not caring for Him. Howis it?” when Pundalik replied, “The worship of two Gods is not im-portant for me but the worship of Ek Hara or one God is importantfor me.” Tukaram said, “He is God.” Pundalik replied, “Yes, He isGod; this is also God. The real God for me is my parent and notPanduranga. From the moment of my birth I have been seeing thisform of my mother, who was responsible for the birth, growth, thenourishment and sustenance of my body. Therefore, I worship her.160Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972The Goddess who has been right in front of me for the last eighteenyears is more important than the God who appears for a few mo-ments and vanishes. If Panduranga cares to grant me darshan, letHim wait until I complete the service of my mother.” So saying, hethrew a brick as a sort of Asana or seat for Panduranga to sit andwait. Even God Panduranga waited until Pundalik completed theservice to his mother and then granted darshan to him.Even God would wait for you. You must discharge your dutyto the best of your ability and to your utmost satisfaction. That mustbe your pledge.Krishna is described as having tilak —kasturi tilak on Hisforehead, kaustubha on His chest, navamouktika on the tip of Hisnose, and kankan on His hand. Kasturi tilak is not the ordinary tilak.It is jnana or wisdom itself. So, He has the symbol of jnana or wis-dom on his forehead. Kaustubha is not an external ornament but isthe emotion of tenderness and love within the heart.There is special significance for wearing a pearl under the tipof the nose. The navamouktika, or the pearl, is the indication that weshould always focus our attention on the tip of our nose in order thatwe may have real wisdom. You may ask why our vision should befocused on the tip of our nose? When we sit down to worship Godand keep our eyes wide open, then there is every possibility that ourattention gets diverted and scattered. If we keep our eyes completelyclosed, then we may be induced to sleep. Therefore, we must keepour eyes half-closed and we must concentrate our vision on the tip ofour nose, so that we do not sleep and also our attention does not getdiverted.Now coming to kankana, or the bracelet on the hand. Indiansuse the bracelet on two occasions. Once at the time of the marriageand a second time when they perform a yagna or yaga. The meaningof the kankana is that we have decided and determined to undertakesome noble action. Then you may ask the question why Krishnashould have kankana on His hand. Is He going to get married everyday or is He going to perform a sacrifice every day? No, He hasSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972161taken some pledges and, therefore, He is wearing the kankana. Thefirst pledge is to protect the right and the good and to protectdharma when dharma is in danger. The second pledge is to lookafter the welfare of those who devote themselves with single-mindedness to God, and who think only of Him and no one else. Hesaid, “When you have abjured all dharma and have taken shelter atmy feet, I shall liberate you from all the sins that you have commit-ted.” Krishna has put on this kankana in order to carry out thispledge. Because we are not endeavouring to gain the grace ofKrishna, the kankana is still there and continues to be there. We arenot able to derive the benefit of the kankana, because we do notpractise thinking of Him only and of none else. He said, “If you dothink of Me only, and of none else and if you worship—if you do allthese three, I shall take care of your welfare.” We do not undertaketo do any one of these three duties and yet we ask the question,“Why is it Krishna is not taking care of me?”Leadership requires that you should lead others in the rightdirection. What you want others to do, you must be the first to prac-tise. Today leaders are experts in saying things, issuing orders andgiving advice to others; but they do not follow their own advice. Inevery walk of life, whether it is political, economic, social, cultural orreligious, they pose as great people and speak as if they are all great“Heroes”. When we look at their actions, they are only big “Ze-roes”. Therefore, the students of today must make it a point to en-dorse, in their daily action, what they learn from others. They mustlead other people in the right direction. Today you criticise yourleaders that they have gone wrong here and they have gone wrongthere. Tomorrow when you become leaders, you must take care tosee that you do not commit the same blunders and you should not letyourselves become the objects of the same criticism.There are five fingers to the palm. We point, when we comeacross a bad man, with the index finger. When you point at others,only one finger points out at them and three fingers point back atyou. So, when you point out one fault in others, you must be able to162Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972examine three times whether there is a fault in you. There is a devicefor this. When you come across a big fault in others, you just con-sider it to be a very trivial one. Then you will not be critical. Supposethere is a small fault in you. You try to magnify it and you will feelyou should never commit a similar fault again. By looking at it thatway, you will not have occasion to be guilty of the same fault again.On the other hand, if you conceal your fault and try to point out thefault of others, it will not be good either for you or for the others. Donot always go forward in pointing out the faults of others. On theother hand, if any one points out any fault in you, you must prostratebefore him because you, by yourself, will not be able to find outwhere you are in the wrong. Because your eyes are directed outward,you will not be able to find the fault in your own nature.Here is a small story. During the summer season, in placesround about Nagpur, water is very scarce. An orthodox old Brahminlady, who was on a pilgrimage, felt very thirsty when she reachedNagpur. She turned on the water taps but not a drop of water cameout of them. At the station, arrangements had been made for a supplyof water in leather bags. When several people were drinking the wa-ter that was served from that bag of leather, the old lady was dis-cussing in her mind whether the man who was serving the water be-longed to a low caste, whether the bag was pure or might not havebeen cleaned well, and so on. She was hesitating to take that water.After much hesitation, she questioned the man who was serving thewater. “My dear sir, is this bag pure? Is it clean?” The man whowas serving the water was clever. He said, “The bag of leather fromwhich water is being served is cleaner than the bag in which that wa-ter will be poured after service, namely, your body. This bag iscleaner than your interior.”Today we are cultivating this undesirable tendency of look-ing at the impurity of the bag but not caring to remove the impuritywithin our own body. First of all, we must try to purify what iswithin us and then only can we rectify what is external to us. This isSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972163essential for the students to know. Because, tomorrow you may be-come high officers though you are students today.Though many students have been attending this course forover twenty days, listening to several discourses on very importanttopics, some students are still not able to give up their previous badhabits. It will be a good augury for the future if you are able to shedthe bad habits that you had before coming here. Here, in the morningand in the evening, the Name of the Lord is dancing on your lips. Ifthe same tongue that is made sweet by the name of the Lord in themorning and in the evening is filled with the fire of the cigarette inthe evening, then all the good effects are counteracted and whollynullified. You must get rid of the bad habit of smoking. It spoilsyour health and damages your lungs, and doctors say that sometimeseven cancer may be the result of smoking. Why should you continuethis habit, which damages your beauty and also your health?If you return home in the same bad condition in which youhave come here, then your stay here will not be fruitful at all. On theother hand, when you return home, if your friends, your relationsand your parents feel that you have returned from the summercourse almost as a new personality and in a perfect condition, thenwe also feel happy that all our endeavour has not gone to waste andhas been rewarded.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ Page 16417. Anger is the Greatest EnemyHe who is able to fully control his senses will be in a posi-tion to attain liberation or moksha. Vemana, the well-known philoso-pher-poet, has written a verse which says that one who has eaten adog is considered a great yogi; one who has eaten a pig is considereda greater yogi; one who has eaten an elephant is considered as thewisest among the yogi. We must go deep into the meaning of thesethree statements. The word “dog” stands for anger, the word “pig”for ego, and the word “elephant” for attachments. One who is ableto control and overcome one’s anger, ego, and attachments becomesa great yogi.Not only in India but in several parts of the world, people aregetting interested in the knowledge and practice of yoga. Thoughthere are many schools of yoga, the most significant is the PatanjaliYoga. Patanjali defines yoga as the regulation and control of the ten-dencies of the mind. Without controlling the senses, we cannot attainhappiness in any walk of life or in any endeavour. If we just let goour senses in a wild fashion, the result will be sorrow and joy. TodayIndians are not paying proper attention to the control of their senses.Some people are under the misapprehension that they miss the veryessence of life if they control their senses and deny themselves thepleasures of the senses. This is a mistaken idea. We should notthink that we are controlling or restraining the senses. The realmeaning and significance of this process is not that we are restrain-ing the senses from performing their functions, but that we are di-recting and regulating them along the proper channels. Thus we shallbe able to enjoy the real delight of the mind and the real pleasure ofthe spirit.Anger, pride, and other passions reduce man to the level of alunatic and sometimes degrade him to the level of an animal. There-fore, it is very necessary that we should recognise vijnana, prajnana,Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972165and sujnana, which are latent in people and direct them along theproper channel and thus achieve the highest state of supreme bliss.The cause for all the troubles, confusion and turmoil is the fact thatwe have lost mastery over our senses. By leaving the senses unfet-tered and unregulated, we will not be able to discriminate properly,think coolly, calmly and rationally. Thus, many times we are misledinto wrong actions. Anger is like an intoxicant. Internally, it inducesus to do wrong things. This is the source of all the sins. It is a greatdemon. Anger leads us to commit all other sins. In the case ofViswamitra, we know that all the good he acquired by thapas, wasnullified by this one evil, anger. The merit he had accumulatedthrough thapas undertaken for thousands of years was all lost in amoment of anger.We need not go as far as Viswamitra. In our daily lives, weknow that when we become angry, our nerves become weak and fee-ble and we lose grip over ourselves. Even a moment of anger takesaway our strength that we gather by eating good food for threemonths. Anger not only debilitates us and takes away the merit ofour good deeds, but also enfeebles our condition. If we are able tocontrol this anger, we shall be in a position to attain merit throughthe utterance of the Lord’s name.Vasishta attained the title of Brahmarishi and Viswamitraalso wanted to attain the title of Brahmarishi. Even after years ofthapas, he could not attain the same. Viswamitra became furious be-cause even when the world honoured him with the appellation ofBrahmarishi, Vasishta did not agree to call him so. Anger inducedthe thought in Viswamitra that if he eliminated Vasishta from theworld, then everyone would honour him with the name of Brahmar-ishi. Once, on a moonlight night, Vasishta was describing to his pu-pils the qualities of Viswamitra. Viswamitra, who was hiding behinda bush with a sword in his hand to stab Vasishta, happened to hearthe glowing tributes Vasishta was paying to Viswamitra. Vasishtawas not aware that Viswamitra was hiding behind the bush and in hisnormal manner was describing the good qualities of Viswamitra’s166Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972thapas, which he compared to the moonlight. This brought about asudden transformation in Viswamitra. He began to repent in hismind his decision to kill Vasishta, who was such a great man andwas talking about his fine qualities. He thought how bad he waswhen he entertained the thought of killing him. He felt that he mustmake amends and fell at the feet of Vasishta, expressing his repen-tance. He did so and Vasishta with a beautiful smile said: “GreatBrahmarishi, wherefrom have you come?” When Vasishta ad-dressed him thus Viswamitra was surprised and felt quite repentant.Vasishta said: “Today you really deserve the appellation of Brah-marishi, because you have eliminated all your anger and ego and fellat my feet in a mood of utter repentance.”We must recognise the truth underlying this episode. Solong as there is the feeling of anger and ego in our hearts, we will notbe able to feel well in our life and will feel sick in our mind. One’sanger is one’s greatest enemy and one’s calmness is one’s protec-tion. One’s joy is one’s heaven and one’s sorrow is one’s hell. Hewho is possessed by anger will be hated by people because he willcommit a number of bad deeds. Anger leads to many great sins.First we must endeavour to control this emotion of anger. Some-times, ego also enters the feeling of anger. The prestige of an indi-vidual is sometimes undermined by one’s own wealth and one’spride in wealth. One’s wealth creates a kind of barrier between himand his kith and kin. People lose everything and are exposed to greatsuffering because of their anger.If we aim at transcendental reality and Divinity, we must de-cide to bring this great emotion of anger under control. Anger iscaused by weakness. It is not the weakness of the body but of themind. To give strength to our mind and remove the weakness fromour mind, it is necessary to fill it with good thoughts, good feelingsand good ideas. While the funeral pyre consumes the dead, chinta,or an agitated mind, reduces to ashes the living body. It is a livingdeath if one is obsessed by pride, ego and anger. A state of mind inwhich one overcomes these things is described as sthita-prajna. ASummer Showers in Brindavan 1972167sthitaprajna is one who is neither elated by joy nor depressed bysorrow. He can take joy and sorrow in his stride with the sameequanimity of mind.Perhaps you think it is not easy to control our senses. Evenif it is not easy to control them, it is very easy to divert all of them inthe direction of God and give them a new orientation. The gopikasgive classic examples of such supreme self-control. By directing thepowers of your senses towards God, all the impurities of the sensesare eliminated in the process. The first step is cultivation of love to-wards all living creatures. This helps you to control your senses anddirect them toward God.There are three fish in a pond. One fish said to the other two:“The water in this pond will run dry day after day. A time will comewhen the pond may become completely dry; and before the fisher-man comes to catch us, it is necessary that we go and stay in someplace where there is a perennial supply of water.” The second fishsaid: “You are imagining. Your mind is full of needless fears. Thepond will not run dry. The fisherman will not come to bother us.Enjoy your present state.” The third fish said the same thing. Thefirst fish was discouraged when the other two did not accept its ad-vice and so it had to share their fate. As anticipated, the fishermancame and trapped them, cooked and ate them. Our life may be com-pared to a pond and the length of our life to the water.The three fish are the three gunas, thama, raja, and sathwa.The sathwik tendency always decides to follow the path of good andfixes its attention on things that are permanent. It decides that beforethe level of water runs down, it should save itself and it always thinksof noble things. Water has been compared to the length of life andday-by-day it recedes and at any time death may overcome it. Thefisherman is the emblem of death. Thama and raja are antagonisticto sathwa and, therefore, even the merit of sathwa is counteracted bythe other two. These two gunas, thama and raja, mislead our sensesand send them along the wrong path. We should first try to controlthama and raja and thereby attain mastery over our senses. If we168Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972follow good methods, even raja and thama may be conquered byclose association with sathwa. We should believe that holy, sacredand perennial love can be found in every human heart where Godresides. We should believe that God is the indweller of the heart andmust follow the teaching that comes from the heart and adopt goodmethods to follow such a teaching.Our ancients have given us sacred paths of yoga and dhyanato overcome evils and gain control over our senses. To control angerand hatred, the ancient sages left their villages and went to the forest.Today it is not necessary to retire to the forest to get rid of anger andhatred. Virtue cannot be practised in a vacuum. If you live in an at-mosphere of anger and are able to control it, then it is a meritoriousachievement. But if you live in a forest where there is no room foranger and say that you have controlled your anger, it is not meaning-ful. You must, therefore, remain in the worldly surroundings wherethere is ample scope for the rising up of emotions of anger and ha-tred and then learn to control them. That will be a meritoriousachievement.The sages used to perform yagnas and yagas for gainingmastery over their senses. The real nature and meaning of a yagna isthe overcoming of all our evil tendencies, throwing them into the fireof sacrifice. This is described as bhootabali. The word bhootabalihas been misinterpreted and some people think it means Animal sac-rifice and this has given rise to evil practices. This is not the rightway. Bali means tax. Today we are paying taxes on our property, onour houses and on our income. But the intention of levying taxes inthe olden times was different from the intention of taxing today. To-day taxes are often collected but misappropriated by people inpower. Taxes of olden days were used to further improve and in-crease the welfare of the people. Where there was no water supply,they used to provide water; where there were no roads, they used tobuild roads. By sacrificing all our evil tendencies to God, we areblessed with what is beyond man and what man badly needs in thisworld.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972169We offer to God so many things, because the offering givesus pleasure. We offer flowers to God, not because God does nothave flowers, but because it makes us happy to offer flowers to Him.Many students say, “If I pass with a first class, I will break five co-conuts at Your feet.” Does this mean that God does not have coco-nuts at His disposal? All the objects we offer, like leaf, flower, waterand all others, have an allegorical significance. The word leaf doesnot refer to tulasi or any other leaf. Our body is a leaf. Our body isoffered as a sacred leaf to God. Because this body is full of the threegunas, we consider it a leaf and make an offering of it to God. Theword pushpa stands for the flower of the heart. The flowers we talkof, in the context of God, do not refer to the earthly flowers, whichfade away. Similarly, the word fruit is the fruit of the mind. It meansthat we must do our deeds without expecting any reward; and if ac-tion is done in that spirit, it becomes a holy sacrifice. Water does notmean that which is drawn from the taps. It refers to the tears of joythat spring from the depths of your heart. You should not offerleaves gathered from trees which are external or flowers from plantsin the garden or water drawn from the well or fruit got from some-where else; but you must offer all these from the tree of your body,which is sacred, to God. Whatever offering you make, when you of-fer those things born out of the tree of your own body, then the fullmerit will be bestowed on you.The word narikela stands for a coconut. Every Indian mustgrasp the inner meaning of offering a coconut to God. We never of-fer the coconut as it is. We remove the fibre that covers it and offerthe fruit that is free from all the external fibre. Only then is it possi-ble to break the coconut. By breaking the coconut, the water in itflows out. The heart is the coconut and it is covered by the fibre ofdesire. The water that flows out is the samskara or purification. Thefibres on the surface are the desires. We must strip the heart of alldesires and offer the core without the fibre. It then becomes an of-fering to God. If we aim at a state of no birth and want liberationfrom the cycle of birth and death, the core acquires a different sig-170Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972nificance. If we plant a coconut as it is, in course of time and by wa-tering it, another plant will grow out of it. At the time of germination,there is water in it. At that time, the kernel will be clinging to thesides of the fruit. The water in due time, gets dried up and the kernelshrivels and begins to drift away from the external surface of the co-conut. If we try to get the kernel out, plant it and water it, nothing willhappen. Our body may be compared to the shell and our life to thekernel. Our samskaras are the waters inside the coconut. As long asthere are samskaras within us, the heart will always cling to the bodyconsciousness just as the kernel clings to the fruit.Control of the senses helps us to get rid of all evil tenden-cies. When your mind is troubled by bad thoughts, try to sit in aplace and think of God, then you will be happy. Several great saintshave taught the path of acquiring control over your senses. Theyused to offer to God all the tendencies that arise from the senses.They used to dedicate all their actions to God because they coulddivert their senses in the right channel. Their senses were nottouched by temptations of sins. When you do any action just toplease God, no evil result will flow out and cause you any suffering.What is offered to God is totally free from all defects and imperfec-tions.Gowranga was the original name of Chaithanya. As he grewup, he directed all thoughts toward God. He used to wander alongthe streets, singing kirtans and beating cymbals in his hands. Inthose days, there were enemies of such nagarasankirtan, or singingon the streets; and they used to take away the instruments from thehands of those who used to go along the streets chanting the nameof God. Even at such moments, Chaithanya never exhibited anytrace of anger. When anyone took away the tala from his hands, heused to think that the Will of God was that He wanted him to chantHis name without any accessories. The harm done to him was inter-preted by him as a great benefit done to him. If anyone abused himbeyond endurance, he used to utter the name of Krishna and thustune his mind to the mood of Krishna. When he uttered the name ofSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972171Krishna, Chaithanya lost consciousness of his body. Because he losthis consciousness whenever the name of Krishna was uttered, hewas known by the name of Krishna Chaithanya. Such titles won inthose days, were because of deserving merit and not like the titlesconferred today on good, bad, worthy and unworthy people, all alike.In those days people never cared for worldly titles. Every personconsidered himself as the child of immortality. The removal of im-morality is the way to attain immortality. Injustice, impropriety, andinequity are weaknesses that must be got rid of. With a pure heartfilled with the spirit of love, we must get ready to serve our country.Though you may not read Vedas and Sastras, though you may notperform yagnas and yagas, it is possible to gain the grace of God bythe cultivation of love.Sathwik food, which is congenial for the mind, is necessaryto develop these qualities of love. Today many people think thatsathwik diet consists of milk, curd, and so many other things. This isnot correct. You must try to understand the real nature of sathwikdiet. You take the sathwik diet through your mouth. The mouth isonly one of the five sense organs. Sathwik diet does not mean sim-ply the food we take through our mouth; but also means the pure airwe breathe through our nose, the pure vision we see through oureyes, the pure sounds we listen to through our ears and the pure ob-jects we touch through our feet. All we take in through the doors ofthe five sense organs may be described as the sathwik diet. Sathwikdiet means the synthesis of sathwik food: breathing pure air, listen-ing to good sounds, looking at good sights and touching pure ob-jects. Only then, we may be said to be sathwik in our habits.We must believe that it is the duty of Indians to control anddevelop the senses along proper channels. Today, India is consid-ered a weak nation because the people have not exercised such con-trol as our ancestors used to, over their senses. We must also try tobring about unity in diversity. One piece of straw cannot bind even atiny ant. But if we weave a rope out of a thousand pieces of straw, wecan bind even a wild elephant. Therefore, it is possible for us to172Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972achieve great things through unity. Indians must all be united, andthrough unity, try to safeguard the higher values of Indian culture.India is a sacred country, which has given spiritual leadership to theentire world for centuries. All the great cultures that have been ac-cepted in other countries originated at some time or other and insome form or other in this sacred land.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 17318. The Path of DevotionYou all rejoice when you look at the pictures on the screenand mistake them for reality. What you should really do is to keepyour attention riveted upon what lies behind the screen; and if youare able to understand what is real and what is not real, all yourdoubts will be set at rest.The foolish crow will live upon rotten flesh and other putre-fied objects. On the other hand, parrots, and cuckoos drink thehoney that is hidden in the flowers and thereby they feel thrilled withdelight. In the same manner, foolish people run after temporal ob-jects and worldly things and waste their time and energy. On theother hand, those who have pure minds drink the nectar of God-realisation and Godly love and experience supreme happiness.“No pains, no gains” is a well-known principle, and we de-rive the fruit only if we are prepared to undertake the work. Thistruth is seen in all walks of life. We cannot achieve any fruit withoutpaying the price for it. It is not proper to follow our mind and liveaccording to the dictates of its whims. Life, which is lived accordingto the Sastras, is the real life. The Sastras alone contain an authori-tative declaration of the real goal of life. It is even not necessary forus to read the different Sastras in order to realise the nature, signifi-cance and the purpose of life. If you follow the truth that flows fromyour heart, you will be led the perfect way.Today, we do not believe that what the Sastras have laiddown is really the expression of truth. The purport of the Sastras isknown by different names and this variety of names sometimes leadsto confusion. When we listen to discourses delivered by experiencedand wise elders, we land ourselves in doubt whether to adopt this oneor the other, and we do not know which is the right path and which isnot. The statement in the Sastras may be interpreted differently and174Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972we land ourselves into trouble by trying to follow the different in-terpretations.With the help of an analogy, we will be able to realisewhether God is serving man or man is serving God. We imagine thatman, manava, is offering everything that he has for the sake of therealisation of God, Madhava. It is not difficult for man to follow thepath and try to realise Madhava. Every discipline and every actionthat leads man to God is not difficult to be implemented. For in-stance, a Vedic Brahmin takes the holy water of the Ganges in thepalm of his hand and offers the same water back to the sacred river.The truth is that he is not offering his property or his father’s prop-erty or his grandfather’s property, but he is offering the holy waterthat he has drawn from the sacred river back to the river. Similarly,when we look at the objects offered by man to God, they are all cre-ated, preserved and bestowed upon man by God Himself. Man is notoffering anything of his own, except when he is offering his devo-tion arising from his heart. God takes care of that devotee who com-pletely surrenders himself with single-minded devotion at the LotusFeet of the Lord. If one is intoxicated with divine love and forgets allworldly responsibilities, God will take upon Himself all the respon-sibilities of that devotee.Our Sastras teach us many good things through the exam-ples of the lives of great saints and great teachers. One devotee ad-dressed God thus, “I am not Sakkubai to let you get bound to thepillar and beaten up in my place. I am not Ramdas to demand thereturn of the money that I have spent for you. I am not Jayadeva todemand that the ruined house should once more be repaired and thatthe roof should be put over it and covered with hay.” We find sev-eral such devotees in our history, who have thus served God andmade God serve them. All our Sastras unanimously declare that lovealone is the one essential requisite for developing unswerving devo-tion. Realisation, which is not possible through logic, through offer-ing sacrifices and through discussion and other disciplines, can beSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972175achieved only through love. Therefore, we should examine why weshould cultivate and cherish this love.The nature of the body, of the mind and of the desires andsenses are not conducive to the realisation of God. We all hear aboutthe Lord who sleeps on ksheerasagara, the ocean of milk. Our an-tha karana, or the inner subtle body, is the ksheerasagara, or theocean of milk. And that which remains after dhyana—the sesha orthe remnant—is the adisesha or the great serpent. The conscious-ness that lies between the two is Lord Vishnu Himself. And the onewho worships or the worshipper is Goddess Lakshmi. Several greatmen have taught us how to make God sleep on the ocean ofmilk—in our own antha karana, or in our own heart.There is hidden meaning as to why we think of the sadhakaas Lakshmi. Unless the inert nature is completely shaken off, the jivicannot be called Purusha. It is possible to attain that principle of Pu-rusha through the feminine nature or stree thathwa. We must ex-amine what this jadathwa or inertness is. There are five phases oraspects of this inertness. The first one is called ghataakasa—the skywithin the pot. The second is jalaakasa, the sky reflected in the wa-ter. The third is the daharaakasa, the sky that is reflected in theheart. The fourth one is chidaakasa and the fifth one is mahada-akasa or the grand sky. So when we look at these five kinds of aka-sas, they are all inert or jada.Each one of you has got a name. The name refers to thebody but not the Atma or the soul in you. The name is given by theparents to the body, which is inert and it refers only to the body butnot to the Atma. Ghataakasa is that state which says, “This is I.”Man uses the word “I”, referring to the body, though there isdeeply lodged within him the higher principle of Atma or the soul.Even when we are lost in the knowledge of the body, thinking onlyof the body, still there is that feeling for the Atma within us.Coming to jalaakasa, it is the state that is full of sankalpa orintention and may be described as the sky reflected in water. If in alittle pond of water the blue sky is reflected and the sky may also176Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972have the shining moon, we have the illusion that the sky and themoon reflected in the water seem to be mobile or moving. The skyand the moon do not move, but only the water moves when thebreeze blows over it. The sankalpa and the vikalpas in us are thewater.Daharaakasa is the state when one looks at sankalpas andvikalpas but one is aware that he is looking at them. Let us take anexample. We pour water into a tub and we look at it. We see ourown face reflected in it, and we say that it is a reflection. Even thoughthat image reflected in the water is beaten, not even a single stroke isfelt by the object, namely, the body. If the object and the image wereone, any injury done to the image must be felt by the object also.Though your face is reflected in water, the goodness or the badnessof the image does not affect you, the object. You may then ask, “Is itnot my reflection?” Yes, it is yours. When the image is hurt and thatinjury is not registered by you, it is “not you.” But when you areabused, you and the image become one. When the image is hurtphysically by anybody, that injury is not felt by the object, but whenthe image is insulted and abused by anybody, then the object, whosereflection is found in the water, also feels the insult. You feel angrybecause you are there in the image also. In sabda or sound, there isunity, but in action or kriya there is no unity. And the nature ofSabda Brahma Thathwa is hidden here. In jalaakasa, we also findthe nature of daharaakasa.Coming to chidaakasa, this refers to man remaining a merespectator. Chidaakasa is the state when a man, without being upset,without being in any way influenced by emotion, just observes andremains like an observer or a spectator. Whatever may happen to thebody —it may be insulted or injured— the person is not affected bythem; he is always engrossed in the higher consciousness and that isthe state of Chidaakasa. The pot may be broken, the pond may rundry, the canvas may be torn to shreds, but that akasa stands there.The sky reflected in the pot, the sky painted on the canvas, only referto the media, but not to the great sky itself. Though this is reflectedSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972177in our body, mind and senses, this thathwa is something that tran-scends all of them.Only when the senses are brought under control and whenthere is a state of nirvikalpa, we reach the highest state of realisation.It is possible for us to realise the nature of the mahadaakasa, or thegreat sky, in the state known as nirvikalpa. Nirvikalpa means ar-resting the activity of all the senses and assuming supreme controlover them. Then the consciousness is not lost in the body or in anypart of the body, but it is entirely devoted to that higher or transcen-dental state. The mahadaakasa is called akasa because it has anelement of jada or inertness in it.We sometimes call a conglomeration of clouds by the nameof sky. The sky has no separate entity or existence. It is not a shapewhich is concrete and made up of the five elements. It has only onequality, namely sabda or sound. And this sound is all-pervading. Itis wrong to identify sabda alone with the sky. The sky is known byseveral names such as akasa, gagana, soonya, or nothingness, andso on. There is nothing there in the sky. The state of nothingness iscalled by the name of sky. When we sometimes refer to our heartand say, this is hridayakasa, it is because there is no shape for thehridaya or heart in a spiritual sense. The akasa has to be cleared ofall baser intentions and instincts, all sankalpas, and vikalpas.If a boy is admitted to a school, he gradually progressesfrom the nursery to the first standard, from the first to the second,third, and so on. He does not suddenly jump from the nursery to thehighest class in the school. The same boy, if he remains at home andunder-goes private studies and takes the help of tutors, it is possiblefor him to go straight to the 6th standard. When we gain God’sgrace and love, it is possible for us to go straight to the highest stateof mahadaakasa without passing through all the various stages ofghataakasa, jalaakasa, and so on. It is necessary for us to search forthe path that easily takes us to the feet of the Lord and realise Him.Elders very often say that this world is an illusion and Godalone is the reality. They say that life is tasteless, that life has no178Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972charm and that life has no substance. Even the scholars who say thatthis world is an illusion are themselves caught up in the illusion andare not able to extricate themselves from it. Though this is transient,false, and ephemeral, it is not possible for us at once to extricate our-selves from it. Though we know that this body grows weak, perishes,drops down dead, still we take all pains to protect it, to attend to itand to beautify it. Though we know that death is an inescapable real-ity, are we not trying to escape it?Though we know that the world is false, it is desirable thatwe recognise the truth even in this falsehood. Let us examine care-fully whatever truth there is in it. Even in boyhood, we have all thequalities of old age latent and hidden. We do not find any basicchanges though we may pass on from the state of adolescence toyouth, to middle age and to old age. And the same body is presentthrough all these stages of change from boyhood to old age. No-body can identify exactly the point of transition when boyhoodcomes to an end and youth begins, when youth comes to an end andold age comes. The body does not undergo any death. The body re-mains and, within the same body, these changes come about. Whenwe contemplate upon this, we verily find truth in falsehood, false-hood in truth, truth in truth and falsehood in falsehood.In this world, which is false, we are leading a life which isfalse. If this world was real, why do we, after our dinner and retiringto sleep, forget all the lectures that we have listened to during the dayand all the experiences of the day? Nothing remains in our mind. Itis not forgetting, but we simply become unaware of all the experi-ence through which we have gone during the day. Though yourbody may be resting in the shed at Brindavan, your mind may bedreaming at night wandering in the streets of Delhi. In the dream,you think that you are moving in Delhi in body. The truth is thatthough your body is here, you are dreaming that the body has goneto Delhi and has gone for shopping. Your body has not gone there atall. What is true in the waking state is false in the dream state andSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972179what is true in the dream state becomes false in the waking state.Therefore, this is falsehood in falsehood.The sun shines brilliantly when there is no obstruction, butwhen we build a house and fit it with doors and windows and closeall of them, there is only darkness but no light inside that house.When we want the sun’s light to penetrate into the house, either oftwo things must be done by us. We must remove the top or we mustget rid of deha bhranthi. We demolish the top, which is made ofahamkara, or ego, and mamakara, or attachment. Alternatively, wecan fit a mirror and see that the sun is reflected into the house. Thenthe mirror also will be able to radiate the effulgence of the sun. It ispossible by moving the mirror to spread the light in the dark interiorof the house. But does the light come from the sun or does it comefrom the mirror? The mirror is inert and it is not luminous by nature.The moon also is like the mirror and the moon has no brightness ofits own. The light of the sun is reflected on the surface of the moonand therefore the light of the moon is so cool and so pleasant.Our Vedas teach that the moon is like the mind, which re-flects the glory of the soul. If the light of the Atma is reflected in themirror of the buddhi, or intelligence, then the entire dark mind maybe seen shining with light. Mind is responsible for our being able toderive prajnana, even though we are in the state of ajnana. If wemake our mind radiant and illumined, then there is no room fordarkness, ajnana, or ignorance. When we turn our buddhi towardAtma, we shall be able to dispel all the darkness from our minds.Mind is the master of the senses and intelligence is the master of themind. Atma is the master of intelligence. And what is grasped in in-telligence is beyond the senses. It transcends the senses. The attemptto gain liberation, ultimately, by passing through all these intermedi-ate stages, is known by the name of moksha marga or the path forliberation.Some days back, I said that I would deal with the subject ofthe different padas in the different yugas and explain how dharmahas lost its padas, in spite of the appearance of the great Avatars. I180Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972shall elucidate it now. Dharma used to live and move about inKritha Yuga on four feet. The four feet are yajna, yaga, yoga, andthapas. There is a saying that there is no dharma higher than truth.Truth is the basis of all dharma and truth depends upon the rutha orthe sankalpa. So these three—rutha, sathya, and dharma—are in-separably and inextricably connected. Rishis in the Kritha Yugafollowed these fourfold paths, described in the foregoing as the fourfeet, in order to gain harmony between thought, word and deed.The loss of one pada in Thretha Yuga really means the lossof one sadhana, namely, thapas. The work of the pada is to helpman walk. Thapas also is the process of enforcement in action. Itwas possible in Thretha Yuga to attain dharma without thapas byfollowing the other three, namely yajna, yaga, and yoga. In theDwapara Yuga with the help of only two, yaga and yoga, it waspossible to attain liberation. Yajna had been eliminated. In the KaliYuga, dharma has only one pada, namely yoga. Yaga is gone andyoga alone remains. “What kind of yoga?” you may ask. That yogawhich is relevant is bhakthi yoga, the yoga of devotion. There is noother way to attain liberation in this Kali Yuga except through thepath of devotion. In the Thretha Yuga, people were able to enjoy theproximity to Divinity through the three methods, yajna, yaga, andyoga. In the Dwapara Yuga, the same could be achieved with thehelp of only two padas, yaga and yoga. It is possible to attain this inKali Yuga through yoga alone. Thus, the inner meaning is that theyhave facilitated the process, eliminated the difficult ones and the onethat is easily accessible to all, the path of devotion, is what remains inthe Kali Yuga.It used to take two months for people to reach Benares somefifty years ago. Ten years ago, it used to take three days for going bytrain. Today it is possible for us to reach Benares by plane withinthree hours. Kasi or Benares has not undergone any change. TheCity of Bangalore has not undergone any change. The four feet weused in the early journeys have finally dwindled into one foot at thepresent time. Our methods have been rendered easier. Let us takeSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972181our life itself as an example. During your first year you use all thefour limbs to move. After a few months, you walk on two feet takingthe help of the wall with your hands. Sometimes you may take thehelp of the mother’s hand. In that stage, you use three limbs. Aftersome time, you do not depend upon either the mother or the wall.You can just walk on your two feet. Later, when you want to be veryswift in your movement, you use only one foot. When you run, thetwo feet do not touch the ground at the same time. Only one foottouches the ground at a time. Because you set only one foot on theground, you are able to reach the destination very quickly. Dharmahas not changed. Only the means of attainment have been facilitated.dharma remains the same.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 18219. Dwaitha, Adwaitha,and VisishtadwaithaIn the Atma Thathwa, all are eternal. In the world-sense, allare ephemeral. Though we know that this body and the sense of theworkaday world are purely ephemeral, we make the mistake oftreating them as permanent. Atma Thathwa, which is jnana, is per-manent. Though we do not accept it, it still exists. It is above all ex-periences of losses and difficulties and nothing can shake it. ThisAtma Thathwa is the embodiment of truth. It is also the embodimentof delight or Ananda Swarupa.Several passages in the Gita refer to the eternal existence ofthe soul. Krishna says, “There was never a time when you were notthere. All the others, Bhishma, Drona, and others also have been everthere. The world is also there, always. I, who am the Easwara, youwho are the jiva and this world which is jagath—all the three havealways been existing.” These three, jiva, Easwara, and prakruthihave been in existence at all times —they were there even before thecreation, and they will continue to be there. Though the physicalbodies may be undergoing transformation, this Atma Thathwa re-mains eternal and changeless.Three approaches or three schools of philosophy have beenpropounded to enable us to know this Thathwa. These three aredwaitha, adwaitha, and visishtadwaitha. Let us first try to under-stand what is dwaitha or duality. Dwaitha propounds that jiva andprakruthi always exist, are always there, and will never become one.The permanence of these two entities, though they are different, isaccepted.Visishtadwaitha postulates chith and achith in the phenome-nal world and accepts the phenomena of appearance and illusion. Itstates that both are true and valid. Visishtadwaitha has also estab-Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972183lished the oneness of jagath, which is jada or inert, and of jiva,which is full of consciousness. Visishtadwaitha also says that jadaand Chaithanya, i.e. inertness and consciousness, are the manifesta-tions of the same principle of Divinity and, therefore, are consideredequally valid. Because these two entities cannot merge with eachother, they have been postulated as different aspects of the sameform and as part and parcel of the same principle.Jagath, the world; jiva, the consciousness; and Purusha, theSupreme, are not three separate entities but are one and the samefrom the ultimate point of view. The greatness of visishtadwaithalies in proclaiming their unity. Though the appearances may be dif-ferent and there may be varieties of experience, it is asserted that inall these, there is one thing present, namely, the unifying spirit. Fol-lowers of visishtadwaitha use the analogy of gold. Though the or-naments may be of different shape, the gold is the same. They goeven a step further. If God has not these subtle and gross bodies, thevery nature of God will be incomplete. I will give an example. Let ustake the kingdom and the people. Without the king, there cannot bethe kingdom; without the people, there can be no kingdom, and with-out the people, there can be no king. They are all interdependent. Be-cause all these three are in a way inextricably interconnected withone another, visishtadwaitha has propounded the unity of the threeentities. When we take into consideration the nature of the king andthe people, then we shall be able to grasp that there is also the princi-ple of non-duality or adwaitha here. The king also is one among thepeople, and he is also a man. The king is the law-giver, and the peo-ple are those who are regulated and bound by the law. Though theruler and the ruled may appear to be separate, as human beings theyare one and the same.Just as we are told about the oneness of jada and the chaith-anya, we find chaithanya, or consciousness, in inertness, and wefind the features of inertness in consciousness as well. Therefore, ina way they are inseparable. The inertness cannot exist without con-sciousness. Consciousness cannot exist without inertness. In the184Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972workaday world, we may mistake and think that conscious forcecannot enter into inert matter and vice-versa. But that is a mistakenidea. We all believe that this whole world is permeated by sabda orsound. But where there is movement or motion, there alone doessabda originate. We close our eyes many a time every minute. Asour eyelids move, they do make a little noise, but the noise is so in-audible that we are unaware of it. Because it is inaudible, we cannotdeny the presence of sound. Just as we are not able to recognise thesound that is inaudible, in the same way we are not able to recogniseconsciousness in jada and we are not able to recognise the elementof jada in consciousness.There are two aspects present in this illusion. One is pari-nama, or evolution. The other is vivarta. Vivarta is the property thatmakes us think that there is a change though the substance remainsthe same. It is made to appear to have a different shape and form.When we are walking alone, we may come across a rope but get de-luded to imagine it as a serpent. The rope does not go and the ser-pent does not come. It is all an illusion. Vivarta is the quality thatmakes us forget the real thing and makes us impose upon that, someother thing which is not there. It is the effect of maya. Parinama isthe property of evolution or change like milk turning into curd. Ifthere is no milk, we cannot change it into curd. Parinama is thatwhich changes what is there. Maya is present both in parinama andvivarta.Today, we live under the influence of vivarta. Though we areAtma Swarupa, we forget the Supreme Reality and live with thatdeha bhranthi, or the body illusion. We mistake our ephemeral ex-istence to be the real existence. We are not afraid of the rope, but weare terribly afraid of the serpent. We are not afraid of the Atma butwe are afraid of life. Though we are Atma Swarupas and should befree from fear, unfortunately, we are lost in fear and illusion.Upadhis or containers apart, there is only one Reality, just asthere is only one sun shining in the sky. When we fill a thousandpots with water, the same sun is reflected in those thousand pots.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972185Because the thousand pots are there and they are filled with water,which has the quality of reflection, the one sun seems to be split upinto a thousand suns. This is only a feeling and is not true. The truthis that there is only one sun shining in the sky. Likewise, this bodymay be compared to the pot that is filled with water and the sameAtma is reflected in each pot, and appears to be separate.Several persons put the question: “Swami, please tell uswhere the Atma goes after the death of the body?” When the potbreaks and the water spills on the ground, where does the sun, whichhas hitherto been reflected in the water, go? The sun has not comeand has not gone. But it has appeared as a reflection because there iswater in the pot. And when the pot is broken and the water has runout, the reflection has disappeared.There is another question. If the same sun is reflected in allpots, would not all the reflections have the same value? The reflectionhas the same value but the pots are of different value. One pot maybe an earthen pot, another may be one of copper, another of brass,another of silver, another of gold. Therefore, the value of the potvaries according to one’s wealth, one’s position, one’s education,but the Atma Swarupa has the same value. So all these differencesare illusory. They are created by things relating to the body. TheAtma Thathwa is one and indivisible.On the bank of a river, once a group of children were tendingtheir cows. It was monsoon time and all of a sudden a furious cur-rent of water developed. Because it was a fast current, one bear,which had slipped into the water, was drawn into the midstream andwas being carried away. One of the boys looked at the floating mass,and from a distance, it appeared to him to be a bundle of blanketsfloating in the water. He said to his companions, “I shall jump intothe water and get the bundle of blankets out,” so he jumped into thewater. With the mistaken idea that it was a bundle of blankets, theboy embraced, with his hands, the bear. Then the bear also embracedhim with its own hands. However much the boy tried to extricatehimself, the bear did not leave him. It held him fast. The boys on the186Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972shore shouted, “Oh, my dear companion, leave that bundle and comeaway.” The boy in the water, struggling to escape, cried out,“Though I want to escape from it, it does not allow me to escape.”So, in the river of life, maya plays like the bear and we mis-take it to be a bundle of blankets. Hoping that it would offer us sol-ace, comfort and happiness, we jump into the river and try to catch it.At a later stage, when we want to extricate ourselves from it, we findit impossible to do so. This illusion is created by maya but the divineprinciple is always one. Visishtadwaitha has been teaching fromtime immemorial that though the forms are different, there is onlyone Purusha, which is the Unity in the diversity and multiplicity offorms.Coming to adwaitha, we have to understand the word tomean non-duality. What is not two is adwaitha. What is that whichis not two? Brahman alone is not two. In the Gita, Lord Krishnataught this principle to Arjuna at several places. He says for instance:“Vrishneenaam Vaasudevosmi; Pandavanam Dhanan-jaya.” “Among the Vrishnees, I am Vaasudeva. Because I am theson of Vasudeva, I am Vaasudeva. Among the Pandavas, I am Ar-juna.” Though He is One, here He represents Himself as two. Hefurther says, “I am Easwara, you are the jiva, and the heroes who areranged against you constitute the jagath, the world. This jagath is allreflected as in a mirror. You are considering that you are separateand all these people are separate from you. You are thinking that youand they are different. Jiva, Easwara, and prakruthi —all three enti-ties have been there from time immemorial.” Arjuna asked, “If theseentities, jiva, Easwara, and prakruthi, have been ever in existence andjiva and Easwara are one, how do you know about jagath and whydo I not know anything about it? When you and I are one, how is itthat you know and I do not know? Please tell me the secret of this.”Krishna said, “Arjuna! You also can know, but you do not focusyour mind upon the goal. Therefore, you do not know. But my mindis always steadily riveted on that Reality. Therefore, I know it. Andthat is the essential difference between us two.” Arjuna could notSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972187grasp this. He said, “You are trying to hoodwink me, Oh, Krishna!”To this, Krishna said, “Arjuna! I shall never utter false or deceitfulwords. I am Sathya Swarupa. Therefore there is no place for false-hood or deceit in My words. It is because of the effect of maya thatyou have become subjected to illusion and you are attributing false-hood even to Me!”Then He wanted to teach Arjuna by an example. He askedArjuna, “How old are you?” Arjuna said, “I am eighty years old.”Krishna asked, “Tell me, three years ago, on such and such a day,where were you?” Arjuna could not recollect and said: “Lord! I donot remember where I was on that day three years ago.” Krishnasaid, “Then you do not remember where you were. You accept youwere in a particular place years ago. If you were not there how couldyou be here today? You admit today that you do not know whereyou were three years ago.” Krishna patted Arjuna on his back andcontinued, “Do not feel embarrassed. I shall put to you anotherquestion. Please tell me how old you were when King Drupada wasbound and brought by you to your kingdom.” Arjuna replied, “Iwas at that time sixteen years old, Oh Lord!” Krishna then asked,“Do you remember when you got married to Subhadra?” Arjunasaid immediately, “I certainly remember, I was married in mytwenty-second year.” Then Krishna questioned: “An event such asthe marriage, which took place fifty years ago, and the incident ofbringing King Drupada bound to your capital, which happened long,long ago, are remembered by you, but you do not remember whathappened just three years ago. Why is it? The secret is this. The na-ture of maya is that it makes you attach importance to some eventssuch as birthdays and wedding days but not to others.”To experience joy and sorrow alike is the secret of samadhi.Rama has been able to demonstrate this samadhi quality, i.e. onewho is not elated by joy and one who is not downcast or depressedby sorrow, how-ever enormous it may be. Not only Rama, but allAvatars have demonstrated this state of samadhi. Rama, who gotready for the coronation ceremony at 7 o’clock, at the same time and188Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972in the same stride, took the decision and left for the forest. He wasnot elated at the prospect of becoming the future king and he did notget depressed or frustrated when he was asked to go to the forest.Krishna always used to be smiling whether it was Rudrabhumi, thesacrificial field, or Yuddhabhumi, the battlefield. Wherever He usedto be, He remained an embodiment of ananda. That was why Hiswords, which were uttered on the battlefield, have acquired the nameof Gita. Gita means song. We sing when we are happy. Does onesing when one is unhappy or sorry? When Krishna could sing evenin the midst of a battle, it means that He can always remain cheerfuland happy.The real nature of Avatars is that they are always overflow-ing with the spirit of delight and joy. Just as the ocean rises andsurges up when there is a full moon in the sky, in the same waywhen I look at the devotees, My Heart overflows with limitless,boundless love for them. Everything is Rasa Swarupa. There can beno change in the attitude, in the affection and in the thoughts of God,but the ignorant attribute the changes they imagine, or differencesthey see, to God out of their petty-mindedness. When Divine powerfulfils some of our desires, we praise God, but when the same powerdoes not satisfy our desires, we straightaway condemn Him. Mancommits sin and he has to undergo the punishment for the sin. Butthen he says, “Oh God! you have no mercy, you are subjecting meto this punishment.” People cannot stand test and trial.People remember those days to which they attach some spe-cial significance and they do not forget them. Because they do notattach importance to other days, they do not find a place in theirmemory. And there lies the difference between jiva and Deva. Jivaimagines some as necessary, and others as unnecessary and dwellson differences. As far as Deva is concerned, there is nothing that isnecessary for Him and that is not necessary for Him. He remains aspectator of all. For a spectator, the past, the present and the futureare all the same. He can visualise all the three periods of time. Heremains as Atma Swarupa during all the three periods of time.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972189Though God is one, as a result of our love for him, we estab-lish different kinds of relationship with God. Some may address himas Father, others as Mother, others as Christ, others as Siva, othersas Hari and so on. It is only the difference that is born out of illu-sion, but there is only one God behind all these relationships.Here is an example that is within the range of experience ofall. Every day we take and enjoy ghee, butter, buttermilk, curd, etc.All these are ultimately derived from milk. Milk is adwaitha. Butteris visishtadwaitha. Buttermilk is dwaitha. Both dwaitha and visish-tadwaitha are derived from adwaitha. Therefore, it is said that wis-dom is adwaitha darshanam. Wisdom reveals to us the BrahmaThathwa. It is described as “Sathyam jnanam anantham Brahma.”Brahma is that which is truth, that which is endless, and that which isall knowing. The word Brahma is derived from the root Bruhi.Bruhi means that which does not change. It is called BrahmaThathwa because it does not change and because it remains eternal.We must adopt the theory of Raso Vai Saha in order to attain thisBrahma Thathwa. The entire world or universe is born out of rasa,God Himself, who is Rasa Swarupa. That which is born out of rasacannot be nirasa or devoid of rasa.Pundits classify rasa into nine categories. They are callednavarasas. According to my view, there are no navarasas or ninerasas. There are only two rasas. The emotions of daya, prema, andanugraha merge in karuna rasa. The emotions of kama, krodha,and lobha merge in rringara rasa. Sringara rasa misleads uswhereas karuna rasa leads us. Therefore, to recognise our duty, wemust take recourse to karuna rasa. Only through karuna rasa canwe enjoy the proximity of the Lord. That is the real ecstasy or bliss.karuna rasa offers to us pure, selfless love. Selfish love leads to anaspect of sringara rasa and that is moha. Moha rasa may be com-pared to the water that is stagnating in the pond. Karuna rasa maybe compared to the water that flows through a river. Moving waterever remains pure. Still water gets contaminated and becomes stag-nant. Stagnant water sometimes becomes poisonous because worms190Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972breed in it. Flowing water always remains pure, and surely and fi-nally reaches the ocean of anugraha or God’s grace.I will give now an example. There is a girl in one house.There is a young man in another house. Their houses are almost sideby side. But the girl does not know anything about the young man,and the young man does not know anything about the girl living inthe neighbouring house. One day, the girl fell seriously ill. That dayall the people in the house were hectic and several doctors werecalled in. When the boy in the neighbouring house heard the noise,he thought it was a disturbance to his studies; and therefore, heclosed his window and started reading. But in course of time, as aresult of destiny, this boy got married to that girl in the neighbouringhouse. The marriage took place in the morning. In the afternoon, thegirl developed a stomach-ache and the bridegroom felt very anxiousfor the girl and her stomach-ache. Where and when did he developthis attachment to the girl? Because he got married to her, even a littlestomach-ache upset him. When the same girl fell dangerously illsome time ago, he did not feel even the slightest anxiety of her be-cause, at that time, there was no attachment or relationship with thatgirl. So, abhimana and mamakara, affection and attachment, are re-sponsible for all joys and sorrows. We must try to attain that serenestate of mind, that equanimity which enables you not to be elated byjoy or depressed by sorrow. When you are able to attain that equa-nimity of mind, then you can attain samadhi.The word samadhi has been variously interpreted by ourscholars. When someone falls unconscious during sankirtan orwhen someone becomes stiff during yoga, they think it is a state ofsamadhi. But this is not real samadhi. The very meaning of theword is conveyed by the two syllables that make the word sama anddhi—sama means equal and dhi means buddhi. So to be untouchedby joy and sorrow, to take them in the same stride is samadhi.Earlier, I was dealing with the four Purusharthas namely,dharma, artha, kama, and moksha. These are comparable to thesteps of a ladder. Dharma is firmly planted on the ground, and if weSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972191ascend the ladder, step by step, we reach the highest rung, the goal ofmoksha. So we deem prakruthi as dharma. And our destination ismoksha or Purusha. Artha and kama are the intermediary stagesbetween Purusha on the one hand and prakruthi on the other.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 19220. God’s Love is like SunshineThere is nothing greater than karma or duty and that dutymust be done in a disinterested manner without having any attach-ment to the fruit of the action. When action is performed in a spiritof detachment, it will lead us to greater happiness in this world.You should clearly understand the meaning of karma, bhak-thi, and jnana. Yoga must be considered to be the common factor inall these. Patanjali has described yoga as the control of the facultiesof the mind and only after that can we undertake any one of thesepaths, namely, that of karma, bhakth,  and jnana. It is not possiblefor any one to abstain from action. Action is the basis for our exis-tence. This body has been given to us for the sake of action. The ob-ligation of man’s life is to sanctify it through action and to purify histime by right action. The stream of action flows through jnana alsoand ultimately leads us to the highest stages of realisation.We think that karma, bhakthi, and jnana are separate but ac-cording to our philosophy, they are indivisible and not separate.Even if they appear to be separate, they are the same in form, time,name and nature. Here is an illustration. At first we find on a tree, asmall bud. By preserving this bud, it develops into an unripe fruit.This unripe fruit develops into the ripe and mellow fruit. When thefruit becomes mellow, it becomes sweet. The bud, the unripe fruitand the ripe fruit are the three manifestations of the same reality. Thepath of karma may be compared to a path that is fraught with certaindifficulties. When we think of the path of bhakthi, it seems to be lessdifficult and more pleasant. To attain the ability to go along the pathof jnana or superior wisdom, action or the path of karma is inevita-ble. To give you another analogy, the path of karma may be de-scribed as a train journey. During the journey by a train, we getdown at one station and get into another train and thus travel by dif-ferent trains. The path of bhakthi may, on the other hand, be de-Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972193scribed as a journey in a through carriage. The path of jnana is liketraveling in a through train.Though the path of karma is difficult, it gives us varied expe-riences. There are three kinds of karma, namely, karma, vikarma,and akarma. According to the Gita, these are three ramifications.Karma may be described as the ordained duty. Vikarma deals withcertain actions that are prohibited. But such prohibited actions, if andwhen they are undertaken for God realisation, become sanctified.Akarma is described as pure laziness or idleness. The karmas areclarified by the Gita and must be enforced in action and not merelytalked about. Karma is our responsibility since our birth. The Gitarefers to man as karmaja. Man is born through and for karma.Moksha or liberation and janma or birth are all derived from karma.It is not possible for us to spend one minute without karma. Thoughit takes a gross physical form, action helps us to spend our time use-fully. As long as we have five senses of our body properly func-tioning, we cannot but undertake some type of action or other. Ac-tion will always lead to a reward or a fruit. The fruit of action is areaction, a reflection and a resound of the action itself. But the Gitateaches us that the actions we undertake for God realisation must befree from any consideration for a reward or a fruit. All those whopropagate the message of the Gita say that man has only the right toact and has not the right to claim the fruit of that action. But the Gitahas not said that man has no authority to enjoy the fruit of the action.The Gita has said that man should voluntarily give up the right toenjoy the fruit of the action. It has not said “na phaleshu” or thereis no fruit. It has said “maa phaleshu” though there is the fruit, theinjunction is that you must give up the desire for the fruit of action.It is also described in our sacred Vedas that man achieves real hap-piness by voluntarily giving up the desire for the fruit.One ponders over how man can enjoy through sacrifice.Without thyaga or sacrifice, we cannot have either bhoga or yogabut have only roga or disease. Take the example of our inhaling.After we inhale, if we do not exhale the air that we have inhaled, the194Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972lungs will be damaged. Similarly, our stomach will be upset if we donot excrete the food we have taken. If the blood that flows throughthe arteries does not flow through a particular point of the body, itwill be stagnant there and then we will get a boil. Therefore, all ourwelfare is inextricably tied up with thyaga or sacrifice. If the childdoes not register natural growth, the mother gets very anxious aboutit. We are giving up the body that we inherit at the time of birth andby growing, we sacrifice the original state and attain the new one.Whether we do it knowingly or unknowingly, thyaga leads us tohappiness. Sacrifice gives us supreme satisfaction. Knowingly wemay not be able to do any sacrifice, but doing it consciously leads togreat happiness.We do not know when this body, made up of the five senseorgans, will drop off. Though they say that a hundred years is thelimit, do not believe it. We may die in childhood, in youth, in middleage or in old age. This we do not know. Whether we will die in ourown village or in the wilderness, we do not know. Death is the ulti-mate certainty. The wise man must realise the truth and death duringhis lifetime. If you give up this deha bhranthi, the body illusion,during your lifetime, you will be able to develop the higher notion,the thyaga bhranthi. There must be a limit up to which you maynourish this body which can be compared to a boat. Your life is theriver. On one side of the river is this world and on the other side isthe other world. You have undertaken a voyage from this world tothe other world, using the body as the boat and you must take care ofthis body until you reach the other shore. This body must be lookedupon as a boat, as a means to an end but not as an end in itself.We must take the Bhagavad Gita as the basis for knowingwhat perfect bliss is. God, who is Mahakarma Swarupa, has as-sumed the karma rupa and appears as Krishna. When Krishna, in akarma rupa, is delivering a message, Arjuna takes the sthula rupa(gross form). As long as Arjuna listened to the Gita in the grossform, he was not able to comprehend its significance. Arjuna prayedto the Lord to remove that great veil which was born in the sthulaSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972195rupa and only when it was removed could he assimilate the Gita. Allthat Arjuna experienced was the result of that sthula rupa. Arjunabecame subject to that great agony in his mind because he wasthinking of the people in front of him to be important as his kith andkin and as his forefathers, as his fathers, as his brothers and othersof the same family. Later, Arjuna was able to absorb the spirit of themessage of the Gita, and he was able to have a glimpse of the ViswaRupa. Dhritharashtra also listened to the same Gita. He could notfind any wisdom, because he simply listened to it in his sthula rupa.When we listen to anything, we must listen to it in our awak-ened consciousness. What we gather through our ears is not enough,but we should try to meditate upon it and then assimilate it into ourown system. Only then, it gives us real nourishment, enlightenmentand enjoyment. All our enjoyment may be classified into three parts:priya, pramoda, and moda. When we look at an object that is afterour own liking and feel happy about it, it is priya. Moda is the joywe feel when we acquire the object we like. Pramoda is the higherjoy, the joy we feel at what we have really acquired. Today we use the word priya in a meaningless manner.Priya means only looking at the object and not getting it or enjoyingit. We must develop that attitude of pramoda and through pramodadevelop priya toward the object. We cannot enjoy real happinessthrough priya and moda. You want to have the darshan of the formof God. If you only look at it, it is priya and it does not give youmuch satisfaction. If you try to gain and master it, it gives greaterhappiness. When you are able to gain and master it, it gives greatesthappiness. When you are able to enjoy it completely, you become apart of it and vice-versa. You do not get your stomach filled, whenyou look at a sweet in the shop. But when you have the sweet inyour hand, you have the guarantee that you can eat it any time. But itis only half the achievement. When you have the sweet in your handand whilst talking to some friend, a monkey may come and snatch itaway. You cannot be absolutely sure of enjoying it. You get full sat-196Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972isfaction only after eating it, after it becomes a part of the digestivesystem.The sadhana involved here is that it is no use looking at asweet, but you should buy it, eat it, assimilate it and make it a part ofyour own system. That gives you full happiness. You must alwaysconduct your enquiry in such a way that the object you see becomesa part of your body by proper enjoyment and assimilation. This isdescribed as step-wise discipline. Following the right disciplineleads to duty. If you look at a sweet and snatch it, it may amount totheft and acquisition in an improper manner. If you have the money,you pay the price and purchase the sweet. If the desire to eat isstrong and you do not have the money, you may request the shop-keeper to give you one. He will give you one. Similarly, when youwant to taste the moksha and feel you do not have sufficient strength,you may pray to God; and God, in His great mercy, will give you theneeded faculty. That which you can procure in this manner is truth.Truth can be easily gained. You should never give up thehabit of discipline. Only when you reach the state of perfection, youdo not have to think of regulations or discipline. You must carry onyour duties and responsibilities as long as you remain in these ash-rams beginning with brahmacharya and ending with sanyasa. Ifyou want to build a house in the village, you require the permissionof the department that controls it. If you want to roam in the forest,you may not require any permission from any office. On the otherhand, as long as you are living in a society, you must necessarilydischarge all your responsibilities that are built around the society.Even the sanyasi and the brahmachari have their own duties setaside for each of them. Today, we find great agitation for rights, butvery few people discharge their duties and realise their responsibili-ties. Remember that only when you are able to discharge your dutiesproperly, you get the authority. You should not hanker after powerwithout doing your duty.In order to attain and understand the Divinity, we must un-dertake sadhana and behave in a way that is like the Divine. This isSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972197the chief doctrine preached to Arjuna. Arjuna asked, “After havingkilled my kith and kin what can I do with this kingdom? Instead, Ishall become a beggar and go about begging.” Krishna asked, “Doyou want to act according to your liking or according to my liking!If you want to follow your desire, then go as you please, but if youwant to abide by the desire, then you must abide by what I say.” It isfor the Divine to discriminate in this matter and decide what is rightand what is wrong. In Arjuna’s thinking, greater importance hasbeen given to the physical relationship of the body to body than theDivine relationship between man and man. Any love that is related tothe body has an element of selfishness in it, and this can be com-pared to the electric bulb we have in a room. The light of the bulb islimited by the walls of the room and this is like selfish love. Love, ifit is on a higher plane, can be compared to moonlight. There is, inthat case, light within and without. This light, too, is hazy and notclear. Pure love, which is entirely selfless, is like sunshine. Sunlightgives us a clear view of all objects. God’s love is like sunshine. Hu-man love is like the moonlight. Individual love is like the bulb in theroom. You rise from the individual love and get into the state of mu-tual love.One question is often asked. Krishna is the Lord of the uni-verse. He is all-pervading, and yet the same Krishna was responsiblefor the destruction of forty lakhs of men on the battlefield. Is it vio-lence or non-violence? This is my answer to this question. An indi-vidual, let us say, has developed cancer on his back. There are mil-lions of germs in that cancerous boil. Does the doctor pause and ask,“Should I kill so many millions of germs?” Is it not the duty of thedoctor to save the life of the patient? Which is of greater importance?Should he protect the life of the patient or should he have considera-tion for the germs? The doctor comes to the conclusion that thesegerms are dangerous and kills them and saves the patient’s life. Inthis process, the doctor has taken into consideration quality and notquantity. In the same manner, the world at this time had developed acancer in the shape of Kauravas. When Krishna found that these198Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972Kauravas were like cancer, He became a surgeon, took Arjuna as Hisassistant and performed the great operation. In that operation, fortylakhs of germs were killed. So we must always take into considera-tion the greater need for protection of dharma. The protection ofdharma is more important than anything else.Our life becomes one of fulfilment when we lead it as one ofmorality. The greatness of life lies not in amassing wealth. Remem-ber that money comes and goes but morality comes and grows. Thisview of morality has been safeguarding India from time immemorial.We do not now find morality in our society, our economics, ourpolitics, our spirituality and other walks of life. Today, I hope andwish that the students will always bear in mind that through morality,they will make their lives pure and can thus uphold the great cultureof India. Bright futures await them if they follow the path ofdharma.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋Page 19921. Pleasure and PainYou cannot kill a snake by just beating on your ankle with astick.Without conquering your body, you cannot know the truth.Without conquering hunger and thirst you cannot know the su-preme reality.If you do not have knowledge of the self, you cannot be calledhuman.Young students!For the last one month you have been listening to very in-spiring discourses and sacred talks. This month must be a goldenchapter and a memorable period in your lives. You should not thinkthat merely by listening to all these discourses, you have God’sgrace in full measure and that it will enable you to attain spirituality.You must preserve all the gems of truth in the casket of your hearts,cherish them and safeguard them forever. It is not enough if you aresatisfied that you had the good luck to be admitted to this course.Though all the birds may be green, can all of them twitter like par-rots? There may be many worms crawling on flowers, but can youcall all of them bees? If an ass covers itself with the skin of a tiger,can that ass become a yogi? Alas, it cannot become even a tiger.There is nothing in the world of today that one cannotfathom or comprehend and that one cannot understand. One can pu-rify his life, his body and his time through the teachings that you hadthe good fortune to hear. But if man does not realise his real nature,if he is simply engrossed in his worldly activities that make him for-get his real identity, he will not be able to gain anything at all. Manmust first try to know who he is. Only then can he easily acquire thefruits of his endeavours.You may have seen cows in your house. As soon as thetether is loosened, the cow immediately goes to the place where there200Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972is green grass and tries to fill its belly with the grass. During thetime of feeding, the animal wastes no time at all; it eats up quickly allthat is available. This does not mean that the food is digested simul-taneously. Only when it returns to the cattle shed does it try to chewthe food it had eaten before. Only after it chews the cud, that foodgets assimilated into the system. The cow first eats as much as it canand later digests the food. In the same manner, all those who had theprivilege of benefiting from the Summer Course from morning tonight, have been taking in eagerly all that they can lay their hands on.During the last month, you have been eating and eating. But it is notthe ordinary food which one can eat at an eating place. For the pastmonth, you have been supplied with a wonderful diet called thesathwik diet in the shape of several discourses from learned elders.When you go back to your own places, you must try to ru-minate over this sacred spiritual diet. This process of ruminationmay be described as manana, that is, thinking of it over and overagain. Even in the case of the animal, if it does not ruminate, it isconsidered to be ill. You must enjoy all that you have amassed in thisone month and make it your own through the process of manana.Then your stay here will be regarded as having been fruitful. On theother hand, if you leave what you have heard here itself, return toyour homes and relapse into the old ways of your life, then your lifewill be futile. The youth of today are in such a state that they do notknow the difference between good and evil, between pure and im-pure, between truth and untruth. Not only young men but all humanbeings born in this Kali Yuga are getting confused because they donot know how to differentiate between good and evil, between sinand virtue and between joy and sorrow. The sense of discriminationis being put to a severe test in us because what seems to be good atone time seems to be bad at another time; what seems to be desirableat one time seems undesirable at another; what seems to be condu-cive to our health at one time seems to be dangerous to our health atanother, and so on.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972201We consume pure food and water; but in a very short time, itgets converted into impure matter fit only for excretion. It is not easyto distinguish between what is pure food and pure water and what isnot. We should not leave it at that, considering it to be prakruthidharma or a natural phenomenon. In nature, there will be impuritiesat first and we have to transform them by suitable processes. Scien-tists, especially those belonging to the geological department, knowthis very well. When they prospect for gold, they find out the spotwhere gold occurs, then dig deep into the earth and find gold-bearingquartz. In its natural state, gold is found to be in the company ofother impurities. At a later stage, they purify the impure mass and getpure gold from it.All natural laws will be like this. It is a natural law to answercalls of nature to sleep, to feed, and so on. But by just followingthese laws of nature, we will not be able to go anywhere or reach anyhigher destinations. From the same heart we find two emotions: an-ger and mercy. We find it difficult to understand this nature in whichtwo contradicting emotions emanate from the same heart. Becausethe heart is the source of both good and evil, it is the bounden dutyof students to understand how our ancestors were able constantly tofocus their attention on good alone. Some people argue that man isborn just for the gratification of his senses. Some people think thatthey should amass food and wealth for the sake of joy and happi-ness only. If man simply consumes food like the other animals, howdoes man differ from them? Is it necessary to be born as a man toamass food? The bird, which is hungry and has not stored food, justgoes straight to the food to satisfy its hunger. On the other hand,man stores food for the sake of future gratification. Man is not bornto go in quest of food. He is born to go in quest of the Atma.We should develop intelligence, because our intelligence en-ables us to distinguish good from bad through the process of con-stant thought and discrimination. We should not stuff our headswith all worldly matters. We must implement the good principlesthat we have stored in our minds. The discourses of elders and the202Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972messages of great books point out the great principle of findingunity in diversity. But this principle remains only theoretical if it isnot implemented in our daily lives. Several holy texts are exhortingus to find unity in diversity and recognise diversity in unity. This isbeing preached; but we cannot find one person who, by his action, isable to drive home the truth into our hearts. If we want to recogniseunity in diversity, we must first know the meaning of three words.We may glibly say that the elimination of sorrow and acquisition ofjoy is the simple path that leads to spiritual illumination. Even in thisregard, we must know the nature of sorrow. Only then can we de-stroy or eliminate it. Sometimes, when we consider one experience tobe sorrowful, after some time it may turn out to be a pleasurable one.And when we consider an experience to be a surfeit of joy, it mayturn out to be one of sorrow or anguish in due course.I shall illustrate this by a small example. A mother longed forthe birth of a son and her wish was granted. She gave birth to a sonbut unfortunately the next day he developed high temperature anddied. Is this a matter of joy or sorrow? That birth which was consid-ered the source of joy turned out to be a cause for her anguish. Be-fore the birth, she had undergone the pangs of birth. The samemother, when she looked at the face of her baby, forgot all her painand was happy. What she considered to be a source of joy turnedout to be one of sorrow and what she considered to be sorrow turnedout to be delight.We read in the papers about several incidents that happen inthe world. A young couple who are enjoying the thrill of their firstday of wedded life are traveling on a bus with some friends and rela-tives. Unfortunately, the bus meets with an accident and their joy isturned into sorrow. We exult in winning a lottery and feel veryhappy about the one lakh of rupees we have won. But the samenight, it may be pilfered by a robber. Sometimes we are perturbed,not knowing how to spend the money. There is joy on the one handin having the money but also anxiety on the other hand.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972203Several businessmen rejoice over the profits they have butare miserable about the heavy income tax that will be levied. There-fore, life is a symphony of joy and sorrow, a mixture of pleasure andpain. Man cannot decide for himself the difference between joy andsorrow. It is not possible for us to have joy without sorrow or sor-row without joy. We must develop the attitude that all sorrow leadsto happiness and that all happiness leads to sorrow. Because mancannot choose for himself only joy or only sorrow, he must cultivatethe attitude of equanimity towards joy and sorrow. He should not beexhilarated by pleasure, nor should he be depressed by pain.It is possible for us to develop the sense of oneness and de-velop the right attitude towards joy and sorrow. Though you havecome from several parts of the country, you are able to mingle to-gether like brothers and sisters, because there is that undercurrent ofunity generated by the feeling that you are all Sai devotees. Here, Saiis one, but the individuals are many. Devotion helps us to recogniseunity in diversity among the people here. In this baffling multiplicityis the shining unity of Sai. This garland in my hand may be regardedas one of the flowers consisting of various colours and perfumes.The flowers are many but the thread that binds the flowers togetheris one. Sai is the thread. You are all the flowers of various colours.We must take into consideration another aspect. Some flowers maybe buds today. Tomorrow they will blossom and the day after, theywill be full blown. You are young today, and after ten years you maybecome householders, and after thirty years you will become old.This process of evolution is inevitable. The flowers undergo changebut the thread remains the same. This thread is the eternal unchang-ing thread called the Brahma Suthra. That principle which ischangeless is Brahma Thathwa.Human life is made up of several stages. Birth, growth, age-ing, getting debilitated, and death are the various stages of thechanging body. In this field, which is full of change, the principlethat remains unchanged is Divinity. The body is full of vikaras butthe Atma is the nirvikara. These are referred to in the Gita as204Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972kshetra and Kshetrajna. Kshetra is the body, which is the field, andthe Kshetrajna is Paramatma. We question ourselves as to why wevisit the field. It is not to see the field but to see the master of thefield. When we go on a pilgrimage to Kasi, it is not to see Kasi butto have the darshan of Lord Viswanath of Kasi. Because Viswanathis in Kasi, it becomes a place of pilgrimage. Why do we nourish andprotect the body, which is the kshetra? It is only for the Kshetrajnaresiding in this body. Those who lose sight of Kshetrajna and thosewho are engrossed only in the kshetra should be termed business-men. Several businessmen go to Benares to buy saris and never visitthe temple of Viswanath. But he who goes to Benares for darshangoes to the shrine of the Lord and then visits the market. Therefore,every individual must clearly bear in mind that the ultimate aim of thekshetra is to enable the darshan of the Kshetrajna residing in him.In the Gita, Lord Krishna says He is both the kshetra andthe Kshetrajna. The kshetra is not purposeful without the Kshetra-jna and vice versa. Both are interdependent. Because of this, LordKrishna said that He is both the kshetra and Kshetrajna. He saidthat He is all-pervading through both. But there is a little distinctionbetween these two. It is clear that when we consider the letters ofkshetra, which are two syllables, we can see that it is different fromKshetrajna, which has three syllables. The vital difference is in thesyllable jna, which means Jnana Swarupa! Kshetrajna is that whichis Jnana Swarupa and without that it is merely kshetra. We willnever enter into bad ways and have evil thoughts when we bear inmind that kshetra, which is almost inert, becomes sanctified by theresidence of Kshetrajna, which is Jnana Swarupa.When somebody says that he is God, we expect him to beabove all other human beings. When God does anything wrong, wewonder if he is God and if he could do that, because we think ofGod as one who always does right. Even in the case of a human be-ing, when we consider him to be gentle by temperament, even if he isonce motivated by anger, we begin to doubt his gentle nature. Couldwe call him never sathwik? Then we condemn him and think that ifSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972205he is really good, he would not have done this at all. Will you evertake to bad deeds when you feel that God resides in this body?When you recognise the sacred principle dwelling within you, youwill always do good and take to good actions.You must also recognise this body as a temple and feel thatGod resides in that temple. It is said that this body is your templeand within this body, God, the eternal principle, dwells. But todaythis body has, unfortunately, degenerated into a dwelling place of thedevil. You must understand the difference between the dwelling placeof God and the dwelling place of the devil. In the house of God,there will always be an eternal flame, shining forever. Where there islight, you will find no bats. Where there is darkness, you will findbats befouling the place. If you do not kindle the flame of purethoughts in the temple of your body, then bats will befoul it and itwill be densely dark. You must see that this sacred flame burns eter-nally. Kindle the flame of love, the flame of knowledge and the flameof devotion in your hearts.We have accepted the namasankirtan as one of our mainprogrammes of Sai activities. The name of the Lord must dance onyour tongues forever. Namasankirtan and nagarasankirtan aregiven a prominent place in our activities. There are some amongstyou who ask why we should utter the name of God with our tongue.Is it not enough to think of God in our mind? The Lord’s name islike an effulgent lamp. The form of the holy name can be comparedto the great sacred cow that confers on us all that we desire. Theform of God, with the help of the name, which is like the rope, mustbe tied to your heart. The heart is like a pillar where it should bebound. Your mouth is the main entrance to the house of the body.When you have a lantern at the main gate, the light can be seen with-out and within. So the sacred flame of the holy name sheds light in-ward and outward.If we compare our life to a tree, even as many birds perch onthe branch of a tree, we can conceive of several birds perching on thebranches of this tree of life. These birds come to eat food, to rest or206Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972to foul the place. When we see a number of birds making noise onthe tree in our courtyard, we go out, clap our hands and shout toscare the birds away. The birds that perch on the tree of our life arethe bad tendencies that wish to foul our thoughts. We should drivethem away with the Nama and the Tala. But in doing this what dowe gain? When the birds remain on the tree, the shade below the treeis befouled. When the birds go away, the precincts become pure andclean.Probably, you may be wondering what you should do if thebirds come again. If you continue to make the sound with yourhands and with your mouth, the birds will not return to the tree at all.To purify your minds and to prevent these bad tendencies from en-tering your thoughts must be the aim of your life. You must con-tinuously chant the name of the Lord so that these birds may not re-turn. The tongue of man is the holiest instrument because it can utterthe sweet and sacred name of God. Therefore, you must never feedthis tongue with impure sounds because the tongue by itself is sa-cred and holy. It is one of the most sacred and holy things for you tolearn from the summer classes—that you should feed your tonguewith sacred sounds and words. You must also not use your eyes tolook at harmful things. You should look at good and useful thingsonly.Many may be familiar with the story of Suradas. He wasblind. In His infinite mercy, Lord Krishna asked him if he wantedvision, so that he could look at Him. Suradas said, “Though peoplehave eyes, they are filled with ignorance and are not able to recogniseyour grand form. Though people have ears, they are deaf and cannotappreciate the sweetness of your holy name. Many people have eyesand ears, but they do not use them to look at your scintillating formand listen to your name. But I want eyes which will always visualiseyour grand form and ears which will always listen to the harmony ofyour song.” Prahlada used to say, “What is the use of these ears ifthey are like the caves in the mountain of the human body? What isthe use of eyes being always wide open like the goat’s eyes if theySummer Showers in Brindavan 1972207do not have the light of knowledge and eagerness to know the realtruth of the world? We should not use our eyes for looking at thingsof a pretty nature but we should use them to look at our parents, atGod, at our elders and at all good things. Today the eyes of ouryoung men are focused on the banners and posters of film starspasted on the walls in the street. If you focus your attention on suchobjects, you get lost. Thereby your hearts will be devoid of humanqualities. If you give place to evil thoughts, if you degrade the templeof your body, then the very purpose of your life will be lost.Dear students!When you return to your places, avoid bad friends and fillyour minds with noble and elevating things. Chant the name of Godand practise namasankirtan in the early hours of the day and re-member the name of God throughout the day. Though you have nowdeveloped the habit of getting up at 4 or 5 o’clock, you may relapseinto the habit of getting up at 9 o’clock at home. Then there is noperson more idle than you. You will be humiliating yourself. Whenyou get up in the morning, sit on your bed and think of the Lord.Think that your getting up from the bed is like rising from thewomb, that you are just born. As soon as you get up, throw yourtroubles and burdens at the feet of the Lord and pray to Him toguide you through life and give you only good thoughts and nobleideas which always serve as uplifting factors in life. When you goback to bed at night, imagine that to be a state of death. Tell yourselfthat during the day, you have acted according to the Lord’s orders.Ask for forgiveness if there is anything wrong and ask to be led onthe path of righteousness. If you begin and end your day with suchprayers, it will help you reach higher attitudes of living. Even duringyour bath, if you remember the name of God, it will be like bathingthe form of God.When you take food, all the evils are eliminated if you offerthe first morsel to God. The food then becomes prasad of the Lordbestowed on man. Prasad is the very embodiment of elixir. It may208Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972not be possible to insist that the vessel be pure, that the man whocooks the food be pure and that the food be pure, but if you offer thefirst morsel to God, it becomes utterly pure.When you return to your homes, you may find seva samithisand seva dals in your places. Take active part in them. Always try tohelp those who are in distress, those who are suffering and the poor.Once upon a time, there lived in Tamil Nadu a poet and holy manwho used to sit on a veranda in his house in front of the Lord’s pic-ture and chant beautiful songs. One day, it was raining heavily andhe sought shelter in another little veranda in the village. One otherman came and asked him if he could also take shelter there. Thebhaktha said he could. He said, “There was place only for me tostretch out, but now that you are here we will sit up.” Later, anotherman came and asked for shelter. The bhaktha consented saying,“There was place for the two of us to sit. Now that you also havecome, let us all stand.” He thus taught the principle of helping oneanother and not sending anyone away who needed help. If you havethree morsels of food and you find another man with no food, youmust cultivate the spirit of serving and parting with one morsel offood for the other man. You must cultivate this attitude of sharingwith others the good things you have. Then only can you put intopractice the great principle of finding Easwara in every creature. Youmust practise this principle in daily life.All of you have great love and adore Swami, but that love andadoration are of no use if you ignore the teachings of Swami. Even ifyou do not adore, if you believe in the truth of the word and enforceit in your daily life, Swami’s grace will always be with you in yourlife. It is no use if you simply utter the name of the Lord and do notfollow the good things that go with the Lord. It is just like utteringthe name of penicillin when you are running a high temperature.Only when you take in the penicillin will the temperature comedown. When you are hungry, the hunger cannot be satisfied by ut-tering words like potato and chapati. If you eat them, it will be satis-fied. It is no use if you only listen. You must try to remember theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972209discourses you have listened to during this month, put them intopractice and judge for yourself how far you have acted according tothe word. Your parents must be able to recognise the transformationin you. When you return home, try to give evidence of the changesthat have come about in you and make your people realise that youuphold the great culture of India.Page 21022. Learning and HumilityIndia is a sacred land, and in this sacred land, tolerance hasalways been the cardinal virtue. Of all the vratas, or the acceptedcodes of conduct, the vrata of truth plays a high role. The highestand the sweetest of all emotions is that of maternal love. People inIndia always considered honour greater than life. Alas, today wehave let all those laudable ideals slip away, and we have begun to apethe cult of the west. We have reached a stage where we have lost thesense of our own greatness like the elephant who does not know itsown strength.In the front row are seated the wise elders who have strivenall through the month to inculcate into the minds of the young stu-dents gathered here, knowledge of the soul. They have been ex-pounding our sacred texts, the Sastras and the Vedas reminding youabout the glory of ancient India. We think of wealth as consisting ofbuildings, property, material goods and we have lost ourselves in themad pursuit of temporal values. These do not constitute real wealththat is capable of giving us abounding joy. Character is our wealthand good conduct is our treasure. Knowledge of God is the founda-tion for both. We should not lose that abiding, precious and eternalwealth, which is knowledge of God, for fleeting and temporarythings that are like the passing clouds. We should also know that inour country, many rajas who were very rich at one time are todayreduced to the level of common people. On the other hand, some ofthe common people have come up to the position of kings, enjoyinggreater material wealth; therefore, we should not equate lasting hap-piness with changing material wealth.When a pond is full of water in the rainy season, there are amillion frogs in it; but when the water runs dry, the frogs jump outof it. In the same way, when one has power and wealth, people gatheraround him in this world but as soon as he falls upon evil days andSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972211adversity stares him in the face, all his best friends leave him. It is theparamount duty of man to know what will not leave him and to gainthat wealth which will always be with him. The history of India hasgiven us examples of great incidents and illustrious people. We re-member people like Ravana, Hiranyakasipu, and others who had allmaterial wealth but forgot the values of life and started insulting oth-ers. They ultimately had a great downfall. Today, those who areproud of their material prosperity and ignore the higher values of lifemust know that the same ruin awaits them. Viswamitra felt proud ofhis physical strength and the strength of his thapas. He even chal-lenged Vasishta but realised that Vasishta had something he did notpossess and that was the strength of God, which is superior to allother kinds of strength.There is an incident in the Mahabharatha that every studentshould know and bear in mind. Krishna posed a question to Arjunaand Duryodhana. He said, “Duryodhana, there are two things,namely, my army and myself. Which of the two do you want?” Heasked the same question to Arjuna, too. Because Duryodhana wasignorant, he foolishly thought that all the physical prowess of thearmy would provide him stronger support than Krishna, who wasonly one individual. He therefore asked for the army and not forKrishna. But Arjuna realised that if he had Krishna by his side, hewould have everything. So he said, “Lord,” be the charioteer of mychariot and not only of my chariot but the charioteer of my life. Yourproximity is my eternal treasure.” Arjuna cared for quality andDuryodhana cared for quantity.Today we must focus our attention on the higher values oflife and not lose sight thereof in the mad pursuit of baser values.Man today is behaving in such a way that there is no trace of Divin-ity in him. He behaves like a monkey exhibiting his baser instincts,losing sight of the higher values of life. The four wheels of thechariot that lead man safely to his destination are character, truth,sacrifice and tolerance. Man today loses sight of the fact that he is aneternal spirit and lives only for the present moment losing sight of212Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972the sublime values of life. Good education is only that which unfoldsall the hidden powers in man. People are wasting their lives just byreading many books. They do not try to understand the spirit nor dothey implement that which they read. Book knowledge has increased,and experience has not correspondingly increased. If we look at therecords in any college, we see more remarks on students than marksfor each one of them. The real marks we should aim at are such as toget rid of remarks.Real education requires the cultivation of a sense of humility.Great learning brings great humility. Without humility, there is noeducation. This is wanting in the youth of today. Several differencesare cropping up between the teacher and the taught. Differences aredeveloping between students and the centres of learning. When welook at this problem and try to understand what is at the back of allthis, how these sad situations have developed and where the respon-sibility lies, the answer comes that it is generally not the teacher, northe student, but it is the politician who has much to do with it. Stu-dents are pure; their minds are pure. The white dress that they haveput on as a uniform this day is the emblem of the innate purity of theyoung. They have been living for the past month in Whitefield. Thewhite uniform is in tune with the spirit of Whitefield. Your heart isthe field, which is the kshetra. It is not enough for you to remainpure only as long as you are in Brindavan, your hearts must be purewherever you may be.A number of people approach the youth, pervert them, mis-lead them, use them as instruments to be provoked while whippingup their emotions. Students should not let such people ruin their fu-ture. They should not become pawns in the hands of the selfish peo-ple and be exploited by politicians. You must first of all work foryourselves and enjoy happiness for your own sake. In the beginning,you must try for self-satisfaction. Only after attaining self-satis-faction can you be self-confident. As students, you must spend allyour time in studying, and later serve your country when you leavethe portals of your institution. When your heart is not pure and yourSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972213powers are not developed, you cannot become a leader of yourcountry. Only when a tank is full of water, can it be made to flowinto the taps. Only when you fill your hearts with noble thoughts,powerful ideals and sublime emotions will you be able to distributethem to the country, just as water is distributed through taps.When there are any differences between students and thecentres of learning, it is up to the students to make a peaceful andgentle representation to the authorities. Then the authorities will alsobe in a gentle mood to consider the representation. On the otherhand, if the students indulge in violent demonstrations, they are for-getting their natural role in life. If the student is a seeker of vidya, heshould not behave in a manner that tells us that he is going on thepath of ignorance. Even if you win your point through violent agita-tion and by creating trouble for others, such gains will not be perma-nent gains for the student body.Several people want to whip up a revolution but do not knowwhat they want to achieve. What we can achieve through love, toler-ance and peace is always greater and more lasting than what we canachieve through a violent revolution. What we gain through violencewill be temporary and unholy. Indians achieved their freedom byadopting the technique of peaceful agitation and not through violentrevolution. When we want to gain something good, naturally we willbe confronted with certain difficulties. We should not be deterred bythese obstacles, but go ahead focusing on the goal that shines aheadof us.During the period of your studies, you must realise your re-sponsibility as students. You must show proper regard to the parentsand teachers and thereby fill your minds with happiness and peace.In the ancient Gurukula, the relationship that existed between theteacher and student was as intimate as that which should exist be-tween a parent and their offspring. The student would always try togive mental and physical happiness to the guru. That service pleasedthe guru and he would impart very vital secrets to the disciple and avery sacred holy atmosphere prevailed in the precincts. Arjuna214Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972served Dronacharya in several ways. He was able to win the heart ofDronacharya through that service. Dronacharya loved Arjuna morethan his own son and used to send his son away on some pretextand then impart some vital secrets to Arjuna.It is very important that all the girl students be trained intogood housewives and good mothers. Just as they have the sweetnessof the love of Sai Matha, so also they must taste by their actions ofdedication, the love of Desa Matha (the Motherland) and train them-selves into ideal mothers in future. I hope that you will all treasurethese gems of wisdom you have extracted from the discourses in thelast month, preserve them in the casket of your heart and then bringthem up as ornaments on your person.At one time there was a severe famine in Bihar. A familyconsisting of father, mother and two children started from Bihar tofind livelihood elsewhere. The father of the family, being responsibleto feed his family, underwent many difficulties and hardships. Heeven starved himself on some occasions and because of frequentstarvation, he died after some time. The mother, having lost her hus-band, suffered from loneliness and had to bear the burden of keep-ing the family alive in this wide world. She went begging from houseto house for food and if she got some and if it was not enough, shestarved herself and let her children eat. In course of time, she becameso debilitated that she found it difficult to walk from house to houseand beg. The boy of twelve looked at the pitiable sight of his motherand sitting on her lap said, “Oh mother, please take rest for sometime. I shall beg and bring food for you.” As she listened to thewords of her son, her heart melted. She felt very miserable that shehad to send her son to beg for food. No mother wants her child tobecome a beggar. But because the boy insisted, the mother con-sented. From that day the little boy was begging for food and givingit to his mother and the little brother and he himself would starve.After some days, he felt he could not walk and go out for begging.He went to a house and found the master of the house reading anewspaper sitting on an easy chair. In a feeble voice, he asked theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1972215master for food. The master replied that it would be useless to givehim alms and said that he would give him food on a leaf. The boy,out of weakness, fainted. The master of the house lifted the boy andput him on his lap. The boy was mumbling some words. To be ableto understand what he was saying, the master put his ear close to themouth of the boy. The boy was inaudibly whispering, “The foodthat you wish to give, please give it first to my mother.” After utter-ing those last words, he passed away.We do not now find this kind of love, this intimate love ex-isting between the members of a family. Here we find that the headof the family starved himself to death for the sake of his family; themother starved herself for the sake of her children and the sonstarved and killed himself to save his mother from begging. Look atthis noble example of affection that bound together the differentmembers of the family. When these three are united together as fa-ther, mother and child, they look like the Holy Trinity. Therefore,each member of the family must discharge his own responsibility.Only then, will the family be in a state of prosperity and happiness.All the householders in ancient India tried to follow their duties ofdischarging all obligations and never claimed any rights for them-selves. Wherever we go today, we find agitation for rights by peoplewho do not recognise their responsibilities. If you discharge yourresponsibility in the right spirit, that will give you real power fromthe well-deserved authority.Our students always remember the two great princi-ples—work and worship—and follow them every minute of theirlives. Whatever job you take up, do it to the best of your ability anddo your duty to the best and utmost satisfaction of everyone con-cerned. Even in your home, you must discharge all your obligationsand responsibilities. If you are able to satisfy your parents today bydischarging your duty in the proper spirit, tomorrow your childrenwill offer you similar satisfaction. If you aspire for a happy and se-cure life in future, you must lead your present life in a conduciveway by discharging all your obligations in the right spirit.216Summer Showers in Brindavan 1972I have been talking to you these thirty days about severalthings. I hope that you will follow the ideals you have imbibed in thepast month. When you are out of Brindavan, you should show thesame sense of discipline and follow the same principles in any walkof life or in any place you may go to. In course of time, you maycome back in a different role, in the role of teachers who teachyoungsters. All the wise elders who gave you messages during thiscourse were also students at one time. You must try to preserve inyour mind and put into practice all those good things that those wiseelders, who had the benefit of wisdom of years of learning, havegiven you. There may be summer courses in several places, but theywill not offer the same kind of training that you get here and the typeof atmosphere in which you have been living. Those students whohave attended this summer course are fortunate and this surely is theresult of the merit that they have accumulated through a number ofbirths. They had the benefit of many wise teachers and their teach-ings should not be ignored. Every teacher who has delivered lectureshas delivered not only lectures but delivered drops of love that hademanated from his heart. You have seen how these teachers weretouched to leave you and how they broke down. This is the truequality of a guru. Where else can you find it except in a summercourse of this kind? These gurus are feeling very much for the sepa-ration from you. You must also be feeling pained at the thought ofgetting separated from your gurus. You should not feel pained bythe mere thought of separation. When you put into action the wisethings that your gurus have taught you then they and Swami alsowill be with you. Only through action, can you have the vital pres-ence of the guru deep down in your heart. He will be a living pres-ence within you.❋ ❋ ❋ ❋ ❋