SUMMER SHOWERSINBRINDAVAN1993INDIAN CULTUREANDSPIRITUALITYDiscourses byBHAGAVAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA© Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications TrustPrashanthi Nilayam, IndiaThe copyright and the rights of translation in any language arereserved by the Publishers. No part, para, passage, text orphotograph or art work of this book should be reproduced,transmitted or utilized, in original language or by translation, in anyform or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo copying,recording or by any information, storage and retrieval system,except with prior permission, in writing from Sri Sathya Sai Books& Publications Trust, Prashanthi Nilayam (Andhra Pradesh) India,except for brief passages quoted in book review. This book can beexported from India only by the Publishers Sri Sathya Sai Booksand Publications Trust, Prashanthi Nilayam (India).Printing rights granted by arrangement with theSri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust,Prashanthi Nilayam, India,To: Sathya Sai Baba SocietyandSathya Sai Book Center of America305 West First StreetTustin, CA 92780-3108USAISBN 1-57836-058-7 Copyright ©1994Sathya Sai Book Center of AmericaCONTENTS1. From Humanity To Divinity12. The Quest For Divinity113. The Mysteries Of The Mind224. Sathyam Shivam Sundaram315. Thoughts—The Basis Of Creation426. The Conquest Of The Mind487. The Malady And The Remedy598. The Quest For Peace699. The Philosophy Of Gautama8010. The Vaiseshika Darshana8811. The Samkhya Philosophy9612. The Philosophy Of Yoga10513. The Philosophy Of Poorva Meemamsa11414. Dharma And Indian Culture1221. FROM HUMANITY TO DIVINITYStudents and Teachers,Man undergoes many a travail and tribulation for the sake ofbodily pleasures. But the man who realises that he is the Self andthat the Self is different from the body, is free from pain andsorrow. There will be no sorrow on earth if humans realise the loftymeaning of Humanity (Manavatva). The Upanishads have declaredthat man, who is born in human society and is brought up by it,becomes worse than birds and beasts if he does not know themeaning and value of ‘humanity.’Mankind is infinite, marvellous and full of meaning andsignificance. Man is not the body alone. In fact he is theconglomeration of Body, Mind and Self. The Body is the vehiclefor action, the Mind is the means for realisation, and the Self is thewitness of both the body and the mind. Hence it is sheer stupidityto think that man is made of the body alone.The students should first realise how they should act, thinkand behave. Man is made of mind. As is the mind, so is the man.There is an adage in English which says “So thinketh the man, sois the man.” It is the bounden duty of students to realise theprofound scope and significance of humanity. Man is encased in thefive sheaths: the Food sheath (annamaya kosha), the Vital sheath(pranamaya kosha), the Mental sheath (manomaya kosha), theIntellectual sheath (vijnana maya kosha) and the Bliss sheath(anandamaya kosha). The Food sheath constitutes the gross body(sthoola shareera) whereas the Vital sheath, the Mental and theIntellectual sheaths constitute the subtle body (sookshama2Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993shareera). Whereas the gross body is the vehicle of action, the subtlebody is the vehicle of experience.THE ALL-INFINITE WILL:The Atmic power that vibrates and shines in the Foodsheath is known as Bodily consciousness; the Atmic power thatfunctions in the Vital sheath is called Nervous consciousness; theAtmic power that activates the Mental sheath is known as Mentalconsciousness; the Atmic power that shines in the Intellectualsheath is termed as Intellectual consciousness. The power thatpulsates the Bliss sheath is called Pure Divine Self (PavithraPurashaartha). This is also known as ‘All Infinite Will.’ It is thisInfinite Will which protects the world. It is Pure Ecstasy.The great sages and seers of India strove hard to enjoy thisInfinite Ecstasy. But how can we enjoy this ecstasy? Only theexperience of the true meaning of humanity (manavatva) can enableus to enjoy this ecstasy. The man who does not realise his truenature is ensnared by the senses, though in reality he is the masterof senses. The man who understands the meaning of ‘manava’(human) is a true ‘Manava.’The Vedanta declares that he who knows himself, knows all.You should make the right endeavour to know yourself. You canknow yourself by developing inner vision rather than outwardvision. All sensory activities like sound, smell, touch and taste areonly external activities. We delude ourselves into thinking that theseactivities are real and ruin ourselves ultimately. It is by harnessingthe mind that we will be able to realise the Divinity within. Mind isthe cause for man’s life, sorrow, joy and liberation as well. It is themind that makes us oblivious to Divinity and lures us to theenchantments of ‘Jagat’ (world). The very meaning of the word‘Jagat’ signifies the transient nature of the world, for ‘Ja’ meansSummer Showers In Brindavan 19933going, and ‘Gat’ means coming. While the world changes, manremains changeless. The very word ‘Nara’ (man) means the ‘onewho is imperishable’ for, ‘Na’ means ‘not’ and ‘Ra’ meansperishable. It is the self in man which is imperishable, for man is theSelf.The mind is of four kinds: the Supermind the Higher-MindThe Illuminated-Mind and the Overmind. Man can know himselfwhen he understands the nature of these four types of mind. Onehas to travel from the Supermind to Overmind to understandDivinity. One has to realise that the Divine power which pulsatesin him is the same as the one that pulsates in others.One can understand ‘Manavatva’ only by realising oneness.But unfortunately today man’s vision does not extend beyond bodyand mind. We should not depend too much on the mind, for themind cannot travel far. Man remains only as man as long as he restson the mind. He should attain the state of ‘Amanaska,’ where themind is extinguished. Amanaska is one who travels beyond thephysical mind and enters into the realms of the Supermind. Manhas to travel from the gross to the Supercausal, crossing the Causalbody in between. The Causal body is of great importance to all ofus, for in this state, man can bring under his control ‘Manas’(mind), ‘Buddhi’ (intellect), ‘Chitta’ (reflective mind) and‘Ahamkara’ (ego). In fine, man is the repository of all powers, forall powers are encased in him. There is nothing that man cannotunderstand in the world as man is endowed with infinite andmarvellous powers.THE DIVINE UNIVERSAL FORM:Man contains in him the cosmic power which pervades theuniverse. The power contained in man is the same as the universalpower outside the body which is like a balloon that bloats by the4Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993intake of air. The air inside the balloon is the same as the air outside.When the balloon bursts, the air inside the balloon merges with theair outside. Similarly, when the body dies, the Cosmic Divine inman becomes one with the Universal power outside. TheUpanishads speak about unity in diversity and unity in the Infinity.Only when he realises this, man will know that the Divinity in himand Divinity in the cosmos are one and the same. This is known asthe ‘Divine Universal Form.’Today man underestimates his own importance and humbleshimself as a consequence. First and foremost, you must understandyour own Divine Nature. But students of today are exposed to theworld outside, without understanding their own nature. In the worldtoday, the rapid rise of material progress is paralleled by theenormous rise of ignorance as well. Ignorance exists as long as manidentifies himself with the body. The body is of limited power, butyour power is limitless, for you are the “Infinite Imperishable”‘I.’ Carried away by this feeling that he is the body, he entertainsdoubts about his own strength. The body is the source of all doubtsand debilities.The elements five make the bodyAnd it will fall one day for sure.Beyond death and birth is the dweller     in the bodyAnd beyond the bounds of delusion too.For, He is verily the Lord Himself.The body is described as ‘Kshetra,’ a centre of Sanctity.Where there is Kshetra, there must be ‘Kshetrajna’ as well. TheAtma is the Kshetrajna, the resident in the body. Hence, thestudents should endeavour to realise the Kshetrajna.Summer Showers In Brindavan 19935The supreme quality that the student should cultivate isSelf-confidence (Atma Viswasa). You are the Dweller in the body,but not the body. You may be living in a house, but you are not thehouse, you are the owner of the house. You may be driving a car,but you are not the car; you are the owner of the car. You must befirmly fastened in the faith that you are the self and not the body.People consult a dictionary to find out the meanings ofwords. The real dictionary of the aspirant is his heart. The heart isthe seat of the Divine Cosmic Power and we must strive to realisethis power. A thorough investigation of the human body revealsthat the entire power of the material world is contained in a singlefinger of the human being: but we usually do not think much aboutthe finger, for we consider the finger to be a weakling. This is themistake that all of us commit, since we are swayed away by theexperiences. It is not the form of man that matters, but it is theDivine essence encased in man that counts most. Most of us arehumans in form but not humans in deed. In fact, “The properstudy of mankind is man.”Man must achieve the unity in thought, word and deed. Butman today is fast developing the animal and demonic qualities. Mantoday has performed wonders in the field of Science andTechnology. He has done marvels in the Science of space and atom,but on the other hand there is a rapid decline in the realm ofmorality and spirituality. The world today is overwhelmed byeconomic upheavals, political conflicts and student agitations. Whatis the cause for all this chaos and confusion? It is the presence ofdemon in man which is the cause of all this strife and tension.‘SKILL’ AND ‘KILL’:Man is endowed with knowledge, skill, balance and insight,but the balance of man is upset today. The cause can be traced to6Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993the fact that man is today killing knowledge instead of ‘skilling’ it.As soon as the balance is lost, man’s insight suffers a setback and itdevelops only ‘outlooks.’ Man should not allow himself to beswayed away by the externalities, ignoring the inner realities. Hemust know for certain that he is neither the body nor the senses noreven the mind. When you say, “It is my body, my mind, mysenses” it shows that you are not the body, the mind and thesenses. You are in fact the ‘I.’It is the sense of attachment which causes pain and sorrow,agony and agitation. You are so much attached to things that youlodge a complaint in the court of law against the man who haspasted a poster on your house. It is your attachment to your housewhich makes you to go to that extent, but once you sell away yourhouse, you remain unconcerned even when a bomb is dropped on it.It is this feeling of attachment which is the cause for your concernand indifference.Once you develop faith in the existence of the Atma in you,you are freed of hatred and attachment. The secret of greatness isman’s faith in himself.HAMSA GAYATHRI:Students, the entire universe is encased in you. Never giveroom to the thoughts that you are the body. You are neither thebody nor the mind. The body is transitory like a bubble, and themind is crazy like a mad monkey. Hence, never set faith on themind and the body, but pin your faith on the conscience withinyou. The human body, though decked with the finest of ornamentsand dressed elegantly, carries no value, once the breath of lifeceases. For man, faith is his life breath. ‘Vishwasa’ (Faith) is his‘Swasa’ (breath). All the attainments achieved by the body carry novalue if he lacks faith. The key is the life of the lock, similarly theSummer Showers In Brindavan 19937self is the key of our life. It is the Atmic Consciousness whichpromotes the functions of the body. The Atmic Consciousnessmanifests as “Soham” in man. ‘Soham’ means “I am God”; ‘So’ is‘That’ (God) and ‘Ham’ means ‘I.’ ‘Soham’ is know as ‘HamsaGayatri.’ ‘Hamsa’ signifies the power of discrimination whichenables man to be established in the faith that he is different fromthe body. The word ‘Gayatri’ signifies the mastery over ‘Senses.’The second name of ‘Gayatri’ is ‘Savitri.’ ‘Savitri’ signifies masteryover life. The third name of ‘Gayatri’ is ‘Saraswati.’ ‘Saraswati’signifies mastery over speech. Hence chanting of Hamsa Gayatrienables man to acquire the mastery over senses, life and speech.Gayatri speaks of the world of ‘Bhur,’ ‘Bhuva’ and ‘Svuha.’ ‘Bhur’signifies body, ‘Bhuva,’ life and ‘Svuha’ stands for Pragna (constantintegrated awareness). These three also stand for materialisation,vibration and radiation respectively. The three worlds of Bhuloka,Bhuvarloka and Svuharloka are in fact contained in man himself.Man is the embodiment of the three worlds and also the three times.Man is the embodiment of Cosmic Divine.Man has sacrificed his Inner Divinity at the altar of thesenses. He is selling away the jewel of life in exchange for charcoal.Man is in fact the eternal, effulgent ‘Sath’ (Being). Man is in factGod, ‘Manava’ is indeed ‘Madhava.’God does not exist anywhere elseHe verily exists encased in the body.Sin does not exist anywhere elseit exists in the deeds we do.Man should cultivate the latent quality of awareness.Awareness is acquisition of total knowledge, but not halfknowledge. Awareness is born of the knowledge of ‘Sath’ (Being).In fact ‘Sath’ and ‘Chit’ (awareness) exist together. It is only whenyou understand ‘Sath’ and ‘Chit,’ ‘Ananda’ (Bliss) arises in us.8Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993This ‘Sath,’ ‘Chit’ and ‘Ananda’ is also known as ‘Asthi,’ ‘Bathi’and ‘Priyam’ in Vedantic parlance. Since man has name (nama) andform (rupa) he is robbed of the light ‘Satchidananda.’Our Vice-chancellor has appealed to me to speak about therelationship that marks ‘Manavathva’ (Humanity) and ‘Divyathwa’(Divinity). In fact there exists no relationship between the two.There is only ‘Reality.’ Relationship is said to exist when things areseparate. There is no room for relationship when Man and God areone and the same. ‘Jeeva’ and ‘Deva,’ ‘Kshetra’ and ‘Kshetrajna’are only one. It is the want of this kind of broadmindedness whichcauses misunder-standing and differences. Truth is one, but nottwo. There is nothing like the American truth, the Pakistani truth,the Italian truth, the Chinese truth and the Indian truth. Truth isonly one and Truth is God.From the ancient times the principles of ‘Sathyam Vada’(Speak Truth) and ‘Dharmam Chara’ (Be righteous) have beenregarded as two eyes. Since the modern man has lost sight of‘Sathya’ and ‘Dharma’ he is unable to protect himself. You shouldrealise the fact that it is through the Self that you have come to theworld. You have come from the Atma. You should not entertain thenotion that you have come from ‘Prakruthi’ and that you are goinginto ‘Paramatma.’ That is why it is said, “You may worship apicture as God but not God as picture.” You must look up and aimhigh. Low aim is crime. There should not be descent but onlyascent. You should not hurt anybody in any way. You must realisethe fact that the Self exists in all.BECOME ‘AMANASKA’:What I have spoken to you today is only an outline, aMaster plan. Students, you should stand as ideals to the world. Youmust spread the true knowledge and bring peace and security to theSummer Showers In Brindavan 19939world. It is selfishness to desire peace and security only for India.You must practice the ideal of “Loka samastha sukino bhavanthu”(let the people of the world live in joy). You should not be satisfiedwith mere acquisition of secular knowledge. You should all have thesecular science only for filling the stomach.The man who studies and studies without discriminationfails to understand himself. A mean-minded man can never give uphis meanness, in spite of his vast learning. Why should one wasteone’s life in the pursuit of acquiring useless learning? Better it is toacquire such wisdom that confers immortality.Education should contribute to elevation. Only thateducation which contributes to your elevation is true education. It isthe spiritual education which is true education. Along with trueeducation, you must acquire secular education as well. The rice ofspiritual education should be accompanied by the side dishes ofsecular learning.Man should become ‘Amanaska’ (the one without themind). In the days to come, you shall understand the mysteries ofsupermind, higher mind, illuminated mind and overmind. You canattain the fullness of knowledge by acquiring spiritual knowledge.These Summer classes are organised to impart spiritualeducation. Your teachers teach you secular sciences in the classroom, but spiritual learning is more important than secular learning.Spiritual education is like an ocean; and the secular sciences likephysics, chemistry, and botany, zoology etc. are the rivers. Therivers of secular learning should merge into the ocean of spirituallearning. This brings about unity in diversity. This Unity inDiversity is seen right in front of us. Though many of you aredifferent individual beings, the air you breathe is one. Beings are10Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993many but breath is one. Hence resolve to sanctify your hearts in theSummer Classes by contemplating on God.❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁2. THE QUEST FOR DIVINITYEmbodiments of Divine Love,We need not carry a lamp to see a burning lamp, for theburning lamp can be seen by its own light. When the Self shines inall its splendour by its own light in everyone, we do not need anyother light of knowledge to see the self. It is not possible to see thelight of Atma even by the light of intellect (buddhi), since buddhiderives its light only from the self. Intellect is like the bulb and theself is the electricity. It is the light of the Atma that shines throughthe senses and the organs of the body.The mind manifests its influence in the state of ‘Jagrata’(waking) and ‘Swapna’ (Dream). The mind comes to a standstill inthe state of deep-sleep. Here the mind shines as SuperintellectualConsciousness. Though consciousness is present everywhere, itshines with special illumination in the realm of the intellect, just asthe fire associated with the iron emits more heat than ordinary fire.In this state of super-intellectual consciousness, mind comes to astandstill and ushers in the state of Supermind. The Supermindenjoys a state of steady serenity without delusion. It is when weattain this state of steady and unruffled serenity that we can reachthe lofty heights of the overmind. There is no room for worldlythoughts to enter in this ecstatic state, in the same way as snakesand scorpions can never enter into well-illuminated rooms.Man remains as man as long as the mind lasts. Manfunctions as man as long as the mind functions. It is only when mantranscends the limited state of mind, he becomes broadminded. Forexample, we have decided to build a spacious building on a12Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993sprawling plot of land. At this stage, the ground seems to be broadand spacious. When we build walls and make apartments, theapartments look small and are not as spacious as the sprawling plotof land. Similarly, as long as we build the walls of name and form,everything appears to be narrow and limited. Once we dismantle thewalls of name and form, we have the vision of UniversalConsciousness.THE PART AND THE WHOLE:Everything is interconnected and interdependent in theworld. One is the part of the other. The five senses are limbs of thebody. The bodies are limbs of the society, the society a limb ofHumanity, Humanity a limb of ‘Prakruthi’ and ‘Prakruthi’ a limb of‘Paramatma.’ The entire world is marked by the principle ‘Angaangi bhava’ (One is the part of the other). It is only when thefeelings of separateness are destroyed, we have the vision of theWhole and the experience of Ananda (Bliss).We are accustomed to perceive the deficiencies and ignorethe merits. For example, while eating rice, if one or two stones getmixed up with the rice, we complain bitterly that the whole food isfull of stones, utterly ignorant of the fact that there are only one ortwo stones amidst thousands of rice particles. This clearly showsthat we shut our eyes to what is good and are alert only to what isevil. Similarly, swayed by the unnatural evil, we ignore the naturalDivinity. In fact, every human is an embodiment of Divinity. Webuild walls of Bhrama (illusion) between humanity and Divinity.These walls create differences and delude us into thinking that weare the doers. We have come to the world to reap the consequencesof our own actions. The subtle body, which is made of Pranamaya,Manomaya, Vijnanmaya koshas (sheaths), is the enjoyer. TheVedas state: “Ritam, Sathyam and Bruhatvam.” Bruhatvam isdescribed in the Upanishads as ‘Mahatathva.’ This is also termed asSummer Showers In Brindavan 199313‘Bhooma’ which means ‘Brahmatathva’ (the principle of Brahma),The Brahman is one who is all pervading at all times.THE SUBLIME HUMAN QUALITY:The man who allows himself to be enslaved by his fivesenses falls into abysmal depths, though he has mastered the fiveelemental forces. The one who is the slave of senses is the slave ofeverything else. As long as man is bound by his senses, he developsonly divisive tendencies. Human qualities are good, noble, lofty andsublime. In the world there is none more sublime and greater thanman. Though we are endowed with sublime human quality, weutterly disregard the Atmic principle, as we are deluded by‘Dehabhranthi’ (identifying the body as the self). All thediscoveries we make and machines we invented are in the realm ofthe world. But these mechanical inventions can only make man’slife mechanical and artificial. There is no room for heart in artificiallife. The heart is the abode of God. We should not allow eitheranimal or demoniac qualities to enter into that sacred abode ofDivinity. The limbs and senses of man are meant to capture theDivine Illumination and shine with the Divine Light.When you build a house you build doors as well. Thesedoors are meant to facilitate easy entry and departure of friends andrelatives. Only those who are authorised to enter are allowedthrough these doors. The door is not meant for dogs and donkeys tocome into the house. Similarly through the doors of senses, weshould usher in only sacred thoughts, feelings and ideas. The Lordcannot be enthroned in the heart fouled by evil thoughts, ideas andfeelings. In the world of today, man has polluted the five senses,five sensations and even the five elements. How can we ensurepeace in a world where the five elements are befouled? The sacredtexts exhort us to attain the state that goes beyond the ken ofsenses. This state, envisioned by the sacred scriptures, is known as14Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993the state of realisation of Inner Consciousness. All that we teachshould go inward and not outward. Such an effort enables us toattain the realisation of Cosmic Energy.THE REALISATION OF COSMIC ENERGY:Where is the Cosmic Energy? The Cosmic Energy is allpervasive. It is in you, above you, below you and around you. Youyourself are the Cosmic Energy; but you are not able to realise it.Once, Sage Vashista asked Lord Sri Rama why he had to go intoexile when he was the Lord Himself. But the Lord pretended asthough He was not aware of His Divinity. It appeared as thoughLord Sri Rama identified Himself with the body and was thereforenot aware of His Divinity.It is this body delusion which causes ignorance in man. Wemust regard the body as a Divine instrument and keep it in a soundcondition. We eat for the upkeep of the body. That is why it is saidin the Veda, ‘Bikashnnam Deha Rakshanardham.’ We dress for theprotection of the body. The body of man is subject to manydiseases. For the disease of thirst, water is the medicine; and for thedisease of hunger, food is the medicine. Man suffers from thedisease of desire, attachment and greed; but man seeks recourse toquestionable methods to cure these diseases. The disease of greed isof two kinds: ‘Perasha’ (Unlimited desire) and ‘Dhrusah’ (evildesires). There is nothing wrong in entertaining desire to have food,clothing and shelter. But the desire which exceeds all limits turnsinto ‘Raga’ (Attachment). While seeking fulfilment of one’s desire,one should not cultivate the desire of selfishness, laziness anddevilishness. Man loses his very humanity by harbouring narrowfeelings.It is natural even for a strong block of iron to acquire rustwhile it is buried in dust. The block of iron when rusted loses itsSummer Showers In Brindavan 199315shine and strength. The same block of iron shines with splendourwhen it is cast into fire. After undergoing severe treatment in fire, apiece of iron becomes bright, soft and strong. Similarly man’s dutylies in self-transformation. By such sincere self-transformation, mancan transform even black into white.For example, a piece of dark charcoal cannot be whitened byeither rubbing it with soap or rinsing it in milk. But both soap andmilk turn black due to the company of the black charcoal. So menhave to conduct an investigation to find out how charcoal becomeswhite. Charcoal, which was once a piece of wood, turned black dueto its unfinished purification in the fire. It neither enjoys its naturalstate nor its finished state. Since it is in the middle state, it ismarked by impurities. It is only by throwing charcoal into fire, andexposing it to the full heat of burning flames, that it can bewhitened. It is only by exposing it to the ordeal of fire that thecharcoal becomes white and bright. The white ash which ultimatelyremains is worthy of worship and is applied as Vibhuthi (sacredash) on the forehead.ATMA, THE UNDERCURRENT:Sacred ash imparts a great lesson and wisdom to all of us.“Oh man! All objects of the world are destined to end up as ashafter going through the purification process in fire.” It also teachesthat everything is temporary and nothing is permanent. It is thevoice of the Atma which is everlasting. This Atmic principle is thevery embodiment of Divinity and Sanctity. This is the uniqueexcellence of human beings. Though we are endowed with SupremeDivinity, we are not able to realise its presence within us. Such aman is like the one who goes for treasure hunting elsewhere, whenthe very treasure is hidden under his feet in the bowels of earth. Wewill not search for pearls outside when we realise that there areprecious pearls in us.16Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993When there is a lamp in our house, why should you go beggingfor the fire elsewhere?Why should you go in search of God when the Lordof Lords is housed in you?You need not go elsewhere when you realise thatthe Lord is enthroned in your heart.When you are established in the truth that the Divinity inyou is all pervasive, you feel greatly energised. The realisation ofthis truth erases the difference between you and God, mine andthine. The same self runs as an undercurrent in all the elements ofthe world. You have not come newly for the first time into thisworld. You have changed many bodies, but the Atmic principle inyou is the unchanging Reality. You are infinite. For example, if yougo to the ocean and start counting the number of waves in the ocean,you will realise that you can never trace the beginning of a wave norcan you find an end to the waves in the ocean. There are waves aslong as there is the ocean. There is Chaithyna (consciousness) aslong as there is the universe.The very meaning of the word ‘Manava’ highlights the factthat man is an eternal entity and not a newcomer on earth. In theword Manava ‘Ma’ means ‘no’ and ‘Nava’ means ‘new.’ Hence themeaning of the word ‘Manava’ points to the fact that man has notcome new to this world.The knowledge that we acquire from the study of Physics,Botany, Chemistry etc., is only artificial knowledge, but notwisdom born of inner vision. The knowledge born of inner enquiryand inner vision is true knowledge, and the rest is only ignorance.Summer Showers In Brindavan 199317WHAT IS MAYA?Man is caught in the coils of Maya (illusion). Death, painand pleasure are all manifestations of this illusion. In fact, maya hasno form of its own; it makes you think the existent as non-existentand non-existent as existent. When we see a rope in darkness, wemistake it for a snake. The rope reveals itself as a rope when light isfocused on it. It is the darkness which is the cause of ignorance.Neither the snake nor the rope have come and gone. It is only yourBhrama that has come and gone. The principle of Brahma neithercomes nor goes. It is not possible to realise the Brahman as long asyou are steeped in Bhrama. One has to become Amanaska to be freefrom Bhrama.How can one become an ‘Amanaska’? It is only when youmerge the mind in the Divine that you become an Amanaska. Whenyou cast silver in a mould of Krishna, the silver flows into the eyes,the ears, the legs and the hands of Krishna. Similarly, when themind is cast on Divinity, it becomes one with the Divine. Butunfortunately today we cast our mind in the mould of ‘Prakruthi’instead of casting it in the mould of ‘Paramatma.’ Since you thinkalways of the world, your mind too is enveloped by the world. Theentire world is nothing but the manifestation of the mind.The universe is the embodiment of the Lord, and not of theworld. The Lord is the cause and universe is the effect. The universesprings as a consequence of action and its effect. Though man isradiant with sublimity of himself, humans downgrade theimportance of human life. A beggar comes to our house and pleads.“Oh mother! I am ‘Anadi’ (helpless one). Please give me alms.” Thetrue meaning of the word anadi is one who has neither beginning norend. The word points out to the sanctity and purity of human life.18Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993On one occasion, Thyagaraja spurned away the treasure thatthe king had sent to him saying that he would prefer the proximityof the Lord to the enjoyment of wealth. He declared that he desired‘Hari’ (Lord), not ‘Siri’ (wealth). Since he yearned for ‘Hari’ hefound fulfilment in life by acquiring all that he yearned for.Kabir was a poor weaver who eked out his livelihood byweaving clothes. Though he was poor, he was always blissful.Mistaking him to be an anatha, the king of the land sent him wealth,through his servants. Kabir, who had just returned from a bath inthe river, noticed the wealth in front of his house. He asked theservants, “Who has sent this wealth?” “The king has sent thiswealth,” the servants replied. “To whom has he sent this wealthand why?” queried Kabir. “The king has sent this wealth becauseKabir is anatha,” said the servants. “Who is anatha? I am not anathasince my ‘Natha’ (master) is Sri Ramachandra. Since I have a masterI am not anatha. As Lord Rama has no master He is anatha and allthis wealth should be truly offered to Him.”Many of us do not know the true meaning of words andwrongly use them. It is by realising the meaning of words of thiskind that we can understand the supreme value of human life.Embodiments of Divine Self, be firm in the faith that you arethe Eternal Self and not the Transitory body. In short, body, mind,intellect and consciousness are the vestures of man. Man has to giveup these dresses one day or the other. That is why Jesus said,“Death is the dress of life.” Hence, death is a mere change of dress.Hence it is not proper on our part to cry when the person changeshis dress. There is no room for sorrow if we firmly believe that allrelationships are temporary and transient.We are ridden with sorrow as long as we have attachments.We must develop attachment towards God and not the world. TheSummer Showers In Brindavan 199319four Mahavakyas proclaim the truth that man is verily Divine. Manshould be rooted in the belief that he is Brahman but not Ramayyaand Krishnayya. But people delude themselves into the thinkingthat they are the body. Parents name your body, but nobody isborn with a name. Bodies come and go, but the Atma is eternal.THE TRIPLE TRUTH:The Upanishads have made three statements in this respect.The first statement is: “When it comes, it never goes.” This isWisdom or ‘Jnana,’ which when it comes, will never go. The secondstatement is: “When it goes, it never comes.” This is Ajnana orignorance, which will never return once it goes. The third one is: “Itneither comes nor goes.” This is the Atma. Many people askridiculous questions like, “What happens to the self when the bodydies? Where does it go? When does the self enter the body again?”Just as a current never comes and goes but only illuminesthe bulb which is connected to it, the Self never comes and goes.Since the Self pervades everywhere, the question of it entering intoa certain place or form does not arise at all. Once Radha sang:When I am about to close the door there is a call asking menot to close the door, but open it. When the entire universe is themansion of the Lord, it is ridiculous to think of a door throughwhich the Lord can enter. All that you can do is to attune yourselfto the Lord and offer the tears of bliss at His feet.It is these tears of bliss which constitute the corridors of themansion of your life. There is nothing like Kailasa and Vaikuntha.Once, Narada said, “O Lord! Where are your headquarters?” TheLord replied: “Madbhaktha Yatra Gayante Tatra Tishthami.” (Iinstall myself wherever my devotees heartily sing my glory).20Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993THE LORD’S ADDRESS:The Lord has only one Head Office. That is the heart. Allother places like ‘Kailasa,’ ‘Vaikuntha’ etc., are only branch offices.Krishna did not present Himself immediately in front of Draupadiwhen she prayed to Him in her hour of plight. She called the Lord‘Dwaraka vasa’ (dweller of Dwaraka), ‘Madhurapura vasa’ (dwellerof the city of Mathura) etc. But Krishna did not appear. Totallytired, she at last said ‘Hridaya vasi’ (dweller of the heart) andKrishna appeared immediately and came to her rescue. Many dayslater Draupadi asked Krishna, “O brother! why did You not cometo me in my hour of humiliation, when I called out to You?”To this Krishna replied, “You addressed Me as Dwarakavasa. Since I am duty bound to prove the truth of my devotee’swords, I had to go to Dwaraka and come back all the way. But Ipresented Myself in front of you as soon as you called Me Hridayavasi.”This incident substantiates the fact that the Lord is theresident of the heart. The Lord is nearer to you than your parents,friends, kith and kin. We should not be affected by praise andblame, censure and appreciation, gain and loss. Chaitanya wasabused wildly by people. But Chaitanya danced in ecstasy eventhen. When someone questioned him why he danced in joy in spiteof the foul abuses, he said, “The foul abuse of the people does notreach me at all. It melts into the thin air. That is why I dance injoy.”Once Uddhava said to the gopikas, “O damsels. Peoplecriticise you. They say that you are infatuated with Krishna andrun after him disregarding the commands of husbands, mothers-in-law and fathers-in-law.” To this the gopikas replied, “Does thecuckoo stop singing simply because the crows are cawing? We areSummer Showers In Brindavan 199321not afraid of anybody in the world, since we sing the name of theLord heartily like the cuckoos. What do the swans lose, when thecranes make fun of them? When dogs bark at the sight of theelephant, the elephant loses nothing. Why should we fear when weyearn for the Lord? We should be afraid when we crave for theworld.”Hence we should not be afraid of the blame and the censurehurled by people.Why should we be afraid of singing the Lord’s name who wouldcome to our rescue at the hour of death, when the messenger ofdeath drags us from the house?Embodiments of the Divine Atma, do not be afraid ofsorrows, for sorrows are like passing clouds. Nothing is permanentexcept Divinity. We must attain Him by our love.3. THE MYSTERIES OF THE MINDBy knowing which, every thing can be knownBy knowing not, nothing can be known,That is the knowledge of the SelfHe is really a human who knows the Self.Embodiments of Love!Man can cognise the working of the world by understandingthe nature of the gross body, the subtle body, the causal body andsupercausal body. The gross body, (the Sthoola Shareera) which isof inert nature is composed of elemental substances like calcium,iron, water, etc.The Subtle body is Mayaswaroopa (illusory form). In thedream state, the mind not only creates itself but also experiencespleasure and pain, fears and agitations. In the subtle body, theseillusory creations of the mind are experienced. These experiences arefelt to be real only at the moment. Maya is that mental state inwhich the existent appears to be non-existent and the non-existentappears to be existent. All the experiences in the dream state areseen in the waking state as unreal.What is real and true must be existent in the waking, thedream and deep sleep states. Truth is that which is true andunchanging at all times—past, present and the future. Hence theSubtle body is associated with Maya.The Causal body (Karan, Shareera) is only an image orreflection of the supercausal body (Maha-kaarana). The supercausalSummer Showers In Brindavan 199323represents the supreme principle. It is as a reflection of the supremethat the causal, the subtle and the gross bodies function.In the waking state, the mind is bound by the limitations oftime and space. In the dream state, the mind creates its own world.It is related to time alone. For example, you get into the traintonight and reach Bombay the day after tomorrow. In this you seethe mind at work in respect of four things: the reason, the actualjourney, the arrival at the destination and the completion of yourduty. You notice that the actions performed in the waking state aremarked by Kaala (time), Kaaran (cause), Kartavya (duty), andKarma (action). How long did the journey to Bombay take? TheJourney took thirty-six hours. The reason for your journeywas—some job to be done in the office. But in the dream state, youwill notice that all the four factors of Kaala, Kaarana, Kartavya, andKarma are not present. The journey, that took thirty-six hours inthe waking state, takes only five minutes in the dream state. All thathappens in the dream state occurs in fleeting moments. What isexperienced in a life of forty years, is covered in two minutes in thedream state. In these forty years, you have completed youreducation, got married, got a son, educated him, and sent himabroad. But the entire panorama of these events is covered in a fewminutes in the dream state. What you experienced in a dreamvanishes the moment you wake up. While the ordinary mindtriggers the action in the waking state, it is the Supermind whichactivates the dream state.THE HIGHER MIND—THE SUPREMEDIVINE SELFAn individual experiences a feeling of delight on waking fromdeep sleep state. It is the absence of the mind in the deep sleepstate which is the cause for such delight. It is the mind which is thecause for either joy or sorrow, pleasure or pain. The joy derived in24Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993the deep-sleep state is attributed to the higher mind. This isassociated with the causal body. The relationship between causeand effect accounts for all the happenings in the world. The Divineis the cause and Cosmos is the effect. This is the Mahaakaaranawhich is responsible for all that happens in the universe. This isknown as the Illuminated Mind. This is the Power that illuminatesevery thing in the world.To experience this Cosmic Principle we need a divine form.This is the Superdivine Self. It is called Purushatva. The Purushatvais in fact the Overmind i.e., the Divine aspect. Such Divine aspect iscalled Purushatva.We repeatedly utter ‘I’ several times during the day. Whereis this ‘I’ seated? This is in fact the Purushatva aspect. This ‘I’ is inevery creature. Every person in ordinary course of conversationmakes a mention of ‘I’ in respect of his actions, as in ‘I am going,’ ‘Iam eating,’ ‘I am doing.’ Therefore in every individual this ‘I’represents the existence of this great aspect of Purushatva. What isthe meaning of Purushatva? Just by wearing a pant and shirt onedoes not become a man. The word ‘Pu’ represents the Divineaspect that vibrates all over the body from top to the bottom. ‘Pu’means ‘Purushatva.’ How does it get the name ‘Purusha’? Thebody is a sacred place (Puramu) in which the Jeevi lives andtherefore he is known by the name ‘Purusha.’ It may be the body ofa woman or a man. It is just a difference in sex, because both manand woman experience hunger, become angry and they havecommon emotional agitations.At the time of sorrow man cries, so also the woman; whilehungry man eats and so the woman; man becomes angry and so thewoman. Therefore, we see here that they have the same emotionallevels. But there may be a man who may suffer within and anotherexpressing it in loud wailing. We should not look into suchSummer Showers In Brindavan 199325differences because their bodies are sacred places for God to live in.In every body there is this Divine aspect. The entire world is areflection of both the gross and the subtle forms. The cause is God.The effect is the world. There is both the gross and the subtle. Inthe life of every man there are blissful experiences. The fiveelements, the five sheaths, the five senses, the five life sources, themind, the intellect, the ego—all these combine together and becometwenty-four aspects. In these twenty-four aspects, this‘Mahapurusha’ becomes the twenty-fifth. Therefore the twenty-five aspects together become this human body. Just as thesetwenty-five aspects are contained in a man, so this world too hastwenty-five aspects. The body, the nation, they are the object andits reflection. There is no difference between these two. But if oneobserves from the worldly point of view, one finds manydifferences. This is the true characteristic of Maya or illusion. ThisMaya aspect makes man forget the reality and thus puts him intolots of difficulties. In this connection, Ramdas sang in philosophicovertones about life’s tribulations and the essence of life’sphilosophy.Everything is illusion in the waking state. When you sleepyou are immersed in a dream.You believe only in the dream and you believe it as true.How long will this dream last! This will last till you wake up andignore this dream. But which is true, the dream or the waking state?This is a day dream and that is a night dream. So both are dreams.WHICH IS TRUE?:The Emperor Janaka believed in right action. He had noattachment to the body. One day after dinner as he was discussingwith some of his ministers he fell asleep. He was made to sleepcomfortably on the bed by his attendants. After a little while he26Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993woke up. He was unable to realise which was true—the sleepingstate or the waking state. He did not answer many questions thatwere put to him. The ministers were confused about the state of theEmperor’s mind. He did not answer any question, but was justrepeating the words, “which is true—this or that?” They requestedthe queen to come. He did not give any reply to her questions. Hewas talking again to himself—this is true or that is true. VasisthaRishi came there. He studied the situation and through his divinepowers he could realise the king’s predicament. He said to the king“Neither this nor that is true.” You experienced certain things in thedreams, as well as in the waking state. In the waking state, there isno dream. In the dream, there is no waking state. But ‘You’ are bothin the dream state and in the waking state. So ‘You’ alone are true.In both the states ‘You’ are present and therefore ‘You’ areomnipresent. ‘You’ lived in the past, ‘You’ live in the present and‘You’ will live in the future. The ‘You’ aspect is timeless andtherefore is Divine.”All those truths that are said and written in Vedas and inUpanishads are related to man alone. We speak of God as‘Ashataishwarya’ (eight aspects of wealth). But no, it is man whois the form of ‘Ashtaishwarya.’ God is described as attributeless,timeless, pure and eternal. But, these attributes are given by man toDivinity because of His own ignorance.MAN CAN ACHIEVE ANYTHING:An individual acquires a lot of power and knowledge. Fromwhere does he get these? It is by virtue of his own effort. For whenhe was born, he did not know even the alphabet. By sheerperseverance and deter-mination, man can achieve anything. But heis tied by limitations because of the mind. He thinks of himself andhis family and this is nothing but selfishness. He should realise thatthere is a society beyond the family. Without the society, family isSummer Showers In Brindavan 199327irrelevant. We don’t take the society into consideration, andtherefore we are unable to understand the Divinity within us. Youlove the world, you desire everything in the world. It is not thehuman welfare you desire. It is only for your welfare you desire theworld. This world is our society, and we should reach the society.Today we face numerous problems because of selfishness andnarrow-mindedness. From the word ‘I’ you evolve into a family,from family to society. Every individual should work for the well-being of the society; and if he does, there will be no problems, nosorrow and no agitation. We can live in a world free from anyemotional disturbances.When men get rid of the narrow egoistic feelings born out ofignorance, they will experience Divinity. The Vedas exhorted humanbeings to strive together for achieving the highest goals of life. Theessence of the Vedas is summed up in one idea, namely the sense ofthe spiritual unity of all human beings. This is the realisation ofDivinity. This is real ‘Advaita’ (Non-dualism).Declarations like “Aham Brahmasmi” and “Tat Twam Asi”are cited as pronouncements proclaiming Advaita. But this is notcorrect. These statements themselves refer to two entities: Ahamand Brahma, Tat and Twam. The recognition that the one and thesame Atma dwells in all beings is true Advaita. The bulbs may be ofdifferent sizes, colours and voltages, but they are illumined by thesame electrical energy.It is because the doctrine of human unity, based on thespiritual oneness of all beings, is not propagated in the right mannerthat we have today many divisions leading to many conflicts.Differences between people professing different faiths are not dueto differences in the teachings of different religions but due tomental attitudes of those belonging to these faiths. All religionsteach the same good ideals. Those who preach hatred on the basis of28Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993religion are perverted people. The broad vision of Bharatiya culturetestifies the glory of Divinity and the fundamental oneness ofhumanity.PUT TRUTH INTO PRACTICE:Today we have lost the sense of morality, respect for truth,respect for right living and respect for our nation. We shouldprotect our culture, tradition, truth and right living. The true cultureof Bharath is enshrined in “Sathyam vada Dharmam Chara.” Thegreat Vedic statements should be put into practice. We look at thebulb and think that the bulb is burning, but in fact it is the currentwhich causes illumination. We just look at the content and not thebase of the content, and thereby we create problems for ourselves.Here is a tumbler. Without any base how can water be contained?Therefore the tumbler is the base. The water is the content. So also,the Divinity is the base and the world is the content. God and theworld are forms of cause and effect. Lord Vishnu is the cosmic formof the universe into which we should carefully make an enquiry.Everything is God’s manifestation. This perspective mustbe developed by us. There is nothing like good and bad in thisworld. In the eyes of God, there is no such thing as bad. It is onlythe vision of the observer which is defective and finds defects inothers. Because of changes in time, things look different. But theform of truth is the same. We eat the fruit because it is good.Tomorrow it will become refuse. We say it is dirty. This isignorance. If the fruit does not change into refuse, how can you behealthy? What ever you have eaten, the good in it is absorbed byyou and the bad is rejected. We consider the pulp of the sugarcaneas useless. But we forget the sweet juice it has given us. The pulpwas once a part of the sugarcane. When the juice is removed, itbecomes pulp. Therefore, for the juice, the pulp is the base. Onceyou cross the river there is no use of the boat. Today we throwSummer Showers In Brindavan 199329away the pulp because there is no more juice in it. Is this all ourgratitude? The boat that has helped to cross should be taken care of,and we must extend our gratitude to it. But today, gratitude has lostits meaning. Human aspect has become zero in man. Trulyspeaking, the human being is a compound of Humanity andDivinity. By acquiring knowledge, man does not become great nordoes a man become small without it. But if he developsbroadmindedness and follows the path of truth, he is consideredvery great.THE PATH OF TRUTH:During Ramakrishna’s time there were many pundits. Butboth Ramakrishna and his wife Sharada Devi were totally illiterate.Vivekananda tried to correct Sri Ramakrishna’s pronunciation for hecould not even utter the word ‘pension’ properly. But Ramakrishnais treated as a divine phenomenon even today. What is the reason?He followed the path of truth. He could realise that Truth alonecould lead him to merge with the Divinity. That is what Bhagavathapreached: “You should go to the place from where you have come.”That is the main objective of life. Ramakrishna Paramahamsa,though ignorant of letter followed the path of truth. But today,there are very few who respect the truth. They however perform‘Sathyanarayana Vratha’ once in year. For Ramakrishna,Sathyanarayana Vratha was the holy Trinity of word, thought anddeed. In this context, it is said in English, “The proper study ofmankind is Man.” But where is this man? He is just a form. He isnot a man in practice. We should attempt to become men inpractice. We should reach that supreme stage. But today peoplerush to the supreme court. One should attempt to reach thesupreme state that is the supreme Divine Self. We have toexperience this stage in our life. In every man, there is mind,Supermind, Higher Mind, Illuminated Mind and Overmind. Allthese are in man. Therefore, he is divine. There is a small example.30Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993Man is only five feet tall; then how can the whole world be in him?You have gone to America, have visited Japan and Germany too. Ifyou come back and close your eyes, all these sights of America,Japan and Germany could come back to your mind as they all getinto you. Though you are small in stature, they came into you andtherefore you are gigantic in stature. You have a very broad heart inspite of the size of your body. The galaxy of stars twinkle in thesky. You can visualise them in a mirror. In the same way, our heartis a mirror. You can visualise the whole universe in it. So, there isnothing greater than your heart, and therefore there is no Godsuperior to yourself. You develop this faith in you. Then alone youcan become ‘Vishwa Swaroopa.’ If you think you are small, youwill continue to be small. ‘Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavathi,’ ‘YadhBhavam Thad Bhavathi,’ You should think that “I am God,” andthis truth will bestow on you the Divine aspect which you shouldcontemplate upon.4. SATHYAM SHIVAM SUNDARAMEmbodiments of Love,The one whose heart is full of compassion, whose words aresteeped in love and whose body is used in the service of fellow menis neither affected by evil powers, nor by the adverse influence ofthe age of Kali.Neither the scriptures nor the sacred texts can ever rendasunder the curtain of the mind. In front of the curtain is man, andbehind it is God. Cause on one side and Consequence on the other.Though the individual Self and the Absolute Reality, Causeand Consequence are one and the same, they appear to be separatedue to the interference of the curtain of the mind. It is by masteringthe mind, the individual Being can become the Absolute Self,Prakruthi (world) can be transformed to Paramatma (Over Self) andCause can become Consequence.Neither house nor forest can liberation confer,For it is the mind that decides.Whether house or forest, it matters littleWhen you have vanquished the mind.For attachment, hatred and for all the differences that weentertain, mind is the cause. The mind envelopes all and encirclesall. Where there is no mind, there is no world at all. Where the worlddoes not exist, hatred and attachment cease to exist; whereattachment and hatred do not exist, sorrow and joy cease to exist.Such a state free from sorrow and joy is the real state of man.32Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993For the sorrow and suffering of man, attachment and hatredare the cause. For hatred and attachment, world is the cause; and forthe world, mind is the cause. Hence it is said: “Mano moolam idamjagat.” It is only by transcending the mind that man can ever hopeto attain Divinity. Man is bound by the power of mind in thewaking state, the dream state and the deep sleep state as well. Mancan become God only by attaining the state that transcends thesethree states.The microcosm contains in it the macrocosm, for the microand the macrocosms are the manifestations of the One Reality. Thetree is contained in the seed and seed in the tree, for the seed and thetree are one and the same. While looking at the seed, you cannot seein it the tree. But in fact, the tree is contained in the seed.Similarly, the macrocosm is contained in the microcosm. It isthe realisation of this truth that enables man to envision his trueform. Man becomes blind to the Reality as long as he has outwardvision. It is only by cultivating inner vision that he can attain therealisation of the Inner Divinity. It is the realisation of this InnerDivinity that leads you to the realisation of the ‘Cosmic Divine.’INNER DIVINE AND COSMIC DIVINE:What is the difference between the ‘Inner Divine’ and the‘Cosmic Divine’? In fact, there is no difference at all. Divinity inman is the ‘Inner Divine,’ and the Divinity that pervades theCosmos is the ‘Cosmic Divine.’ They are like object and reflection.But man has to renounce worldly feelings and cultivate Divinefeelings. Unless one renounces Prakruthi bhava, (worldly feelings)Summer Showers In Brindavan 199333one cannot cultivate Paramatma bhava (divine feelings). Unless onepeels off the bitter rind of the orange fruit, one cannot taste thesweet juice in the orange fruit. Without renouncing the rind ofworldly feelings one cannot enjoy the sweet juice of Divinity.Indeed Prakruthi and Paramatma are one. The mistake lies in‘Dristi’ (vision) not ‘Sristi’ (creation). When we look at a silverplate, we are not conscious of the silver content of it. We areconscious of the plate, not the silver. But when we turn ourattention to the silver in the plate, we are oblivious of the plate.Similarly, when we gaze at the Divinity that pervades the world,the world vanishes. Only the Divinity remains.In fact, the relationship between the ‘Prakruthi’ and the‘Paramatma’ the ‘Jeeva’ and the ‘Deva’ is inextricable andinterdependent. But it is the mind that brings the difference,standing as a curtain between Prakruthi and Paramatma, You andGod. Jeeva and Deva become one, once the curtain of the mind islifted. It is by effort and endeavour that the mind can be conquered,not by bookish learning and argumentation.From dawn to dusk, our vision is directed outward, notinward. We are lured away by the transitory pleasures of the world.Materialistic pleasures are momentary.TRUE BEAUTY AND WORSHIP:It is said that face is the index of the mind. But this is nottrue in the case of modern man who practices hypocrisy. Modernman undervalues the importance of life. But life is precious, infinite,immortal and eternal. But man takes delight in enjoying themomentary pleasures of the world, instead of drinking at thenectarine springs of life. The scramble for transitory pleasures robsman of peace and joy. I will give an illustration to substantiate this.Man decorates his house and body, for man craves for beauty. But34Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993such efforts give him only momentary satisfaction, not lasting joy.It is the inner beauty, not external beauty, that lends eternalsatisfaction. It is invisible beauty of the heart that everybodyshould endeavour to cultivate. Love, patience and compassion arethe virtues that lend beauty to the heart. Sweet are the words of theman who has cultivated the beauty of the heart. Such a man’seffulgence is true effulgence; such a man’s hands seek noble deeds.Such a noble one is worthy of worship. What is wrong inworshipping such a worthy one?What is worship? We have a mistaken notion that worshipis offering of fruits and flowers. True worship is the union and theharmony of hearts. It is the enjoyment of true beauty that goes intothe making of a real worship. The perception of unity in diversityand the enjoyment of Divinity in Humanity is real worship. It is theduty enjoined on man to cultivate the maturity of the heart. Thoughthe world is the embodiment of God, it appears to be insipid, aslong as we look at it with a worldly attitude. What is the cause forthis?Everybody looks at the world from his own angle. Even thebest of the mangoes tastes astringent when raw. It tastes sour whenhalf-ripe; it is sweet only when totally ripe. The world is like a ripefruit. But it tastes bad as long as we look at it with a worldlyattitude. The nectarine sweetness of the world can be enjoyed onlywhen it is viewed with a Divine attitude. Hence man’s mainendeavour lies in the transformation of his attitudes and mind. Onlya deliberate and sincere effort can yield dividends in this regard.THE TRUE MAN:It is the ‘Drishti’ (vision) that distorts the mind. Thethoughts which constitute the mind actually contribute to theaberration of the mind. Hence, a true man is one who cultivatesSummer Showers In Brindavan 199335sublime and noble thoughts; a true man is one who has cultivatedthe right vision, the right speech and the right feeling. The story ofthe three monkeys substantiates this truth. The monkey that shutsits eyes tells us not to see bad; the one that closes its ears teachesus not to hear bad; and the one that closes its mouth tells us not tospeak evil. Hence, do not see evil, do not hear evil, do not speakevil.The world is fouled and polluted by the distortions ofhearing, speech and sight. It is the inner pollution of man which isreflected as the pollution outside. Everything is the reflection of theinner being. There is no redemption unless mind is redeemed. It isnot possible to extinguish the mind; the solution lies in merging themind into the Divine. The sandal-stick yields no fragrance as long asit is a stick; it yields fragrance only when it is rubbed hard on theground. Similarly, ‘Prakruthi’ too has such fragrance. But it can beenjoyed only by merging Prakruthi into the ‘Paramatma.’ Unless wegrow from one mind to another—the natural mind, the Supermind,the Higher mind, the Illuminated mind and the Overmind, it isimpossible to attain such a sublime stature. How can we travel upto the Supermind when we are not able to restrain even the naturalmind? It is only by strong resolution that the impediments can becrossed and the objective attained.It is indeed easy to transform the mind. It is easy to do goodand difficult to do evil, easy to speak truth and hard to speakfalsehood. Man has to devise devious ways to utter falsehood.Truth involves no effort; falsehood involves hard and crookedeffort. It is indeed easy to report things as they are. It is not amistake to commit a mistake—Sadhana lies in realising the mistakeand correcting it.THE ETERNAL ‘I’:36Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993Deluded by the form and externalties, we should not deludeourselves into thinking that we are ordinary men. Though man hasto undergo different stages of infancy, childhood, youth and old age,the same Divinity runs as an undercurrent all the time. Divinity isalways the same. Divinity is changeless, eternal and true. Truth isGod. In the numerals, the number ‘1’ remains changeless though theothers have to undergo changes and variations. Similarly, Divinityremains changeless and eternal. ‘Ekam Sat Vipra Bahuda Vadanthi.’Though the Reality is one, man considers it to be many, dependingupon his thoughts, feelings, attitudes and station. For example thewater in the tumbler is called “Neeru” in Telugu, “Tanni” in Tamil,“Pani” in Hindi and “Vari” in Sanskrit. Though the water in thetumbler is called differently in different languages, water remains thesame. There is only one Reality that exists in the world. ThatReality is Divinity.What is the first name of this Reality? Neither Atma norDaiva (God) nor even ‘Aum’ is the first name. In fact ‘I’ is the firstname of Divinity. This ‘I’ is frequently used in daily life for ‘I’ isthe basis for all our deeds. ‘I’ is the vital breath, the self, theoverself and everything. That is why it is said “Easwara SarvaBhutanam” (The Lord manifests himself in all). It is because the ‘I’is existent in all, the Lord is said to be manifesting in all. Though wesay that the Lord manifests Himself in all, our words do not carrythe true conviction born of firm faith. One day thieves stole thevaluable ornaments in the temple where Ramakrishna was a priest.Ramakrishna Paramahamsa after noticing the theft went toMadhuranatha, the custodian of the temple and reported the theftto him. Madhuranatha, became furious after hearing the news of thetheft and immediately went to Krishna’s statue. His anger knew nolimits when he saw that there was not a single ornament on thestatue of Krishna. He shouted “Krishna! Fie on you! How can youguard the world when you are not able to guard your ornamentsfrom the hands of the thieves? Are you asleep or are you dumb? ItSummer Showers In Brindavan 199337is shameful that being Divine you could not protect your ownornaments.Hearing these words Ramakrishna said, “Madhuranatha!Speak no more, why should Krishna crave for your ornamentswhen Lakshmi, the Goddess of wealth, is His consort. Why shouldyou be pained so much for the theft? Since you are full of desires,you delude yourself into the thinking that the Lord craves for theornaments. In fact, the Lord allows Himself to be robbed off.Indeed, the Lord is ever ready to offer Himself to devotees totally.Hence change your attitude and never criticise the Lord.”Madhuranatha went away crestfallen. Then RamakrishnaParamahamsa sat near the statue of Sri Krishna and pleaded, “OhLord! Grant me the blessing to be crazy after you and not after theworldly possessions for which people go crazy. Grant me theblessing of Divine intoxication.” It is only after the experience ofDivinity that everything appears to be Divine. The universe issuffused with Divinity.The world is the same in all the four states of Jagrat,Swapna, Sushupti, and Thuriya. The thuriya state is indeed thestate of the overmind. It is in this state of the overmind that manachieves the total transcendence of the mind and shines as “ThePure Divine Self.” The Pure Divine Self is devoid of all attributesand hence all-pervasive. It is the attributes of sound, smell, touch,taste and form that decide the pervasive quality of the elements. Forexample, the earth which is endowed with the five attributes ofshabdha, sparsha, roopa, rasa and gandha is very heavy and stable.But fire which is devoid of the attribute of smell is lighter thanwater and leaps up. The air which is without smell, taste and formis lighter than fire and blows around. Ether, which is devoid of thefour attributes of smell, touch, taste and form, is lighter than air andpervades everywhere; but Divinity, in whom all attributes areabsent, is more pervasive than the ether.38Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993SATHYAM SHIVAM SUNDARAM:Man is an eternal entity. Though man is surrounded by theperishable things all around him, he entertains the notion that hewould not perish and live forever. Though he sees death everyday,he feels that he should last long. This only points out to theimmortal nature of humans. Though the body is mortal, you areimmortal. There is a secret longing in every man that he should lastforever. Even an old man of one hundred years goes to a doctor andrequests him to give an injection without causing pain to him. Thisonly points out to the fact how man craves for comfort. Hence,truth, beauty, and joy are verily the forms of Divinity. This alsohas been described as Sathyam, Shivam, Sundaram (Truth,Goodness and Beauty). These three, constitute the reality of man.The truth is unchanging, Beauty is pleasant to behold. It is said,“Alankara Vishnupriyaha: Jaladharo Easwara Priyaha; NamaskaroArunah priyaha; Bhojanam manavahpriya.”Today, man does not yearn for either of these three: (Truth,Goodness and Beauty). On the other hand he craves for food, forfood constitutes the gross body of the humans. Neither the grossbody nor even the subtle body is permanent. The subtle body existsas long as the mind exists. In the deep-sleep state the mind isinactive and merges into the causal body. It is this merger of themind and the causal body that contributes to man’s happiness inthe deep-sleep state. Hence it is necessary on the part of man toexplore the mysteries of his mind first. In fact, man and mind arenot two different entities; they are only one, for man is mind. It iswe who delegate the unwarranted authority to the mind and allow itto reign over us. We must keep the mind as the servant, subservientto our commands and never as our master. Then alone mind is at ourbeck and call, ready to carry out our commands. But today,Summer Showers In Brindavan 199339unfortunately man allows himself to be mastered by the mindinstead of his mastering the mind.INDIVIDUAL DIVINE, DIVINE INTELLECTUAL WILL, ANDCOSMIC DIVINE:Students, you should make the right endeavour to educateyour mind and make it subservient to your wishes. When you findthat your mind is wavering, you should say, “Oh mind! Do not gocrazy and greedy. Be discreet and try to discriminate.” It is thiskind of teaching that halts the accelerating speed of the mind. It isby the dint of such efforts that we cultivate the supreme quality of“Divine Intellectual Will.” It is by this Divine Intellectual Will thatwe can transform the entire universe into Cosmic Divine. It ispossible for man to bring about this transformation since nothing isimpossible. It is by determination and earnest resolution that theimpossible becomes possible. Even a kite, if it does not decide tofly, stands transfixed to the ground. But when a tiny ant decides tomove, it can cover miles. Hence it is the quality of determinationthat causes the difference. You must earnestly resolve to erase thedifference of ‘I’ and ‘You’ and regard your fellowmen as good asyourself.People labour under the impression that spirituality isritualism. Spirituality on the other hand is the spirit of oneness. It isthe spirit of oneness that constitutes the real spiritual endeavour,the right devotion and the correct wisdom. But unfortunately, wehave not succeeded in attaining such wisdom.THE NEED FOR CONVICTION:People think that wisdom can be obtained by bookishlearning. But, bookish learning, is only an artificial exercise, and truewisdom can never be obtained by artificial means. True wisdom is40Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993harvested by the heart alone. First and foremost, man should erasethe feeling that he is different from God. One day, man will realisethat he and God are one if he persistently practices the faith that ‘Iam God.’ But, merely giving lip service to such statements yieldsno results. There was once a devotee who used to chant ‘SivohamSivoham.’ His friend who watched this asked for the meaning ofSivoham. The devotee answered that the meaning of Sivoham is ‘Iam Shiva (Lord).’ Then, his friend questioned further, “If you areShiva, what is Parvathi (the consort of Shiva) to you?” As soon asthe devotee heard this, he said that it was outrageous to make suchstatements. This only brings out the artificial exercises of devoteeswho chant mantras (divine spiritual formulae) without anyconviction. If the devotee had the conviction that he was indeedShiva, he would have immediately said that he was himself Parvathi. The mantras which we utter should carry conviction. Weshould practice the unity of thought, word and deed. It is thisharmony of thought, word and deed which constitutes truespirituality. It is the practice of this kind of true spirituality thatcontributes to the prosperity of the nation. Listen to the spiritualteachings with one-pointed attention. What is heard should beremembered and reflected upon: what is remembered and reflectedupon should be practised. That is the true meaning of the wordsSravana, Manana and Nididhyasa. Sravana can be compared to thepreparation of food stuffs in the kitchen, Manana, to eating thefood stuffs and Nididhyasa, to the digesting. In fact, it isNididhyasa that contributes to happiness, for Nidi-dhyasa ismarked by practice. It is the practice of noble teachings that lendsjoy to mankind. It is not the hear-ing nor even the reflecting butonly the practising which contributes to the joy of man. The ancientadage is, ‘Do at least one instead of saying a hundred.’ This is thephilosophy that everyone should learn today. The tongue shouldutter the Divine name, the ear should rejoice in hearing the Divine,the eyes should enjoy the Divine form, the heart should be filledSummer Showers In Brindavan 199341with the love for the Lord. Strive sincerely to harvest this Divinejoy.❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁5. THOUGHTS—THE BASIS OFCREATIONTo mankind God gave the sword of the mindin the beginning of time.The one who trains the mind and trainsit well flourishes in the world.But he who is enslaved by the mind cannever enjoy peace and comfort evenin the realm of dream.Embodiments of Love,Mind is a sharp sword. Man will be able to fulfil himself ifhe realises the subtle and mysterious workings of the mind. Mindtravels fast, is strong, lighter than ether and subtler than electricity.Man becomes an easy prey to sorrow and suffering by directing themind on questionable paths.THOUGHTS AND MIND:Mind travels faster than lightning. For example, theprogramme given by a musician in Delhi is instantaneously heard atour house in Whitefield. This only reveals to us how fast the soundwaves travel. Even the mind is made of vibrations as the sound ismade of sound waves. There is no end to the waves of thought thatemerge from the ocean of man’s mind. How is it possible for man torestrain the infinite waves that emerge ceaselessly from the infiniteocean of the mind? In fact it is not necessary to restrain and arrestthese mental vibrations.Though the body is mortal, the thoughts are immortal. Thepower of thought vibrations run round the world. As the heatSummer Showers In Brindavan 199343waves, the electrical waves and light waves radiate, the mentalwaves too radiate. The thought vibrations are the cause for man’sjoy and sorrow, health and disease, woe and weal, birth and death.Man’s life becomes meaningful if he conducts himself fully aware ofthe power of the thought vibrations. The entire world is suffusedwith mental vibrations. In fact the whole world is the verymanifestation of mental vibrations. Hence it is necessary to directour thoughts on noble paths. Man’s mind shines with resplendentpurity if he cultivates noble thoughts, ideas and feelings. It is onlyby developing the purity of mind that we can ensure the purity ofaction. Only pure deeds can yield pure results.We sow the seed of thought and reap the fruit of action; wesow the seed of action and reap the fruit of nature; we sow the seedof nature, we reap the fruit of character; we sow the seed ofcharacter and reap the fruit of destiny. It is evident from this thatour destiny rests on our thoughts. For man’s rise and for man’s fall,the thoughts are the cause. Thoughts can lead us into dungeons ofdarkness and also into illuminated halls. The thoughts are the veryvital breath of man. It is by harbouring the evil thoughts of hatred,envy, anger and ego that man brings his own downfall. Manharbours evil thoughts to harm his fellow men. But the harm that hedoes to his fellow man boomerangs on himself with all its powerand strength. By abusing, criticising, hunting and scandalising hisfellow men, man in fact is abusing, criticising, hunting andscandalising the Lord Himself. Utterly ignorant of the presence ofDivinity in others, man indulges in such heinous conduct. The manwho takes the sword shall perish by it; the man who woundsanother will be wounded in turn; the man who abuses another willbe abused in return. As is the thought, so is the consequence.As is the feeling, so is the result. Utterly ignorant of thepower of the mind, and its might, we underestimate the supreme44Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993importance of the mind. Our whole life rests on the mind. Weshould make earnest efforts to understand the power of the mind.FACE—THE MIRROR OF THOUGHTS:Man makes many an effort to cover up his flaws. Theostrich buries its beak in a heap of sand, deluded by the thoughtthat it is invisible. But it succumbs to the bullet of a huntereventually. Similarly, the evil man thinks mistakenly that his evilthoughts go unnoticed by others. The mind of man is like agramophone plate. The good and evil thoughts of man are indeliblyimpressed on his mind and show themselves up. His thoughts andfeelings are easily gauged by an onlooker. The face of an evil manlooks dry and lifeless like an earthen pot. The face of a man is like aguidepost, revealing to us the direction in which his thoughts aretravelling.Thoughts constitute the very basis of one’s life. It is themind that lends life, sustains it and ultimately brings it to an end.Mind is the cause for Creation, Sustenance and Dissolution. Thereis none greater than it.Man’s mind is made of thoughts and desires, and thesethoughts and desires are determined by one’s character and conduct.Though he harbours hatred and ill-will against others, he pretends asthough he loves them. It is sheer self-deceit, for while trying todeceive others, man deceives himself. You are the authors of yourown downfall and degradation. Man should make sincere efforts tosee that his heart is free from evil thoughts and feelings. The heartof man is an abode of sanctity and the snakes of evil thoughtsshould not be allowed to slither in it. Can a man rest in peace whenvenomous snakes slither in his room? These evil thoughts are morevenomous than the deadly snakes.Summer Showers In Brindavan 199345The thoughts are so powerful that they can be usedsuccessfully to bring relief to the afflicted minds. Noble thoughtsearn for us noble friendship; and this friendship, in course of time,is Divinely transformed.THOUGHTS—THE BASIS OF CREATION:Like-minded people attract like-minded friends; a drunkardbefriends a drunkard; a thief befriends a thief; a musician befriends amusician; a doctor befriends a doctor; and a lawyer befriends alawyer. The noble-minded people befriend only the noble-mindedones. Even our noble thoughts undergo an evil change in thecompany of evil people. Even the creation can be changed bythoughts. It is in the light of this that Arjuna said to Krishna,“Chanchalatve manah Krishna Pramadi Balavarthudam.” (OhKrishna! The mind is fickle, capricious, strong and fraught withdanger). The thoughts are full of might and danger. Thoughts are notonly capsules of danger, but they are capsules of immortality andnectarine sweetness as well.There is no end to the waves in an ocean. Similarly, there isno end to the thoughts as long as the mind exists. Our love andhatred, pain and pleasure, life and death are based on the mind. Eventhe five elements, the five senses, the five sheaths and the five vitalairs draw sustenance from the mind. It is very hard to plumb andfathom the depths of the mind. Our attitude towards the mind is anattitude of indifference, and it is this attitude of mind that spellsdoom to the very life of man. It is this attitude of indifference whichis responsible for man turning into a demon and beast. The mind isthe cause for our selfishness and self-interest.WHAT IS SADHANA?:46Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993Man becomes verily Divine when he cultivates a broadmind. The Sadhana (spiritual endeavour) that man should take up isthe Sadhana of bringing in the blossoming of the human mind. Whatis Sadhana? Neither worship, nor the chanting of the name nor evenmeditation is Sadhana. All these are indeed futile exercises and giveonly an ephemeral satisfaction. We achieve nothing by theseendeavours without transforming the mind first. Man istransformed when the mind is transformed. It is the transformationof the mind which makes man truly Divine. Mental transformationis the main spring of human transformation: human transformationis national transformation; and national transformation is universaltransformation. The chaos and the confusion, the agony and theagitation that we witness in the country today are nothing but themanifestation of the distorted mind.The mind is made of vibrations and there is no end to them.They flow ceaselessly arising every moment. As the waves of theocean are true to the ocean and are of the same nature as the ocean,the thoughts of man are also stamped by the nature of one’s mind.These thoughts shape, mould and guide the very course of theworld. Hence, it is imperative on the part of students to makeearnest efforts to guide the mind in the right direction. The man whodoes not realise the power and the might of the mind allows himselfto fall into abysmal depths day by day. The evil thoughts willmanifest themselves tomorrow, if not today. He may think that thesmall evil act he has done will in no way harm him, but in fact theevil actions boomerang on him, tenfold. It is only by fostering nobleand sublime thoughts that the prosperity of the nation and worldcan be fostered. The world can be divinised if thoughts aredivinised. The evil thoughts in fact decide the very course of anation and brings disaster in course of time. Hence we should neverunderrate and undergrade the power of thoughts. As a seed incourse of time becomes a mighty tree, similarly an evil thoughtassumes gigantic dimensions in course of time. Unless evil thoughtsSummer Showers In Brindavan 199347are nipped in the very bud, they bring in disastrous consequences.It is said that, “Even a tiny snake should be beaten with a big stick.”Similarly even a mean thought should be dealt with severely. Thethoughts are so powerful and influential that they distort even oursight, speech and hearing.  6. THE CONQUEST OF THE MINDIn chanting and meditation, many lifetimeshave passedBut steadiness of mind remains unachievedBy chanting and meditation, can liberationbe attained?It is by steadying the mind one is uplifted.Embodiments of Divine Atma:It is by the five attributes of Feeling, Form, Quantity,Colour and Energy that the mind pulsates, activates and energisesthe universe. Since the universe is suffused with the mind, these fiveattributes too suffuse the universe. The power and might of themind is immense. We can understand the workings of the universeby understanding the power and potency of the mind. By tastingone drop of water from the ocean, we can experience the very tasteof the entire water of the ocean. The drop is the ocean and ocean isthe drop. The mind is the world and world is the mind. More thanfive hundred crores of people live in this world; but mankind is thesame in spite of the differences of form and name, food habits andlife styles.The physical body is composed of five forms. It is only byprofound philosophical enquiry that we can understand the natureof these five forms. It is “Tathwa Vicharana” (Spiritual enquiry)which enables us to plumb the depths of the mind. “TathwaVicharana” is nothing but spiritual enquiry about God. The Lord isinfinite and immeasurable. Such infinite Lord can be realised bypursuing the path of infinitude. The Vedanta has laid down theSummer Showers In Brindavan 199349Ninefold path of devotion (Nava Vidha Bhakthimarga) of listening(Sravanam), singing (Keerthanam), remembering God(Vishnusmaranam), massaging the feet (Padasevanam), saluting(vandanam), worshipping (Archanam), serving (Dasyam),befriending (Sneham) and surrendering (Atmanivedanam). TheNinefold path has been laid down to sanctify and sublimate one’slife.THE FOUR KINDS OF BODIES:The human body is composed of twenty-five principleswhich consist of five organs of action (Karmendriyas), five organsof perception (Jnan-endriyas), five vital airs (Pancha Pranas), fivesensations (Pancha Tanmatras), four internal instruments(Anthakaranas i.e., manas, buddhi, chitta, ahamkara) and the Lifesource. Since the Physical Body consists of the twenty-fiveprinciples which originate from ‘Vishwa’ (universe), the physicalbody is known as ‘Vishvudu.’ So man is not mere individual but theembodiment of the Universe itself. While the physical Body isknown as ‘Vishvudu’ consisting of twenty-five principles, theSubtle Body contains in it seventeen principles of five sensations,five organs of perception, five vital airs, mind and intellect. Sincethe subtle body consists of the seventeen principles suffused with‘Tejas’ (effulgence), the subtle body is called ‘Taijusudu’ (Theeffulgent one). It is the subtle body which experiences the trials andtribulations, joys and sorrows of the world. Hence, the subtle bodyis also known as ‘‘Yathana Deha’ (the suffering body). The CausalBody (Karana Deha) is made of the two principles of ‘Chitta’(reflective mind) and ‘Pragna,’ (constant integrated awareness). Asthis body is suffused with ‘Pragna,’ it is called ‘Pragnudu.’ TheSupercausal Body (Mahakarana Sareera) which is also known as theOvermind is self-resplendent, self-luminous and self-radiant. ThisSupercausal body is also known as ‘Uniki’ (existence). ‘Uniki’ isnothing but the knowledge of oneself. Since ‘Uniki’ is synonymous50Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993with awareness, this is known as ‘Eruka.’ The non-awareness ofthis is known as ‘Marupu’ (forgetfulness). The gross, the subtleand the causal body are stamped by this ‘Marupu.’The three states of waking, dreaming and sleeping are alsoenveloped by this forgetfulness. But the Divinity pervades thespheres of awareness as well as non-awareness and is known as‘Tarakam’; it shines with equal splendour running as anundercurrent in all these states. Every material object ‘Padartha’ inthe world is filled with the spirit ‘Parartha.’ Though matter andspirit appear to be different, they are in reality one only. Matter isgross and derives its energy and sustenance from spirit. Hencematter and spirit are intertwined and interrelated. This ‘Parartha’and ‘Padartha,’ ‘Adhara’ and ‘Adheya’ have been described as‘Kshetrajna’ and ‘Kshetra.’ The world is the ‘Kshetra’ and theDivinity resident in it is ‘Kshetrajna.’ This fact has beensubstantiated by the aphorism in Brahma Sutra ‘Tat Jalan,’‘Tat’—That (God), ‘Ja’—Birth, ‘La’—Mergence,‘An’—Flourishing. It means that the world which emanates from‘Tat’ is sustained by it and merges in it.THE SECRET OF LIFE:The secret of life lies in the harmonious suffusion of‘Kshara’ and ‘Akshara’ (the perishable and imperishable). Whereasthe body is ‘Kshara’ (perishable), the ‘Atma’ is ‘Akshara’(imperishable). This proves beyond doubt that life is marked by theexistence of the perishable body and the imperishable self. Theimperishable self is enveloped by the perishable body. These twoexist together intertwined and interconnected. Life is a harmoniousblend of ‘Prakruthi’ as well as ‘Paramatma.’ It is a mistake to thinkthat ‘Prakruthi’ is inert. On the other hand ‘Prakruthi’ pulsateswith ‘Chaitanya.’ It is the union of these two that contributes toSummer Showers In Brindavan 199351the oneness of humanity. For example, the matchstick which I holdin My hand, is not aflame (Bhagavan creates a matchbox on thestage and pulls out a matchstick from the matchbox and holds it inHis hand); Once the matchstick is aflame, it can burn anything thatcomes in contact with it.But where is the fire? Is it in the matchstick or in thematchbox? In fact, the fire is latent in the matchstick as well as inthe matchbox. It shows that the fire latent in these two is ignited,when the stick and box come in contact. Similarly the effulgencelatent in the heart and the mind emerges as Divinity when the heartand the mind act in unison. Just as the fire latent in the matchboxand the matchstick is one only, the effluence encased in the mindand the heart is the same. In case the matchstick is dipped in water,no fire emanates from it, the cause being, the matchstick loses itscapacity to be aflame. Similarly, the human mind sunken inmaterialistic desires, loses its capacity to radiate the Divine Atmicsplendour. When does the matchstick regain its original capacity tobe aflame?It is only when it is dried in the sun, it regains its originalcapacity, since the sun’s rays dries the dampness of the matchstick.In the same way the human mind steeped in sensual pleasures,regains its original potency and radiates Divine effulgence when it isdried in the sun of detachment (Vairagya). The birth of detachmentin man assures him of the birth of bliss in him. Even if peoplepractise for ages, they do not radiate Divine splendour as long astheir minds are sunk in the waters of sensual pleasures. There is nosalvation for man as long as his mind and heart do not become one,aflame with Divine radiance. Man should realise the truth about thetransience and impermanence of the human body.Man rejoices at sunrise and sunset. This only reveals thefoolishness of man. He rejoices at the beauty of sunrise and sunset52Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993oblivious of the fact that with each sunrise and sunset a part of hislife span is sliced away. Living in the ‘Vishwa,’ he desires to see‘Vishweshwara’ (The Lord) unaware of the truth that‘Vishveshwara’ is there everywhere in ‘Vishwa.’ The entireuniverse is suffused with Divinity. Since your mind is steeped in‘Prakruthi’ you are not able to see ‘Paramatma.’ Just as when youfocus your attention at a necklace, you shut your eyes to what it ismade of, similarly as long as you look at the world with amaterialistic attitude, Divinity shuts itself off from us. Once yougaze at the world with Divine attitude you see only Divinity. Thesaint Soordas said, “Oh Krishna! Can I ever hope to find you, foryou are the smallest of the small and the biggest of the big, theMaster thief of thieves. Who are the thieves that steal into man andsteal away his peace and joy? They are the thieves of Desire, Pride,Greed, Infatuation, Anger and Jealousy, who rob man of his riches.But the worst of all thieves who inflicts the worst damage is‘Matsarya’ (envy). That is why it is said, “You can befriend anangry man, you can sleep beside a serpent, but you should notbefriend an envious one.” Saint Soordas addressed Krishna as theworst thief, because, he considered the Lord to be the embodimentof the entire creation. We must turn our gaze at Divinity whichpervades the universe.Though man undergoes different experiences in the threestates of waking, dream and deep sleep, he is the ‘one’ undercurrentthat runs through all these stages. Though the experiences aredifferent the ‘Experiencer’ is one. As he is present in all the threestates of ‘Jagrat,’ ‘Swapna’ and ‘Sushupthi’ and the three times ofPast, Present and the Future, man is omnipresent. In a way man isthe very Trinity—Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara. Vishnu issymbolic of Sathwic attribute, Brahma that of Rajasic attribute andMaheshwara of Tamasic attribute. As long as man contains inhimself all these three attributes—Sathwa, Rajas and Tamas, he isthe embodiment of Trinity. Man has to undergo differentSummer Showers In Brindavan 199353experiences dominated by different qualities from time to time. Manhas to experience pleasure as well as pain, sun as well as rain. Mancannot understand the value of joy unless he experiences pain. Mancannot realise the value of food unless he is hungry. Hunger enablesman to relish food, and sorrow enables man to relish joy. Pain andpleasure are like sun and shadow, both go together.STEADY SADHANA:The Sun is one though shadows are different. Ocean is onethough waves are many, but the water in all the waves is the same.Men are the waves that originate from the ocean of ‘Satchidananda’(Being Awareness and Bliss) from time to time. Though man is likea drop in the ocean, he shares with the ocean the qualities of‘Satchidananda.’ The Divinity present in man and God is the oneand the same. Though the bulbs are many, the electricity is thesame. The bulbs differ in their radiance due to the difference in thevoltage of the bulbs. Some people complain that the Divine radiancein them is dim. In these people the Divine radiance is dimmed bynarrowness of mind. The Divine radiance shines resplendently onlyin those who have broad mind. But many people today are selfishand narrow minded and their concern is limited only to themselvesand their family. Unless their concern envelops the society and theworld, the Divine radiance can never burn resplendently in them.The cultivation of a broad mind and a broad heart enables one tohave the vision of one’s self (Swa Swaroopa Sandharshana). ThisDivine principle is also known as Infinite Divine (MahapurushaTathwa), but we should be able to sustain the state of InfiniteDivine throughout our life.The Divine experience we enjoy should not be limited to aparticular time, it should embrace all times. A man who has drunkwine is under its spell as long as its effect lasts. The temporaryexperience lends only temporary joy. The experience of the InfiniteDivine should become our natural state. It is only by transcending54Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993the ‘Sthoola,’ ‘Sukshma’ and the ‘Karana’ and by merging in‘Mahakarana,’ that you can achieve this supreme state. We cannotexperience the supreme ecstasy unless we transcend the Supermind,the Higher mind and the Illuminated mind. The state of theOvermind is also known as the state of ‘Amanaska’ (without mind).This is also described as ‘Videhasthithi’ (without the body).JOURNEY TO THE OVERMIND:How can we reach this overmind? The Vedanta has declaredthat we should offer ‘Patram,’ ‘Pushpam,’ ‘Phalam’ ‘Thoyam’(leaf, flower, fruit, water). The Lord does not yield Himself toeither property and possession or power and authority. TheKrishna Thulabaram stands as a testimony to this. Sathyabhama,the consort of Krishna, tried to balance Krishna on the balance panby the weight of gold. But Krishna outweighed all the gold that sheplaced on the pan. Sathyabhama was selfish and she entertained thefalse notion that gold and wealth could be on par with Him. But,Rukmini, who was pure and unselfish was aware of the truth thatfor the form of Krishna, His name alone could match. In consonancewith the Indian tradition that a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water shouldbe offered to the Lord, she chose the Tulasi leaf (basil leaf) to offerto the Lord, with all her devotion uttering Krishna’s name. Whilethe name of Krishna uttered by Rukmini proved equal to Krishna’sform, the Tulasi leaf offered by her out weighed Him, bringing reliefand joy to Sathyabhama. When it is said that we should offer a‘leaf,’ a ‘flower’ a ‘fruit,’ ‘water,’ it does not mean that we shouldoffer mere physical objects. These objects are symbols of greatspiritual significance. The message is that we should offer the leaf ofthe body, the flower of the heart, the fruit of the mind, and thewaters of tears of Bliss to the Lord. When we sincerely cultivate thespirit of this message and practice it in real life, we can really reachthe state of the Overmind. Our devotion should be full-timedevotion and never part-time devotion. It is not a sign of trueSummer Showers In Brindavan 199355devotion to be inflated in times of joy and deflated in times ofsorrow.The Vedic injunction is ‘Sathatham Yoginah’ (You should bea yogi always). People practice Yoga in the morning, Bhoga in theafternoon and suffer from Roga in the night. It is unbecoming on thepart of man to behave contrary to the sacred injunctions of theVedic texts. We should practice Yoga at all times and in all places.We should restrain the vagaries of the mind and merge the mind inDivinity. We should be immersed in the feeling contained in thesacred statement ‘Sarvathaha Pani Padam’ (the feet of the Lord areeverywhere) and ‘Sarvam Bhagawath Prithyartham’ (For thepleasure of the Lord). You should be established in the awarenessthat the Lord is ever present. You must also be prompted by thefeeling that you are performing the deeds for the pleasure of theLord. This is the easiest way of achieving the control of the mind.If you are prompted by the feelings that your body belongsto the Lord, you will not sin with your body. On the other hand, allyour efforts and endeavours would proceed towards Divinity. Ifyou are saturated with the conviction that your energy belongs toGod, you will not misuse it. It is in the light of this that we haveprescribed the principle of ceiling on desires in the Sri Sathya SaiSeva Samithis. The first ceiling on desires is: “Don’t waste Food.Food is God.” Your body is made of food and you are the result ofthe food eaten by the parents. ‘Anna Brahma’ (Food is God). Eat asmuch as it is necessary to eat. But do not throw away food bytaking too much in your plate. By wasting food you will be wastingthe energy Divine. The second instruction is: “Don’t waste money.God is wealth.” Since God is wealth, misuse of money is evil.Practice charity by gifting away money, food, clothes, houses etc.,instead of misusing it in extravagance. Misuse of money is not onlyevil but a sin as well. The third instruction is: “Don’t waste time.Time waste is Life waste.” God is exalted as ‘Kalaya namah,56Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993Kalakalaya namah, Kalathithaya namah, Kala swaroopaya namah.’Spend the time by using sanctifying words. Do not waste time.Wasting time is wasting God. The fourth instruction is: “Don’twaste Energy.” People waste their energy by indulging in badthoughts, bad looks, bad hearing and bad action.The right royal road is:See no evil, see what is good.Hear no evil, hear what is good.Talk no evil, talk what is good.Think no evil, think what is good.Do no evil, do what is good.It is by translating the above instructions into practice youwill be sanctifying your time. This is the ‘Sadhana’ and the servicethat you have to practice. A time will come when the mind will beextinguished and the merger with the Divine, achieved.SADHANA AND DHYANA:What is ‘Sadhana’? What is ‘Dhyana’? The process ofmerging the mind in Divinity, oblivious of the world, is described as‘Dhyana.’ But this alone is not meditation. Even the activities likewalking, talking, eating, driving, reading, writing etc., are alsomeditation. Unless you meditate on what you are writing youwon’t be able to write at all. Unless you concentrate you cannotdrive at all. Whatever you are doing, do it as if life itself ismeditation. You must ensure that while performing actions youmust do them with concentration avoiding haste, waste and worry.Haste makes waste.Waste makes worry.Summer Showers In Brindavan 199357So, do not be in a hurry.Never give room for hurry and worry. Hurry, worry andcurry, (food) cause ailments of the heart.It is difficult to control the mind without sublimating it. Donot entertain the notion that the path is fraught with difficulties.Anything can be achieved by earnest endeavours. You can reach theregion of the space which is lakhs of miles away from us by sincereefforts, but we are not making any effort to reach the region of theheart even by half an inch. One should strive to go within. You haveto spend crores of rupees to reach space, but you need not spendeven a paisa for reaching the regions of your heart.Students, first and foremost turn your attention inwards. Donot cultivate ‘outlooks,’ the external attitude. Outward vision maydistract your mind and make it a monkey mind.Body is like a water bubble.Mind is like a mad monkey.Don’t follow the body.Don’t follow the mind.Follow the conscience.Conscience leads to consciousness. There will be noproblems in the world if we achieve the state of consciousness.Strive for the peace of the world. The world is at rest, butman’s mind is full of unrest. Let the mind, which is full of unrest, befilled with peace. All this depends on man’s conduct. Teach theworld through noble actions and words. Fill your heart with thename of God. Fill your mind with the spirit of service. Mankind hasto make the right use of the head, heart and hand. By following the58Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993three H’s of Head, Heart and Hand we reach the most sublimeheights.❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁7. THE MALADY AND THE REMEDYLike the fragrance hidden in flowers,the Lord is hidden in you.Like the mad musk deer that seeks thesource of its own fragrance elsewhere,why seek the Lord elsewhere,O foolish one!Embodiments of love,Man today seeks God outside him, while God is in him. Asash covers embers, attachment and hatred cover man and concealGod’s form. As ash is blown away from the embers, hatred andattachment can also be blown away. Then man will have the visionof Divinity. The mental workings of men differ from one another.The mental processes of man differ, depending upon his role asfather, husband, grandfather and child.These mental processes vary according to varyingsituations. The kind of relationship that exists amongst peopledecides the nature of their mental responses. The love that themother has for a daughter is different from the love that she has forher daughter-in-law. The love one has for one’s own son is differentfrom the love that one has for the son-in-law. The infatuation thatone has for one’s wife is different from the reverential affection onehas for one’s mother. What is the cause of all this? It is therelationship which determines responses like love, affection,infatuation etc. Why is the mind bound by these ephemeral andtransient relationships?THE PANCHA KLESHAS:60Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993What is the cause for man’s sorrow, delight and infatuation?The cause can be traced to the different ‘Kleshas’ (sorrows) whichafflict man from time to time. The first sorrow which afflicts man is‘Avidya Klesha’ (the sorrow caused by ignorance). Deluded by thefeeling that he is the body and that God is elsewhere and muchdifferent from him, man makes a misery of his life. The ignorantbelief that God and man are poles apart, creates a distance betweenhim and God and causes anguish in him. Though man knows forcertain that the mind is the cause for his bondage, he does not striveto restrain the mind and suffers as a consequence. Though he is wellaware that the mind is the source of agony, anguish, attachment andhost of other worries, he makes no effort to quell the mind.The sorrow that man suffers as a consequence of hiscomplacence is called ‘Abhinava Klesha.’ The man who is sunk inthe mire of materialistic joys is afflicted by sorrow, as ‘Vishaya’(Sensual Joys) is nothing but ‘Visha’ (Poison). In his frantic cravingfor enjoying the sensual joys, a human loses his discrimination andsuffers from many a sorrow. Man takes materialistic joys as thesummum bonum of life and suffers untold miseries. All the sorrowsborn of such materialistic attitudes on the part of man, are known as‘Asthitha Klesha.’There are also human beings who are lured away by thedesire to acquire wealth and property and toil day and night tosatisfy their insatiable cravings to acquire more and more.Disregarding food, sleep and rest, man struggles from dawn to duskto acquire wealth and property. Unable to restrain his desire toaccumulate these materialistic acquisitions, he makes a misery of hislife, though he knows thoroughly that wealth and property areephemeral and impermanent. It is man’s infatuation to satisfy hisinsatiable greed which afflicts him. The affliction born out of thisinfatuation is known as ‘Raga Klesha.’Summer Showers In Brindavan 199361Hatred arises as a sequel to the frustration born ofdisillusionment. People prompted by the expectation of rewardsseek shelter at the feet of men. But when the due rewards do notfollow their efforts, they feel shattered and disillusioned. Theyharbour hatred against these men who fail to reward them. Angeralso arises as a result of the selfishness and self-interest which theynourish within themselves. Man approaches and adores peopleprompted by selfishness. But when these men fail to meet theirselfish demands, he becomes angry and suffers as a result. There aresome men who harbour hatred against God, when God does notcondescend to their desires. The grief which arises as a result ofhatred is called ‘Dvesha Klesha.’ Such an unfortunate person is aneasy prey to distress and disappointment and disregards thepresence of the Self within him. The delusion that he is the bodyand that Divinity is different from him is the cause of man’ssorrow.THE STATES OF MAN:The world presents a motley spectacle of people undergoingvarying experiences. There are some men who appear to be everpeaceful and there are also men who appear to be ever sorrowful.There are also men who appear to be experiencing joy as well assorrow; and there are also men, lost in Divine intoxication, totallyblissful. What is the cause for these different states of man? Mind isthe cause for all this. The presence of the demon, the beast, thehuman and the Divine in man is the cause; and but for all this, themind is the main cause. It is only in man that we have the ‘Human-divine,’ the ‘Human-human,’ the Human-demon’ and ‘Human-animal.’ All these are deeply rooted in the mind of man.62Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993It is said ‘Brahmahanista Paro Devaha.’ Ever established inDivine consciousness, performing actions and duties enjoined onhim for the pleasure of the Lord, the Divine man sees Divinityeverywhere. To such a man, all forms and beings are the reflectionsof Divinity; and he leads a life of joy born of Divine intoxication.‘Sathya Dharma Paro Martyaha.’ Living in the humanworld, the Human-man treads on the path of truth andrighteousness and leads a truthful and righteous life. Hescrupulously follows the commandments of ‘Sathyam VadaDharmam Chara’ and lives a noble life. To such a man, duty comesforemost; and he is also endowed with the noble qualities ofcompassion, charity, tolerance, sympathy etc. He has no craving forpower and pelf.The Demoniac-man is described as ‘Madhyapana RathoDanavaha.’ The demoniac man gives himself to a life of eating,drinking and sleeping. Devoid of compassion and understanding,discretion and discrimination, he takes delight in inflicting pain onothers by abusing them and criticising them. Swayed by selfishnessand self-interest, he strives for his own joy and does not contributeto the happiness of others in the least. He harbours hatred andjealousy against righteous and noble people and flies into a rage attheir very sight. The Demoniac man is the very embodiment of evilqualities, evil thoughts and evil feelings.The Human-animal is infatuated by sensual pleasures andspends his lifetime in seeking sensual joys from birth to death. Helives the life of a beast, steeped in selfishness and sensual pleasures.The laws of reason and season are flouted without anycompunction of conscience, though the animals observe these lawsscrupulously. There is no end to the vices to which he is a prey.There is no room for virtues like righteousness and love of justice inthe heart of the Human-animal.Summer Showers In Brindavan 199363The mind is the cause for all this variance of character andconduct. Man must first of all foster faith in the existence of asacred power in this world. He should also nourish the convictionthat in this world, he must lead a perfect life. The world plays itstricks on man, catering to the joys of his senses. It is the world thattempts his body, tantalises his mind, rejoices his eyes and mouldshis life. But there is an immortal Divinity in this mortal world. Themortal and the immortal, the temporary and the eternal are theaspects of ‘Satchidananda.’ The perfect world emerges from the allperfect world. Only perfection remains even after the bodyperishes. It is in the light of this the Upanishads declared‘Purnamadha Purnamidam Purnath Purnamudhachyathe;Purnasya Poornamadhaya Purnameva Vasishyathe’ That isFull, this is Full. Full is born out of the Full. Fullness deleted fromFullness, is also Fullness. What remains is also Fullness.Everything is Fullness only. Everything in the world is anaspect of ‘Satchidananda.’ Though man is an embodiment of‘Satchidananda,’ man subjects himself to sorrow and pain byfollowing the vagaries of the mind. The ‘Human-divine’ life is thehighest life. The ‘Human-human’ life is a medium life. The ‘Human-demoniac life’ and the ‘Human-animal’ lives are the worst. Themind which is the seat of attachment, is the cause for all thisconfusion. Man is not made of sorrow, man is made of joy. Man isin fact the embodiment of ‘Satchidananda,’ Since he is theembodiment of ‘Satchidananda,’ he should strive sincerely toexperience this. In this broad and wide world, we must foster withinus broad and noble feelings without giving room for narrow-mindedfeelings to arise in us. We must cultivate feelings of infinite Love inthis infinite world. Cultivating narrow-minded feelings, man leadstoday a life of distress. Whose fault is this? The fault lies in manwho allows himself to be swayed away by his mind.THE POWER OF INTELLECT:64Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993The man who rests on the mind,Falls worse than an animal.The man who rests on the intellect(Buddhi): is transformed into God.What is ‘Buddhi’? The intellect is marked by discretion anddiscrimination. It goes beyond the mind but is placed beneath the‘Self.’ Since it is placed close to the ‘Self,’ it basks in the light of the‘Self.’ The knowledge of ‘Atma’ is his who follows the intellect byliving a life of discrimination. Man today toils from dawn to duskfor the sake of food. What does he achieve by this toil?From morn to night man struggles throughoutfor filling his tiny belly and wastes his life.What great joy have you gained by neglectingthe worship of the ‘Lotus Eyed One’?Pause and ponder dearly on this, O man.What has man achieved by neglecting God? What has heachieved by leading a life of materialistic pursuits? All that he hasachieved is only sorrow. What have you achieved by reading booksand meeting Mahatmas (great people?)Why do you arrogate to yourself thatyou have mastered many books and texts?Of what avail is all your learning andscholarship?Of what avail is all your life and effortIf you don’t think of the Lord andFold your hands in salutation to Him?Summer Showers In Brindavan 199365Of what use is our worship, our faith, our learning andintelligence if it does not help us to proceed towards the Lord? Ourefforts yield only temporary joy but not permanent bliss.It is a crime and a sin to be arrogant on the strength of one’spower and authority. The real authority rests in the man whoexperiences Divinity in everyone. The real authority is his whobelieves that all our experiences should find fulfilment in God. Thechasm, that exists between our thought, our word and our actioncontributes to our demoniac behaviour.THE SINS OF SHANKARA:Adi Shankara, after his triumphant march all over India,reached the city of Benares. He went to the temple of Vishwanathaand prayed thus:“O lord! I have come here to redeem myself of the three sins I havecommitted. It is said ‘Yatho Vacho Nivartante Aprapya manasaSaha.’ Though I know that the Lord is ineffable, beyond the ken ofthought and word, I have dared to describe you. I have committedthe sin of not practising what I have known. This is my first sin.Though I have professed ‘Eashwara Sarvabuthanam, EashwasyaIdamsarvam, Vasudeva Sarvamidam,’ I have come for yourdarshan. Though I declared that the Lord is everywhere, I havecome to seek you here. I have committed the sin of saying one thingand doing another. This is my second sin. In spite of making thestatements ‘Ekatma Sarvabhutantaratma, Ekameva AdwitiyaBrahma,’ I have come for your darshan. In spite of my declaringthat there is only One entity in the world, I have come for yourDarshan. Thereby I have considered You to be much different frommyself. This is my third sin, O Lord! Redeem me of my three sinsand bless me with the Bliss born of non-dualism.”66Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993The disharmony of the thought, word and deed is in itself asin. We must seek atonement for the sins we have committed. It isonly after redeeming ourselves of our sins and after experiencing theOneness, we will be transformed into perfect humans. TheUpanishads declare ‘Manasyekam, Vachasyekam,Karmanyekam, Mahatmanam.’ The Mahatma (noble one) is onewho has achieved the unity of thought, word and deed. The evil oneis he who does not observe the unity of thought, word and deed.That is why it is said in the Upanishads, ‘Manas Anyath, VachasAnyath, Karman Anyath Duratmanam.’It is the mind which makes a man scale ethereal heights andalso fall down to irretrievable depths. Everything becomessubservient to us if we can control the mind. It is the mind whichmakes a man. It is the mind which makes the world. Man, mind andworld are one and the same.If these three are one, how is that we have three forms andthree names? As the Brahmin who performs different functions isaddressed by different names, things too acquire different names inconsonance with their actions. For example: The Brahmin when hecooks food is known as “Brahmin, the cook”; the Brahmin, when heconsults the almanac is known as “Brahmin, the astrologer.” TheBrahmin who initiates a person into a mantra is known as“Brahmin, the preceptor.” Though the Brahmin, who has performedall these functions is one person only, he has acquired differentnames due to the different duties performed by him. Similarly, sinceman is made of mind, he is called ‘Manishi.’ As the world is themanifestation of the five elements, it is known as ‘Prapancha.’Things acquire names according to their functions. In the word‘Prapancha,’ ‘Pra’ means blossoming (manifestation) and ‘Pancha’means the five elements.UNITY IN DIVERSITY:Summer Showers In Brindavan 199367Hence, we should strive to see unity in diversity. Thoughthousands are seated in this auditorium, the air which they breatheis the same. Beings are many, but the breath is the same. Our bodiesare like chariots and the charioteer is the Self. Though the chariotsare different, the charioteer is the same. In spite of the manifolddiversity amongst men, there is a striking unity as well. As regardsbirth, a millionaire and a pauper come to this world through thewomb of the mother. All people have hunger, whether one is amillionaire or a pauper. The millionaire may take sumptuous mealswhile the pauper may take meagre meals, but hunger is common toboth. The millionaire and pauper are equal in their death. All peoplehave thirst, though the way they quench their thirst may bedifferent. The millionaire may drink cool drinks while the paupermay drink cold water from a stream, but thirst is the same. Onenessmarks the life of man, in hunger and thirst, in birth and death.Hankering after job and money, we allow ourselves to belured into evil and questionable paths. Treading the wrong road, weruin our lives ultimately. Man’s life has become cankerous like thelife of a worm. As our authority and opulence grow, our charactershould also grow to lofty heights. Whether he rises high in the fieldof spirituality or politics, his thoughts should rise along with hisstatus. On the other hand today, instead of nourishing the noblestof thoughts, man harbours the worst of feelings. Man pretends tobe happy, though he is fast heading towards disaster. Man is like apuppet directed by a puppeteer.There is an imperative need for man to control his mind.You should not leap into action immediately, listening to thepromptings of the mind. We should discriminate and progressfurther. But there are people in the world, who listen to thecommanding call of the mind and translate it into practiceimmediately. Man is transformed into God when he makes efforts68Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993with his mind. Who is ‘Manava’ and who is ‘Deva’? The one whois not bound by the day is ‘Deva,’ for the day symbolises morningand night. Hence ‘Deva,’ is the one who transcends morning andnight. The lord is beyond pleasure and pain, merit and sin. Webesmirch God today by our wrong conduct. But God is beyondpleasure and pain. He goes beyond our ken. He exceeds our grasp.Dogs bark when elephants walk. What does an elephant lose whendogs bark? What does God lose when people carp at him? It is manwho is the loser but not God. The man who has fastened his faithon God should foster Divine feelings and Divine actions. God is theembodiment of Love.Love is God. Live in Love.Start the day with love.Fill the day with love.Spend the day with love.End the day with love.This is the way to God.❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁8. THE QUEST FOR PEACEWhen they are young and tender,Steadiness of mind, youth should acquire.If steadiness of mind is not secured,They suffer and life is wasted too.Students, The Embodiments of Divine Atma,Peace is another name for the steadiness of mind. Peace is asacred virtue; it is the embodiment of the Self. It is an ornament toman; the heart of the selfless one is its abode. Losing this sacredornament of peace, which is eternal and everlasting, man falls preyto agitation and unrest.The Universe, with all its visual phenomena is created,sustained and dissolved by the three attributes (Trigunas). Theseattributes are the very life breath of this illusory world, and activatethe workings of the Universe. Influenced by these three attributes,man loses the Divine jewel of peace.Man should strive not to come under the spell of evilcompany. It is said:Tyaja Durjana Samsargam.Bhaja Sadhu Samagamam.Kuru Punyamahorathram.Smara Nithyamanithyam.Give up evil company; desire noble company; domeritorious deeds day and night; think of the eternal and thetransient.70Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993THE INFLUENCE OF EVIL COMPANY:Evil company results in evil feelings, wrecks your humanquality and devalues your life. It is this loss of value which leaves aman as a man only in form, but not as a man in action. Evilcompany is like a venomous worm, which instantaneously preys onthe noble virtues of man and kills them in the end.Evil company acts on the very mind of a man, in all itsmanifold forms, causing manifold mental aberrations. It enters intothe very core of the human heart and destroys the human quality inhim. The words of the evil one sound sweet; but his mind issaturated with venom. The evil man is the very opposite of the trueman. It is said: “He is a real man who observes the harmony ofthought, word and deed. The proper study of mankind is man.”Young people like you should cultivate Divine feelings andqualities, participate in sacred activities and lead a life of exemplaryexcellence.It is not mere association with evil people that constitutesthe evil company. The cultivation of evil qualities is also evilcompany. Students should not give scope for vices like ego, envy,falsehood, pomposity etc. to worm into their hearts, since they arethe worst enemies of man. Humans shine in their full splendouronce they totally exterminate their enemy. The scriptures havedeclared that disease, debt, foe and fire should be quelledcompletely without leaving any trace.The Vedic injunction is, “It is disastrous if ‘Shatrusesha,’‘Agnisesha,’ ‘Runasesha’ and ‘Roga-sesha’ (the trace of foe, fire,debt and disease) is left.” If the debts are not discharged completely,the undischarged debt grows by leaps and bounds and assumes itsSummer Showers In Brindavan 199371original figure due to the interest charged. Similarly, if a patient isdischarged from the hospital without being completely cured, thetraces of the disease left in him may relapse and prove disastrous tohim.In the same, way if a fire is not extinguished totally, theremnants of it may blaze into a conflagration. If the enemy is notquelled completely, that too, in the course of time, will provedetrimental to man. It is only the complete extinction of the enemywhich earns peace to man.What is peace? When does it arise in the human heart? Peacearises in man when the three attributes of ‘Satwa,’ ‘Rajas’ and‘Tamas’ (serene, passionate and dull temperaments) are totallyrouted. You must make earnest efforts to develop ‘Virakthi,’‘Upeksha’ and ‘Anasakthi’ (detachment, apathy and disinterest)towards the three attributes. Everything is fraught with fear in theworld, and it is detachment (Vairagya) alone which can bestow‘Abhaya’ (fearlessness). A man who suffers from ‘Raga’(attachment) is a prey to fear; a man who has cultivated detachmentis free from fear. If ‘Raga’ is allowed to grow, it ultimately ends upas ‘Roga’ (disease). If the waves of ‘Kama’ and ‘Krodha’ (lust andanger) are not nipped in the bud they assume great proportions. “Ifa plant does not bend while it is a sapling, can it ever bendwhen it is a tree?” says the proverb. If a plant is not controlled asa sapling, it grows uncontrolled when it is a mighty tree. That iswhy youth is the most appropriate period to cultivate the controlof the mind.THE PURITY OF THE MIND:The true education is the training of the mind. Life is a futileexercise if the restraint of the mind is not achieved, in spite of one’shigh intelligence and status. So it is said:72Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993Of what use is worship, without the purity of the mind?Of what use is cooking, without the purity of the vessel?Of what use is spiritual practice, without the purity of the Self?You cannot rest in peace in a room where venomous wormscrawl; the worm should be either caught or killed. We should rootout this worm from the chitta. There will be no peace for man untilthe worm is caught and killed.The youth today do not know what are ‘Chitta,’ (memory)‘Hridaya’ (heart) and ‘Manas’ (mind). Man is made of mind andmind is nothing but a conglomeration of thoughts. Since thoughtsdetermine our conduct, we should cultivate noble thoughts. Thoughthe heart is the seat of purity, evil company infects the heart andvices arise as a consequence. If a piece of charcoal and a burningember are brought into contact, the former loses its blackness andglows with intensity, as the heat and the fire of the latter enter intoit. The charcoal turns into a totally burning ember when it is fanned.The charcoal glows as an ember to the extent it allows itself to beconsumed by fire.This is the miracle of transformation wrought by noblecompany. The company of a burning ember transforms a blackcharcoal into another ember. Hence it is said, “BrahmavidBrahmaiva Bhavathi” (the one who knows the Brahman becomesthe Brahman). It is not enough if you are ‘Near’ noble company.You should become ‘Dear’ too, endearing yourself to it. Forexample: When we carry a flower in the hand, the fragrance of theflower spreads to our hands and dress. If a foul smelling flower iscarried in the hand, it befouls our dress and body. Hence, good andevil are endowed with equal potency to exercise benevolent andmalevolent influences respectively. You are what your company is.That is why Einstein said, “Tell me your company and I shall tellSummer Showers In Brindavan 199373you what you are.” It is the company one keeps which makes orunmakes him.Though endowed with the physical prowess and prowess of theintellect,Without the prowess of God, you will be a slave for sure.What happened to the mighty Karna at the end?Never, never forget this noble word.Though Karna was endowed with physical and intellectualprowess, he was destroyed by associating himself with the evilcompany of Duryodhana and Dusshasana. In the end, he becameone of the evil four (Dushta Chatustayam) and was far removedfrom the Grace of God. It is only the power of God and the powerof righteousness that can make all powers to rally around you. Butthe students of today, bereft of noble thoughts and noble conduct,are deprived of the immense strength that comes as a consequenceof God’s grace. Man is befouled today instead of blooming intoexcellence.Man’s excellence lies in radiating Divine illumination. Man’sspeciality lies in the acquisition of peace, but when can man acquirethis peace? People shout slogans saying, “I want peace, I wantpeace.” How can you secure peace while keeping atom bombs inyour hands? You can never acquire peace even if you land on themoon. If you keep the bombs of evil conduct and evil feelings everin your hands, peace remains a far cry. Peace is obtained only whenevil feelings are destroyed. First and foremost, there must beindividual peace, which in its turn contributes to family peace;family peace, in its turn, contributes to peace of the village. Peace ofthe village leads to peace of the state: Peace in the state, in its turn,secures national peace. National peace contributes to internationalpeace. This is how individual peace contributes to world peace.Similarly Ashanti in a person has the potentiality to affect peace all74Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993over. Students and educational authorities disseminate only unrestand agitation without making any contribution to peace ofhumanity.RIGHT AND RESPONSIBILITY:The students of today are the architects of India’s future.Poverty and prosperity of India hinges on the behaviour of ourstudents today. The Dharma of a student is his duty. But thestudents of today fight for right without any responsibility.Without responsibility there is no right. Duty is so important to astudent that it is a yoga (spiritual practice) to him. So it is said,“Karthavyam Yogamuchyate.” By disregarding one’s duty andassuming authority, people today are destroying the very meaningof humanity. If you discharge your duty sincerely, authority comesautomatically to you. Right and responsibility are like the twowings of a bird, the two wheels of a chariot. But people today haveaxed the wing of responsibility and have utterly disregarded duty.The fight for rights is an unrighteous fight, for you have no right tofight, unless you have performed your duty.What is your duty? Your duty lies in striving for theupliftment of the society, not in selfish striving for the upliftmentof your own family. Once we have uplifted society, we shouldwork for the well-being of the nation. Then alone you willaccomplish self-fulfilment. It is said “Shareera Madhyam KaluDharma Sadhakam” (Body is given for ensuring righteousness).God has gifted the body to man for performing good deeds. That iswhy, the Buddha laid down “Buddham Sharanam Gacchami,Dharmam Sharanam Gacchami, Sangham SharanamGacchami.” This is how you should at first surrender yourself toBuddhi. It is by transforming and sanctifying Buddhi, you becomeBuddhimata (The noble intellectual). After sanctifying your Buddhi,you must use it in the service of society (Sangham SharanamSummer Showers In Brindavan 199375Gacchami). After serving the society you must infuse Dharma(Dharmam Sharanam Gacchami) into society. This is how manshould travel from Buddhi (intellect) to Sangha (society) and fromSangha to Dharma (righteousness).THE LAST JOURNEY:The Upanishads gave supreme importance to Karma(action). What is the significance of this? The significance is thatrighteousness should shape and mould our Karma. The BrahmaSutras said, “Athatho Brahma Jignasa.” What do we need for thecultivation of ‘Brahma Jignasa’ (enquiry into God)? We need finedresses and beautiful ornaments for attending a marriage; we needmoney for seeing a cinema; we need a walking-stick and slippers forwalking, but all these activities are left to your choice for, you arefree to cancel them or postpone them. But you have no choice inregard to the last journey. You can never postpone it. People makeenough preparations for performing small activities like walking,reading, writing etc., but what preparation do they make for aserious and significant activity like the journey beyond death? Wespend lavishly on paltry activities; we sacrifice ourselves for thesake of trifles and trivialities. We sacrifice our body, wealth andtime for temporary and transient things. What do we sacrifice forsecuring the Vision Divine? Our minds are not steady even for twominutes during Bhajan. It is said, “The thought that I bestow on mykith and kin, on property and wealth will surely not save me fromLord Yama at the time of death. It is my loving contemplation ofthe Lotus Feet of the Lord which will enable me to launch on thisjourney beyond death. Hence, Oh Lord! Bless me with the desire tomeditate on Your Feet every moment of life.” We must follow thespirit of this prayer and elevate ourselves.Students! Our body is transient like a water-bubble, but lifeis a long journey. In this long journey, we change our bodies many a76Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993time, as we change our dress. In fact, death is nothing but change ofdress—“Death is a dress of life.” We change our dresses but can wechange the journey of our life? In this long journey of life, it benefitsus well to carry less luggage. It is said, “Less luggage, more comfort,makes travel a pleasure.” The less luggage that we should carry inour life is nothing but the desires that we entertain. There is nothingwrong in entertaining desires; but it is seriously wrong to entertainexcessive desires, as excessive desires cause unrest and agitation.Our desire should remain as a limited desire and should not assumethe proportion of greed. That’s why Adi Shankara said,Not for you, not for you,Oh man, the thirst for wealth.Wealth is a consequence of action.Contain your desires and be content.Chant, O foolish one, ‘Hari Govinda,’‘Hari Govinda.’Shankara once found an old grammarian who was religiouslyrepeating Panini’s grammatical formula, ‘Dukrin Karana.’ AdiShankara went to him and said:Bhaja Govindam Bhaja Govindam Govindam Bhaja MoodaMate.Samprapte Sannihite Kale Nahinahi Rakshati Dukrin Karane.(Oh foolish man, Chant the name of Govinda. When thehour of death comes, it is only Govinda who will save you and notyour grammar.)Hence man should wholeheartedly chant God’s name for hemay be saved in the hour of death.The knowledge that you acquire in the educationalinstitution is not the true knowledge; the secular education in whichSummer Showers In Brindavan 199377you are trained is no education at all. It is only spiritual educationwhich is true education. Secular education educates only the mindand leaves the heart and the spirit untouched. What arises from thehead is the ‘Pravrithi’ (materialistic) and what springs from theheart is ‘Nivrithi’ (spiritual). Human life is interwoven with‘Pravrithi’ and ‘Nivrithi.’ The six vices of desire, anger, greed, pride,infatuation and jealousy lead us on ‘Pravrithi’ marga whereas Love,Truth, Patience, Sacrifice and Compassion lead us on ‘Nivrithi’marga.NEED FOR LOVE AND FAITH:We can succeed in the secular world if we place ourselvesfirmly in the spiritual world. That is why it is said,For enjoyment in this world, you mustlearn ‘Taraka Vidya’ (science of Alchemy)For enjoyment in the other world, you mustlearn ‘Brahma Vidya’ (spiritual science).We should obtain success in secular as well as spirituallearning. But do we make any sincere endeavours for our success?Learning and learning, a learned man forgets himself.The mean man never gives up his meanness, in spite of highlearning.Such learning fosters only argumentation and the fullness ofknowledge remains unobtained.What is the use of all learning, if it does not confer immortality?All our knowledge today is only secular knowledge and notimmortal knowledge. What is immortal knowledge? The true andimmortal knowledge is the knowledge of “So-Ham.” It signifies theoneness of man and God. The “So-Ham” mantra is repeated with78Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993every breath, for man says ‘So’ with every inhalation and ‘Ham’with every exhalation. Our breath itself teaches the unity of manand God, but we are not prepared to master this knowledge. Ourbookish knowledge fosters only argumentative skills. But what werequire is practical knowledge. We need the knowledge that enablesus to experience Ananda in our daily life. Mind is the seat of allsecular knowledge whereas the “Spiritual Heart” is the seat of allAtmic knowledge. It is by Love alone that the science of spirit canbe known.Where there is Love, there is no hatred; where there is nohatred there is peace. We should propagate peace all over the world,and it can be done only through love.What is love? Oneness of feeling is love. If you foster thefeeling that the same Atma resides in all, you will be able to love all.That is why the Upanishads say, “Sarva Jiva NamaskaramKeshavam Prathi Gachathi” (your salutations to living beingsreach keshava). If you salute the living beings, you are saluting theLord Himself as the Lord is the resident of all beings. While salutinga person you must feel that you are saluting the Lord in the templeof heart, for the body is a moving temple. Instead of worshippingthe Lord in a physical temple made of brick and stone, worship theLord in the living temple of the human body.National feelings have declined in the students of today. Wemust cultivate the feeling that we are children of the sacred land ofBharath and that we are all equal in the eyes of God. We must showgratitude to the country in which we are born. We must be actuatedby the feeling that our fellow beings are embodiments of God. Wemust be actuated by the feeling that our irreverence to fellowhumans is tantamount to irreverence towards God. “Sarva JivaTiraskaram Kesavam Pratigachathi.” The Bhagavad Geethaexhorts us to make the river of our life flow between the two bundsof “Shraddhavan Labhathe Gnanam” (knowledge is obtained bySummer Showers In Brindavan 199379diligence) and “Samsayathma Vinashyathe” (Doubts destroy us).The river of our life, while flowing towards the ocean of grace,would do well to flow between the bunds of the two sacred‘Ashtakshari Mantras’ (eight lettered mantras). The observance ofthe exhortation sounded by the Geetha saves us from dangers andenables us to reach the destination of Divine grace.Man is one who has faith. We cannot live even a momentwithout it. Unless you have the faith that you are going to returnhome with vegetable in hand, you will not go to market for buyingvegetables. Every trivial act of yours is prompted by faith. But mandoes not nourish such faith in the existence of God. This want offaith is our worst weakness. We don’t bring ourselves to believe inthe presence of God who saturates and suffuses the Universe.There is none other than you in this universe as you are the Self.Your virtues make you a God and your vices make you a demon.You have the choice to become either Divine or demoniac. Yourvirtues testify to your Divinity, whereas your vices testify to yourdevilishness. Meditate on the Lord at all times and at all places, forthe Lord is the Source. Love God, love all.❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁9. THE PHILOSOPHY OF GAUTAMAHe may have mastered the Vedas and scriptures,He may compose verses with utmost ease,But bereft of purity of mind, he comes to ruin.Mind is the cause for all these, O Man!Embodiments of Divine Atma,The Shaddharshanas (the six systems of philosophy) areIndia’s rational and convincing answer to those people who dismissIndian philosophy as a corpus of blind beliefs. The six systems ofphilosophy are the profound expositions of the manifold meaningsof the Vedic texts. The Shaddharshanas laid bare to the world thedeep scientific thought and wisdom contained in the Vedas. Firmlyplanting themselves on the three principles of theism, inner visionand the Vedas, the sages handed over to mankind a profoundsystem of philosophy that never changes in all the three times ofpast, present and future. Plumbing the very depths of humanity,Shaddarshanas dispelled the doubt and the fear, the sorrow and theanxiety, deep seated in the human heart. Keeping the welfare ofhumanity uppermost in its mind, the Shaddarshanas gifted to theworld a philosophy of hope, well-being and serenity, showing tomankind the art of self-purification.The six systems expounded the unity of the Vedas (sacredtext), Vedantha (Vedic philosophy) and Vedagna (the knower ofVedas) and professed the unity in diversity in the Divine creation ofGod. The Shaddharshanas traced the variety and diversity, thatexist in the world, to the mind and showed how mind is the seat ofthe noble and the ignoble, the lofty and the low. They fathomed thedepths of human mind and expounded the principles of oneness, theright royal road for humanity to tread upon.Summer Showers In Brindavan 199381NYAYA PHILOSOPHY:The author of Nyaya philosophy is sage Gautama, and theprinciples expounded by him are known as ‘Gautama Sutras.’ Thegreat sages of India envisioned great truths, by transcending thedomain of the mind. They made gigantic leaps from one mind toanother, the supermind, the higher mind, the illuminated mind andthe overmind and ultimately found themselves face to face with‘Reality.’ The so-called scientists of today, rooted in their ordinarymind, fail to understand the sublime Divine truths envisioned by theIndian sages. As though, that were not enough, the scientists oftoday pride themselves, boasting that they have discovered factsand things which the sages had failed to discover.ANCIENT SAGES VERSUS MODERN SCIENTISTS:The discoveries made by the modern scientists are in therealms of matter (Padartha) whereas the sages of ancient Indiaexplored the region of the Spirit (pararha). The scientists are feedinggreedily on what was dismissed as trash by our great sages of thepast. The narrow-minded scientists do not bring themselves tobelieve in the great discoveries made by our ancestors. Whetherthey believe or not, the truths discovered by the wise ancestorsstand as eternal verities. It is not science which is anti-God; it is thescientists who are anti-God.Students should probe into the matter and find out what isTruth and what is falsehood. They should realise that it is somenarrow-minded scientists who emerged as anti-God. The glow-worm that glows in the darkness claims that there is none brighterthan it. The light of the glow-worm pales into insignificance in thepresence of the blazing light of the Sun. The half-baked knowledgeobtained by the scientists similarly pales into insignificance in the82Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993presence of the splendrous wisdom of our ancients. The scientistsof today are shining like the glow-worms while our ancient sagesshone like the mighty sun itself.It is sheer ignorance on the part of the scientists to becarried away by the proof furnished by the senses. The scientistsshould enquire and investigate into their hearts, instead ofmechanically probing into machines. Investigation into the heart isfar superior to the investigation into the machine. Today man pinshis faith on machines which are highly unreliable. Take for example,the computers. There is nothing unique about the computers sincethey only produce whatever they are fed upon. A flaw in themechanism will prove disastrous. There are many instances of thewrong results produced by the computers due to the faulty feeding.We hear of computer results which change a pass into a failure andfailure into a pass. Hence the proof furnished by the machines isinadequate and highly undependable. But the boy who wrote theexamination derives inspiration from his heart, and knows at heartabout his excellent performance in the examinations. The heart is theproof of one’s performance. Hence the most dependable proof isthe proof furnished by the heart.THE PROOF OF THE HEART:The heart is also the seat and foundation of justice. Thanksto the greed of man, people of today overturn the very base ofjustice, by turning justice into injustice and vice versa. Today thecourts are not the seats of justice, it is only the human heart whichis the seat of justice. All religions uphold the supremacy of justice.Hazrat Mohammed, the prophet of Islam, laid down sternpunishment for crimes committed by the people. The punishmentwhich he prescribed for a crime was a hundred lashes. Once, it wasfound that his own son had committed a crime and HazratMohammed bowing to the inexorable law of justice, sentenced hisSummer Showers In Brindavan 199383own son to a hundred lashes. His son gave up his body at thefiftieth stroke delivered by the whip. When the executors askedHazrat Mohammed what should they do about the rest of the fiftylashes, he ordered them to deliver the strokes on the tomb of hisdead son. See Hazrat Mohammed’s tenacious adherence to justice,which transcended the barriers of ‘mine’ and ‘thine’! How sacred!How sublime! But, the law courts today, said to be the seats ofjustice, flagrantly flout all codes of justice by favouring its ownpeople. People explore the intricacies of law to extricate their ownkith and kin from due punishment. It is no justice if it is besmirchedby meanness and narrow-mindedness. Sage Gautama expounded thesupreme law of justice.The six systems of philosophy are Nyaya, Vaisheshika,Samkhya, Yoga, Poorva Mimamsa and Uttara Mimamsa. TheNyaya philosophy forms the basis and the very life breath of theremaining systems of philosophy. This philosophy grasped thenoble virtues of compassion, harmony and unity and declared thathumans alone can enjoy bliss and freedom. The philosophy of thissystem is based on certain pramanas which facilitate theunderstanding of certain truths. The word pramana advocates theneed for a measure as a precondition for probing into truth. In theword ‘Pramana’ (measure) ‘Pra’ means before and ‘Mana’ meansmeasure. Measure/standard is most necessary to assess quality andquantity of matter, knowledge, ignorance, wisdom etc. The Nyayaphilosophy advocates the four proofs which enable us tounderstand things in their reality. The four proofs are PrathyakshaPramana (direct proof), Anumana Pramana (inference), UpamanaPramana (comparison), Shabdha Pramana (testimony of sound).This divine system of Nyaya, with the help of the four proofs itpropounded, dispels the doubt and fear that lurks in man anddemonstrates the existence of Divinity. It lays bare the excellencesof mankind and shows us how man may sanctify himself.84Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993PRATYAKSHA PRAMANA:The Nyaya philosophy brings out the fallibility of the proofbased on direct perception by the senses. The proof offered bysense perception is not dependable. The eye that sees, the ear thathears, the tongue that tastes and the nose that inhales, testify to thetruth as long as the sense organs are healthy. But a diseased tongueand a jaundiced eye do not offer the real truth. The diseased tongueafflicted by malaria, tastes everything as bitter, jaundiced eye seeseverything as yellow. The Nyaya philosophy also advocates theNyaya mimamsa. The word ‘mimamsa’ shows the finality ofthings. For example, ghee is the finality of milk. Milk, when curdledand churned, brings out butter; and butter, when heated, brings outghee. The Nyaya philosophy brings out the flaws of the proofoffered by direct perception, whereas Nyaya mimamsa shows ushow deep investigation and enquiry is ultimately rewarding.Through the proof of Nisakarsha (finality), it shows us, how deepinvestigation, unravels the ultimate truth. Though curd, butter andghee are not perceptible in the milk to the eyes directly, they arethere hidden in milk and surface only when they are subjected to avariety of processes. The Nyaya mimamsa propounds the truththat things reveal themselves when they are exposed to the searchlight of flawless investigation and enquiry.Anumana pramana is based on inference. In this Anumanapramana, conclusions are arrived at based on inference. For example,it is inferred from the presence of cranes at a particular area thatthere must be water too. People infer from the presence of smoke,the existence of fire.Upamana pramana makes use of similes and metaphors todrive home facts, for example, the principles of Pathibhasika (theapparent), Vyavaharika (empirical) and Paramardhika(transcendental), are explained by comparing these three principlesSummer Showers In Brindavan 199385to the foam, the wave and the ocean. From the ocean ofParamardhika, arise the waves of Pratibhasika and from the wavesof Pratibhasika arises the foam of Vyavaharika. Though the waveand the ocean appear to have different forms, they share the waterin common. This comparison is used here to demonstrate the unityamidst diversity.Shabdapramana (sound) demonstrates the presence ofGod, by the testimony of sound. The Nyaya philosophy provesthe presence of Divinity firmly planting itself on the testimony ofthe Primordial sound ‘AUM.’ According to exponents of thisphilosophy, the primordial sound is Brahman itself; and only aperson who has steadied his mind by meditation can experience it.It is said:One may master all knowledge, and one’s adversaries inargumentation,One may be mighty like an elephant and fight a battle to theend.One may be an emperor reigning over vast kingdoms.One may give the gifts of gold and count the countless stars inthe sky.One may reach the region of the moon.One may master the most intricate yoga.But it is impossible to achieve the supremestate of equanimity of mind without controllingthe senses and directing the vision inwards.SHABDABRAHMAN:This Shabdabrahman is endowed with Astaiswaryas(opulences): Shabdha Brahmamayi; Charachara mayi; Vang mayi;Parapara mayi; Nityananda mayi; Maya mayi; Jyotir mayi; Sri86Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993mayi; Sounds elicit response. Most of the daily activities areperformed based on the testimony of sound. Sound can causesorrow as well as ecstasy, hope as well as depression. Singing(sankeertana) is a sublime harmony of sound and lifts the people tolofty heights. Once Narada went to Mahavishnu and said “O Lord!I come for your darshan now and then. That is my nature. If I wishto see you immediately where can I contact you?” To this LordVishnu replied, “Madh Bhakta, Yatra Gayanthi, Tatra ThistamiNarada” (Where my devotees sing my glory, there I installMyself). Vishnu did not say that He would live there. On the otherhand, He said that He would firmly install Himself there. Such isthe supreme efficacy of Keerthana (singing). Whereas the explosionof bombs shatters our very ear drums, singing on the other hand,blossoms our heart. The Shabdha Pramana is tantamount to VedicPramana. Nyaya runs as an undercurrent amongst all these fourPramanas. Hence, it is imperative for us to hear the sacred anddivine sounds. So the Nyaya philosophy said, “O Man! Doingyour daily tasks in this secular world, yearn for the vision of truth(sathya darshana) and find Him at last by discriminating betweenthe eternal and the ephemeral.”SPEECH AND CONSCIENCE:How can you determine the existence of Truth? We candecide the presence of the Truth by the testimony of Conscience.This conscience has been described as the vibration of the vitalPraana. Vaak (speech) arises from this vibration. There is a markeddifference between the speech born of mind, and the speech born ofa state that transcends the mind. The supreme speech born beyondthe region of the mind is termed as Vibration, Conscience andBhur. The conscience pervades the body and originates fromSuvaha. This Suvaha is nothing but Pragna. In Vedic parlanceBhur stands for materialisation (body), Bhuva signifies Vibration(conscience) and Suvaha signifies Radiation. The Rig Veda stemsSummer Showers In Brindavan 199387from speech; Yajur Veda springs from mind and Sama Veda fromthe Prana.”Samagana is said to be the most mellifluous harmony ofsound. Since Sama originates from prana, we must use it withutmost care. The Yajur Veda is repository of spiritual formulae andis an embodiment of effulgence. Describing the Lord as the veryembodiment of light, it seeks to experience the Light. The Rig Vedais the repository of light. The Yajur Veda is the repository of ritualsand Sama Veda is the embodiment of sound. These three Vedas areessential for world peace. The Vedas inspire us to chant the glory ofthe Lord with mantras and delight Him with music. The three Vedasdescended on the world to enable man to merge into the Lord bylistening and singing His glory. Songs are more powerful than wordsand verses. You cannot melt the heart of the Lord by mere speech.Whereas speech is dull, singing is highly inspiring. Songs have thesuperlative capacity of merging the individual soul into theAbsolute Soul. The Nyaya philosophy is a sublime philosophythat dispels doubts and regales the human heart.There is no greater Veda Sadhana than the Sadhana ofunderstanding the six systems of philosophy. The study of the sixsystems delights our hearts, reveals the mysteries of the universeand imparts the supreme knowledge to us. Ignorant of the sublimeIndian literature, the students of today lead wayward lives. TheShaddarshanas contain in themselves the very essence of thescriptures which the sages distilled by profound investigation andenquiry.❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁10. THE VAISESHIKA DARSHANABeing the smallest in the small,Becoming the biggest in the big;Shining as an omnipresent witness,Brahman is ‘Prakruthi’ and‘Prakruthi’ is Brahman.Embodiments of Divine Love,Even before history began, the great seers and sages of yore,endowed with Divine wisdom, heard the voice of Divinity. Theyprobed into the Divine world, enquired and investigate into it anddeclared to mankind the great wisdom which they heard through theDivine voice. They experienced what they heard.The universe is made of two entities—Matter (Padartha)and the Spirit (parartha). But it is Panini who explored themeanings of word, unravelled the secrets of language, harmonised itsmyriad aspects and imparted it to mankind. It is sage Kanada whoprobed and investigated into the nature of matter and disseminatedthe knowledge of his discoveries to the world around. Vaiseshika isa system of philosophy expounded by the seer Kanada.The founder of Vaiseshika, after profound investigation intothe nature of matter, declared to mankind the impermanence ofmatter and the permanence of the spirit. All branches of knowledgewhich exist in the world originate from the Vedas. Setting aside thestudy of the secular knowledge which dealt with the transient andtemporary, the seers of yore devoted their lives to the study of theimmortal science of Divinity. By dint of penance and meditation,they perceived the great truths of eternity and shared their sacredknowledge with others.Summer Showers In Brindavan 199389THE INNATE UNITY:The world of matter appears to be marked by diversitywhen it is subjected to physical investigation. But a penetratingsearch into the inner nature of matter reveals the inner harmony andDivinity inherent in matter. The mountains are made of rocks; theearth is made of clay; the trees are made of wood, and men are madeof flesh. Though matter appears to be of diverse nature, differingfrom substance to substance, they are in truth the manifestations ofthe five elements. The ‘Vaiseshika’ philosophy declared tomankind that the diversity that marks the world of matter arises outof deluded vision, and exponents of this philosophy affirmed theunity of Atma that harmonises all matter. ‘Visesha’ is nothing butthe study of the difference that exists among atoms and Vaiseshikais that which lays bare the ‘Visesha’ (particularity) of a substance.The Vaiseshika philosophy explores the world of atoms andconcludes the truth about matter. The exponents of the philosophyproved that substance does not change, and it is only the formswhich change. For example the broken pots merge into earth andbecome clay. Pots and rock change but matter remains the same.You can cast silver into different moulds and have different forms ofsilver like tumbler, plates etc.; but silver is the same. Hence it isproved beyond doubt that it is only the forms that change, butsubstance remains changeless. Similarly they traced all forms ofsound to the primeval sound ‘AUM.’ The sounds are many but thesource is the same. The seven notes in a harmonium sound differentbut the source of the sound is the same ‘AUM.’The ‘Vaiseshika’ philosophy finally affirms the permanenceof Spirit as well as matter. This system of philosophy bases itsconclusions on facts. It reveals the equality of man and womanarguing that man and woman may differ in gender; but as humans,90Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993they are one and the same. The male and the female are equallyrequired for creation.THE NEED FOR HARMONY:The ‘Vaiseshika’ philosophy propounded unity andharmony, not discord. What is the cause for the miserable plight ofthe world today? It is by developing discord and differences thatmankind has fallen low. It is by disregarding the unity of the spiritthat man has gone down to the deepest depths. The want of peacein the world can be traced to the selfishness of man. Man expectsmuch from society without contributing anything to it. How canyou expect good from society without your doing any good to it? Ifyou strive for the peace and upliftment of the society, then thesociety too will strive for your peace and upliftment. TheVaiseshika philosophy asserted in unmistakable terms that you arethe author of the pain and the pleasure that you undergo in theworld. Do not ask the world how much it contributed to your joy,but ask yourself how much you contributed to the welfare of thesociety. The Vaiseshika philosophy asserts the duty which we oweto society. Hence it is imperative on the part of man to know howmuch his acts and deeds contribute to the welfare and well being ofmankind.The atoms are packed with infinite power. The Vaiseshikaphilosophy exhorts man not to be satisfied with the mereappearance of things but to probe into the inner nature of thesubstances.The philosophy stands as a luminous lamp of Truth, whichradiates Divine effulgence at all times, by defining Truth as theeternal transcendental Reality. It addresses man thus, “O man! Weare birds of the same nest; we are the children of the same mother;we are the flowers of the same creeper; we are citizens of the sameSummer Showers In Brindavan 199391country.” Why should we harbour hatred? In truth, you hateyourself when you hate others. The body is the cage in which thesoul is encased. The cage can lodge the bird as long as it is afledgling. Once the wings grow, the bird wings its way out of thecage. We have to seek the shelter of the body till we attain theAtmic enlightenment. Once the wings of the Atmic wisdom grow inus, we abandon the nest by developing detachment.We are the children of the same mother, Mother Earth.We are made of clay. This can be proved by the fact that there isclay in the enfolded palms of new born babies. Even after athorough cleansing. the baby carries the clay in its palm after a fewhours of resting. The body which is made of clay, returns to clay atthe time of death. The king and the servant, the millionaire and thepauper come from the earth and return to the earth again. Even gemscome from the earth. They do not grow on trees. If we realise thistruth, it will be possible for us to consider ourselves to be thechildren of mother Earth.We are flowers of the same creepers. Our minds are theflowers that grow on the creeper of the heart. The flowers may bedifferent but the creeper is the same. We are the children of thesame race! We all belong to the race of humanity but not to therace of birds and beasts. Since we belong to the illustrious race ofhumanity, we must conduct ourselves in a sublime manner. We arethe waves, born in the ocean of Satchidananda. Since we are bornof the same race, we should radiate the oneness of humanitywithout harbouring hatred against any one. This great system ofVaiseshika upholds the oneness of mankind and the existence ofDivinity and exhorts us to lead sublime lives. The so-calledexponents of modern Vaiseshika philosophy impart to people onlybookish knowledge, without experiencing the noble tenets of thissystem in their daily lives. Hence, their teachings do not light up thehearts of people. The true exponents of Vaiseshika are scarce92Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993indeed! The seers of India, endowed with wisdom, transcended therealms of the physical world and leaped into the region of theSupermind. To those seers who gazed from the gigantic heights ofthe Supermind, all our secular achievements appeared paltry. Theexponents of the Vaiseshika philosophy successfully explained thesubtle meanings of words and the substances which the wordssignify. But unfortunately, today there is no proper andsatisfactory linguistic explanations of the words current amongst us.We pronounce W-A-L-K as ‘WAK.’ There is no explanation for“L” being silent there, but Panini’s grammar offers most rational andconvincing explanation for words and sounds.We distinguish between good and bad, though in realitythere is nothing like good and bad in this world. Good and bad are infact a matter of time. But as long as we are bound by the bodilydelusion, we must know the difference between good and bad.UPADHANA AND NIMITTA:Since man is sans discrimination, detachment has become aburden to him. Since he is devoid of the Atmic knowledge, body hasbecome a burden to him. Since he is devoid of Love, the mindbecomes a burden to him. All grief of the world can be traced to thelack of discrimination. We should exercise our discrimination to findout what is Adhara (support) and what is Adheya (supported).The potter makes pots, but without clay and water, the pottercannot make pots. Hence clay and water constitute ‘Upadhanakarana’ (material cause). The potter who makes the pots is only aninstrument and hence he is the ‘Nimitta Karana’ (efficient cause).Similarly, Divinity is the cause and creation is theconsequence. But some scientists of today do not believe in thecreator, and they base themselves on creation alone. They pridethemselves on their achievements and parade their knowledge. ForSummer Showers In Brindavan 199393example, they declare that they could turn salt water into drinkingwater by the process of desalination. But this involves hugeexpenses, amounting to crores. They further assert that they cancreate water by combining hydrogen and oxygen. The scientists,carried away by their achievements, ignore God who is the creatorof hydrogen and oxygen. These people feel no gratitude to God forall that He has done to them. We express our thankfulness to aperson who hands over the kerchief when it falls from our hands.When we are thankful to people for such a negligible act ofgoodness, how much more grateful should we feel towards God,who has granted to mankind the gift of life. The Vaiseshikaphilosophy upholds the permanence of the individual soul, natureand matter and for this God is the ‘Adhara.’ The exponents of theVaiseshika system propounded that the universe is made of atoms,but no two atoms are the same. The ‘Visesha’ (particularity) lies inthe difference that exists between one atom and the other. Since thissystem upholds the particularity of atoms (visesha) the system hasbeen known as ‘Vaiseseha.’The exponents of Vaiseshika system marvelled at thewondrous creation of God. Saint Purandaradasa marvelled at themight of the Lord and said, “Who tinted the parrot in green andpainted its beak with red? Who coloured the peacock in manysplendoured beauty?” All this speaks volumes to the majesty of thecreator of the universe.Man discovered the atom and created the atomic bomb. Buthe lives in perpetual fear of the weapon that he himself had created.That is why Churchill remarked “Man has known everything but hehas not known himself.”Prahalada said to Hiranyakasapu:94Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993You have conquered the three worlds in a trice, O Father!But you have not conquered the sensory world and the world of themind.Man has become a slave to his senses. He is the slave of hissenses from dawn to dusk. Subdued by the senses, which areoutside him, how can he ever hope to conquer the internal organs ofManas, Buddhi, Chitta and Ahamkara? It is said, “He whosuccumbs to the inner foes, can never hope to defeat hisenemies outside.” Man has become a victim of his own senses andis subjected to sorrow and suffering. But he does not enquire intothe cause of his sorrow. He takes shelter in destiny and consoleshimself that he was destined to suffer. But it is not proper on thepart of man to trace everything to destiny.There is nothing that man cannot achieve by human effort.With a determined effort, man can imprison the air in his palm; hecan split the sky into pieces and hold them in his possession; he candrink up the water in all the oceans as water in a tumbler; he canhold fire on the palm of his hand. It only needs a sincere effort, toachieve anything in life.Today, man has made himself into a ‘Cinematic’ man.(Ma-Ni-Si if reversed, becomes Si-Ni-Ma, meaning movies).Everything he does is steeped in artificiality. Hence he becomes aslave to his senses. The man who restrains his mind is a real man.The man who has not conquered his mind is a man-in-form, but nota man-in-reality. Only when he controls the mind completely, hecan be called a true man.The Vaiseshika system of philosophy unravels themysteries of the inner world and bares the secrets of creation. Asthe tiny seed contains a tree with all the twigs, branches, fruits andflowers in it, every atom contains in it the entire creation. TheSummer Showers In Brindavan 199395Vaiseshika philosophy explains how the macrocosm is contained inthe microcosm.❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁11. THE SAMKHYA PHILOSOPHYThe highly learned ones, if they succumb totheir senses,Are worse than dead men.Who can measure the power of the senses?Learning should make you the noble one.The learned one is he who has crossed therealms of the senses.Such a one is beyond all sorrows.Students, The Embodiments of Divine Love,Being endowed with infinite sublime powers, it is notproper on the part of man to be satisfied with mere worldly life. Areal philosopher is one who has cultivated ‘Dama’ (self control).The ancient sages, having envisioned the Truth and harmonisingtheir lives with the melody of the Truth, shared their joy with thepeople around.The Samkhya philosophy did not accept the philosophicaldoctrines propounded by the ‘Nyaya’ and ‘Vaisheshika’systems. The Samkhya system propounded that the world is aharmonious product of paradoxical dualities with inherent harmonyof the world. Sage Kapila is the founder of the Samkhya system ofphilosophy. Hence, it is also know as ‘Kapaala.’ According to thisphilosophy, the world is marked by the harmony of numerals(Samkhya). Hence, it has been called Samkhya philosophy.PRAKRUTHI AND PARAMATMAAccording to this system, ‘Paramatma’ is latent in the‘Prakruthi,’ as oil is latent in the seeds, as fire in wood and asSummer Showers In Brindavan 199397fragrance in flowers. The ‘Paramatma’ is the cause and ‘Prakruthi’is the consequence. This system upheld that ‘Prakruthi’ is notseparate from ‘Paramatma.’ It is nothing but the physical form ofthe Lord. The Samkhya system employed ‘Tatwa’ the power todiscriminate between the eternal and the ephemeral, to explore themysteries of the Universe.The Samkhya system held that the creation cannot be madeof one entity alone and that it is the union of two entities, viz.nature and God. One cannot clap with one hand; one needs twohands to clap. Similarly Prakruthi and Paramatma are essential forcreation and without them, creation is impossible. Hence, it is sheerfoolishness to consider Prakruthi as a separate entity. The Samkhyasystem held that Divinity runs as an undercurrent everywhere inPrakruthi.According to this system the world consists of entitiesnumbering twenty-four. The five organs of action, the five organsof sense perception, the five vital airs, the five sensation(Tanmatras) and the four inner organs (Antharendriyas) of Manas,Buddhi, Chitta and Ahamkara add up to twenty-four and constitutethe world. The world is made of paradoxical dualities like air andfire, fire and water etc. It is these dualities which make theUniverse. It propounded that Moksha is not seclusion in the forest.‘Moha’ + ‘Kshaya’ = ‘Moksha’ (the extinction of delusion isliberation). When Purusha joins the twenty-four principles, itbecomes the twenty-fifth principle. The twenty-sixth principle isParamatma. After sincere enquiry into Prakruthi, the Paramatmabecomes the twenty-sixth Principle and merges into Easwara.PURUSHA AND EASWARA:According to the Samkhya system, the Universe is aharmonious union of Prakruthi and Purusha. The Jiva (individual98Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993being) merges into the twenty-sixth principle of Paramatma (theJiva is made of twenty-four principles and the Purusha makes thenumber twenty-five). The Jiva, by separating itself from Prakruthiand Purusha, should merge into the twenty-sixth principle, Easwara(the absolute soul). Both Prakruthi and Purusha are contained inJivaThe Jiva is in the body and the Lord is in the heart.They play their game and go apart.There is a puppeteer who directs this play.The puppets of good and bad coexist in one.How to grasp this unity wherein the two exist in one?Seeing diversity in unity is human, but seeing unity in diversity isDivine. The Samkhya system of philosophy propounds thathumanity is nothing but Divine Unity.In the human heart is the Kalpataru (wish-fulfilling tree)But weeds in abundance grow around the tree.Clear the weeds and the tree can be seen.That indeed is the celestial cow which grants allyour wishes.Both the celestial cow and the wish-fulfilling tree exist inman. Humanity is a bridge between the visible and the invisible.Since man is positioned in the middle state between the twoentities, he is known as ‘Martya.’ Our life is a consequence of theunseen effects of our action.The mind of man is a slate containing the writings of ourmany past lives. Deep seated in the Chitta (mind) is Pragna. He isthe Chitra Gupta who records faithfully all the happenings inChitta. The Pragna is the radiation which activates ‘Prana Shakti’Summer Showers In Brindavan 199399in the inert body. Man is a harmonious fusion of Materialisation,Vibration and Radiation. Hence man is the unity of Jiva,Prakruthi, and Purushatva.The Samkhya system opined that Moksha (liberation) doesnot descend on man from the higher regions, nor does it ascend toman from the lower regions. Mohakshaya (extinction of delusion)is Moksha. Extinction of ignorance is liberation. Man is under thespell of Moha as long as he does not realise the Truth. Comingunder the spell of delusion that he is the body, man wastes his lifein the pursuit of bodily pleasures. The Samkhya system exhortsman not to be deluded by the body. It states:O Man! the world is made of twenty-four tatwas (entities);the Jiva, the Purusha are made of diverse substances. Man cannotsee Truth so long as he has these Tatwas; he should go beyondthese Tatwas. Only then does he reach the state of the Supermind,from which he leaps from one mind to another, the crown being theOvermind.The Samkhya system professed that unless man destroysPrakruthi Drishti (the worldly attitude) he cannot have‘Paramatma Drishti’ (the Divine attitude). This systemdemonstrated the existence of the Self whether it is encased in thebody or not. The Atmic current is a perennial force, though it isinvisible to the eye. The bulb lights up as soon as it is put in aholder since the current is there all the time, though it is invisible tothe eye. The current was there both before and after putting thebulb in the holder. similarly, according to the philosophers of theSamkhya system, Atmic power is there both inside and outside thebody.One day or the other, man has to reach his destination. SaintThyagaraja said: “O! Rama, howsoever high the bird may fly, it has100Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993to seek the shelter of a tree when it is tired. Similarly, man has toseek shelter at the Feet of the Lord, one day.” In this context theSamkhya exhorts, “O Man! Since you cannot help reaching yourdestination one day or the other, why not strive to reach it at theearliest, instead of delaying your advancement?What is the Sadhana which man has to launch on? He neednot do any other Sadhana than the Sadhana of fostering humantemperament in man, by destroying the demoniac nature in him andultimately merging in God. The Samkhya philosophers said that itis demoniac on the part of man to disregard Divinity. You need notmake great efforts to see the fire covered by ash. Once the ash isblown away, the fire in the ember is visible to the eye. The sea ofthe human heart is covered by the moss of materialistic tendencies.The moss of materialistic tendencies can be removed only by‘Namasmarana’ (chanting the Lord’s name). Jaya Deva said thatin the Kali age, there is nothing more powerful than ‘Namasmarana’to fight the adverse influences of Kali.This system stated that unless we vanquish ‘Prakruthi’which is steeped in ‘Samkhyatatva,’ we cannot realise Divinity.Saint Ramdas expressed similar sentiments, “If you do notunderstand the twenty-four ‘marmas’ (subtle secrets), you willcome under the hold of maya of twenty-five tatwas.” We will reachthe twenty-sixth ‘Tatwa’ (Easwara) if we understand these twenty-five Tatwas thoroughly. Hence, Samkhya philosophy asks us tokeep the twenty-four Tatwas on the right track by observingdiscipline, since it is impossible to do away with them.IMPORTANCE OF DISCIPLINE:Days, nights and seasons all observe discipline. Therecannot be days and nights if there is no discipline in the cosmos;there will be no seasons without days and nights; there will be noSummer Showers In Brindavan 1993101life on earth without seasons. Hence there is an imperative need toobserve discipline. Here is an incident to substantiate how violationof discipline is detrimental.There was once in England a dealer in milk who used tosupply unadulterated milk. Since he was a righteous man, he wasdoing his business honestly. After some years, the people who usedto buy milk complained that the quality of milk supplied by himwas adulterated. The judge, before pronouncing his judgement,decided to probe into the matter personally. He presented himselfwhen the cattle were milked. He found that the milk that the cattlegave was not of standard quality and concluded that the dealer wasnot adulterating the milk. On further enquiry he found that thefarmer was not milking the cattle at a scheduled time but was doingit at his own convenience due to domestic disturbance. Since he wasnot milking at a particular time, the cattle that previously yieldedmilk of standard quality, were not able to do so, due to the violationof discipline. The judge concluded that even cattle reacted to theviolation of discipline.Take for example the discipline regarding food. Food decidesthe nature of your mind. If you are afflicted by evil thoughts at thetime of eating, these evil thoughts affect the food you are taking andconsequently affects your mind. Mind is born of the food you take.As is the food, so is the mind. That is why our ancestorsrecommended the partaking of Sathwic food. The gross part of thefood we take is converted into excreta; the subtle part of it goes intothe making of muscles; the subtlest part of the food becomes themind. Similarly, the gross part of the water we drink becomes urine;the subtle part of it becomes blood. The subtlest part becomes‘Prana.’ We can say for certain that water contains ‘Prana.’ That iswhy when anybody faints, water is splashed on his face. Waterenables the fainted man to recover as it contains prana in it.102Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993PRAYER BEFORE GOD:We should partake of food with a Sathwic mind. Ourancestors recommended the offering of food to God beforepartaking. Food so partaken becomes ‘Prasad’ (consecratedoffering). Prayer cleanses the food of the three impurities caused bythe absence of ‘Patra Shuddhi’ (cleanliness of the vessel),‘Padartha Shuddhi’ (cleanliness of the food stuff and ‘PakaShuddhi’ (cleanliness in the process of cooking). It is necessary toget rid of these three impurities to purify the food; for, pure foodgoes into the making of a pure mind. It is not possible to ensure thepurity of the cooking process, since we do not know what thoughtsrage in the mind of the man who prepares the food. Similarly, wecannot ensure ‘Padartha Shuddhi’ (cleanliness of the foodingredients) as we do not know whether this food grains wereacquired in a righteous way by the seller who had sold it to us.Hence, it is essential on our part to offer food to God in the form ofprayer, so that these three impurities do not afflict our mind. Theprayer:Brahmarpanam BrahmahavirBrahmagnou BrahmanahutamBrahmaivatena GantavyamBrahmakarma SamadhinahaAham Vaishwvanaro BhutvaPraninam dehamashritahaPranapana SamayuktamPachamyannam ChaturvidhamThe food thus offered to God is digested by ‘Vaishvanara’in the digestive system. Since God exists in the form of fire asVaishvanara, He digests the food along with impurities. So, man willSummer Showers In Brindavan 1993103not be affected even if the impurities enter the food. That is why itis a practice in Sathya Sai hostels to chant “Brahmarpanam” beforeit is partaken.But some parents do not encourage the children to followthe sacred principles laid down by our ancestors. In the vacationtime, they pamper their children by serving them food in front ofthe TV. But the evil sights and things shown in the TV affect theirminds adversely. Hence, the parents should see that the ancienttraditions are maintained faithfully. These principles may soundsmall, but they are very significant. A piece of wood when it isattacked by the termites, should be immediately treated lest thetermites should damage it entirely. All evils should be nipped in thebud. Otherwise, they will prove detrimental afterwards.THE PURITY OF PRAKRUTHI:The three systems of Nyaya, Vaisheshika and Samkhyaaffirm their faith in the existence of God in unmistakable terms.The Universe is a harmonious fusion of Prakruthi andParamatma. But man in his ignorance, thinks that Prakruthi deceiveshim. But, it is you who is deceiving Prakruthi. The fault lies in themind of man who entertains false ideas about Prakruthi. Mancannot change unless his mind changes. A good man makes good useof the gift given by Prakruthi. A good man makes use of the gifts ofeducation and wealth. But the same education and wealth in thehands of an evil man is used in evil ways. The five elements, thefive senses, the five vital airs are sacred entities. But they becomepure or impure when they enter into the human system. The humansystem is composed of Pancha Koshas. Hence, it is most essentialto purify ourselves first. The impurities are not in Prakruthi but inourselves. We should not develop unsacred feelings like ego,pomposity, envy etc. Once they enter into the system, we must104Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993throw them out as fast as we pick out the thorn which has enteredinto our flesh. The evil qualities, if they are not nipped in the bud,assume gigantic proportions afterwards.We should read the sacred texts to cultivate good thoughtsand ideas. Many of you do not know the sanctity and the excellenceof the various systems of Indian philosophy. It is only after sincerestudy and enquiry that you will be able to understand theuniqueness of these systems of philosophy.The Shaddarsanas professed the philosophy of unity andharmony, not discord and difference. We are all the children of thesame Mother Earth; we are the flowers of the same creepers; we arethe birds of the same nest; we are the citizens of the same nation. Ifat all we see differences in Shaddarshanas, the differences are nonebut the reflection of our mind. In disturbed water, the reflection ofthe sun also appears to be disturbed. There is no disturbance in thesun. But it is the disturbance of the water which is the cause of thedisturbed image. We see ourselves in others. Our own defects andshortcomings prompt us to see these qualities in others. Hence, weshould make right effort to nourish noble and pure qualities, so thatwe may become noble.Brahma Vid Brahmaiva Bhavathi❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁12. THE PHILOSOPHY OF YOGACharity is the ornament for the hand.Truth is the ornament for the throat.Scripture is the ornament for the ears.Of what use is any other ornament?Deeds done without purity of mind will never confer peaceon the seeker.He who can still the mind without agitations and impuritiesis the one who is really great.Embodiments of Divine Atma,The seers of ancient India professed and practised Yogawith its eight components of Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama,Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana and Samadihi. Though India isthe homeland of Yoga, it gains popularity in foreign lands. Indianshave neglected Yoga, nourishing the mistaken notion that Yoga ismeant for the ochre-robed forest-dwellers who feed on tubers. Theythink that only recluses and renunciates are worthy enough topractise Yoga. They deluded themselves, entertaining the wrongidea that an ordinary man has nothing to do with Yoga.Man in his frantic scramble for amassing wealth has lostproper sleeping habits. Man forces himself to take sleeping pillsand intoxicants to induce sleep, into his worried mind. Pills anddrugs take a heavy toll of his health and make him a target for bloodpressure and heart ailments. The hurry and insatiable greed of manhave brought in their wake a host of mental maladies.THE HEALING POWER OF YOGA:106Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993Some intellectuals began to think whether there could be aremedy for the heated nerves and worried minds and diseasedbodies afflicted by blood pressure and lung diseases. ProfessorCarlton researched into these problems and declared that the YogaShastra of Patanjali shows a sure remedy for this malady of themodern man. Inspired by the investigations of Carlton Cane, theProfessor of Hawaii University like Elliot, Shuton and Johnsonbegan researching into Yoga. Professor Johnson in the beginningdoubted the efficacy of Yoga; but as his research progressed, herealised the great power of yoga. He concluded that the clue to theproblem lay in controlling the vagaries of the mind. He along withother Professors, further stated that the practise of Yoga fostersphysical and mental stamina, and people could remedy their mentalafflictions without spending a pie. The professors determined thatthe joy that one derives from two hours of undisturbed deep sleepcan be obtained by twelve minutes of Yogic practise.In their frantic hurry to ensure more production, the farmersand labourers in advanced countries like America, Germany, Franceetc. neglected their health by forgoing sleep. The stress and strain,the worry and the tension of modern life and the lack of properenvironment, damage the health of the modern man. There is anincrease in the number of people suffering from physical ailmentsand mental maladies all over the world. Experiments were conductedon the prisoners in a jail in Old Mexico to find out the exact causefor the rapid rise of mental patients amongst the prisoners. Theyconcluded, after thorough investigation, that the problem wascaused not by food, but by tension and worry. The professorsmade the prisoners undergo Yogic practises, to rid the prisoners oftheir mental tension. In a short time the patients became normal.The patients not only made a total recovery, but gained greathappiness due to the practise of Yoga.Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993107The practitioners of Yoga began to shun drugs, intoxicantsand even stimulants and evinced a keen interest to intensify theirYogic practice. Today, there are about four lakh students whopractice Yoga in Mexico. Though India is the homeland of Yoga, thepeople ignore the efficacy of Yoga and thereby fail to benefit fromit. Though Devaki was the mother who nurtured Krishna in herwomb, it was Yashoda who enjoyed the pleasure of Krishna’scompany as a foster mother. Sitting under a tree Devaki lamentedher misfortune thus:It was not for me to see the wondrous deed of your suckingaway the life of Putana while shesuckled you;It was not for me to kiss your wondrous belly, which ropesfailed to bind;It was given to me to suffer the labour pains to deliver you tothe world;It was given to Yashoda to fondle you in fond joy:Though fertile, I became a barren women.Without begetting a son, Yashoda became the mother of a GreatSon.The plight of the Indians today is similar to that of Devaki.Though India is the mother of Yoga and Shaddarshanas, it is theforeigners who foster Yoga in their countries and derive immensebenefit thereby. The Indians are reduced to the pitiable condition oflearning Yoga in foreign lands. They do not strive sincerely tobenefit from the marvellous, sacred and unique wisdom contained inthe sacred texts.Sage Patanjali devoted his entire life to the study of Yogaand declared that health is most essential for life. He stated that thewell-being of the body depends on discipline. He defined Yoga as,108Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993“the observance of discipline for the physical, mental and spiritualwell-being.”DISCIPLINE AND THOUGHT CONTROL:‘Na Shreya Niyamam Vina’ (No well-being is obtainedwithout discipline). Yoga lays down certain disciplines (Niyama)like partaking of moderate, balanced and pure food. But modernman flouts the yogic discipline by helping himself with spicy andsumptuous food to cater to his greedy tongue. He ignores theancient doctrine that food should be taken like medicine for thedisease of hunger. We should take the medicine. Whether it is tastyor not, to cure our illness. But the modern man flouts this disciplineand feeds voraciously on spiced food, e.g.: Indians make use of a bitof tamarind to savour their dishes, though tamarind is detrimental tohealth. The modern man has hence fallen prey to mental debility,blood pressure. Blood pressure is the cause of mental restlessness,tension and anxiety. The chaos and the confusion, the agitation andupheaval that you see in the world today arise from ill health. AGerman doctor, Ritan, conducted experiments on the behaviour ofmonkeys, to determine the benefits of observing silence. He foundthat the monkeys benefited tremendously. Consequently, he foundthat their intelligence, memory power and mental health increasedby observing silence.An experiment was also conducted on a dull student whoused to score low marks in the examination. Though he had no faithin the efficacy of Yoga, he started practising it due to thecompulsion of teachers. Three months of yogic practisetremendously improved his intelligence and memory power andenabled him to perform excellently in the examinations. It changedthe very mental makeup of the student. The boy who had beencrude and never uttered courteous words like ‘please,’ startedbehaving like a gentleman, uttering words like ‘please,’ ‘excuse me’Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993109etc. Inspired by the tremendous improvement in his son, hisseptuagenarian father also started practising Yoga. He too registeredexcellent progress. Yogic practices should be accompanied by yogicdisciplines as well. It is a serious mistake to take Yoga as a physicalexercise.Yoga is not mere physical exercise. It involves exercise ofbreath as well. It is known by the term ‘Pratyahara’ and‘Pranayama’ Pranayama involves the three processes of Puraka(filling in the air), Kumbhaka (retaining the breath) and Rechaka(breathing out). The observance of time is very important withregard to Pranayama. The time taken for inhalation, retention andexhalation should be the same. The entire exercise should be naturalwithout any strain. The air taken in goes through the nerves of Ida,Pingala and Subhumna. Pranayama should be performed withmeticulous care, lest it should damage the lungs and the brain.Breathing should also be without any strain and panting. Some boyspant heavily after running. But a good runner does not pant evenafter running. As we have to keep the ingredients for cooking inproper proportion to ensure proper cooking, so also inhalation,retention and exhalation should be in proper proportion.There is a proliferation of pseudo-yogic systems all over theworld. Many physical exercises are paraded as Yoga today. Thetrue Yoga is based on Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras and is marked byNyaya, Vaiseshika and Samkhya. True Yoga observes the senseof fair proportions, which is an important mark of Nyaya system.The system of Yoga is also marked by the influence ofVaiseshika. The Vaiseshika philosophy believes that the world ismade of atoms, but each of a different nature. It also believes thatthere is a connection between one atom and another. For example, astone thrown into a lake generates a series of waves which travel tothe shore. Similarly, a thought that arises in the lake of mind,110Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993surfaces and spreads to the borders of the mind. Good and badthoughts which arise in the lake of the mind have their impact notonly on the mind, but on the body as well. Thoughts determine thegood and evil in a man, and it is these thoughts which make themind. Hence, Yoga gives utmost importance to the control ofthoughts. “Yogaha Chittha Vritthi Nirodakha.” (Yoga is thecontrol of thoughts).ASPECTS OF YOGA:‘Yama’ (the control of inner sense organs) is an importantaspect of Yoga; whereas Niyama is discipline. Yama is senserestraint. ‘Parigraha’ is another important aspect of Yoga.Whatever we take, we should take from good people, because thethoughts of the good people also exercise their impact. Hence,whatever we do, we should do with a sense of devotion, firmlyestablished in the feeling that the Lord is everywhere. It is said inthe Bhagavad Geetha, “Sarvada Paani Padam.” When you pray tothe Lord, “O Lord! Don’t you see my difficulties with your eyes?”God responds only with His two eyes, and His two eyes willpresent themselves where the devotee has uttered his prayer. Whenthe devotee prays, “O Lord! Don’t you listen to my prayers?” theLord responds only with His two ears, and these two ears willpresent themselves where the devotee uttered his prayer. When heprays, “0 Lord! why don’t you be with me and rid me of mydifficulties?” The Lord responds and one can hear the footfalls ofthe Lord. The Lord manifests Himself in different ways accordingto the prayers of His devotees. There is a chapter in the PatanjaliYoga Sutra which speaks about the offering of different limbs to theLord. But the modern devotees make a mockery of this. They say,“I offer my eye to You, O Lord!” But they touch their eye with aflower and throw it at the idol. Similarly they pray “O Lord! I offermy ear to you.” They then touch their ear with the flower andthrow it at the idol. People only make lip service but they do notSummer Showers In Brindavan 1993111follow what they say. The two prayers made by the devotees, callfor the control of the ear and the control of the eye. Even whileSwami is speaking, the people do not pay proper attention to Hiswords. Their eyes are on Swami, but their thoughts are somewhereelse. That is why it is said:O ears! You are so keen to hear all kinds of idle talk aboutothers.Why don’t you be so keen and alert when Divine things aretold?Why don’t you say Shiva, Shiva, Shiva and thereby erase allyour sorrows?O mind! Are you not ashamed to roam around the world? Youhear all kinds of rubbish talk about cinemas and you are stillnot satisfied.O Eyes! Is it so hard for you to rest your vision on the Divineform? You often prowl around, like an unemployed dog.Why don’t you,O mind, contemplate on the feet of the Lord even for a moment?We have the patience to stand in queues to see a cinema, butwe don’t have the patience to pray sincerely even for an hour in thetemple. We come out of the temple as fast as we enter into it. Wedisplay monumental patience in temporary and ephemeral things,whereas we want to hurry up in spiritual matters. A total reversalof this attitude is essential. That is ‘Yoga.’ People shoulddiscriminate between what is good and what is bad. To some peoplethe worldly life appears to be very good, and they derive pleasureout of it. The pleasure which they obtain out of temporal activitiesis momentary. Santhosham is Some + Thosham (some pleasure).You derive temporary satisfaction by satisfying your hunger at acanteen by eating two chapatis. But, after two hours you becomehungry again. The pleasure we obtain from activities of this kind isknown as Santhosa, whereas the joy we obtain from spiritual112Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993matters is ‘Ananda’ (Bliss). Whereas pleasure arises from the head,bliss springs from the spiritual heart. The head is the seat ofresponsibility; the heart is the seat of right. Hence, the heart and thehead are equally important to man. Think good and perform withhands whatever good you have thought. The essence of Patanjali’sYoga Sutra is the harmony of the three H’s head, heart and hand.Patanjali’s Yoga Sutra professed the supreme quality ofunity. Unity is nothing but harmony of heart, head and hand. Unityleads to purity and purity leads us to Divinity. Everything will beextinct when we reach Divinity.PATIENCE AND PERSEVERANCE:Students should press forward with patience in spite of thestress and the strain, the trial and the tribulation which they have toundergo. It is hard for you in the beginning to move forward. But, asyou press forward, it becomes natural for you to make your joumeytowards God. Man masters walking, talking, reading and writingafter assiduous practice. It is by dint of practice that he will be ableto reach his destination.It is a mistake to think that Yoga is only for Yogis andSanyasis (renunciates). In fact, it is necessary for every man topractise Yoga. If you wish to lead a peaceful life, you must lead ahealthy life. ‘Yoga’ helps you lead a peaceful and healthy life.‘Dharana’ is another important aspect of ‘Yoga.’ One-pointed concentration is called Dharana. Ramana Maharishi used topractise this by concentrating his vision on a single star in the skyby lying down on the ground. ‘Dharana’ (concentration) enables usto practise ‘Dhyana’ (meditation). People think that it is very hardto practise concentration and meditation. It is easy to practiseexercises like concentration, meditation and Pranayama.Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993113Whether you believe it or not, Swami never practised theseexercise of concentration, meditation and Pranayama. In all thesixty-seven years of my life, I never experienced tiredness orpanting. All powers are in Me. The Yoga Shakti is very powerful.The Atmic power is only one. Foster the feeling of Atmic oneness.Do not give room for evil feelings of anger, ego, envy etc. to rest inyou, for these feelings are animal qualities. Ever nourish the feelingthat, “I am God, I am not an animal.” If you practise thisfaithfully every day, you will achieve serenity and peace of mind.Since the body is the temple of God, we must maintain it carefully.We keep doors for our houses to facilitate the entry and thedeparture of the people authorised. But, if you allow each andeverybody to enter into the house, the house becomes a choultry.Hence the doors of the senses should be used to perceive, to dogood, to see good, to hear good and to be good.By sincere enquiry and investigation, by effort andendeavour, man can become God. You should not undergradeyourself by thinking that you can never become God. ‘DaivamManusha Rupina’ (God is in the form of man). Be firmlyestablished in the faith that you can become God. Be steady, freefrom bumps and jumps.Students, you are most fortunate to get this opportunity ofparticipating in the summer course on Indian Culture andSpirituality. Strive hard to benefit from the Golden opportunitygiven to you. Yoga is very easy to practise and never involves strainand expense. It is easy to obtain joy by Yogic practices. Bypractising Yoga, you can enjoy the gifts of health and Bliss.❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁13. THE PHILOSOPHY OFPOORVA MEEMAMSAIt is hard to obtain the company of the noble.It is easy to obtain the company of the ignoble,Pebbles are available in plenty; but it is hardto obtain the precious diamond.Embodiments of Divine Love,The sages of yore made an intense study of metaphysicsand shared their wisdom with others. Sage Jaimini devoted his entirelife to the study of Meemamsa and propagated it in India. Sincethis system of philosophy originated before the Vedas andflourished much before ‘Uttara Meemamsa’ it came to be called‘Poorva Meemamsa.’This system propounded that man should advance from‘Karma Jijnasa’ to ‘Dharma Jijnasa’ and from Dharma Jijnasato ‘Brahma Jijnasa.’ Sage Jaimini made sincere investigations intothis subject, experienced it and gifted his doctrine of PoorvaMeemamsa to the world.KARMA, DHARMA AND BRAHMA JIJNASA:The system of Poorva Meemasa recommends KarmaJijnasa in the initial stages. Man’s life from morn to night ismarked by Karma. All actions of humans—including inhalation,exhalation, blood circulation etc.—constitute Karma. The universeis suffused with Karma at all times. Sage Jaimini beautifullyexplained the three concepts of Karma Jijnasa, Dharma Jijnasaand Brahma Jijnasa through a convincing example of making‘Chutney’ (a side dish). Gathering all the ingredients like coconut,tamarind etc. and finally preparing the chutney constitutes KarmaSummer Showers In Brindavan 1993115Jijnasa. Tasting the Chutney is Dharma Jijnasa. Realising that someingredient is disproportionate, like salt, and adding it is BrahmaJijnasa. Whereas making the Chutney and tasting it is Karma andDharma Jijnasa respectively; finding the deficiency in thepreparation and correcting it is Brahma Jijnasa. Similarly theperformance of actions and putting the scriptural commands intoaction immediately, constitutes Karma and Dharma Jijnasarespectively. Tracing the deficiencies and correcting them is BrahmaJijnasa. Living the human life marked by the five elements is KarmaJijnasa. Realising that the life he is leading is devoid of eternal joy(Sashwatananda) due to the non-experiencing of Brahmatatwa andmaking it up is Brahma Jijnasa.Sage Jaimini propounded the system of Poorva Meemamsato enable the common man to experience the bliss of Brahma in hisdaily life. The life of the modern man today is centred on the secularworld. Believing that the secular world is everything, he strives hardto enjoy as much secular joy as possible. Though man worshipsgods numbering three crores, he is not able to dispel the unrest andthe agitation deep-seated in his heart. Ignoring the moral andspiritual tenets, he subjects himself to disappointment anddisillusionment by leading a worldly life. He identifies himself withthe body and considers the body to be everything without caring toenquire about the presence of Divinity within.Man introduces himself to others as Ramaiyya, Krishnaiyyaetc. basing himself on the name given to his body. If the people askwhat he is he introduces himself depending upon his profession,like a lawyer, farmer, business man etc. If he is further asked whohe is, he replies that he is a Canadian, an Indian, an African etc.Thus man introduces himself in terms of name, profession andnationality, without giving his true identity. Identifying oneselfwith a name, profession and nationality is wrong, as they are noteternal. People change names, professions and even their116Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993nationality; hence it is a mistake to give ones identity in terms ofprofession, country etc. Hence, the answer to the question “Whoare you?” is “I am Atma.” Since Atma is the eternal reality whichtranscends all times and all entities, it forms the real identity ofman. Atma is Dehi whereas the body is Deha: Atma is charioteer,whereas the body is the chariot: Atma is the owner of the house,whereas the body is the house.ATMA, THE LIGHT OF THE BODY:It is sheer foolishness on the part of man to identify himselfwith a house while he is only a simple resident in it. It is as good asidentifying oneself with a car which one is driving. As the body is aharmonious composition of eyes, ears, legs, hands etc. and not amere eye, ear or hand, similarly the Atma is the harmonious entityembracing the entire universe including manas, buddhi etc. In fact, itis Atma which activates the senses and makes them function. Thisfact can be substantiated with the example of a car. Though the carhas different parts like steering, clutch, brake etc., these partscannot function by themselves unless there is a driver who operatesthem. Similarly, for the car of the human body, the Atma is thedriver who operates the senses, the organs etc. It is the Atma whichmakes the eyes see, the ears hear and the hands work. It is thedriver who forms the life of the car, because he is the one whooperates the different parts of the car and makes it run. The body isShivam (auspicious) as long as Atma dwells in it: it becomesShavam (dead body) once Atma leaves it. Though the eyes, earsand other senses are very much existent in the body, they do notfunction once the Atma leaves the body. It only proves that Atmais the true master of the body. An earnest enquiry into the humansystem reveals that the different organs in the body are onlyinstruments, the Atma is the master. The conglomeration of Mind,Buddhi and Samskara (tendency) is Atma. Mind is called manasSummer Showers In Brindavan 1993117because it has the quality of doing manana (remembering andreflecting).The mind functions by the power of the Self. The intellect,which is endowed with the capacity of discrimination, is also theinstrument of the Self. The intellect has the capacity todiscriminate, to decide and to investigate. Samskara whichconsists of tendencies which one develops in one’s life, forms thefoundation for the next life. The tendencies are like seeds whichsprout later. It is said that the last thoughts of a man on hisdeathbed decide his next life. The last thoughts of man are decidedby his dominant thoughts in his life. If we wish to think of the Lordat our deathbed, we must prepare ourselves for the final end bythinking of the Lord. Our own practices in life decide the finalthought. This can be substantiated by an example. If you have thehabit of rotating the rosary with your fingers, the finger rotatesinvoluntarily, even if you are unaware of it. Similarly, people whohave the habit of snuffing, take their fingers automatically to theirnose.It is said “Shreyohi Jnanam Abhyasat” (knowledge isobtained by practice). As good practices are firmly implanted in thehuman system, so also the bad habits. It is by virtue of goodpractices alone that we will have a good next life.The life of an Indian is marked by purificatory acts frombirth to death. The purificatory acts range from ‘Namakarana’ topiercing the ears. Sage Jaimini clearly indicated the importantpurificatory acts which a man has to perform. We cannot obtainproper rewards without performing proper deeds. For example, wetake bath to cleanse the body; but it is not enough if we clean thebody alone, without cleaning the mind. If we are not able to cleaneven the body, how can we clean the mind? There was a lazy‘renunciate,’ who went to the house of a lady for alms. He118Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993requested the lady to give him food as he was very hungry. Sinceshe was a learned lady, she asked him to take bath in a nearby riverand then come for food. But, the lazy renunciate was a fake as welland did not want to trouble himself with a bath. He therefore said toher, “O mother! For renunciates like us, the name of Govinda isitself a bath.” As she was a very intelligent lady she retorted,“Govinda is food as well.” She then asked him to go away chantingthe name of Govinda. We have such lazy renunciates all over thecountry today. These people have desecrated the entire KarmaKanda laid down by our scriptures.It is imperative on the part of a Sadhaka to cultivate thepurity of mind. The sages have recommended the chanting of theDivine name to ensure purity of mind. Some people argue that theworld is not the creation of God and that it came naturally intoexistence. But it is foolish to say so, since there is no effect withouta cause. Just as a person is required to make a garland with the helpof flowers, needle and thread, so also there should be somebody tofuse matter and energy. Even if we have a container, oil and wick,there should be somebody to light the lamp, because the container,oil and wick etc., cannot light by themselves. It is not possible tomake a necklace without a goldsmith despite the availability of goldand gems. Even if a boy has intelligence, he cannot know thealphabets unless there is someone to teach him. Without theguidance of a teacher, it is impossible for a boy to acquireknowledge. But, a true Guru is one who has experienced what heteaches.THE CONQUEST OF ANGER:As aspirant should not lose heart if his mind is eclipsed byignorance, since ignorance is a passing cloud. The sun of Self iscovered by a cloud of ignorance. But the cloud comes from the Self.Coming from the Self, it covers the self. The cloud of ignorance willSummer Showers In Brindavan 1993119not stay permanently. It also will pass, leaving the sun to shinewith all splendour. Hence it is most essential for a sadhaka tocultivate the sterling quality of patience. The Poorva Meemamsataught how a sadhaka should cross impediments which come in theway of his progress. It advises people to think of happiness at thetime of sorrow, so that sorrow will be driven away. Similarly, whenignorance descends on him the sadhaka should start enquiring. Ifyou suffer from a fit of anger do not act or speak immediately. Ifyou start enquiring the cause of anger, you will find that the speedof anger will be reduced. In times of anger, one should drink a glassof cold water or sit down or look into the mirror. If you are afflictedby conflict or stricken by sorrow, sit quietly in one place or walkspeedily. You can even go to the bathroom and turn the tap on,attempt to merge your voice with the sound of the falling water.You will find that your sorrow is gone in the process of yourharmonising your voice with the sound of the tap water. There areever so many stratagems by which your anger can be quelled. Butthere are no people to tell the subtle points. However, Saint Jaiminicame out with many solutions for the problems of man.The system of Uttara Meemamsa resembled PoorvaMeemamsa in certain respects. But otherwise, these two systemsstand poles apart. Since north pole and the south pole can never bebrought together in the phenomenal world, similarly, these twosystems can never be united. If at all they merge, they will mergeonly in God.Arjuna made a reference to the two opposite poles whenKrishna was sent as an ambassador to the court of the Kauravas. Hesaid, “Oh Krishna! Will the narrow minded Kauravas ever join us?Will the north pole and the south pole ever meet? Be ready for war.Let us not waste time.”The same Arjuna who very much wished to fight the battlefound himself in a different predicament on the first day of the120Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993Kurukshetra battle. He lamented thus, “Oh Krishna, how can I killmy friends, relatives and teachers? My eyes are rolling. Let usretreat from the battle. Let us not waste time.” It was the mind ofArjuna which was the cause for his different predicaments. Mind isthe cause for one’s sorrow as well as joy: for one’s gain or loss, forpraise or for blame. Liberation cannot be obtained unless the mind isconquered. Saint Jaimini said that one cannot attain liberation bysimply living in a forest. Saint Jaimini said, “Misfortune will cometo you even if you hide yourself in a dense forest. Your body isbound to be destroyed by death even though you take utmost careof it.”DHARMA TO BRAHMA:Man’s foremost duty is to foster his Atmic knowledge. Hehas to struggle hard to protect Dharma. “Dharmo RakshatiRakshitah” (the man who protects Dharma will be protected byDharma in return). Everyone has to perform his Dharma. Thehouseholder should perform Gruhasta-dharma; the celibates shouldperform Brahmacharya-dharma; the renunciate should performSanyasa-dharma.One should not only lead a righteous life, but also lead aDivine life as well. It is not enough if you close your eyes and say‘Ram,’ ‘Ram’ by beating your sides. All your activities should besuffused with Divinity. Whatever you see, see with a Divinefeeling; whatever you hear, hear with a Divine feeling; whatever youdo, do with a Divine feeling. Do everything for the pleasure of theLord. Students, it is not proper on your part to forget all that youhave heard during the past few days. Implant in your heartwhatever you have heard and seen here and reflect on them. It isonly by practising what you have heard that you will derive the realbenefit of having attended the summer course. You will also findfulfilment in this life.Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993121❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁14. DHARMA AND INDIAN CULTUREA true student does not seek pleasure; he is no student whoseeks pleasure. The seeker of pleasure cannot be a seeker ofknowledge. He should seek knowledge and never pleasure.Fostering amongst people love for the Lord is his foremostduty,Living for others, not for himself, is his sublime ideal.In selflessly offering himself for the service of man lies his self-contentment.Nourishing love untainted in the heart,If you do not help fellow humans,Of what use is your learning, O Foolish One.Students, Teachers and patrons of education,Of all the nations of the world, India is a nation that standson the strongest foundation. Though there arose from time to timetremendous challenges and upheavals, there were men in India whofaced these challenges with peace and patience and kept the grandmansion of India safe and sound.The monarchs who ruled over India fall into three categories:the supporters, the denigrators and the middlings. The monarchswho favoured Indian culture, contributed substantially to herbeauty and glory; the denigrators made tremendous efforts todestroy Indian culture and found themselves defeated in theirendeavours, the middlings who adopted an attitude of complacenceand indifference disappeared in the womb of time. These threecategories of men existed then; they exist now; they will exist in thefuture as well. But thanks to the patience and forbearance of itsSummer Showers In Brindavan 1993123people, India made tryst with history, met the challenges of timeand emerged grand and victorious.The nations which appeared to have been built onunshakeable foundations have come crumbling down in front of ourvery eyes. Such is the fate of the nations who prided on theirphysical and mental prowess.But India, on the other hand, though not endowed with themoney and might of such nations, resisted the ravages of times andvicissitudes of history. Indian culture even today stands as an idealto be emulated by other nations. The foreigners who investigatedinto the cause for India’s untarnished culture found no answer. It isIndia’s adherence to dharma and the dharmic life which her peopleled that has made India’s culture an eternal culture.There is no word which can successfully convey the depthand the amplitude of meaning contained in the word ‘Dharma.’Words like ‘Right action and righteous living’ are only translationswhich do no justice to the original meaning. Only ‘Dharma’ is theequivalent of the word ‘Dharma.’ Many people have mistaken‘dharma’ for religion. But ‘religion’ does not convey the infinitudeof meaning latent in the word ‘dharma.’ Dharma is an ocean whereasreligion is a lake. While the scope and significance of a religion isconfined to a certain number of people following a certain creed,‘dharma’ is universal in scope, transcending race and religion.Dharma belongs to all.It is a belief common in the west that everybody has certainrights. But on the contrary, the Indian belief is everybody hascertain ‘dharmas’ to perform. But rights and dharma are related.When the parents discharge their dharma, the rights of the childrengrow; when the children perform their dharma, the rights of theparents grow. Similarly when the teachers discharge their duties, the124Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993rights of the students will grow. When the students discharge theirduties properly, the rights of the teachers will grow.DHARMA OF A STUDENT:What is the essential dharma of a student? Self-respect, self-confidence, selflessness and self-support constitute the dharma of astudent. The modern students of today lack all these four qualities.In the first instance students should acquire self-respect which inturn enables them to cultivate self-sacrifice. It is only the personwho does self-sacrifice can acquire self-satisfaction. Since thestudents have lost all these four qualities, education, students andteachers too have lost their value. Man enjoys freedom and justiceonly when he has cultivated the qualities of harmony andadjustment and feeling of Atmic oneness. Universal love springs outof this Atmic oneness. This love is the basis of universalbrotherhood. Man finds fulfilment by experiencing this nectarinelove and sharing it with fellow humans. Thus by this love alone thedivinity in you will shine, sathwic strength will arise, universalharmony will spring and Divine union will be possible.EDUCATION FOR LIFE:Why does a student seek admission in educationalinstitutions today? They do so only to eke out their living. Astudent gives his energy and time to earn the degree so that he willbe employed. What is the value of a degree if it does not enable himto serve society and nation? Today a student, as soon as he earnshis degree, joins the queue at the employment office to register hisname. He also tries to obtain a passport which will enable him tosatisfy his greed for acquiring wealth. He is thus lured away to goabroad to make money. Students should realise the truth thateducation is for life not for a living. Birds and beasts do not go toSummer Showers In Brindavan 1993125any university, yet they manage to live. We must seek educationnot for making money, but to understand the meaning of life.Can the knowledge of reading and writing makeone educated?Can one become educated by earning degrees?Can it be called education if it is devoid ofwisdom and conduct?Science has made tremendous progress. But along with it,like a shadow, even ignorance has also progressed.Our vision today is defective, as we see only the outside,not the inside. To a person who sees only outside, the oceanappears to be a mass of turbulence; but it is all calm underneath.Hence man should not allow himself to be swayed by theexternalities of things. We must develop broad vision in this broadworld.The knowledge that we obtain in the educational institutionstoday is only information oriented. It can be compared to theprocess of gathering raw materials. The information you acquireshould enable you to bring out the products such as self-respect,self-support, self-confidence etc. It is our duty to supply theseproducts to the nation. But the modern student, on the other hand,passes in some subjects the knowledge of which neither helps himnor his friends.It is only when the students shed selfishness that theseedling of spirituality will sprout in them. The well being of allsciences depends on the study of moral and spiritual sciences. Theexcellence of all branches of learning depends upon ‘Vidya’(education). Only good education can transform people andprofession. It is said, “If the daughter-in-law is dark, generations126Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993will become dark. Similarly if educational system becomes dark, allfields of activity will be dark. The darkness which marks theeducational institutions today is the darkness of selfishness.TRUE EDUCATION:The education system today should radiate splendour. It isonly spiritual and moral education which can foster harmony andunity and humanity. But spiritual and moral education has almostperished in the world. The want of spiritual education is the causefor the ferment and the agitation in the world today.Today Indians are lured away by the concept of ‘freedom,’the mark of western civilisation. Freedom is not licence. Freedom isrestraint. Restraint of the mind and the senses is real freedom.Reckless abandonment to the things of the world is not freedom.India has won political freedom, but not economic, moral andspiritual freedom. People must have self-confidence. You shouldnot be dependent on others. You should depend on yourselves.This is known as self-support. But today self-confidence hasvanished; self-support has broken down; self-satisfaction has beenblown away. All that the students have today is only bookishknowledge. They are totally devoid of practical knowledge. Themodern student today:Studies mathematics assiduously but ignores the science ofarithmetic;Knows the route to America but ignores the route to the holyKashi;Master of Algebra, he is ignorant of the area of his house.Everyday he takes exercises, but struggles to sit in padmasana.Master of botany, he doesn’t know the uses of Tulasi leaf.Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993127Hence mere theoretical knowledge, devoid of practicalknowledge, does not lead you anywhere.Students should be endowed with spiritual yearning. It iseasy to acquire wealth and property, but wealth and propertyincrease our ignorance. We are like those people who fence thethorny bushes with fruit-yielding trees. Our secular studies are likethorny bushes which should be used to guard the fruit bearing treesof spirituality.Students, Love and respect others as you wish to be lovedand respected. Unless you respect others, how can others respectyou? Respect and courtesy are reciprocal, they are not one-waytraffic.Our boys chant the following Vedic utterance:Nakarmana, Naprajaya,Tyage naike Amritatwa Manasuhu.Our students do not have the spirit of sacrifice; if at all theysacrifice, they sacrifice their character. What is the good of living ifyou have forfeited your character? You can sacrifice anything, evenyour life, but never your character. It is said three-fourths of yourlife is character. In fact our real life is character.The students of today acquire secular skills to enjoyworldly life and worldly happiness. Swayed by selfishness, thesepeople think in terms of their family and themselves. Though theyderive much benefit from society, they don’t want to benefit thesociety in any way, ignoring the fact that the happiness of hisfamily and his own happiness depend on the happiness of thesociety. Every educated student should plunge into the service ofsociety. Then alone, you will acquire self-respect.128Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993WHOM TO BLAME:Our Vice-chancellor and our guest, Sri Rami Reddy havespoken to you about the existing educational system and about thenumber of educational institutions we have in the country. We havenearly two hundred recognised universities and thousands ofcolleges. What do these institutions do? Every year they turn outlakhs of graduates with a degree in their hands. Our educationalinstitutions today have become factories for manufactur-inggraduates. These educational institutions add only to the existingnumber of five crore unemployees today. The government is keenon starting institution after institution. But it has not done much tocast the students and educational institutions in proper mould. Inthe absence of proper employment, unemployed youths haveturned into naxalites, hijackers etc. It is not the students who are tobe blamed, it is only the parents and govern-ment who are to beblamed. Carried away by their blind love for their children, theyaccept blindly whatever their children do without correcting them.These people have become the followers of Dhritharastra whonever corrected the unrighteous deeds of his children. Theseparents, who follow the footprints of Dhritharastra, will share thesame fate of Dhritharastra. At the end of his life, Dhritharastrafound all his sons dead. Not even one was left to perform his lastrites.Today the parents give unlimited freedom to their childrenwhich is highly disastrous. If the children are not controlled at thetender age, they can never be controlled. This is the golden period ofyour life, do not fritter it away. Since no one cares to teach theexcellence of Indian culture to the youth today, I have taken uponmyself the task of teaching you the glory and splendour of Indianculture. Try to understand how sacred and how sublime is IndianSummer Showers In Brindavan 1993129culture. Indian culture is the embodiment of all excellences. It issuffused with dharma.Dharma is infinite and timeless. Unaware of the infinitemeaning, contained in Dharma, people equate it with religion.Dharma is steady, eternal and changeless. The summer course inIndian culture and spirituality is organised to acquaint the studentswith the spirit of Dharma. What is this culture? What is thisspirituality? These too are nothing but parts of Dharma. As a clothis nothing but thread and cotton, similarly the thread and cotton ofculture and spirituality form part of Dharma. Though since thebeginning of history many foreign races like Persians, Greeks,Muslims, Portuguese, Dutch and English made inroads into India,they could never shake the foundations of Indian culture. Thoughthe foundations of many cultures have tumbled down, thefoundations of Indian culture stand strong, steady and secure.We must seek education to cultivate noble virtues, but todaywe are sacrificing noble virtues for the sake of education. It is said:Modern education has fostered only cleverness,It has not instilled even little virtue,Of what use is ten acres of barren land?It is enough to have a little of fertile land.We must nourish noble qualities for the blossoming ofhuman excellence. We must lead lives of exemplary idealism. Peopleshould appreciate your good conduct and virtuous character. Ofwhat use is high learning without good character and conduct?Along with the cultivation of good character and conduct, youshould also cultivate the four noble virtues of self-confidence, self-respect, self-support, self-sacrifice. Then alone you will findfulfilment as a human being.130Summer Showers In Brindavan 1993Students, all these fifteen days you have learnt aboutdifferent aspects of Indian culture. But mere knowledge is of no usewithout translating knowledge into practice. You must maintain thesame discipline and good behaviour which you are maintaining noweven after you go elsewhere.Students work feverishly for marks; but at the same time,they must see that they earn no remarks. The value of your markswill be enhanced if you earn no remarks against you. We must givesuperlative importance for cultivating sublime virtues; and we mustdevote all our energy, all our strength and everything to nourishnoble qualities. We must revere parents and elders; we must havefirm faith in our culture. The more important thing is we mustpractise culture in real life.We must understand the value of virtues by practising them,not by theorising them. But students today do not cultivate thesequalities but allow themselves to be carried away by this greedwhich ultimately brings disaster in its wake. Greed is fraught withgreat danger. Wishing to obtain more milk, if you cut off the udderof a cow, you will be committing an act of foolishness. If you cutopen the stomach of a golden goose that lays golden eggs, you willbe losing golden eggs forever. Hence, it is highly dangerous to becarried away by greed. More desire brings greater danger, less desirebrings more happiness.YOUR DUTY:You must try hard to earn respect for your country. Thiscan be achieved by conscientious conduct on the part of studentsand teachers. We must ask ourselves in our conscience whether weare working in proportion to the remuneration we receive. We turnourselves into traitors if we receive more salary and turn out littlework. India has borrowed crores of rupees from other countries.How can we discharge this debt unless we work hard? We willSummer Showers In Brindavan 1993131obtain self-satisfaction only when we work hard in proportion tothe salary we receive. We must try hard to experience self-satisfaction, born of sincere work.Students should realise that India is facing many politicaland economic conflicts. But students should remember that theyshould not enter politics while they are students. But it is nothingwrong to enter politics after you finish your education. There isnothing wrong if you work for the welfare and well being of thecountry. But if you touch politics when you are a student, you willtouch thorns. But there are some selfish people who drag studentsinto politics to serve their selfish ends.You must all resolve yourselves to keep Indian cultureintact. What is Bharatiya education? Bharatiya education consists insacrificing oneself happily for the sake of others. Discharge yourduties with divine feelings. You will be blessed. Lead spiritual lives.What is spirituality? Spirituality is nothing but theblossoming of love. Whereas science is the split of love, spiritualityis spirit of love. It is love alone that unites entire mankind into one.Then mankind will have no problems at all.❁ ❁ ❁ ❁ ❁