SUMMER ROSES ON THEBLUE MOUNTAINS, 1976
Discourses ofBHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABAonIndian Culture and Spiritualityduring the summer courseheld for college studentsat Ootacamund
SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India.Grams: BOOK TRUST    STD: 08555   ISD: 91-8555Phone: 287375   Fax: 287236PRASANTHI NILAYAM© Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, Prasanthi NilayamP.O. 515 134, Anantapur District, (A.P.) IndiaAll Rights Reserved.The copyright and the rights of translation in any language arereserved by the Publishers. No part, para, passage, text or photograph orArt work of this Book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilised, inoriginal language or by translation, in any form or by any means,electronic, mechanical, photo copying, recording or by any information,storage and retrieval system, except with prior permission, in writingfrom the convener Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, PrasanthiNilayam (Andhra Pradesh), India - Pin Code 515 134 except for briefpassages quoted in book review. This book can be exported from Indiaonly by the Publishers – Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust,Prasanthi Nilayam (India).International Standard Book Number81-7208-347-581-7208-113-8 (set)Revised Enlarged Edition :  May 2003
Published by:The Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications TrustPrasanthi Nilayam, India - Pin Code 515 134STD: 08555 ISD: 91-8555 Grams: BOOKTRUSTPhone: 287375   Fax: 287236CONTENTS
1. Opening Address 12. Brotherhood Of Man And Fatherhood Of God 113. Dharma Never Declines. It Is The PracticeOf Dharma That Declines 354. Two Great Human Qualities Of Humility And ObedienceCharacterised The Krishna Avatar59 5. Krishna Was Always A Lover OfPeace And Never A Warmonger 796. Mahabharatha Contains Many Valuable Lessons For Us 1017. A Good and Peaceful Death Is CovetedBy All Saintly People 1198. Man Should Promote Inner Vision For Himself 1339. Be Good, Do Good, And See GoodThat Is The Way To God 15110. Man Should Not, At Any Time, Behave Like An Animal 17311. The Human Body Is Like A Water BubbleOn The Surface Of Water 18512. Man Becomes Blind By His Ego 20113. Man’s Mind Is Like A Mad Monkey 21714. The Path Of Love Is The Quickest To Reach God 23315. Your Conscience Is Your Master And Guide 2531. OPENING ADDRESS
Without getting rid of yourThamo Guna and your anger,how are you going tounderstand the spiritual background?Without getting rid of your Rajo Gunaand of your temper, how are you going totake any interest in spiritual aspects? Infact, the best of the three gunas or qualitiesis the Sathwa and that itself promotesBhakthi or devotion and that is the bestsadhana. What I am telling you is thesimple and elemental truth.Divyaatma swarupas, boys and girls, who are thefuture citizens of this country:The first thing man does soon after he is born, isto try and understand his mother and father. In thewider context of the community in which we live, afterunderstanding one’s parents, one should make an attemptto understand the full significance and meaning ofone’s mother country and mother civilisation. Thehistory of our country and the history of our traditionsand culture are our true parents. Although more thantwenty-five years have lapsed since we have attainedthe independence of our country, it is a great misfortunethat in our entire period of independence, we have notbeen able to produce one single text or scripture whichis typical of the culture of our country. Although, we,in this country, have been listening to real history inmany ways, yet we are truly not able to recognise theessence of our civilisation. Such permanent truth, whichdoes not alter with time, such permanent truth which isnot affected or altered by revolutions, is the only truthwhich is the essence and true form of our culture. Theinner meaning and significance of such truth representsthe history of our country. Forgetting this sacred historyof ours, we are taking two alternatives which aretemporary, transient, and artificial. Because of thischange, no student has been able to assert and say whatthe true picture of our country is.Unfortunately, today every student makes allattempts to pass an examination. They do not make anyattempt to understand the wisdom that lies behind true2Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976education. The students of today are spending theirlives in trying to acquire some cheap texts or notes andsomehow or other, by hook or by crook, and by copyingfrom such cheap texts or even by terrorising the teachers,they just want to pass the examination. From the timehe wakes up from sleep till the time he goes back tobed, man spends all his time in such a trivial manner.Today, man’s way of living is such that he becomesdependent on others. Man is always in a hurry, he issimply spending his time in running from one thing toanother. He runs for a seat in a bus, he runs for a seatin a cinema hall, he runs for a seat in a college, he runsall his life for acquiring one thing or another. Evenwhile undertaking to do things in such a hurry andrunning for everything, they have the misfortune ofhaving to wait for everything. Our life appears like thelife of a bird or of an insect dependent on others foreverything. We spend all the time today in readinguseless stories. One does not find time to read usefulhistory and useful aspects of one’s culture. Not onlythis, man also wants to take a short cut for everythingthat he wants to achieve. Man does not want to makean effort in growing crops. He wants to go and steal theharvest prepared by someone else. He does not want totake the trouble for anything. He wants to earn hismoney by picking the pocket of someone else and suchare the shortcuts that he wants to adopt for everything.How is the breadth of vision of a man going to enlargeif he wants to lead a life like that? A man whose Atmahas not blossomed and a man whose spiritualbackground has not blossomed will never understandthe whole purpose of his life. Today people think thatacquaintance with a large number of books is education.Acquaintance with books can never be called education.For this enormous creation that we see in thisuniverse, that there is an invaluable strength behind itall, is a truth that we should recognise. Although man’sbirth and death look to us as common things, yet tounderstand the secret of birth and of death is a verydifficult matter. No one is making an attempt tounderstand the reason for human life and for humanbirth and death. No one is trying to understand thebasis for this. Man is not making an attempt tounderstand the duties and responsibilities of himself asa human being. Why is there so much anarchy andconfusion in the world today? Why is there no peace?Is it because there are no educated people, and is itbecause there are no educational institutions? No, thereare plenty of them, but the educated people do not havethe necessary culture and breadth of vision along withtheir education. Our country has been known as theSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 34Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976spiritual treasure house. Yet today we are forgetting thespiritual treasure and the real strength of our country.Children are not understanding even the meaningof education. For the root word “Vid” if you add “Ya”then you get Vidya. Here “Vid” stands for illuminationand “Ya” stands for that. Therefore, that which givesillumination and light is Vidya. That which gives youlight and sheds your ignorance and that which givesyou wisdom and superior knowledge can alone be calledVidya. What promotes ignorance and darkness cannotbe called Vidya. From time immemorial, our countryhad been the leader of all the countries in the world. Ithad enjoyed the position of leadership in this world,and that is the kind of sacredness that we have enjoyedin the past. Because there are no leaders today who canset an example of such ideal life and who can hand onsuch ideals to other countries, we have fallen on badtimes. The main reason for this is that in the people,there is no co-ordination between the words that theyutter and the acts that they do. You are all the futurecitizens of Bharath. You are the citizens who will bringup the welfare of Bharath. The entire prosperity andwelfare of the country rests on your shoulders. Yourlives and your hearts are pure and sacred. They areunwavering. I am hoping that you will not allow theconfusion and anarchy prevailing in the country toconfuse your pure, unwavering, and sacred minds; andI am hoping that you will develop into ideal citizens ofthis country.We keep on talking about discipline. Simply tokeep on talking about discipline and not have thestrength and faith to accept discipline is not going to doany good. To discipline and duty we should also adddevotion. It is only when these three D’s—Discipline,Devotion, and Duty—are together and firmly implantedin your heart, that your heart will be able to developinto a sacred one. Today, unfortunately, even personswho claim to be, and boast of being highly educated,appear as weaklings in practical life. Such people donot understand the value of true education. As onestudent has just mentioned, the entire education hasturned into one begging bowl.Students, after having a degree in their hands,should undertake to be of some service to thecommunity. If, on the other hand, you search for a jobor beg for a job, it is not correct. For the chariot of thisbody, the axle, namely the Atma, has become verydistant. It is for rectifying this defect—namely to removethe distance between the body and the axle, we willhave to undertake Yoga. Yoga does not mean that oneshould give up his family and his house. It does notSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 56Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976mean going to a forest and sitting in meditation. Todayman faces many problems in the community that helives in. To be able to face those problems courageously,and to meet and solve them, is the true meaning ofYoga. Every man aspires for happiness and a peacefullife. Every man wants a respectable position in thesociety in which he lives, and every man wants goodhealth; but to be able to deserve this happiness, thishealth, and this peaceful life is a part of Yoga. To beable to enjoy this peace and happiness, we will have toadopt a path, and the path that we have to adopt for thiswill constitute the Yoga of which we are talking.In the Bhagavad Gita the Yoga that was taught toArjuna was to give him the strength by which he doesnot turn his back on the problems that he was facing.The lesson that was given to Arjuna was that he shouldface the problem and find a solution for the problem.This kind of Yoga, which the students should undertakein their lives, should enable them to face the countryand community and the problems thereof. You find thesolutions to the problems, and by God’s grace, theseproblems will be solved. One should regard the country’sproblems as one’s own problems. Put away theselfishness and ego in you and regard the problems ofthe society as your own problems, and you must solvethem. It is necessary that students take the lead insolving such problems. I hope that those of you whoare students will be able to imbibe the messages givenby the older people in sacred congregations like this,and that you will shape your lives in such a mannerthat you will become useful citizens of the country. Ihope that this will be possible for you.Of all the animals that are born in this world, tobe born as a human being is the most difficult andfortunate thing. Having been born as human and havingacquired that special gift of intellect, you must sanctifyyour human birth and human existence. You must beprepared to put into practice one out of the ten thingsthat you preach in preference to just saying ten goodthings. You must be prepared to serve as servants forall your lives. Never think of being a leader. Withoutbecoming a servant you cannot become a leader. Youmust first learn to follow before becoming a leader. Wefind the world in an unfortunate state because, today,people become leaders without knowing how to becomegood followers. In that context you must be prepared tospend all your lives in the service of humanity. In thefirst instance, you must serve your own home, then youmust serve your village, then your state, and then thecountry. Without acquiring the ability to serve in yourown home and produce results in your home, how canyou serve your country and hope to produce results?Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 78Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Students!In the first instance you must give satisfaction toyour father and mother. According to our traditions,mother and father who have gifted us this human bodyare to be treated like gods; and if we cannot show themgratitude, our lives are meaningless. Many great saintshave sacrificed everything else in order to satisfy theirmother and father. Saints like Chaitanya and Pundarikahave sacrificed everything to be of service to theirparents. In the first instance, you should showgratefulness and provide satisfaction to your motherand father. Then you can make an effort to serve thecountry. You should be sure that the kind of work thatyou undertake does not cause waste of time. Everythingis time for us, in fact, time is the very basis of all thatwe see in this creation. If we waste time, we will bewasting our entire life and body. The significance ofour commencing the summer classes today is that werecognise the spiritual strength in us. We should takesuch steps as would promote this spiritual strength andlet it blossom out and become useful to others. In theworld there are many organisations which are devotedto the service of the community; but our organisation,the Sathya Sai Organisation—should have somethingspecific and distinctive—showing an ideal to otherorganisations. We are commencing our summer classestoday and many experienced and elderly people willcome, and they will give you their messages. I amhoping that you will imprint their messages in yourheart. Not only imprint them in your heart, but also tryand put them into practice. I bless you all and bring thisdiscourse to a close.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 91 0Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 19762. Brotherhood Of Man AndFatherhood Of God
Children who do not have goodqualities, education which does nothave character as its objective, andlife which has no morality are purposelessand without any use. An individual whohas no peace of mind and the world whichhas no moon shining in it are similar andare without use and purpose in this world.Pavitratma Swarupas!Every item of creation in this world has somedistinctive feature and a character of its own. If anyitem in this world gives up this distinctive aspect, itwill destroy itself. Here are some examples for this.Fire has the ability and quality to burn. Water has theability to flow. Man has got the quality of humannature, and an animal has the quality of being a brute.When the ability to burn disappears, you cannot call itfire. When the ability to flow disappears, you cannotcall it water. When the inner vision or the basic humannature disappears, you cannot call him a man. Whenthe external vision or the brute nature disappears, youcannot call it an animal. Here we see that for everythingthere is an inherent quality, and this constitutes the lifefor that particular item. To have an inner vision is thenatural quality of a human being. By its very definition,an animal can look only externally. One may, in form,be a human being; but if he has only external visionand is unable to see within himself, he cannot be calleda human being. He will be called an animal. Becausea prescribed quality is being exhibited or worn as acloak by each one of these items, this quality is alsobeing called its dharma. This dharma takes manydifferent forms. When any one item exceeds the naturaldharma or quality characteristic of itself and promotessomething in excess, then that will be referred to as anattempt to promote dharma. Just as by effort, a studentin a particular class can be promoted to a higher class,an individual by promoting his own natural dharmaand giving attention to something higher and noblercan earn promotion to a higher level. A lifeless piece ofiron can be converted to a set of several usefulimplements by successive heat treatments.12Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Out of a piece of iron which has not been properlytreated, and therefore worth only a few annas, by makingsuitable changes, we can produce a watch which isworth 300 rupees. You should notice here that it is thesamskara, or the change that we give to the substance,that brings the value to it and not the inherent value ofthe untreated material. As in this analogy, an ordinaryand unsophisticated human being can, by seeking thecompany of elevated beings, get an opportunity ofelevating himself to the position of a Paramahamsa(Realised sage). Man’s mind aspires to get such sacredwisdom through the use of the sensory organs. In sucha situation, because the mind is not able to distinguishbetween the good and bad, the intelligence comesforward and puts itself ahead of the mind for the purposeof distinguishing good from bad. Even the intelligencecannot, by its own accord, decide between the goodand the bad; but it is able to make a judgement ofeverything that is put before it. In the case of a judge,we know that he will decide between right and wrongonly on the basis of facts that are put before him. Asin this analogy, the nature of intelligence is such that itcan decide between good and bad only on the basis offacts that are put before it; and it cannot go outside thefacts. Conduct and practice of dharma is the quality ofthe mind; and the decision between good and bad, onthe basis of facts put before it, is the quality ofintelligence. But in the world today, this kind ofintelligence can be classified into four differentcategories. These are—the first is a selfish type, thesecond is a selfish-selfless type, the third is a purelyselfless type, and the fourth is based upon Atma. Thefirst category is always thinking of what is good forone’s own self and makes a decision of being good forone’s own self. It is like the intelligence of a crow. Thisis very common today, and we find this category inlarge numbers in the world.The second category partly selfish and partlyselfless—will think of the good of one’s own self alongwith the good of others. This appears as the ordinaryway of life. The third category, which may be describedas selfless intelligence, always thinks of others and willthink of the kind of happiness that he wants for himselfas also the kind of happiness that others must get. Thekind of sorrow that he wants to get rid of is also thesorrow that he wants others to get rid of. So long asyou feed and look after a dog, it will follow the master.So long as you give a salary to a servant, he will bewith you and serve you. If you do not show affection,do not give food, and beat a dog with a stick, even adog will bite you. Similarly if you do not look after theservant well, and if you push the servant to a distance,Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 13 14Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976the servant will stop serving you. In the same manner,when you wish good for others, you will get good foryourself, and when you wish ill for others, you will getill for yourself. In that context, realising that the humanbody is given to you for the sake of causing benefit toothers, this third category of persons will always betrying to do good to others. This has been described asthe kind of buddhi (intelligence) which is all the timedoing and thinking of doing good to others.The fourth category—the Atma Buddhi is alwaysconcerned with the aspect of dharma and the necessityfor safeguarding dharma. He always thinks of himselfas a messenger of God; and forgetting his own selfishinterests, he always thinks of sacrifice and does goodto the rest of the world. In this category only truth hasthe right to make a decision as to what is good andwhat is bad. Others have no right to make such adecision. It is in this context that our Sruthis havestated Sathyam nasthi paro Dharmaha (There is nodharma other than truth). It is because of truth that thesun and moon are shining. It is because of truth that theearth is revolving round itself. It is because of truth thatthe world is going on in the way in which it is goingon. Truth is the basis of everything. But today man hasno faith in truth and does not want truth. The one thingthat man does not like today is truth. He is alwaystaking a backward step even in regard to finding outand getting the truth regarding himself. He is afraid ofcoming to know such truth.How then can such a man, who is afraid of truthwithin himself, take to the path of truth? On the platformwe speak, like a parrot, words like truth, prema (love),ahimsa (non-violence); and in our daily life we do nothave faith in truth, we do not practise ahimsa, and wedo not follow the path of buddhi. In that context, theyoung people of today must learn to put into practicethese words and not simply utter them in a meaninglessway.Man’s life depends upon three things—his words,his thoughts, and his deeds. Whatever desires one gets,one will exhibit them and take them to his mind. Forgetting a thought, mind is the basis. The thought thatcomes to your mind will be exposed to the world as theword of the mouth. Once you utter this word of yourmouth and expose the thought that has come to yourmind, in order that you put it into practice, actioncomes on. It is only when there is a harmony betweenthis thought, word, and action that man will be in aposition to recognise his own true nature. When one isSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 15 16Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976able to put these three—thought, word, and action alongthe right path, then do we earn punya (merit from gooddeeds); but if we put them along the wrong path, thenwe will earn sin. We come to the clear conclusion thatfor good and bad, the three basic things are thought,word, and deed. In order, therefore, to purify ourthoughts, words, and action, we should undertake somekind of sadhana (spiritual practice). We should makethe right attempt to bring about the harmony betweenthought, word, and deed. This is what was meant whenthey said that the proper study of mankind is man..There is a necessity for us to enquire whether this kindof human nature is present today or not.The cost of all items in this world is going onincreasing, but the value of man is going on decreasing.Because man has not got the fortune to understand thereal value of human nature, he himself is acting in amanner causing the value of a human being to comedown day after day. In the very first instance, we mustmake an attempt to purify and ennoble the thoughtsthat come to our mind. When thoughts come surging toyour mind, you should spend at least a few minutesenquiring whether such thoughts are good thoughts orbad ones, and whether they are for the good of yourcountry, and whether they are going to be helpful ornot to the community around you.Students!As soon as thoughts come to your mind, you mustmake an attempt to spend time and decide whetherthose thoughts are good or bad. If they are bad thoughts,you must immediately put them aside; and if they aregood thoughts, you must make an attempt to promotethem. When a thorny plant is seen, it is removed themoment it is recognised as a thorny plant; but when agood fruit tree comes up, we try to take care of it andpromote its growth. In the same manner, in the field ofyour heart, as soon as bad ideas sprout, you must pullthem out and throw them away. As the seeds grow intoa big tree, man also must try to grow and becomeMadhava (God) ultimately. For both these paths, ourown qualities have the basic responsibility. Whether inlifeless matter or in living matter, the promotion ofgood qualities will depend on the way in which youpromote and nurture those qualities. Everything that isborn in this world must change. Change is a naturalquality of all things that are born in this world. Howcan things that change from moment to moment givepermanent happiness to people? Permanent happinessand bliss can be got only from permanent things andnot from changing things. Today, in the very firstinstance, we should make the necessary attempt tomake sacred the thoughts that come to our mind. TheSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 17 18Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976young people of today get all kinds of meaninglessthoughts into their minds. For those who get thesemeaningless ideas and thoughts, sacred ideas will be ofgreat help. Man has no rest and peace. Man who issuffering from such an anguish can be helped verymuch by his entertaining such sacred ideas. Our sacredthoughts have prescribed a Karma Kanda, the path ofwork, by practising which, we will be able to generategood ideas and sacred thoughts. Our body has not beengiven to us for only eating in the morning, afternoonand evening. The body of ours must be sanctified bydoing good work at prescribed times. Time, action andduty should be regarded as man’s primary responsibility.From time immemorial, there have been sacredsayings in our ancient texts; and it is not appropriatefor us to forget these and not pay any heed to suchsacred things. If we make our thoughts, words, anddeeds sacred, there can be no better way for man’semancipation. If each student asks himself the questionas to why he is going through the process of education,he will get the answer that it is for securing such andsuch a degree or for securing such and such a job orauthority; and he will, all the time, think of what hewill get in return as a result of the education anddegrees that he is seeking. This cannot be the rightattitude of a student. For him, the right attitude shouldbe to ask himself how his degree will be of use to thecommunity and the country in which he lives, or howhe can be of use to others. Life should be a process ofgive and take, and it should not be a one-way trafficwith you being at the receiving end always. All thedifferent branches in education, unfortunately, look asif they have no essence in them. They appear as thingswhich are simply enabling us to just carry on in thisworld. Good education must be such that it covers bothworldly and spiritual matters. Out of education comeshumility, and out of such humility comes the right toacquire good qualities and from such a right, you willbe able to acquire wealth. Once you acquire wealth,you will be able to follow the path of dharma; andonce you follow the path of dharma, you will be happyin this world as well as in the spiritual world.Students!Do not be under the impression and illusion thatyour education is for the sole purpose of begging for alivelihood. Remember that the education that you getshould enable you to do some good to the communitythat you live in, and the world that you are born into.Just as there is a flash of lightning in the sky wheneverclouds gather in the sky, so also, where there iseducation, there should be wisdom like a streak ofSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 19 20Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976lightning. When such sacred wisdom shines in the cloudsof your heart, then only will your education enable youto do some good and be of some service to otherpeople.Today we regard education as just that which welearn in a school or a college or a university. No, thisis not right. The entire universe is a place of educationfor us. Whether it is a workman, or an agriculturist, ora businessman, there are so many things that he has tolearn in this world. In fact, every moment in this worldwe are learning so many things irrespective of what ourprofession is. In fact, in our lives that kind of educationwhich goes under the name of general knowledge isvery essential. Here is a small example. Let us take thecase of a student who has taken an M.A. degree andmarries a girl who has taken a B.A. degree. In duecourse, they have a son. If this son gets a cold or afever, they will be in a terrible confusion not knowingwhat to do. They will take the son and run to a hospital.If you have not got the courage and the capacity tohandle a situation in which your child gets sick, what isthe use of an M.A. degree or the B.A. degree that youacquire. The meaning of this is that in your daily life, ifyou want to meet a situation and face it, you do not haveto take an M.B.B.S. degree; but you have to acquiregeneral knowledge in addition to the knowledge inyour own subject. The very first thing that the studenthas to understand is what is essential for him in hisdaily life. Let us ask ourselves a question. If we wantto acquire a B.A. degree, we can purchase text books,read in our house and pass the examination. For this,why should we go to a college? By going to a college,you have the company of students of different types,we have different attitudes; and by being with them,you get the necessary discipline by which you can faceand find solutions to situations which you might face.While you will get a pass by getting marks in subjectslike Physics, Chemistry, Zoology or Botany, there issomething else which constitutes the basis of all thesesubjects and that basis is discipline. If you do not getthe necessary qualifications in this broad subject, thereis no use of getting marks in a specialised subject. Ourstudents should take care of this aspect. It does notmatter even if you do not get marks, but you shouldhave the proper discipline and see that you do not earnremarks. You should make an attempt to respect yourteachers. You should make an attempt to satisfy yourteachers by your behaviour and conduct.Prahlada had said that one who teaches you thevery basis of education is the real teacher, and one whotells you that all that you have to do is to reach thedivinity of God, is the true father. Such is the teacherSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 21 22Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976and such is the father that you have to seek. Butunfortunately, today neither such teachers nor suchfathers are available to you. Teachers of today arethemselves not following the correct path, andaccordingly, the students who learn from such teachersare also not following the correct path. Both are reallydeceiving the community in which they live. In thisyoung age of yours, while you are still in your youth,the kind of sacred thoughts that generate in your mindand the sacred experiences that you go through willdetermine the future for you. A young lad by nameMohandas Karamchand attended the drama ofHarishchandra, whereby he learnt the importance oftruth. He went back to his mother and told her that hewould stick to truth in his later life, and by sticking totruth, Mohandas Karamchand evolved into being knownas Mahatma Gandhi. Even in those days, there wereteachers who wanted to put Gandhi on the wrong path.When the teacher tried to put him on the wrong path,Gandhiji did not yield. He stuck to the truth, and becauseof this, he ultimately succeeded even though it meantdisobeying his teachers.Maybe today some teachers will try to give youthe wrong path; but if your conscience tells you that itis the wrong path, then it is better for you to disobeythe orders of the teacher and follow the right path. Thekind of pictures that we witness today, and the kind ofdramas that we see today, or the kind of wall postersthat we see are such that they cause distortions in yourmind and destroy the very human nature and thesweetness of your heart. Because of the destructivenature of what you see, you are getting such bad ideas.The pure, unwavering, and clean minds of people arebeing changed and spoiled by the atmosphere aroundus. The kind of attraction is very transient and cannever be true. Such artificial attractions can cause greatharm to us. This is responsible for several accidentsthat occur. Because there are several such things thathappen in your daily life, there is a necessity for me totell you about these common incidents. Some persons,either to go to a library, or to a college, or to fulfilsome other duty, go on the motorcycle in the bazaar. Insuch a situation, the person who is driving themotorcycle must keep his attention on driving and mustensure that he reaches his destination without harmingothers. He should concentrate on reaching his destinationsafely. But the person concerned is not accepting andfollowing this duty. He goes on his motorcycle at agreat speed and he does not have his attention ondriving. His attention is directed towards the wall postersand he gets involved in an accident by hitting againsta car or another automobile. The only result of thisattracting wall poster is harm.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 23 24Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976There is a necessity, at this point, for me to narratean incident which actually took place. In Kerala, thebus accidents used to be very large in number. Thisissue was taken to the assembly and several peoplepointed out the reasons for this large incidence ofaccidents. Following the advice given by the people,the government followed many approaches but still theaccidents were not reduced. When I visited Trivandrumand went to the house of a responsible person, he askedme the question, why, in spite of all that they had done,were accidents not reduced? I gave a seemingly trivialadvice. Immediately this advice was followed, all theaccidents stopped. In the Kerala state, women made aspecial appeal to the authorities that they should begiven reserved seats in the front area of the bus, justbehind the driver, so that they may travel comfortablyand avoid the jolting that one gets in the rear seats ofthe bus. Because of this, all the time the driver waslooking in the mirror to see these ladies and henceaccidents occurred in large numbers. You can see howsuch a foolish attraction by the driver was causing somuch harm.In man’s mind today, he is giving room for andpromoting foolish thoughts. In the minds of youngmen, who are the future citizens of this country, suchthoughts are coming and they are becoming traitors totheir own country. Today you call yourselves students,but in fact you are not seeking Vidya, you are seekingmaterial pleasure.Students!You should set aside imitation and you shoulddevelop your own inner strength. Whether it is in ourconduct and behaviour or in the way in which we dressand talk, all seems to depend on imitation. You have alife of your own, you have desires of your own, andyou have a mind of your own; but by imitating andfollowing the mind and actions of someone else, yousimply turn yourself into a slave. You are an independentperson. Where does this come from and what is themeaning of swatantra (freedom)? You have freedom ofthought or swechha. This word swechha comes from acombination of “Swa” and “Ichha.” You follow thedictates of your own desires but never undertake tofollow the desires of others. Introspect well on yourdesires and think carefully; and if you feel that it isgood, follow it; but if you think that it is bad, give itup. But man today does not take such a step. He is everready and is always attempting to imitate others.What you see with your own vision cannotrepresent the ultimate truth. Your vision is looking atthe entire creation. When the whole creation constitutesSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 25 26Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976what you see, then you change yourself into the onewho sees. When the eye itself becomes what is seen,then your intelligence becomes that which sees. Thereis an example for this. You are all sitting in thiscongregation. Your ears are here. Your eyes are here. Ifat this instant of time, your mind is thinking aboutsomething in your village, then even while you are hereand while your ears are here, you will not be able tolisten to what Swami is speaking. Even though youhave your eyes here, you will not be able to see whatis in front of you. Thus, while the mind is elsewhere,even if the sensory organs are here, they cannot functionas one who sees or one who hears. But sometimes eventhe mind is seen and the intelligence becomes the seer.In some cases and instances, even the intelligencebecomes the seer and the Atma becomes the seer. Thuswhat witnesses everything is the Atma and nothing issuperior to this. Intelligence is useful to you as seeronly with regard to worldly matters, and intelligence isindeed very superior to the sensory organs.There is a small story to illustrate this. In a village,a blind man and a lame man become friends. The blindman had legs and the lame man had eyes. The lameperson sat on the shoulders of the blind person. Thelame person was serving the purpose of seeing thepassage and steering the blind person. The blind personhad his legs, and he was using his legs to move about.In this way they were moving and begging. They weremoving from village to village in this manner. In themiddle of their journey, the lame man saw a heap oflarge cucumbers. He said, “Dear brother, if we canstray a little and go to the left, there are many cucumbersthere; and we can collect some cucumbers and then goour way.” The blind man said that if there are so manycucumbers, it is not likely that they are unprotected.Just think a little before we go near the plant. The lameman then said that there does not appear to be anyfence or protection. The blind man then suggested thepossibility of a watchman keeping watch over the plants.The lame man then said that there was neither a fencenor a watchman keeping watch over the cucumbers. Hewanted to go and eat the cucumbers. The blind manthen said that if they were truly good cucumbers, wouldthey be left in such large numbers in an unguardedmanner? They are surely likely to be bitter cucumbersunfit for eating. Indeed here, the intelligence has workedand the sensory organs have not worked. When theytasted the cucumbers, they were found to be indeedbitter. It is obvious from this story that intelligence issuperior to sensory organs. Atma is superior even tointelligence. Following the dictates of the ultimate Atmait is called Svechha. We have changed this word intofreedom a kind of freedom that is enjoyed by an animal.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 27 28Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Students!We all have the form of a manava (man). We havethe form of a human being. We have the superiorintelligence and even after using this intelligence, westill conduct our lives in an inferior way. That cannotbe the true nature of human beings. Your desires andthoughts should reach the level of being sacred andgood. You should look upon the whole world as aconglomeration of brothers and sisters. In the humanfamily, you should understand and experience thisbrotherhood of man and fatherhood of God. This shouldbe the spirit of all human beings. Only on that daywhen you are able to practise and proclaim these idealsto the world can we say that you have re-establishedthe glory of this country. Our Vedas and Sastras havegiven us the answers to questions like how a manshould live, how a man should conduct himself, andhow he should die.Birth is not the important thing for man. He shouldpromote a good mind and good thoughts throughout hislife and should have it at the time of death. To man,death is more important than birth. Your rebirth isdetermined by the type of death that you get. If youwant a good rebirth and a good life in the next birth,you must also desire a good death. We should not diean uncared for death like a death of a dog.We should not devote our life to fulfillingmeaningless and sensory desires. Our sensory organsshould become our slaves, but we should not becomeslaves to our sensory organs. The day we becomeslaves to our sensory organs, we will become slaves tothe whole world. If we become slaves to our ownsensory organs, what kind of strength can we claim?We should be masters to our servants, but should notbecome servants to our servants. Today, we shouldmake an enquiry as to whether we are living in ourhouse as a master or as a servant. The servant of thehouse can know and will be able to tell you wherecertain external things are present in the house. But themaster of the house will know where the valuablethings are kept in addition to knowing the articles ofdaily use. He knows where each of the valuable thingsis locked up. Today, we talk of many things which areexternal to ourselves but we are unable to take orrecognise the valuable spirit that is present inside ofour hearts. In that context, we are living like a servantof the house of the body rather than as a master of thebody. If we are really the master of the house in whichwe are living, why is it that we are not aware of thegood ideas and good thoughts that are present in us?God is not something present outside you. He is presentinside you. Similarly sin is not something which isSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 29 30Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976external to you. It is decided by your own action. Themoment you realise these two truths, you will not be aservant to your sensory organs. They will be yourservants.Students!The things that you listen to here must beproclaimed to the community and you must be preparedto put them into practice. If you want the lamp to shedlight on all places, then you should keep the lamp at aheight. If you put this light in a pit, how is it going toshed light around? So the sacred ideas in you should beput at a height, in an elevated place, so that the wholeworld can see them. You should not put them inside thepit of your heart and make them stagnant.Our body is like a machine. We have the machineof a radio and through the radio we listen to severalprogrammes. Where are these coming from? Is theradio generating them or are they generated elsewhere?These programmes are being generated in some otherbroadcasting station, and those programmes are beingtransmitted to us through the radio. The radio is notgenerating the programmes. Like this, when we listento a person’s thoughts or ideas, we must realise thatthey are not coming from his mouth. They are beingtransmitted through him after they are generated fromhis heart. He only transmits them like a radio. There isan origin, there is a source from where these sounds aregenerated. Radio is only an instrument through whichthese sound waves are transmitted to us. The humanbody is like this radio. The source is the atma and allideas and thoughts are being generated at this source,the atma. You may ask the question as to what aregood thoughts and bad thoughts if they are all comingfrom the sacred atma. But why should you classifythem as good and bad thoughts? In the process oftuning the radio, you are making a mistake. In thisprocess, the thought that we want to listen to issomething, and the station to which we tune is somethingdifferent. Not only this, in order to enable us to listento the right thing, the manner in which you make thetuning and the adjustment should also be proper. Ourdesire is one thing, and if our action is not in tune withthat desire, we are having this difficulty. We want tolisten to one station, and we tune to a different station.It means such sacred ideas which you want to promoteand such sacred ideas which you want in your mindshould guide your actions. That is, whatever you domust be to promote such sacred ideas. The ideas andthoughts will not be called good if they are good onlyto you. They will be called good only if they do goodto the whole world.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 31 32Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976In man, there are four kinds of desires that emanate.One aspect is to regard the faults of others and one’sown faults as being on the same footing and speak onthat basis. Another aspect is to speak about the goodthat is in him and speak about the faults that are inothers. The third aspect is to speak about the good inhim as well as the good in the others. The fourth aspectis to claim the good that is not in him and speak aboutthe faults that are not in others. This is the worst aspectof the whole lot. Today, we must make a determinedeffort to root out this fourth aspect. We must be preparedto put into practice the ideas that we want to proclaimto the world.Divya Atma Swarupas,When Sankaracharya wanted to propagate hisphilosophy in the entire country, he did it with onlyfour disciples. In each college, even if we get tenstudents who are willing to practise and proclaim theseideals to the rest of the world, that is enough. Everystudent should make an attempt to make thisdetermination.It is not as if there is no obvious reason fororganising this summer course in Ooty. As soon as thesummer vacation comes, it is customary for students toplan for different things, and they have many ideas.They want to have the pleasures of life in this vacation.Submitting oneself to these desires and wasting one’stime is one aspect. There are ample opportunities forthe students, in the summer vacation, to misuse thefacilities that they have. Wasting time is like wastinglife. In order to make sure that you do not waste yourtime, we are making efforts to convert these holidaysinto holy days in this sacred place. In this sacred time,you should acquire sacred and good ideas and youshould be prepared to communicate these ideas to otherswith whom you come into contact. From tomorrow wewill take some specific topic like the Mahabharatha orthe Bhagavatha or the Ramayana and will make itpossible for you to have sacred ideas and thoughts.Today is your first day, and I have given whatever isnecessary for you to lay a strong foundation for whatyou are going to get in the rest of the days. Withoutspending more time, I will bring the discourse to aclose.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 33 34Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 3. Dharma Never Declines. It Is ThePractice Of Dharma That Declines
Do you know why this life has beengiven to you? It is not forsearching for food all through norfor eking out a livelihood, but it is toenable you to search and search for God.Pavitratma Swarupas,The moment we hear the word Bharath, the nameof our country, the Himalayas come to our mind. Forcenturies in the past, the essential and the great principlesof Hinduism were symbolised in truth and ahimsa.These two great principles of truth and ahimsa are alsosymbolised in the silvery mountains of the Himalayas.These lofty mountains are the places where great menand great saints have performed their thapas (austeritiesand sense control). Those mountains appear to us asthe symbols of purity attained through truth and throughdharma. When we look at those mountains, we get thefeeling that those silvery mountains are lost in themeditation of Madhava. In those mountains, where therishis (sages) had performed their thapas, lies the originof Ganges, the sacred river. Ganges is the flowingsymbol of Hinduism. Ganges also symbolises whatflows through the blood vessels of our country from itsspiritual heart. We have to compare the blood vesselsand the arteries of Bharath and of its citizens to theflow of the sacred Ganges. The moment we hear thename of Ganges, we are reminded of the two banksthereof on which are the centres of pilgrimage, and onwhich lie the great places of learning. We visualise,when we think of Ganges, the great spiritual centreslike Benares, Prayag, Rishikesh, and Hardwar.In the same manner, as in this analogy of Ganges,we should also recognise the great pilgrim centres ofour mind which lie on either side of the blood vessels.Our own intelligence and Anthahkarana (innerconsciousness) are the great pilgrim centres of ourbody. It is customary that in these sacred places ofpilgrimage, sacred tasks are performed; and as aconsequence thereof, sacred ideas are generated. In theinner body, alongside the life flow of blood, our mind,36Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976our Chitta (mind), our Anthahkarana, etc., can all berecognised as places where good ideas can be generated.The fact that Ganges flows in our country hasitself got a spiritual significance. The moment we hearabout the name of our country, Bharath, we are remindedof the great epic the Mahabharatha. The hero of thisepic is Lord Krishna. However, the great deeds of LordKrishna are being pictured in a distorted fashion, andone gets the feeling that we are forgetting the truenature and true character of Lord Krishna. Krishna isone who had mixed with the gopis (cowherd maids)and gopikas (cowherds) as water mixes with milk. Hemoved intimately with gopis and gopikas.In order to recognise the sacred truth behind theactions of Krishna, we should realise that in the greatbattle between the Kauravas and the Pandavas, he tookArjuna to the centre of the battlefield and has taughtthe philosophy of Karma or the path of work to Arjunaand to us in the world at large, through the ears ofArjuna. It is said in this context that Dhritharashtraasked a question and described the battlefield asDharmakshetra (Field of virtue)—Kurukshetra (Fieldof action.) Dhritharashtra asked a question according towhich he wondered about the name Kurukshetra. Weshould understand the hidden meaning and significanceof this question. The question says “Mamaka”—that is,those people to whom I am bound down by attachmentand Pandavas who are known for their sathwic (pure)qualities—what is it that these two groups are doing inthe battlefield of Dharmakshetra? We have to understandhere that Dhritharashtra, in his ignorance, asked aquestion which really means, from an inner significancepoint of view, what are the thamo (slothful) and rajo(passionate) gunas (qualities), represented by theKauravas, doing in the battlefield with the Pandavaswho represent sathwic gunas. His ignorance was aboutwhat these thamo and rajo gunas were doing in thebattlefield of his heart along with the sathwic gunas.In this context, to limit this battle between thesequalities to a period of eighteen days is not correct.This battle between the thamo and rajo gunas on theone hand and the sathwic gunas on the other hand, iscontinually being waged, for all time, in the body whichis the Dharmakshetra, in Kurukshetra which symbolisesthe sensory organs. This continuous battle is alwaysgoing on and when the battle is on, Lord Krishna in theform of atma or the witnessing consciousness is awitness of this battle all the time. Krishna here shouldbe understood as the very essence of Mahabharathacome in the human form. This Krishna symbolises theinner consciousness, the unseen atma of Hinduism.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 37 38Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976With a view to propound this aspect of the cult ofKrishna in an ordinarily understood language to thepeople of the world, to the people in the political, in thecultural, and social spheres, Krishna, the Lord, hascome in the ordinary human form.When we think of the situation in the world today,we see that it is a very diverse and a complicatedsituation. We are trying to create a new society in thename of socialism wanting to make all human beingscome to the same level and wanting all human beingsto be exactly the same in regard to their food,requirements, wealth, etc. We are regarding this associalism, but truly this aspect cannot be calledsocialism. There is no support in our history or in ourtraditions to call this socialism. Today, we may beready and in a position to distribute the wealth andproperty and to distribute the houses equally among allhuman beings, but we are not in a position to distributethe totality of desires of all humanity equally betweenall human beings.Only when all the human beings have the samedesires, can we say this. In fact, all the material wealth,earthly possessions, etc., will be distributedautomatically if the desires of all human beings are thesame. The process of equitable distribution between allpeople from the worker to the agriculturist, really startedwith the French revolution. With this original conceptas the starting point, the feeling has arisen that, withevery individual, there must be a position of authority.It has given rise to desires, and the feeling grew thatauthority and power should not be concentrated in thehands of a few people, but that it should be distributedequally among all men. Gradually this conceptunderwent several changes; and when it took a distortedform, it acquired the name of Communism.During both these revolutions, the ideas that gavebirth to them are indeed good and sacred and are worthaccepting; but in practice, the original concept and theideals got distorted. As a result of this, the revolutionswere unsatisfactory.These basic ideas of giving equal opportunity andof distributing wealth equally amongst all human beingsare being regarded as something new and novel, butthis is not correct. Fifty centuries ago, Krishna, in fact,did these very same things and started these ideals.This historic figure, whom we call Krishna, reallyestablished the root of what we, today, call the newsociety of Bharath. This great figure in our historybrought the worker, the agriculturist, and the educatedperson to the same level and exposed the politicalSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 39 40Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976hypocrisy which the rulers of the country showed evenat that time; and brought them to understand theseconcepts well. He ruled like an uncrowned king. Fromancient times, we have had the sacred idea of referringto Krishna as Gopala. In the word Gopala, we havetraditionally come to regard Go as representing a cowor an animal. This is not correct. In the historic times,everything that gave us prosperity and happiness weregarded as Go. We now regard Go as meaning ananimal; but in reality whoever looks after the happinessof humanity and provides for the prosperity of humanityshould be regarded as Gopala.In those days, Krishna propagated the view thatwhat gives prosperity to the world is the Cow. Man,today, is ignorant and is unable to recognise what istrue wealth and what gives true prosperity to humanity.We are now in an unfortunate position of looking atcurrency notes and thinking that they constituteprosperity or wealth. Krishna pushed aside the foolishconcept that these artificial printed notes constitutedwealth. This is not wealth; and he regarded the cowwhich gives us milk as wealth, and this wealth wasdistributed equally among the people. Not only do weget milk, ghee, butter, curds, and other food materialfrom the cow, but from the cow emanate the cattle; andwe use these for purposes of agriculture. We generateall the food that we need from the cow and the cattle.When we talk about the harvest and the milk and thecurds, these are in two different categories. Therequirements of humanity are essentially of two kinds.One is the milk and related products and the other isthe agricultural harvest. These were distributed betweenthe two brothers. Gopala looked after the milk andother related products and the cows; and Balarama,symbolised by the plough, looked after the agricultureand the various products that come through agriculture.Truly the prosperity of the human race depends on theharvest and the milk and milk products. Theserequirements of the people do not drop from the skynor do they generate out of the earth of their ownaccord. They must come through the cattle and theland.Balarama and Krishna were examples who showedthat they do not care about their own physical strengthand that they would sacrifice everything. They werewilling to do hard work and showed through hard workthat prosperity can be achieved by sincere hard work.The Lord Krishna was all-knowing, all-powerful, anddivinity incarnate, and yet he worked as a charioteerfor Arjuna. Krishna was one who recognised theimportance of service to the community; and by hisown practice and by setting an example to others, heSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 41 42Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976showed that service to others was important. After thebattle of Mahabharatha, these were the people whotook the horses to the river, washed them and tendedtheir wounds and applied medicines. They therebydemonstrated that hard work and compassion to allliving beings constitute the duty of all human beings.These two people set such an example in those days.If we hear of Krishna or Balarama, we immediatelythink that they were just ordinary sons of either Yasodaor Devaki. This kind of feeling is on an ordinary humanlevel. But if we look at the root meaning of the nameKrishna, we understand that “One who is an object ofattraction to everyone is Krishna.” There is anothermeaning for this and we can say KarshayateethiKrishna. According to this, Krishna is one who ploughsthe field. Of course, we must realise that the field thatKrishna ploughs is the field of your heart. By thisploughing of your heart, he produces the fruits of peaceand distributes them amongst the human beings. Krishnasymbolises the great person who planted the seeds ofpeace in the hearts of the people, and he distributed thefruits of peace among human beings. Such is the idealpicture of Krishna which we should form in our mind.He used to talk to great people and tell them that thisrepresents the thinking of the great sages of this country,Bharath. There is another aspect to this. He made asacred determination that he would bring peace andhappiness to all human beings by setting an example.He was unmindful of the obstacles that came his wayand was always showing a happy and blissful life.Such was the life of Krishna.He had the nature by which he radiated happiness,irrespective of whether he was in a battlefield, or acremation ground, or in a peaceful place. This was agreat quality of his. This is the reason why even in themidst of a battlefield, he taught the Gita to Arjuna.Gita means and stands for a song. We sing only in ourhappy moments, but Krishna was singing even in abattlefield and was radiating happiness. He waspermanently in bliss and he was permanently happy.This is the reason why he was also called Sath-chith-ananda (Being awareness bliss).As a human being, the divine power that waspresent in him can be seen more in the Mahabharathathan in the Bhagavatha. In a story of Bhagavatha, hewas simply showing some childlike leelas (Divinesport), but in the Mahabharatha he exhibited a uniquecombination of human nature and divine nature. Inorder to proclaim and establish dharma from time totime, he himself stated in the Gita that he will comeagain and again. It has been said that he will appearSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 43 44Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976and reappear every time that dharma declines. Heappears in order to save the good people and punish thebad people and re-establish declining dharma.Here we should understand what dharma is. Ifdharma is destructible, then why should the embodimentof dharma, God, reappear to establish dharma. Ifdharma can disappear like all other destructible things,then it will not be dharma at all. Dharma is notsomething which can be destroyed or weakened. Ifdharma is not destructible, then where is the questionof dharma sthapana (establishment of dharma)? Weshould interpret this as the establishment of the practiceof dharma and not the establishment of dharma itself.What is declining is the practice of dharma, but notdharma. When we look in the traditional way, we seethat dharma in the earliest times, in the Kritha Yuga,was on all four legs, and we believe that later in theThretha Yuga, dharma was standing only on the threelegs. Still later in the Dwapara Yuga, it was only ontwo legs; and it is believed that in the Kali Yuga it isstanding only on one leg.We are also learning from our Puranas and sacredtexts that dharma was declining in the Kritha Yuga andthat Rama came to save dharma and re-establish dharmain the Thretha Yuga. But if Rama re-established dharmain the Thretha Yuga, what is the meaning of saying thatdharma had only three legs in Thretha Yuga? Onceagain, as dharma was declining, we believe that Krishnacame in the Dwapara Yuga to re-establish dharma, andyet we believe that in Dwapara Yuga, dharma stood ontwo legs only. What is the meaning in saying that oneleg has disappeared in the Dwapara Yuga in spite ofKrishna coming to save it. Krishna came in the DwaparaYuga and came for the purpose of re-establishing dharmaand yet we say that in the Kali Yuga, dharma has onlyone leg. If this is so, what is the great thing thatKrishna has done in Dwapara Yuga for the protectionof dharma? These legs have to be interpreted as relatingto the practice of dharma.These Avatars never come to re-establish dharma—dharma was never destroyed—but the practice ofdharma went on decline. In the Kali Yuga, only oneway of practising dharma remained and that isNamasmarana (Remembering God through the Name),and hence we say that there is only one leg in the KaliYuga. When man is born, he is born on two legs. Aftera few months he walks on four legs. After a few moremonths he gets back to the use of two legs. When hegets old, he walks on three legs as he uses a stick. Allthese legs cannot be called legs. They are simplysupports to enable him to move his body in the dailySummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 45 46Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976life and do his duty. They are instruments which enablehim to fulfil his life. So also, as Yugas went on, inorder that dharma might be practised by people, variousmethods have been introduced, and these methods have,from time to time, been described as legs which enablehim to carry on in his life.The basis for dharma is truth and truth is somethingwhich is permanent and so dharma is also somethingwhich is unchangeable. Today some people give ameaning to dharma which is different from the originalmeaning. But at the time when Krishna lived, he wasexplaining the meaning of dharma in a different way.Today we want to interpret dharma by saying that suchand such a person is entitled to be happy, and such andsuch a person is entitled to all comforts. Today’s questionis why should a wealthy person alone enjoy life? Whyshould a rich man alone enjoy the pleasures of life?Why should not a poor man also be given wealth? Thewealth should be distributed equally between the poorand the rich people. These questions constitute whatwe call socialism of today.In today’s socialism, we find a hidden andconcealed intent of wanting to provide prosperity toonly a certain kind of people, and not wanting the sameprosperity for another category of people. But theembodiment of dharma in the human form of Krishnawas one who desired the well-being of the entirehumanity. The true interpretation of dharma is to askfor the well-being of the entire human community inthe universe. In this context, you may begin to arguethat Krishna himself behaved as if he wanted to likesome people and favour some people and dislike otherpeople. But the situations were such that Krishna, whowas all-knowing, had to make the determination oftaking a certain line of action. We should look back andsee what Krishna said when Arjuna, in a state of greatdespondency, refused to go to battle against his ownkinsmen, kill them, see their blood and yet become aruler. Krishna told Arjuna, “I am giving the future ofDhritharashtra and his family. Listen to it. He has onehundred sons but they are all selfish. There is no placefor selfishness in this world, and all these must bekilled. Even though Dhritharashtra had one hundredsons, there will not be even a single son left to performthe obsequies for him when he dies. Good or bad,punya or papa are not something which others willgive you. These are simply direct results of whateveractions we perform.” What Krishna said and agreed towas that under such circumstances, to fight a battle wasthe right kind of dharma. The reason for this is thatthese people were born to destroy such a nice family.For this process of destruction, the one, who is born ofSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 47 48Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976a slave, has become the help. And in order to add fuelto this fire, there was Sakuni. The battle that was goingto come up, the fire that was about to rage wassomething that cannot be stopped. If you want to savethe world and the destruction thereof by this fire, battlecannot be avoided. You have to accept the power of thebattle and of the arrows. The fire of adharma hasspread and taken possession so much that if you wantto remove this fire, the only way that can be done is tohave a heavy rain and not just ordinary drops of shower.Also this rain must be the rain of arrows. Krishnabelieved that the battle and this shower of arrows wasnecessary to stop the fire of adharma engulfing thewhole world.The youth of today may get a doubt. Krishnawanted the peace of this world and yet he encouragedthis big battle in which forty lakhs of people werekilled. Is this called himsa (violence) or ahimsa (non-violence)? Even then, Krishna gave an appropriateanswer to this. He said, “Arjuna! Let us take the caseof a cancerous growth on the body. This cancerousgrowth gives pain to the whole human body, althoughthe growth itself is confined to a localised area. In thatcancer, you have so many small germs present in thewound. When the doctor performs an operation on thiscancerous growth, he will no doubt kill millions ofgerms. He will not think that he is going to kill amillion germs and therefore stop the operation. If hedoes not perform the operation, the germs will be savedbut the patient will suffer. He will surely kill the disease-causing germs and save the patient.” Krishna furthersaid, “In this body of the world this is the situationnow. The cancer has come in the form of the Kauravaswho are ruling. The whole world has got upset, and astate of anarchy is prevailing in the world now. Thereis also a decline of dharma. All families who are livingpeacefully are being broken up. Therefore, I will be thedoctor, with Arjuna as the compounder. I will performthe operation of cancer in the form of the battle ofMahabharatha. In this battle or the operation, 40,00,000(four million) of disease-causing germs will be killedfor the benefit of the world. Is this bad or is this goodfor the world?”We can also look at this from another angle andwe will see that all kinds of attachments andrelationships are only bodily relationships. God ispresent in everyone and some people suffer because oftheir past actions while the others will not suffer becauseof the good actions done by them. In this context, wecannot decide what is right and what is wrong. Rightand wrong depend on the actions. One body getsrelationships with another body because of the bodilySummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 49 50Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976relationship, but there is no such relationship betweenone atma and another atma. There is only one atma inevery human body.In our body there are several organs. Although thebody is composed of so many organs, if one of theorgans gets sick and has to be separated, we will beprepared to cut it away and remove it. In the same way,if we recognise that the very ancient jiva (individualsoul) who has entered this body, taking it as a temporaryresidence; and if a portion gets diseased, there is nothingwrong in cutting away and removing the diseased partof the body. Here Krishna is only demonstrating hisauthority.It is a very difficult matter to recognise and acceptauthority. There is a small example for this. In a hospitalyou may find a very proficient and capable doctor. Hemay be a very reputed person in his field. He comes toa decision that for a particular person an operation hasto be performed at a particular time the next morning.This will be notified in the notice board and allconcerned relatives will be informed. There is no secretabout this. Everybody will know about this and thepatient will be carried into the operation room. Thedoctor takes him into the operation room and performsthe operation; but due to some misfortune, the patientdies. As a result of this, the police will not come andarrest the doctor. In the same context, if two peopleenter into a quarrel and one of them inflicts a smallwound on the other man with a razor blade, the policewill immediately come and register a case and arrestthe man who has caused the injury. In the secondexample, the person does not have the authority toinflict a wound with a razor blade while in the firstcase, the doctor has the right to perform the operation,even in public.Sometimes we interpret and call one of these as ahelp or a good deed while the other one is called aharm. We take the case of a diabetic patient with awound on his hand. The wound may not heal and mayspread to the whole body in the form of gangrene. Thedoctor will have to come and say that to prevent furtherspreading of this, the hand will have to be removed. Hewill then amputate the whole hand, and this is a gooddeed done to the body.In another case, if there is a lady who is wearingbangles on her hand, a thief may come and decide totake away the bangles by cutting the hand and takingaway the hand with the bangles. While the thief and thedoctor have both done the same thing, what the thiefhas done is harm and what the doctor has done is good.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 51 52Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976When there is a young child who unknowinglysets fire to a house, we think that he has done greatharm and we begin to punish him. However, whenHanuman burnt down the whole of Lanka, which wasas prosperous as heaven itself, we not only did notpunish him but we regard him as a sacred person. Thereason for this is that in the first case something goodwas burnt down while in the second case what Hanumanburnt down was the sin itself. He caused injury to thedemons and the Rakshasas while the small boy causedinjury to good people.Thus, in order to remove or promote the demoniacqualities in us, we have the complete right and power.It is in the context of recognising these variousconflicting situations, in order to preach the innermeaning of these conflicting situations, Krishna givesvarious instances which will proclaim to us what goodthings are. Krishna was a selfless person, and he alwaysdesired the well-being of the human community. In thatcontext, whatever he may have done, was always good,and there was never anything bad in what he did. Hehimself conquered many kingdoms, but he never becamea king of any of these kingdoms. He gave thosekingdoms to several people. Whatever he may havedone, there was always an inner meaning. All his actionswere directed towards preaching an inner meaning.To take another instance, the battle went on foreighteen days, the Kauravas were defeated and thePandavas were victorious. In the victory, Krishna wasthe charioteer and Arjuna was in the chariot. After thevictory, they came back to their mansion. Arjuna wasin the nature of a human being and there was a littleremnant of ego in him. As is the common practice eventoday, the driver of a car is expected to come and openthe door of the car when the owner will get down fromthe car. In the same way, on that day also, when thechariot came and stood in front of his house, he insistedon Krishna getting down first and opening the door.Krishna did not agree to this; and, in fact, in somewhatstrong language, he admonished Arjuna, asked him toget down first and go inside. Not recognising the innersignificance of what has been given to him as acommand, Arjuna still indulged in an argument withKrishna. Arjuna thought that in the battle, victory wason their side because of Krishna; and he was afraid thatsome danger might come to him if he enters into anargument with Krishna; and so somewhat reluctantly,he finally accepted what Krishna has said. As soon asArjuna got out and no sooner did Arjuna go inside,Krishna, in one leap, jumped out of the chariot. Assoon as Krishna jumped out, the entire chariot was inflames. All the Pandavas who were witnessing thiswere surprised and asked Krishna why the chariot hadSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 53 54Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976burnt away like that. Then Krishna explained that duringthe battle, very powerful weapons were sent by heroeslike Karna, Bhishma, and others and all these weaponswere subdued and kept under his feet. If he had not gotdown first, the weapons would have exploded, killingArjuna and the others. Krishna explained that this wasthe reason for asking Arjuna to jump out first and hisjumping out later.In order to save his devotees, God plans so manydifferent actions in several different ways. Devotees,not being able to recognise and understand the innermeaning of such actions, misunderstand and think thatGod is giving them unnecessary difficulties. Man hasonly external vision. God has inner vision. Paramatmais always caring for the well-being and good of hispeople. Whatever he does, he does it for the well-beingof his devotees. Even if a son, who has been broughtup very carefully by the mother, makes a mistake, themother will punish the son by giving a slap. When wesee this, we feel that a mother who has brought up theson with such care, love, and tenderness is harsh inbeating the child; but the mother who beats the childdoes so with affection. In the same manner—God, theuniversal father, will punish his devotees, when needbe with prema and with love. Just as a consequence ofthat, we should not get the idea that God is wanting topunish people. God is always full of grace. He nevergets angry. However, at times He uses words which areharsh, but He is not harsh. It is only the words that areharsh, His heart is soft like Amritha (Divine nectar).We must first acquire competence to understandthe kind of love and tenderness which God entertainstowards His devotees. Pleasure comes out of pain. Weshould recognise that all pain will ultimately end inpleasure. Because the Pandavas were in the jungles fortwelve years and were hiding themselves unrecognisedfor another year, the people had an opportunity to seetheir divine qualities.Because of the many obstacles and troubles thatcame to Prahlada, and because of the punishments thatwere given to him, it was possible for the rest of theworld to know how great Prahlada’s devotion was.Prahlada never had tears in his eyes and he neverexhibited any pain when the Rakshasas were harminghim. He was only uttering the name of the Lord andwas asking the Lord to come to him. Because of sucha situation, he was able to promote devotion and showothers what real faith and devotion can do. On theother hand, had Prahlada been looked after by hisfather with care and tenderness and if he took him inhis lap, how would Prahlada’s devotion and faith beknown to the rest of the world?Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 55 56Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976So all the pains and difficulties that we get willultimately turn out as means of getting happiness andpleasure. Even a quality diamond does not get its valueunless we cut the facets on it. Even pure gold will notbe turned into a beautiful ornament unless it is repeatedlybeaten hard and put into fire. In all pains and troubles,we should recognise only paths for getting ultimatehappiness. So we should be prepared to accept pain. Toseek pleasure alone and not to welcome pain is notright. This sacred content of the Mahabharatha and thesacred teachings of Krishna regarding the conduct ofdevotees and other aspects will be given to you fromtomorrow. I hope that the students will listen, understand,and benefit by this story of the Mahabharatha. I willbring this discourse to a close now.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 57to guide us is a very rare thing. When we take anoverview of our ancient history, we find that there isone such individual who was able to give a lead and setan ideal example in all spheres of activity. Krishna wasa rare individual. He could be regarded as an ideal forthe entire world. But to be able to understand theseaspects of Krishna, we have to make some attemptsand effort. Truly, if we want to comprehend these idealaspects of Krishna, we have to push aside, to someextent, the divinity present in him and concentrate onthe human aspects of his life and work. So long as weconcentrate on his divine aspects, the good humanqualities in him will not come to our attention in theproper perspective. Also, if we remain in the positionin which we now are, and if we want to experience thegreat human qualities which he exhibited, this is notpossible.We will have to make a journey backwards intime and move to the times in which he lived. It willbe a difficult matter to make a comparison between thetime and environment in which he lived and the timeand environment in which we now live. Today, thecitizens of this country are prepared to worship man;but they are not prepared to understand man.Understanding the kind of divine strength that is presentin human beings is possible only if we attempt to do sothrough human nature.60Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976
4. Two Great Human Qualities OfHumility and Obedience CharacterisedThe Krishna Avatar
Do you know why you have beengiven your vision and your eyes?Is it for seeing everything that isaround you? No, certainly not. It has beengiven to you to help you to see the supremeone, the omnipotent Divinity.Pavitratma Swarupas,Today what our country requires is idealism. Inthe social and political sphere, we have to have a goalwhich will be our ideal which we have to aspire for. Inany country and in each sphere, one particular individualmay be an ideal. But an individual who in all spheres—in the social, political, spiritual, and economic—is ableTherefore, if today we want to understand andcomprehend the human aspects of Krishna, we willhave to make a journey into the times in which helived. Many may not have understood this; but if welook at the legends around Sri Krishna, then it willbecome perfectly obvious to us that humility andobedience were two characteristic features of him.People of these times are likely to get some doubtwhether humility and obedience are qualities whichwere, at all, really present in him. The reason for thisdoubt is that the kind of Krishna which we see depictedin the cinemas today, and the description of Krishnathat we read in the texts of today, differ very muchfrom facts, and hence we get this doubt. In that context,we are also likely to get a doubt as to whether therewere such sacred ideas in those times, in Bharath.Just for the sake of earning some money and forthe sake of temporary pleasure, we have been distortingour own sacred history. In fact it has become commonpractice for us to misrepresent our sacred history. Whenwe see these things, we get the picture that Krishnawas always fighting with kings and removing themfrom their thrones. We also think that he was blindlyworshipped by his devotees. These are the only twofeatures that we notice. But if we carefully look at thecontents of the Mahabharatha, written by Vyasa, weget the unmistakable feeling that humility and obediencewere present in Krishna in a large measure. In fact, wewill see that they were present in excess of what acommon man would accept.There is one simple illustrative example for this.One day, the battle was raging in a terrible manner, andon that day, Karna was using his deadly weapons.Unable to withstand the fury of Karna, the Pandavaarmy was running hither and thither and the Pandavaswere very hurt. Dharmaraja hurried to his camp. Whenhe returned to his camp, he found that Arjuna wasengaged in another part of the battlefield and Dharmarajahad no help. Dharmaraja was suffering from his wounds,suppressed his excitement, and was waiting for Arjuna’sreturn to camp. Arjuna returned to the camp after sometime. Dharmaraja was, after all, a human being andwas suffering a great deal from the physical injury thatwas caused by the weapons and could not bear it. In hisexcitement, he started blaming Arjuna and his Gandiva.Dharmaraja looked at Arjuna and said, “What is theuse of your Gandiva and all your penance by whichyou acquired these sacred weapons? Karna has beencausing havoc in our camp and you have not been ableto retaliate.” In this manner, when Dharmaraja showedexcitement, Arjuna also showed excitement, and bothof them were in an excited mood. Each one tried toSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 61 62Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976console the other. Arjuna went into such a fury that hecould not contain himself and was about to hitDharmaraja with the Gandiva.At that critical moment, Krishna entered the campand the humility which was shown by Krishna wassuch that the Pandavas could never forget it thereafter.Krishna held the hands of Arjuna and pleaded with himand said that in the excitement of war, he should notdisobey his brother; and then he went to Dharmarajaand touched his feet and said that he will not let go ofhis feet till he has excused Arjuna with the fullness ofhis heart. He told Dharmaraja that the Five Pandavasare like the five pranas (vital airs). If among the fivebrothers, who are like the five pranas, such differencescome up and if these differences be known to theworld, what was going to happen to this world? Hewould not leave the camp until he was assured thatDharmaraja had excused Arjuna.In that situation, when Dharmaraja found thatKrishna was showing an unprecedented amount ofhumility and obedience, tears came out of the eyes ofDharmaraja. He said that the humility and obedienceshown by Krishna were because of the great love whichKrishna had for the Pandavas. Immediately he went upto Arjuna and asked him to forget about the quarrel andapologise to him. We should ask ourselves why Krishnaput himself in this situation where he had to go andtouch the feet of Dharmaraja. We will then get theanswer that this is because of the affection and lovewhich Krishna had for the Pandavas.As a result of his prema to his devotees, God willbe willing to put himself in any objectionable position.Krishna is one who demonstrated that as a result of hisprema to his devotees, he is willing to subject himselfto any situation. Here, we should ask ourselves whetherwe should take the human qualities in Krishna andappreciate them or take the divine qualities in Krishnaand take that as an example. In the later case, we willimmediately get a doubt as to why he is submittinghimself to these things if he is a divine personality. Inthe context of the society in which we are living, asociety which is decrepit in many ways—we shouldtake the human qualities of Krishna and study them.Such a study will benefit us.He never modified what he wanted to say either toplease others or displease others. He always uttered thetruth, irrespective of whether it pleases or hurts others.On one occasion Dharmaraja wanted to perform aRajasuya yagna
.1 He called all his brothers and toldthem that they should support him. The brothersSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 63 64Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976immediately accepted the orders of the eldest brotherand said that he was the right person to perform suchyagna, and they were ready to help him. The next dayhe called for various pundits and priests, and hementioned to them his intention of performing the yagna.The pundits also praised the idea and said thatDharmaraja was the right person to do such a thing.They said many things to please him. Next day he alsosent for Dhaumya and Vyasa and told them of hisintention of performing the Rajasuya Yagna and soughttheir blessings.However, Dharmaraja was not satisfied with theapproval which he got from these quarters. He thoughtthat Krishna was the very basis of all things and heasked Arjuna to go and bring him. When Krishnacame, Dharmaraja touched his feet and told him of hisintention of performing the Rajasuya Yagna. Krishnalistened to all that Dharmaraja had to say, very quietly,and with a smile. Krishna was not prepared to approvethe idea just to please Dharmaraja. For a moment helifted his eyebrows and told Dharmaraja that he shouldgive up the idea of performing the Rajasuya Yagnabecause he did not yet have the right to do so. So longas Dharmaraja was not the undisputed king of thiscountry and so long as there were other kings likeSisupala, Dantavakra, and so on, who were equallystrong or stronger than him, he would not have theright to perform the Rajasuya Yagna. When he is ableto conquer and subdue these other kings such asSisupala, Dantavakra, and Jarasandha, he will acquirethe right to perform the Yagna. The reason for this isthat to perform any Yagna, a certain amount of rightwas required. To perform a certain Yagna, there has tobe a lot of wealth and a lot of help coming from theother kings. At that time, Dharmaraja could not counton the support of many powerful kings. So long asthere were kings who did not regard themselves as hissubjects and were ready to help, there would, in fact,be a lot of trouble for the people.Here, we should really enquire as to what thereason was for Krishna to tell Dharmaraja to go andconquer powerful kings like Sisupala, Dantavakra, andothers. These kings were intensely selfish and woulddo anything in order to maintain themselves in theruling position. In that process, they were doing a lot ofharm to the people with the ultimate objective ofselfishly retaining their possessions.Krishna had the idea that if there are kings who donot have the welfare of the people in their minds, whoare only selfish in their approach, there will not be anypeace in the world. He thought that such rulers wereSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 65 66Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976undesirable and felt that they should be removed. Whenthe ruling power is in the hands of selfish people,knowing that the king will do things which will simplyhelp him in his selfish ambitions, even at the cost of theinterests of the people, Krishna told Dharmaraja thatsuch rulers should be removed. Krishna felt that thepeople in a country are like the organs of a body of theruler, and the ruler of the country is like the heart of thecountry so far as the people are concerned. The intimaterelationships that exist between the heart and the bodyshould be the kind of intimate relationship that shouldexist between the ruler and the ruled in a country.The country and the body are like the object andthe image. Just as an individual makes all attempts toescape from an injury that may be coming to his body,so also when there is some harm that is foreseen for thecountry, the people of the country should make allattempts to remove such danger. Without any personalmotive, Krishna very clearly stated that so long as thereare such selfish rulers in the country, the country is notgoing to have any peace and security. So, if Dharmarajawanted to have the right to perform such a Yagna, hemust first remove such kings.Dharmaraja accepted the orders of Krishna. Withthe blessing of Krishna, he started to first conquer andremove King Jarasandha. With the help from Arjunaand Bheema, it was possible for Dharmaraja to removeking Jarasandha from the kingdom. Having done this,Dharmaraja prepared for the Rajasuya Yagna. Krishnahimself was ready to give all help to Dharmaraja in theconduct of the Rajasuya Yagna, and Krishna was helpinghim in every way.Dharmaraja was entrusting each individual with aspecific task. Vyasa was nominated as the chief priest.Arjuna was asked to attend to all the preparations forthe Yagna. Sahadeva was entrusted with the task ofreceiving the guests. Kripacharya was given the task ofgiving gifts to various people. As each individual wasbeing given tasks, Krishna was also standing with foldedhands, and he said, “Dharmaraja, you are now theundisputed king of this country and I am one of yoursubjects, I stand before you and ask that I be given anappropriate task.”Dharmaraja was somewhat hurt and said that allthe territory and Kingdom of which he was the rulerand all the wealth which he was enjoying were all theresult of the divine blessing of Krishna, and it was notright for him to ask to be entrusted with work. ThenKrishna said that at that point of time, Dharmarajashould see only the human aspect of Krishna and forgetSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 67 68Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976the divine aspect. He further said, “You should not lookat me and regard me as one individual citizen amongstyour people and you should not think of me in theaspect of the divine atma.” Dharmaraja then addressedKrishna and said that he should choose any work thathe would like. Krishna said that he would like to serveeveryone, and that he would like to wash the feet of allthe guests and sprinkle the water on his head. Herequested that this duty be given to him. He statedfurther to Dharmaraja that he was the leader whileKrishna was the follower and that as a follower hewould like to serve people.Krishna was all-knowing and all-powerful and oneshould try to understand the meaning of Krishna offeringto do such service and the humility that underlies suchan offer. Truly, in the books that we read, or the cinemasthat we see, or in the dramas that we see, when we lookat Krishna, we come to the conclusion that all theaspects in which he is portrayed are indeed divineaspects and that there is nothing human in him. Krishnalived in the Dwapara Yuga; and for us who live in theKali Yuga, it will be very difficult to understand thehuman qualities of Krishna. If we want to understandKrishna’s conduct, then the right thing for us to do isto go back to Krishna’s time and not bring Krishna toour time.The young people who really want to understandand comprehend Krishna as an ideal human examplemust be prepared to travel back and look into the timeswhen Krishna lived. He was the great individual whoset up an example for ideal conduct in the social,political, and spiritual fields.On one occasion, Arjuna was very despondentand he was preparing to commit suicide. Realising andfeeling that if this was to be allowed, it would be a veryshameful act and a blot on the entire family of the greatPandavas, Krishna went and entreated Arjuna to refrainfrom such an act, and convinced him that it should notbe done. Under many circumstances and in manydifficult situations, he was protecting the Pandavas aseyelids protect the eyes.On one occasion when Krishna went as anAmbassador, Dhritharashtra insulted him and told himthat the Pandavas and Kauravas were all brothers, andone set of brothers should not be looked at in anyspecial and privileged manner. Even in that situation,Krishna was prepared to tell the truth to Dhritharashtrawithout fear or favour. He told Dhritharashtra that therecan never be friendship between fire and water. He saidthat he was always on the side of Pandavas because thePandavas were the embodiments of dharma and theySummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 69 70Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976always protected dharma. On the other hand, theKauravas were evil and bad people. While the evil andbad people were giving trouble to those who follow thedharmic way of life, Krishna could not remain a passivewitness to such a situation. In the body, Dharmarajawas like the head, Arjuna was like the shoulders,Bheema was like the tummy, Nakula and Sahadevawere like the legs, and in that body composed of thePandavas, Krishna was the heart. So the kind of closerelationship that existed between the Pandavas andKrishna was like the relationship that exists betweenthe various parts of the body and the heart. If thePandavas that constitutes the body are not true, there isno heart called Krishna; and if there is no heart calledKrishna, there is no body called the Pandavas. Thiskind of a relationship that exists between the Pandavason the one hand and Krishna on the other was toldwithout fear or favour in an assembly where evil peoplewere sitting, with the intention of hurting Krishna andinsulting Him. For this, we should take Krishna as anideal example of a person who is willing to speak thetruth, irrespective of the consequences.This was not a one-way love. The Pandavas werealso regarding Krishna as their very life. It is only asa consequence of the prema which the Pandavas hadfor Krishna that such a two-way relationship existed.The kind of tree that sprouts will be determinedby the nature of the seed. The smell which one getswhen one has a belch will be determined by the kindof food which one eats. The kind of cake you will getwill be determined by the kind of flour you will use inmaking the cake. When Krishna was sent to undertakepeace negotiations, the amount of trouble and thehesitation which the Pandava brothers had is not easilyunderstood by others. It is very well-known to Krishna.The Pandava brothers, particularly Nakula andSahadeva, were worried that their elder brother wassending Krishna, the Paramatma, into a court filledwith evil people. They were greatly worried about apossible harm these people might do to Krishna. UntilKrishna returned safely after completing thenegotiations, Nakula and Sahadeva did not even take asip of water. They were living in fear and dread ofgetting bad news about Krishna and were constantlythinking of Krishna and his welfare.When Krishna returned, the youngest of thePandavas, namely Sahadeva, embraced Krishna andexpressed himself in the following terms, “I was ingreat hesitation and doubt when Krishna, my brother-in-law, was being sent to negotiate peace. I was worriedthat harm would come to him. Indeed, I was wanting toask them to drop the idea of sending him for theSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 71 72Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976negotiations; but I thought that if I gave rise to such anexpression, it would have been considered a bad omen.So I kept quiet. However, I am glad that Krishna hasnow returned safely.” So saying, he embraced him andexpressed great pleasure.Because the Pandavas had such great faith andaffection towards Krishna, Krishna in turn was alsoprotecting them at all times. The kind of connectionthat exists between God and his devotees is alwaysstrengthened by the bonds of prema. Even Lakshmicould not bind Narayana to herself, but Narayana wasbound down by the prema of Prahlada.When we look at the Avatar of Narasimha,
2 weget a feeling of terror. When we look back at the storyof Prahlada and Narasimha, we will realise that whenNarasimha was giving darshan (Seeing the Lord) toPrahlada, he showed great kindness. But it looked as ifPrahlada was standing in a corner full of fear. At thattime, Narasimha looked at Prahlada and asked him ifhe was afraid of the fearsome figure which had cometo punish his father; but Prahlada explained that he wasnot afraid of the Lord as it was the sweetest form onecan comprehend. He said that he was indeed happy tobe able to see the Lord. Narasimha then asked whyPrahlada was afraid. To this Prahlada replied that hewas afraid because the divine vision which he was thenhaving was likely to disappear in a few moments andhe would soon be left alone. The fear which wastroubling Prahlada was that God will leave him in thisworld and disappear. Prahlada wanted to ask God notto leave him. God’s divine vision and divine beauty aresuch that only his devotees can appreciate.Hiranyakasyapu went on saying that God does not existanywhere. On the other hand, when Prahlada said thatGod will be found wherever we want, to him indeed,God was present wherever he sought him, and this issimply the result of Yad Bhaavam tad Bhavathi (Thethoughts will determine the action). Whatever you havein mind will be reflected back to you as a reality.Today, we are performing Puja (ritual worship) toGod, and we are worshipping and wanting to followhim. For whose benefit are we doing all these? We aredoing all this for our own benefit and not for thebenefit of God. The reason why we do all this is thatby thinking of the good qualities that are present inGod, we will also get such good qualities.There is a small example for this. When we havea thought in our mind about something which is exciting,then we find that our words show excitement and ouractions also show excitement. On the other hand, if inSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 73 74Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976our mind there are thoughts which are sorrowful, thenour external body will show the sorrow that our mindis experiencing. We need not go so far. If we think ofa lime and think that we are cutting it, you will findthat there is saliva on the tongue in your mouth. Actually,the lime juice has not come and touched your tongue.The thought of the lime juice makes your tongue water.If we think of some dirty matter while eating our food,there will be some disturbance in our mind. That iswhy it is our traditional practice that while people areeating their food, no one should go and talk to them ofdirty matter. The reason for this is that the moment wethink of something and a thought passes through ourmind, our heart attunes itself to that kind of thought.When we are sitting here, if somebody shouts out thatthere is a scorpion which is seen, irrespective of whetherthere is a scorpion or not, the very word will make usall shudder and go away from here. Therefore, aparticular thing which enters our mind will make us getattuned to that thought in all our actions. So it followsthat if we keep on thinking of the divine qualities ofGod, there is a chance of ourselves developing thosedivine qualities in us.It is in this context that it has been said Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavati. The knowledge of Brahmanwill turn you into Brahman himself. Therefore, weshould promote good ideas, good ideals, and goodthoughts. The result of that is that good will be promotedin us. The real meaning of this is not that God issomewhere and listening to our prayer and that he willcome all the way from somewhere to solve ourdifficulties. In a worldly plane, if someone goes near aperson in a position of authority and praises him thenhe may do some good for the person who praises him,but God is not like this person who is in a position ofauthority. Even if you pray to God in your mind, Hisgrace will help you. Therefore, prayers to God, singingthe glory of God, and thinking of the divine qualities ofGod are being done by us for our own good and for thepurpose of acquiring some of them for ourselves.Students!In many ways you are attempting to understandvarious sacred aspects like the Mahabharatha, Gita,etc.; but so long as you just listen to them and do notput them into practice, there will be no good at all. Willthe Brinjals described in the puranas help you in anyway? However hungry a tiger may be, will it eat apoori? There may be any kind of attraction, but a realdevotee will never think of things which are worthless.Whatever obstacles may come in your way, providedyou do not bend in the context of those obstacles andSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 75 76Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976have your faith firmly implanted in your mind, then wecan build up a Krishna army. You must all make up your minds to have anunwavering faith and a steadfast vision. This is anattempt which you should make. Whatever you havegrasped in your hand, you have already got. Until yourobjective is achieved, do not let go the hold. Whateveryou have desired for, you have expressed it; and untilyour desired objective is fulfilled, do not turn back.What you have asked, you have asked. Until what youhave asked is granted to you, do not give up. Whateveryou have in your mind, you have already thought of it.Never move away from that thought till it is fulfilled.Seeing your determination and devotion, God will yieldand grant your desire and what you want, or it may bethat you will be tired and you may collapse. Until then,do not change your mind. That is the right path, but togive up your determination is not the right path.Students!I am hoping that you will turn back a little into thehistory of Bharath and look at the ideal life and idealexample which Krishna has set before us. You shouldhave that as your objective and develop yourselves asfuture citizens of this country. I bless you and bringthis discourse to a close.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 77he took to prevent war between the Pandavas andKauravas and to establish security and peace in thecountry, at that time, will be evident if only we look atVyasa’s Sanskrit text.Krishna started for Hastinapur in order to negotiatefor peace. When Duryodhana, Dussasana, and otherKauravas learnt that Krishna was coming to negotiatepeace, they made all preparations and arranged areception and welcome for Krishna in the very outskirtsof the city of Hastinapur. When the great chariot came,it was brought to the front of the city so that a fittingwelcome could be given. As soon as Krishna got out ofthe chariot, Duryodhana and Dussasana met him andappraised him of the fact that a special welcome hadbeen arranged for him and a spacious mansion hadbeen prepared for his stay. They invited him for aspecial dinner on that day in the palace.Krishna, who was the very embodiment of peace,appraised Duryodhana and Dussasana that he camethere as an Ambassador to negotiate for peace and thatit was not right for one who had come in the role of anAmbassador to accept their hospitality even before one’smission was completed. He said that he would gladlyaccept their hospitality after the mission was completedas it would be proper to do so. With these pleasing80Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976
5. Krishna Was Always A Lover OfPeace And Never A Warmonger
Do you know why you have beengiven legs? Are these legs givento you to go round all the streetsand the narrow lanes in a purposelessmanner? No, they have been given so thatyou may visit the temple of God.Prema Swarupas!By superficial observers, Krishna is not regardedas a peace-loving person. People generally think of himas one who encouraged battles and fights. They alsothink that the bloodshed that was caused in the battle ofMahabharatha was due to Krishna’s love for war. Thisis not a true picture of Krishna. In fact, he was verypeace-loving; and the efforts he made and the troublewords, he went to the house of Vidura. It was a greatsurprise to Vidura to see Krishna come to his house forhe never even dreamt that Krishna would come to hishouse. He was overjoyed, and he thought that it washis great fortune, and he made all arrangementsaccordingly.Vidura gave a hearty welcome to Krishna andthey both sat down for a meal. After the meal, bothVidura and Krishna sat together for conversation. ThenVidura said that to him it did not appear proper thatKrishna should come, for negotiating peace, to thehouse of bad people who may do him harm. He feltthat knowing everything, Krishna should not have comethere to negotiate for peace.Then Krishna said that it was not as if he did notknow that Kauravas were people with bad qualities andevil intentions. Despite this, he felt that when innocentpeople were being troubled and bloodshed wasforthcoming, then everyone who had a responsibilityshould try his best to prevent injustice and bloodshed,and it was in this context that he was trying to negotiate.If we really look at the inner significance of whatKrishna had said at that time, we will find that Krishnawas really concerned with the peace and security of thepeople; and we will understand that Krishna was trulypeace-loving and that he was not a warmonger. Allthese aspects and acts of Krishna, which were beingdone on a human plane, should be understood by us ashaving been done by a human being on a human planeand not by divinity.Vidura then expressed his doubt and said thatthese peace negotiations were not going to reach asuccessful completion because he knew that theKauravas had everything ready. All those who wereconnected with them were also invited to be ready. Theweapons were made ready. Under these circumstances,he did not expect any peace.Krishna then told Vidura that according to Dharma,which was only too well known to Vidura, all effortsshould be made to establish peace. He said thatirrespective of the success or failure, we must do ourduty.The day dawned and Krishna got into his chariotand moved into the city of Hastinapur. That day thecity looked gay, the streets were decorated with arches,and all the streets were a pleasant sight to see. InHastinapur, the people came forward to welcome himlike the waves of an ocean would welcome the moon.In that environment, he moved on, smiling and lookingat the people of Hastinapur. As soon as he came nearSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 81 82Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976the Palace, Duryodhana and Karna were standing thereto welcome him.Women were bringing flowers so that they may beshowered on Krishna. Fragrant flowers were showeredon Krishna from the terraces. It appeared to Krishnathat all this was prearranged by the Kauravas to pleasehim. However, all these external symptoms did neitherelate him nor bother him; and he entered the mansion.As Karna and Duryodhana were showing him the wayto go into the assembly, Kritavarma was followingKrishna. As soon as Krishna entered the assembly, allthe kings and subordinate kings stood up and madeobeisance to him.As soon as Krishna entered the assembly,Dhritharashtra, with the help of others, came to greethim. He embraced Krishna and was moving ahead ofKrishna with the help of Bhishma, and Drona requestedKrishna to occupy the seat of honour. Krishna did notoccupy the seat of honour and told Drona that, as hevery well knew, there were very learned and eminentMaharishis and yogis who were gathered in thatassembly to observe what was going to happen to thepeace and prosperity of the country; and it was notproper to offer the seat of honour to him. In accordancewith Krishna’s instruction, Bhishma called variouspersons and arranged to seat them in accordance withtheir importance.As soon as all these persons were seated, Krishnamade obeisance to the members and then occupied hisseat. After that Duryodhana, Karna, Bhishma, and Dronaoccupied their respective seats. After all these elderswere seated, the other subordinate kings also took theirseats, making obeisance to the assembly. In thatassembly, everyone was anxious to hear what Krishnawas going to say and know what message Krishna hadbrought. In their anxiety to listen to him and not missanything, they all maintained pin-drop silence. Everyindividual in that assembly had probably looked atKrishna many times earlier, but they were all stilllooking at Krishna anxiously with wide-open eyes,expecting something very special from him. While hisblack curly hair and pearl-white teeth were attractingpeople, he turned towards Dhritharashtra.The first words uttered by Krishna were that thereshould be peace between the Kauravas and the Pandavas.He then said, “Let the two families of Kauravas andPandavas remain friendly forever and establish peaceand prosperity in the world. The entire world wantedpeace and this was the only word that they were lookingfor.” He further said that he had come there as aSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 83 84Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976messenger and ambassador in the context of wantingpeace. He did not stop at this. He went to Dhritharashtraand said that whatever was going to be decided in thatassembly was a matter of great concern to him and thatDhritharashtra should think carefully before arriving ata decision. The Pandavas lost their father when theywere children. Such innocent children were brought upby Dhritharashtra, and he was responsible for theirwell-being. The Pandavas were happy that, althoughtheir natural father was not alive, there was someonewho was affectionate to them.Krishna went on to say, “Like your natural sons,you have looked after these adopted sons as well asbrought them up. It is not right for you to show hatredtowards such children whom you have yourself broughtup. In obedience to you, they were in a forest fortwelve years; and they lived incognito for one year;and because you told them that you would give themtheir kingdom if they came back after those years, theyhave now come back.I am now going to tell you what Dharmaraja toldme before I came here. Dharmaraja asked me to conveyto you, if they had committed any mistake knowinglyor unknowingly, they should be forgiven and all thatthey were seeking was the affection of Dhritharashtra.He said that your love and affection were more importantto them than any kingdom which may or may not begiven to them. Dharmaraja said that there were noreasons whatsoever for any hatred on the part ofDhritharashtra towards the Pandavas. If there were any,they were prepared to come and ask for pardon fromDhritharashtra. When we hear such words from thePandavas, we see how good and how sacred they were.We will also realise that Krishna, the negotiator ofpeace, was in no way interested in promoting war.People, particularly students like you, shouldunderstand how much trouble Krishna took, and towhat extent he went in the promotion of peace. All thekings and monarchs assembled in the hall heard allthis; and while reflecting on the circumstances ofnegotiations, their eyes were filled with tears of sorrow.All those who were sitting in the assembly were deeplymoved at the noble qualities of Krishna who wasshowing great respect to the elders and great love toeveryone. But what could they do in the presence andin the context of the evil-doers, the Kauravas? No onecould object to what the Kauravas were doing. Everyindividual in that assembly developed good feelingtowards the Pandavas.In this manner, Krishna was telling Dhritharashtrain addition to negotiating for peace, various thingsSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 85 86Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976which will help the cause of the Pandavas. It is not asif Dhritharashtra did not know the truth and strength ofwhat Krishna was saying, and it was not as if he didnot understand the sacredness thereof. He also knewthat his sons were undertaking something which waswrong. But he had no alternative. He had become aweakling and had to submit himself to the wickednessof his sons. Although Krishna told him in so manywords to accept peace, he could not do so, because hewas surrounded by his evil children.When things became unbearable, Krishna toldDhritharashtra, “When a person had no right over akingdom and still wanted to have the kingdom, he wasto be regarded as a thief.” The meaning of the wordDhritharashtra is, “one who thinks that a kingdom whichdoes not belong to him is his, and enjoys it.” He furthertold him, “As a consequence of what your sons aredoing, the entire country was going to be thrown intoconfusion and bloodshed. A situation is coming wheninnocent women and children are going to be involvedin this bloodshed. You are taking the world to a situationwhere the sages and the rishis, who are generallyconfined to the forest in their thapas, will also bedrawn into this bloodshed.“The battle is not going to be confined to theKauravas and the Pandavas only. Every individual inthe kingdom will be drawn into the battle. The forestfire, when it starts raging, will not think that the mangotrees should be saved from the fire because they givefruits. This fire of war is going to spread to the entirepopulation and all the people will be burnt.” In thiscontext, Krishna advised Dhritharashtra that he shouldnot undertake this war. Dhritharashtra did not knowhow to meet this situation and what reply to give, andhe asked for some time to take rest. Krishna whounderstood the inner meaning of Dhritharashtra wantingrest took him aside and explained to him the backgroundof the situation.Then Krishna consoled him and talked with him.In this context, Dhritharashtra said that he realised thathis sons were bad people and that they had evilintentions; but being their father, he could not go againsttheir wishes.Krishna then thought that it was an opportunemoment, and he was prepared to use some harsh words.He asked, “If bad things are emanating from our body,are we protecting them and keeping them simply becausethey have come from your own body? The excreta andurine are coming from our body and are we not throwingthem away and cleaning ourselves? Simply becausethey have come from your own body, are you protectingthem and keeping them with you?”Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 87 88Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976To that, Dhritharashtra said that excreta and urinewere lifeless but his sons were living beings. ThenKrishna asked, “If bad living bodies are born from us,are we going to keep them and protect them? Similarly,your living sons who were born out of your body arelike evil bugs.” Because of these words of Krishna, themind of Dhritharashtra changed a little.The Kauravas guessed that Krishna was trying tochange the mind of their father, and they were planningto catch hold of Krishna and bind him down so that hedid not further attempt to influence their father. Vidhurawas afraid that some physical harm may be done toKrishna, and he was making attempts to pull Krishnaback from the assembly. But Krishna’s main purposewas to secure peace and prosperity for the people, andfor this he was prepared to sacrifice even his life.By just reading what people write in sundry books,without recognising the essential basis of all thesenegotiations, we think that Krishna was promoting warrather than peace. This is quite wrong. Unfortunately,because in our country there are no people who arewilling to present even historical events in the properperspective, we are prepared to regard Krishna, thisembodiment of peace, as a warmonger. The generalityof people unfortunately do not know Sanskrit and are,therefore, not in a position to read the original text ofthe Mahabharatha as written by Vyasa.There is one other instance which can be cited toillustrate the peace-loving nature of Krishna. ThePandavas prepared an assembly, and they were preparingto give the first respectful salutation to one who wasmost respected. The Pandavas did all preparations andwanted to choose one who was universally regarded asthe top person in that assembly. Many of the elders inthe assembly like Bhishma, Drona and others were allindicating that this honour was to go to Krishna. SoDharmaraja went to Krishna with a view to honouringhim.At that instant, Sisupala, who was sitting therein,got up to decry Krishna in many ways. He was preparingto talk in a very irresponsible and irrelevant manner.People sitting in the assembly could not even bear theharsh words which were being uttered by Sisupala. Ina few moments, such irresponsible words spreadthroughout the assembly. However, Krishna was not atall affected by this tirade and he stood smiling. Sisupaladid not stop at this. He got up and shouted, “For whatgreat act of yours are you going to be honoured? Is itfor stealing the clothes of the gopis when they werebathing? Is it for stealing the butter from the cowherdsSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 89 90Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976that you are going to be honoured today?” Immediatelyhe walked up to Bhishma and asked him to stop hispraise of Krishna. At that point, Bhishma started to saysomething and Sisupala retorted, “Do not be arrogant.Shut your mouth.”At this fearful and most disrespectful situation, allthose sitting in the assembly were afraid that somethingserious was going to happen and they were all showinggreat concern. But Krishna was completely unperturbedand he was seen smiling. There was no anxiety in hisface nor was there any hatred or fear seen in his face.He was regarding all that was going on as somethingthat was being done by Sisupala out of ignorance.Arjuna and Bheema, from among the Pandavas, werevery angry. Krishna, noticing that they were gettingvery excited, signalled to them not to get excited andthat they should remain peaceful.At this instance, the grand old man, Santanu,Bhishma’s father, got up and said that the only personin the assembly deserving the honour was Krishna. Hesaid that Sisupala was so excited because of personaljealousy caused at the time of Rukmini’s marriage, andhe challenged Sisupala to show even one person in theassembly who deserved the honour better than Krishna.Every king sitting in that assembly had already beensubdued by Krishna. If you talk of good qualities, noone else had better qualities than Krishna. If you takethe question of learning of the Vedas or Sastras or eventhe sixty-four different types of art, no one can equalKrishna. If we talk of the practice of Dharma, Krishnais the embodiment of Dharma. If we talk of selflessservice, Krishna stands right on the top. If we talk ofprema and love, then the entire blood flowing in thebody of Krishna exhibits peace and love at all times.Krishna who possesses all these good qualities is theonly one in the entire assembly deserving this honour.Santanu again challenged Sisupala to show anotherindividual who deserved this honour more than Krishna.To these words, all the kings sitting in the assemblynodded their agreement; and Drona and Bhishma alsosaid that there was no one who deserved this honourmore than Krishna. Sisupala was very disturbed andbehaved madly, because his end was drawing near. Hewas still wanting to talk like a madman. Because hisend was drawing near, he challenged Krishna to a dueland pulled at Krishna’s hand. Even then, Krishna wascompletely unperturbed and was smiling. But time waspassing and Sisupala’s conduct was becoming moreand more unacceptable.Noticing this, Arjuna started moving closer toKrishna. At that time, Krishna told Arjuna that heSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 91 92Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976should not get excited and should not worry about whatSisupala said, particularly because that was an assemblyand not a battlefield. Their reputation was not going tobe lowered just because of what Sisupala says.But if we read the modern text and the descriptionof this event therein, we learn that Krishna was veryangry and that he simply threw the disc in his hand atSisupala and killed him. This is very untrue. In fact thepeace-loving nature and the composure which Krishnashowed were indeed a surprise to many of the peoplein the assembly. Here again, the unperturbed attitudeexhibited by Krishna, under those trying conditions asa human being, is an ideal example to the world.In another situation, one other king wanted toimitate Krishna in many ways and his name wasPoundarika Vasudeva. He thought that, after all, Krishnawas not the only Vasudeva and that he was also aVasudeva; and in that belief, he used to behave anddress himself exactly like Krishna. He was goingeverywhere where Krishna went and was saying thathe was Krishna. He was behaving as an exact prototypeof Krishna. He did not stop there and he was creatinga lot of confusion. He was saying that he was the realKrishna and that the real Krishna was, in fact, puttingon a show as an imitation. This was the confusion thathe was creating.This was going beyond all limits and many peoplecame to ask Krishna about the meaning and purpose ofall this. Krishna gave them a reply in perfect composureand was not in the least perturbed. “Who has the rightto say that the kind of dress that I wear should not beworn by me and who has the right to say that I shouldnot do such and such a thing? So, if someone is wearingexactly the same dress as I am wearing and has thesame appearance as I have, I have no right to tell himnot to do that. Each one has the liberty to wear suchdress on his body as he chooses.” He told those peoplethat in a matter like that, it was not good to take anyaction. It was for the people who were undertakingsuch imitation to see that they should not do so, and itwas for them to take proper steps.But this situation was trespassing all limits, and itcame to a stage when the imitator went to the extent ofsaying that Sathyabhama and Rukmini belonged to him.Even then, Krishna was very calm and unperturbed. Heonly said that it was not correct for one to interfere inthe affairs of another’s family. Krishna said that onemay do what one likes with regard to one’s own selfand his family, but it was not right for him to interferein another’s family, particularly with regard to thewomen members. Krishna thus warned him that heshould exercise great care in such matters. It was onlyin an extreme situation that Krishna interfered.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 93 94Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976In this manner, Krishna always demonstratedperfect composure and a peace-loving attitude. It isonly when we understand the ideal nature and qualitiesof Krishna in the proper perspective, that we will be ina position to get a correct assessment of the ideals ofour country in such matters. Young people as you are,on whom rests the future of our country, it is veryimportant for you to understand these aspects of Krishna.Living a selfless life, desiring only the welfare of thecountry, and taking care of the people amidst kingswho were terrorising the people, he wanted to handover the kingdom to good and honest people. Thus henever wore a crown and was the uncrowned king doingall this good.Young students, if you really want to understandthe true nature of Krishna, you can do so only bytravelling backwards in time to the situation whenKrishna was living and doing his work, in the conditionswhich existed at that time. But for us to try andunderstand the aspects of Krishna from our presentposition is not possible. What I am now telling you iscontained in what I have often been stating in thewords, “You may worship a picture as a God but neverworship God as a picture.” What you should do is toelevate whatever you see to the position of God. Thusyou may worship this tumbler, this table, or this clothas God; but do not attempt to lower God to the stageof this table or tumbler. You must elevate all things tothe high position of God.If you understand the ideals for which Krishnastood, what you should do is to make a journey and putyourselves in the context of where Krishna lived. Ifyou want to remain where you are and understandvarious aspects of Krishna, who lived five thousandyears ago, it is not the correct way. If you want tounderstand an ideal, it will be possible only when youmake a journey, mentally, to a period when the personwho demonstrated those ideals lived.There is a small example for this. A boy of elevenyears of age was married to a girl of nine years of age,but unfortunately the boy died in an accident. The girlhad a photograph of the eleven-year-old boy. As timewent on, the girl grew up and attained the age ofseventy. This seventy-year-old woman takes thephotograph of the eleven-year-old boy and says that heis her husband. This statement looks ridiculous if youlook at the form of the seventy-year-old woman. Whenshe says that the eleven-year-old boy is her husband,the statement has meaning only when she regards herselfas the nine-year-old girl. It is not as if the seventy-year-old woman was married to an eleven-year-old boy. TheSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 95 96Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976nine-year-old girl was married to a boy who was elevenyears old. In the same context, the statement has ameaning only if she puts herself back in time in theposition of a nine-year-old girl. In the same manner,those of us who are born now, if we want to understandthe ideals of Krishna, we will be able to do so only ifwe take ourselves back to the times of Krishna.Whatever ideals which he demonstrated to theworld, be they in the political sphere, or the economicsphere, or the social sphere, will be appreciated only ifwe take ourselves back to the environment and time—politically, socially, and economically when Krishnalived. Therefore, young people like you should makean attempt to read and understand the sacred text of theMahabharatha in the proper perspective. As a result ofour foolishness and lack of understanding, we regardMahabharatha as a very insignificant text and compareit with the ordinary food like a Vadai that we eat.There is a proverb which says, “If you listen to atext, you must listen to the text of Mahabharatha; andif we eat anything, we must eat a Vadai.” Thiscomparison is ridiculous. If you really want tounderstand the level at which the Mahabharatha waswritten, you should recognise the sacred contents. Onewho cannot understand the value of the Mahabharathaand of its sacred contents is ignorant and foolish.There is one small example for this. A shepherdtook his sheep and goats and went into the forest. Oneday, when he was looking after the sheep and goats,there was a heavy rain. As a result of this, some stoneson the hill became loose and started rolling down. Hefound that a particular stone was shining very brilliantly.That particular place was known to be a place wherediamonds were found. But the shepherd did not knowanything about diamonds. He took this bright stone andtied a string round it and put this bright shiny diamondround the neck of a black goat. This bright stone roundthe neck of the black goat was shining and the goat wasattracting him very much. He frequently went to thisgoat and was looking at it affectionately.While showing such affection to this goat, he wassitting under a tree and relaxing when a group ofpeople were passing that way. Among those passers-bywas one individual who knew the value of diamonds.This person was a diamond merchant, and he quicklyrealised the value of the diamond tied round the neckof the goat. He recognised the fact that this stone wasworth several lakhs of rupees. He thought that poorshepherd boy would not know the value of the stoneand he offered him ten rupees in return for the diamond.The shepherd boy said that this bright stone was verybeautiful round the neck of the goat, and that he wasSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 97 98Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976not going to part with it. The diamond merchant temptedhim and offered him a hundred rupees. The shepherdboy thought that with a hundred rupees he could buy ahundred such stones and tie each stone around the neckof each goat and he agreed to part with the stone for ahundred rupees.We see that in the hands of the shepherd who didnot know the value of the diamond, it was happy, safe,and sound. The moment this stone came into the handsof the diamond merchant, he thought that he had secureda valuable thing; and as soon as this thought came intohis mind, the stone suddenly broke into several pieces.When the stone broke into so many pieces and fell tothe ground, the merchant was surprised. This diamond,in a formless divine voice, said that as long as it wasin the hands of person who did not know its value, itwas satisfied; but when a person who knew its worthpaid only one hundred rupees, its heart broke intopieces at the unjust act.As in this analogy, in the vicinity of a person whodoes not understand divinity, it does not matter howthings are; but if, knowing the nature of divinity, webegin to communicate and trade with it in a cheapmanner, how can we obtain God’s grace? How canGod’s grace come to individuals if we do not conductourselves well? Thus, after knowing the greatness andvalue of Krishna’s ideals if we do not put them intopractice, we will really be making a mistake. When oneis moving with you, you regard him as an ordinary manand only when you see something extraordinary, youascribe divinity to him. When you recognise divinity,you should make all efforts to follow the divineinjunctions. When we read the lives of Avatars andwhen we are told such stories, we should learn theirideals and put them into practice. Only then will we beresponding to divinity. But merely to read any textwhich comes our way and not put it into practice is notthe right thing for educated people to do. InMahabharatha, we must understand the human aspectsof Krishna. I am hoping that by understanding this trueform of Krishna, you will also follow the ideals ofKrishna. I am blessing you in this manner and bringingthis discourse to a close.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 99 100Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 19766. Mahabharatha Contains ManyValuable Lessons For Us
Do you know why you have beengiven your hands? They have notbeen given to you so that youmay continually feed your mouth withthose hands. They have been given to youso that you may perform puja with flowersto the Lord.Students!It is not easy or possible for us to understand thelevel at which Paramatma functions because we are ata human level. If we recognise that the level at whichdivinity operates is different from, and higher than, theordinary human level at which we all operate, there isa possibility of raising ourselves to a level in which wecan try and understand divinity.For doing any kind of work in this world, thereshould be some order and discipline. Any work thatyou may do without discipline will not yield goodresults. In order to get this limitation in the worldlyplane, some discipline is necessary. That which rulesthe world is the rule of law. What is required to controloneself and put oneself under the rule of law, isdiscipline. This control of oneself is like thapas. A life,in which there is no discipline and control, will fail andfall one day or the other. If you put yourself on thewrong side of thapas which is “pata,” it means thatyou are going to fall. One must recognise the truth thatthere should be controls on, and limits to, human nature.The five elements that constitute the earth are alsocontrolled by certain laws. Even the infinite oceanmoves under certain laws and regulations. In the contextof the whole world, man’s life is only a part. Therefore,man’s life has to be regulated. Whether it is for prema,for hatred, or for anger, some regulation is necessary.Such regulation has been shown to us, as an example,by Sri Krishna in his lifetime. It has become the traditionof our country to accept the stories of the Mahabharathaas ideal examples. Since this kind of respect and traditionhas come to us from the time of the Vedas, our citizensare always anxious to listen to such stories and welcomean opportunity to do so. It is also very necessary for us102Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976to accept and study the human side of such Avatars,and the stories about them, and implement them.That day was the Karthika Bahula Triodasi. Thesacred land of Kurukshetra was close to Panipat. In thissacred land of Kurukshetra, the armies of the Kauravaswere lined up for battle. In the front of the army andleading it was a white-turbaned, lion-like man sitting ina white chariot drawn by white horses. This aged, lion-like man was Bhishma.On the opposite side, the army of the Pandavaswas also lined up for battle, and Bheema was leadingthat army. This aged Bhishma had performed threehundred Aswamedha Yagas. The Pandavas were filledwith fear when they saw such a powerful person leadingthe armies. They expected some tragedy to befall them.On the one hand, the roaring battle sounds from theconches were being heard. The horses were neighingand the elephants were trumpeting loudly. The flagssymbolising the chariots of each army were being flown.The weapons of each army were shining brightly.In this situation, as if coming from nowhere, achariot came and stood in the centre of the battle. Itappeared that in that chariot there was one individualwho was very despondent and discouraged. There wasanother person who was giving him courage and pattinghim on the back. Those two were Arjuna and Krishna,the best of men and the best of gods, respectively.These two represented the deserving human of Arjunaand the supreme Avatar of Krishna.We should notice here that the Avatar hasdescended from his high pedestal to the level of thebest of human beings who deserved to be taught, andthe Avatar was teaching and giving the necessaryencouragement to the human being. After a fewmoments, Krishna descended from his chariot and beganmoving towards the chariot of Dharmaraja. It is notknown what Krishna told Dharmaraja at that time, butit could be seen that Dharmaraja removed his armourand weapons and started walking with folded handstowards the Kauravas.When the Kauravas saw this scene, they began toshout loudly. They thought that Dharmaraja was comingto surrender and seek peace on behalf of the Pandavas.Arjuna and Bheema, who saw this situation, were alsovery perturbed. The thought which Dharmaraja had andthe noble feelings which made him undertake this taskwere not understood by Arjuna and Bheema. In thenext few minutes, Krishna came and signalled to Arjunaand Bheema that they should also follow their brother.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 103 104Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976In spite of the confusion and excitement in theirown minds, Arjuna and Bheema obeyed the injunctionsof the Lord and followed their brother. Dharmaraja,followed by his brothers, went along to Bhishma. WhenBhishma looked at the brothers, he understood whatwas in their minds, and he knew the noble ideas thatwere passing in the mind of the eldest brother,Dharmaraja, and was praising Dharmaraja withinhimself.They went close to Bhishma, touched his feet,addressed him as grandfather, and said, “Ever since welost our father, you have looked after us and brought usup; but today, unfortunately, we have to fight with you.Please give us permission for this battle.” Bhishma’sheart was very much moved when he saw that evenunder those terrifying battle conditions, Dharmarajawas willing to do his duty by dharma and came all theway to seek his permission.Bhishma embraced Dharmaraja and said, “Even inthe battlefield, you are observing dharma and this givesme great pleasure. You will be victorious in this battlebecause you are acting according to Dharma. Dharmorakshati rakshitah. Those who protect dharma will inturn be protected by dharma. You are protecting dharmaand so dharma will protect you and victory will beyours.”Immediately after that, Bheema, Arjuna, Nakula,and Sahadeva also sought the blessings of Bhishma.They approached Dronacharya and touched his feetand said, “You are the guru and we are the students.Unfortunately, today such bad times have come thatdisciples have to fight with the teacher. In such asituation we are begging you to bless us.” Dronacharyarecognised the right conduct in this, and he alsoembraced them and blessed them towards victory. Suchregulatory conduct was shown by Krishna; and thisexample makes us wonder if we, as human beings, areobserving any rules and code of conduct.Why should the all-powerful and all-knowingKrishna undergo all these troubles and tribulations?Did he do all this for himself with a selfish motive? Allthis was done for someone else and in the interest ofpromotion of peace. He underwent all these troublesand tribulations in order to help and support those whosought his grace and support. As a result of the lovewhich God has for his devotees, God has been goingthrough several kinds of troubles for their sake.Moreover, while he taught the Gita to Arjuna, therewere several occasions when Arjuna had doubts; andthere were situations when Arjuna became despondent.Krishna was undertaking this yoga in order to enableArjuna, the human, to overcome the obstacles that wereSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 105 106Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976coming in his way, and to take courage and moveforward.We generally think that the Gita consists of certainteachings which will help us and teach us renunciationand take us along the spiritual path. This is not thecorrect aspect. We should recognise that the Gita givesus teachings which will help us to run our daily livesand meet the situations which we come across.Krishna established the truth that our spiritual lifeand our daily worldly life are not two distinctcompartments. He demonstrated that our daily life issomething intimately connected with spiritual life. Heshowed the need for harmony and connection betweenman’s thoughts, words, and deeds. He proclaimed thatin order that man may have good thoughts, his mind isvery important. In order that he may communicatethese thoughts to the world, his word is very important.In order to put this into action, his deeds are equallyimportant.Many people argue and say that God could doanything, and they say that God should have avoidedthe war by his own Sankalpa (Will). Here, we mustnotice that Krishna was not willing to use his divinestrength for the benefit of mankind directly. He wasliving as human beings do, and he wanted to use thenormal human methods by which to control variousactions. There are thousands of people in the worldwho are willing to demonstrate these spiritual aspectsin a manner which is quite easy to understand. Thereare great people who will help you to follow the essenceof the Vedas in an easy manner. Were there not kingswho acquired wealth and ruled over kingdoms? Wherehave all those kings and kingdoms gone now? What isit that they have taught to the world? Today also, wehave a large number of people who preach and say thatthere are short cuts to teach the essence of the Vedas,but there are very few people who put them into practicein their lives.All these individuals and the lessons that theyteach are merely like guideposts. The best that aguidepost can do is to tell you that if you travel in thatway, you will reach such and such a destination; and ifyou travel along another path, you will reach anotherdestination; but the actual ups and downs along aparticular path will be understood only by the peoplewho undertake the journey. The guidepost cannot tellyou anything about the ups and downs. One can speakabout a crore of things, but one cannot put even one ofthem into practice by merely speaking. You should putinto practice what you say and set an example. Youshould be prepared fully to put into practice what yousay and hear.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 107 108Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976The situation in the country is not something whichyou do not know. Today, hatred, injustice, and fearhave filled all aspects of our lives, and the youngstudents are the only people who can remove thoseevils. You have the capacity to do this. You shouldmake an attempt to understand the sacred ideals thatare contained in our sacred texts. The spirit of sacrificewhich pervaded the lives of the citizens of this countryat all times is contained in the blood flowing in you. Insuch a sacred country, the Pandavas have led lives in amanner which are ideal examples. They were personswho were the leaders in all aspects—the political,ethical, moral, and all other aspects.On one occasion when Dharmaraja, Arjuna,Bheema, and others were in some other place in thebattlefield, Abhimanyu was lured into the padmavyuha(Labyrinth of the lotus shape). His mother cautionedhim by saying that the situation at this time was veryprecarious. The times were not very good for them: hiswife was in the family way, his uncle Krishna was notpresent. He was only being lured into the battle, and heshould think twice before going into the battle. Whenthe mother was thus entreating him not to go into thebattle, Abhimanyu, because of his brave family traditionsand because of the sacrificing spirit in his blood, wasbegging his mother to let him go. He told his mother,“Instead of telling me to be a lion and jump into thebattlefield, you are trying to prevent me from goingthere.”The mother, herself, was a great heroine, and sherealised the greatness in Abhimanyu’s heroism. Shethought that if she let him go forward, it was bad; andif she stopped him, it was also bad. She was unable todecide between the two evils. This was the situation inwhich she found herself. In this unfortunate situation,you can imagine what the people of today would havedone. They would have cursed God and cried out, “Oh,cruel God, why did you put my son in such a situation!”But this heroic mother was blessing her son by sayingthat he should go and secure victory on the battlefield.The kind of blessing which she gave her son was anunparalleled one. We should ask ourselves if any motherwould give a blessing like that these days.Every part of the Mahabharatha is such that it hasan ideal lesson for us. The ideals demonstrated by thePandavas and taught by Krishna are very essential forthe people of our country even today. As I explainedyesterday, when Krishna went to negotiate peace andwas asked by Duryodhana to accept his hospitality, hesaid that as he had come on a mission; he had no rightto accept the hospitality till the mission was completed.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 109 110Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Until the peace negotiations were completed, he didnot want to accept the hospitality offered byDuryodhana; and he went and stayed in Vidura’s house.Because such rules of conduct were being observed inthose days in the matter of political negotiations, theywere always of a very high order. Today, if ambassadorscome from other countries, they are driven to the RajBhavan straight from the airport; and even before thenegotiations begin, a dinner is arranged and other typesof hospitality is given to the visitor. In the conditionsthat are existing today, if we accept and put into practicethe ideals that were demonstrated in the Mahabharatha,our country will certainly prosper. We are thinking andtaking the view that the Mahabharatha simply consistsof people who were warmongers. This is not correct.The Mahabharatha is an ideal text for people whoare peace lovers. The leelas and the stories that welearn from the Bhagavatha are not as important as thelessons and morals that we learn from theMahabharatha. So long as we are human beings, andhave to live as human beings, we cannot understandand follow the actions of divinity. We have to acceptand follow the actions done by God as a human being.When the chariot was kept between the two armies,Arjuna begged of the Lord, in many ways, forenlightenment. He accepted that all that was said byKrishna was truth and was backed by what had beensaid in the Sastras. Because Arjuna was an ordinaryhuman being, he could not understand Krishna’sdivinity; and he prayed that he be given the strength tounderstand the potency of what was told to him. Herequested that the great divine vision of Krishna beshown to him. He also requested that the weaknessesthat were in his mind and body be removed. Herequested that mercy may be shown to an ordinaryhuman being like him and that he might be elevated. Inall humility and in a devoted way, he was beggingKrishna.Arjuna’s anxiety and sincerity were noticed byKrishna; and convinced of his devotion, he told Arjunathat his divine form could not be perceived by theordinary eyes; and he touched his forehead and saidthat the eye of Wisdom, which he could give, wouldenable him to perceive the Lord. By this touch ofKrishna, the Wisdom eye had entered Arjuna. This gifthad come only through grace and did not come byright. Thus, Krishna had given this gift to Arjuna as aGrace.Through this eye of Wisdom, Arjuna realised thatthe entire creation was contained in the divine vision.He realised that all living beings—human as well asSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 111 112Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976animal and insect—were part of this vision. He realisedthat Krishna was responsible for all creation. Heperceived that Krishna was present in every minuteparticle. Arjuna closed his eyes and the divine visionwas there in all directions. He then addressed Krishnaand said that he did not have the strength to bear thatdivine vision any longer and said that he had seen hisgreatness and his divine strength.Arjuna prostrated before Krishna and wasoverwhelmed and began singing in ecstasy and said,“How can I know you Krishna? You are smaller thanthe smallest thing in this world, and you are greaterthan the greatest thing in this world. You are the verybasis of the eighty-four lakhs of kinds of jivas in thisworld. You are infinitely great, and you cannot becompared even with the greatest thing in this world,and you are the source of everything that can be seen.I now surrender to you and will do whatever you askme to do without any question.”An Avatar is capable of all things at all times, yetthe Avatar will not undertake to demonstrate his powersat all times. An Avatar will undertake to demonstratesuch powers when exceptional circumstances demandit, and will shed the grace on a deserving person only.Although such Avatars were present in our country forthousands of years, and although our people wereexposed to such Avatars, they have not fully understoodall the aspects of such an Avatar. We should examine the reason why the formlessLord takes the form of a human being and comes intothe midst of humans. This formless being comes in theform of a human being so that he may mix with thehuman beings and set up examples and ideals for humanbeings and convey to them all aspects which they shouldlearn. Many people ask very innocently and ignorantlywhy an Avatar, who possesses all powers, should subjectitself to all troubles; and why should it tolerate hungerand suffering all around. An Avatar who has all thepowers should be able to remove all such suffering inone moment. If there is any meaning in such a question,why should an Avatar come in human form at all? TheAvatar can remain as a formless divinity and do allthese things from that position itself. In time, and undercertain conditions and environment, whatever has to bedone must be done and such acts, at a human level,have to be performed.Certain things are essential for remedial actionand without doing those things, to expect an Avatar tosimply remove all suffering is a very foolish thing.First of all, you should make an attempt to make goodSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 113 114Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976use of the mental and physical strengths that have beengiven to you. When you are so lazy as not to use themental and physical strengths that have been given toyou, what are you going to do with divine strengths?Suppose that you have been given food and drink bythe divine grace and strength of the Lord. Because Godhas given you enough food on your plate, for you tothink that God has also to help you in transferring thisfood to your stomach is a very lazy idea. For taking thefood to your stomach, God has given you hands, apalate, and a mouth. You should make good use ofthem. If you are not able to use the organs that havebeen given to you, and if you are not able to use themind and mental strength that have been given to you,it is better to die than to live in that condition. That wemay learn to make good use of our mental and physicalstrengths and other organs, God comes in human formto demonstrate how these may be used.The essential quality of an Avatar is to teach youhow to make good and proper use of your thought,word, and deed. Depending on the conditions in thecountry and the environment in the country, the Avatarcomes to teach you and show you the right use of allyour organs. In Bharath, a country which is like heavenon earth, so that you may be able to make good use ofthe facilities and faculties that have been given to you,I am hoping that the sacred texts of the Bhagavathaand Mahabharatha will provide good examples.Divya Atma Swarupas, Boys and Girls,To some extent you should make an attempt tomaster your sensory organs and not become a slave tothem. I am hoping that by mastering your sensoryorgans, you will become ideal citizens andrepresentatives of our ancient culture. The ideals thathave been demonstrated to us in the Mahabharatha,and the close relationships between the Pandavas andKrishna that have become evident from this sacredtext, and the lessons from such a relationship must beunderstood by us and put into practice in our dailylives. The Mahabharatha is not an ordinary text. Infact, it has come to be known as the fifth Veda.Every individual character in the Mahabharathahas some powers which are attributed to God. They arenot people who are born like other ordinary people. Asthey are not just ordinary people, every act that theyperform is an exemplary act. They are individuals withsuperhuman powers, and so whatever they had doneshould be taken as an ideal act. That text has, in thecontext, been compared with the Vedas. As days go on,you will hear more stories from the Mahabharatha,and you will learn how Krishna had set aside his divinity,Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 115 116Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976and as a human being, taught how human beings shouldbehave and conduct themselves. I am hoping andblessing you that you will take these lessons and putthem into practice and develop yourselves into usefuland worthy citizens of our country.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 1177. A Good And Peaceful Death IsCoveted By All Saintly People
Do you know why you have beengiven your intelligence? It is notto be used for the purpose ofaccumulating wealth. Intelligence has beengiven to you so that you may realise thatall that you see around is a very temporaryand transient phenomenon.Pavitratma Swarupas, Students! Boys and Girls,Man is like a seed. As the seed sprouts and thenbecomes a plant, finally becoming a tree giving youfruit, so also man should grow and blossom and shouldput out flowers of peace and distribute those flowers tothe rest of the world. Man has two aspects of his life.One relates to his livelihood and the other to the ultimateobjective of his own life. The former is the ability toget one’s livelihood and relates very much to the materialworld whereas the latter relates to the spiritual world.But today man develops capacities in the former aspectto be able to eke out his livelihood but does not havethe capacity to seek out the objective of his life. Thespiritual world and the material day-to-day world cannotbe two separate worlds. When we talk of the capacitiesto suit this world, we mean the capacity to acquire allthe conveniences to give comfort to this body. What wedo in this world, what we see around us, and what wedo to keep our body healthy are all called the abilityrelated to this world. If we want to describe this briefly,we can say that this is the capacity related to theexternal world.There is another aspect which can be brieflydescribed as the inner world. But unfortunately today,from the time that we get up to the time that we go tobed again, all our efforts are directed to accumulatingthe capacities relating to this external world. Whateverwe do relates to our daily lives and what we see aroundus. However, it is not possible to think of the day-to-day world without thinking of the internal or spiritualworld, just as we cannot develop external vision withoutthe help of the inner vision. Religious texts of allcategories have been teaching people how to promote120Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976and how to develop this inner vision. Most religioustexts have always been teaching methods and pathsrelated to the spiritual world.The Bhagavad Gita has not been making adistinction between the external and the inner visionand has been saying that both of them have to bestudied together. This spiritual text has been teachingus that whether you stress on the external vision or theinner vision, the ultimate objective is the same. Thereis also a small story which has been given as an examplefor this. Let us take the case of a woman who carriesa pot filled with water on her head. She will be talkingand joking along with other women and is quite free asshe walks along. Yet she takes great care of the pot ofwater on her head.As in the above analogy, while we live in thenormal world taking things lightly as they come, wewill have to take great care of the spiritual aspects aswell. We cannot forget them. Whatever work and taskyou may undertake, if you have your attention ondivinity, then God will take care of you.There is one more example for this. A mother willput the baby to sleep. After the baby is asleep, she willgo to the first floor and will be attending to her work.All the while, her attention will be on the baby, and herthought is always about when the baby will get up.Even if she is engaged in urgent and pressing work, herattention will be on the baby and as soon as she hearsthe cry of the baby, she will come running. She will notstop to consider in what raga (tune) and tala (tempo)the baby is crying. Just as the mother comes runningfrom her work as soon as she hears the baby crying, soalso, if man cries to the Lord from the depths of hisheart, even if the Lord is busy, he will come out of hisplace and help the devotee. God does not ask what paththis devotee is adopting or what bhajans are being sungby him, etc. But he will only look at the sincerity withwhich the devotee has cried out.God is all-powerful and can melt even stony hearts,yet he will not undertake to do so. But man has thestrength to correct his path by the Purusharthas (Goalsof life—dharma, artha, kama, moksha), and so Godwill expect that man should first set right his thoughtsby his own efforts. In this context, man should not goon arguing about God’s capacity but should examinehis own capacity and use it to set things right. Godbehaves like a human being when he comes amidstthem, understands the psychology of the behaviour,and investigates the manner in which he can change theminds and hearts of men.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 121 122Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976In the battle of Mahabharatha, Bhishma was in aferocious condition. During the first nine days of thewar, Dussasana and Duryodhana went to Bhishma onone particular day and asked why they have beensuffering defeat after defeat practically every day andhad not seen victory even on one day. Bhishma realisedthat he was then in the service of the King and said,“Yes I understand your difficulty, I will bring youvictory in the war tomorrow.” Dussasana then suggestedto Bhishma that the objective should be to capture andkill the Pandavas rather than just to secure victory overthem in the war.In that context, Bhishma promised that before thesun rose the next day, he would kill the Pandavas. ThePandavas came to know of this and realised that thepromise made by the grand old man would indeed befulfilled by him. Anyway, the Pandavas had noalternative, and they were preparing themselves to bekilled by the grand old man who brought them up. Thisnews came to be known to Droupadi as well. She couldnot sleep or eat her food and she was terror-stricken.The dark night had set in. In the whole drama,Krishna also had a part to play, and he was thinking ofhow to bring the Purusharthas to operate and changethe minds of people. Bhishma realised that he hadmade the promise in the excitement of the moment. Hewas fully aware of the greatness of the Pandavas andtheir qualities and was much agitated. He could not eathis food and was moving from one place to another.However, Krishna was divine and he knew what washappening on both sides, and he knew the difficultieson both sides.Droupadi, anticipating the terrible future, came toKrishna, touched his feet and sat down. Then Krishnasaid, “Sister, do not get excited. Do what you can andI will do the rest.” Although this assurance was given,being a woman, she was very agitated. At midnight,when all were asleep, Krishna came to Droupadi andsaid, “Simply follow me and do not ask any questions.”It was dark and it was the battlefield. Droupadi did notwant to be recognised and so she covered herself witha cloth.In the battlefield, there were no mansions, andthey were living in small improvised tents. However,the place where Bhishma was living was quite a bigplace. In the dead of night, Bhishma was wonderinghow he was going to fulfil the promise that he madeand perform the act of killing the righteous and good-natured Pandavas, who were indeed very brave. Hewas anxiously moving about hither and thither. KrishnaSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 123 124Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976noticed this opportunity when Bhishma was very excitedand agitated, and he signalled to Droupadi that sheshould leave her shoes behind, as the shoes of wealthywomen in those days made a great deal of noise andcould be heard even from a long distance, and go andfall at Bhishma’s feet. She was only following Krishna’sorders. She left the shoes at one place, covered herself,and quickly ran inside and fell at Bhishma’s feet andbegged him to save her husbands’ life.Because of his inherent good qualities, Bhishmaimmediately reacted without a thought and blessed herby saying, “May you remain a Sumangali (marriedwoman with her husband alive) for a long time!” ToDroupadi, the assurance coming from Bhishma that fora long time she would be a Sumangali with livinghusbands was quite enough. Bhishma had made thepromise that he would kill the Pandavas before the sunrose the next day and also assured that Droupadi wouldremain a Sumangali for a long time to come, and now itwas for Bhishma to fulfil one or both of these promises.At that moment, when Bhishma saw that the personwhom he thus blessed was Droupadi, he was in utterconfusion as a conflicting situation had risen. Theconflict which troubled Bhishma was which of thesepromises was he going to fulfil. At that moment,Bhishma asked her who gave her this plan of action,for she certainly could not have come alone, at thedead of night, with this grand plan.At that time, Krishna, the master architect of thewhole plan, came inside with a cloth bundle in hishands. Bhishma expressed his pleasure at seeing Krishnaand said that this plan was drawn up by Krishna inorder to save his devotees and that Krishna was theonly person who could save even Bhishma from theconflicting situation. At this moment, he noticed thecloth bundle in Krishna’s hands and asked what thebundle contained. When the bundle was opened, it wasseen that it contained the shoes of Droupadi. Indemonstrating his grace and love, God will be prepared,not only to help his devotees, but even to carry theshoes of his devotees if it became necessary. At thisunparalleled grace shown by Krishna, Droupadi’ s eyeswere filled with tears and she asked, “Is it not sufficientthat you have been taking care of our lives? Is it notsufficient that you made a plan for my husbands to bespared instead of being killed the next day? Did youhave to carry my shoes which have no value at all?”Is Krishna doing all these things as God on earth?These are being done by him to show what one humanbeing must do to another human being at a time ofSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 125 126Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976need. Man alone can demonstrate the kind of relationshipthat should exist between man and man. So he wasconducting himself like a human being. That prema isthe very basis for one’s own life has been demonstratedby Krishna.Bhishma fully understood this leela of Krishnaand came to the conclusion that whatever he might do,the Pandavas will not be subjected to any harm. But hedid not make any attempt to get out of his promise, ashe was a great adherent of truth. On the next day hewent to the battlefield with all his determination tofulfil the promise that he had made. On that day, thebattle was very fierce and the Pandava army ran helter-skelter, but because of the divine grace of Krishna, thePandavas were able to save themselves. The eveningcame and Bhishma fell down. Krishna had to play allthis drama to demonstrate that one’s physical and mentalstrength are not very important, and it is the divinestrength that was real strength.The day when Bhishma fell down was the tenthday of the battle. From that day till the eighteenth dayof the battle, Krishna was conducting various events ofthe battle, but Bhishma was lying on the bed of arrowswhich he made for himself. After the last day of thebattle, the victorious Pandavas came to Bhishma. Thekind of battle that took place, at that time, was subjectto its own rules and code of conduct in accordance withthe times. The battle took place 3138 years before theadvent of Christ. The war in which Bhishma took partwas for nine days, and the period for which he was onthe bed of arrows was fifty-eight days. These twotogether constitute a total of sixty-seven days. Afterthis, the Pandavas along with Droupadi went to seeBhishma and had his darshan.Lying on the bed of arrows, Bhishma showedgreat affection to the Pandavas and preached to themwhat has since come to be known as the Shanthiparva.In that context, while Bhishma was preaching the codeof conduct relating to peace in the Shanthiparva,Droupadi had some thought in her mind; and shelaughed loudly and attracted everyone’s attention. ThePandavas thought this to be very inappropriate, andthey did not like Droupadi laughing in this manner inthe presence of the elders. Bhishma was all-knowingand he knew the thoughts that were passing in theminds of the Pandavas. In order that an appropriateexplanation might be given to the Pandavas, Bhishmaasked Droupadi to come closer to him. He blessed herand said that she would remain a Sumangali for longand went on to say that she would not do anythingwithout good reason. He asked her to explain why shelaughed so that her husbands might know the answer.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 127 128Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Droupadi addressed Bhishma in great reverenceand humility and asked Bhishma, “At the time when Iwas humiliated in the court of Duryodhana, you neverspoke of any code of conduct; and at the time when myhusbands were banished into the forest for twelve yearsand were to live incognito for one year, you neverpreached any code of conduct. You are now teachingthe Shanthiparva to the Pandavas who are the veryembodiments of dharma. Why are you now teachingthis to the people who do not need to be taught? Thisshould have been taught to Duryodhana and hisaccomplices. Such a thought came to my mind and Ilaughed. Not only this, in the court that day Dharmarajalost in the game of Dice and also lost when he placedhimself as the stake. Then he offered me as the stake.It was then decided that the Pandavas were to go to theforest and I was humiliated. Was this dharma? You arean embodiment of dharma and right conduct. Do youthink that on that day, after losing himself in the game,Dharmaraja had the right to bid me? I was married tofive husbands, and in that context, belonged to all ofthem. If only one husband wanted to bid me, was thatright? At that time, what had happened to all yourprofessed adherence to right conduct.Secondly, Dharmaraja offered me as a stake, afterhe lost himself in the wager. He had no right to do this.On that day itself, I questioned whether Dharmarajalost himself first and then offered me as a stake orwhether he offered me as a stake first and then losthimself. You did not give me an answer then. What hadhappened to all your right conduct at that time? Today,when there is no need at all, you are preaching all thisto the Pandavas. This, indeed, is a laughing matter andhas induced laughter in me.”While Bhishma was lingering between life anddeath, the fact that Droupadi was arguing so vehementlyand asking inconvenient questions upset even Dharmaraja.Bhishma, however, laughed loudly and praised Droupadifor asking such questions and said that the answers tosuch questions would be of great importance to thecoming Kali age and asked the Pandavas to calm down.Bhishma said, “For many years, I had been serving evilkings and sinners and had been living on the food thatthey had given me. Therefore, all the rights and dharmain me were submerged. As a result of the arrow thatstruck me from your husband’s hand, all the evil bloodhas flown out and now the dharma that had beensubmerged has come up; and I am preaching the needfor good conduct.”From this Shanthiparva, preached by Bhishma,we have to learn the lesson that if anyone promotesSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 129 130Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976himself with the help of money accumulated by badand evil ways, then the good in him will be submergedby the bad blood in him. It is in this context thatKrishna had taught that the pot in which you cook, thematerial which you use to cook, and the food itselfshould all be clean.In this dialogue, Bhishma had taught to the worldthat there can be evil in the food that you take. Fromthe food that we take, come the thoughts. From thethoughts that are generated in us comes the action.From our actions, will come our good and our bad.After giving the appropriate lessons to the Pandavas,Bhishma gave up his life.The day before that was an auspicious day becauseon that day the sun commences his northward journey.That day is also called Ratha Saptami. The previousday to Bhishma’s death, Ratha Saptami, was a sacredday; and on that day, all the Pandavas came near himand he performed the rituals to his forefathers. On thenext day, he gave up his life. But at this time, accordingto our panchangas (almanacs) we think that Bhishmadied on an ekadasi (eleventh day of the lunar fortnight)and we call it the Bhishma Ekadasi. Actually this is notcorrect. The day on which Bhishma died was an Ashtami(eighth day), and the prevailing star was Rohini. Krishnawas also born in the star on Rohini. Thus, Bhishmadied on a day similar to the day on which Krishna wasborn.Also, that was the beginning of a very auspiciousperiod in the year. They regarded that day to be veryauspicious for a death. Bhishma had waited for fifty-eight days in order that the sun might start its northwardjourney. He was thinking of the Lord on all those daysand was waiting for an appropriate time to die. In thisaspect, Bhishma taught to the world that the time ofdeath was more important than the time of birth. Morethan being born on an auspicious day, it is to be covetedthat one dies on an auspicious day and time as well. Ifone dies like that, rebirth will be a good one.Today, we all want a good birth, but we are notseeking a good death. The inner meaning of a goodbirth is to enable one to have a good death. We mustrecognise the truth that all the sadhana that we do isnot for the sake of a pleasurable life but for a good andpeaceful death. All the great saints and yogis direct alltheir prayers towards aspiring for an easy and gooddeath, and they pray that they be enabled to merge intothe Lord easily. Our attempts should be directed to theobjective of ultimately merging with divinity. This isthe sacred lesson that is contained in the Shanthiparva,and it is my hope that you understand this and put itinto practice.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 131 132Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 19768. Man Should Promote Inner VisionFor Himself
Do you know why you have beengiven your mouth? Is it to utterall kinds of words? No, it hasbeen given to you so that you might singthe glory of the Lord.Pavitratma Swarupas,Today man is very eager to listen to the news thatcomes to him from all corners of the world. He thinksthat it is his mission to know everything that ishappening, but he does not make an attempt to hearwhat is coming from within himself. An individualwho cannot understand and recognise his own naturehas not achieved anything. All that he is learning byway of education is apparently only for eking out aliving. This has become common with us and hasbecome an illusion of our mind. This is somethingwhich has no basis worth mentioning. This kind ofattitude was criticised in a downright manner by Krishna.The basis for such a desire is your attachment andhatred. This attachment and hatred are commonly foundin one who thinks that he is different from theenvironment around him. So long as one thinks that aparticular car or house or land belongs to him, thenthere will be attachment to whatever he thinks belongsto him, and he will have a dislike of things which hethinks do not belong to him. Man does not have thecapacity to distinguish between things which belong tohim and things which do not belong to him. In a humanbody, there are several organs and the body itself iscomposed of those several organs. From amongst theseseveral organs, even if one is hurt or damaged, the painis experienced by the entire body; and this is the reasonwhy man regards all the organs in the body on thesame footing; and he desires the well-being of all theorgans of his body.In the same manner, the grace and kindness of thecreator will fall equally well on all living and non-living things with gunas—sathwic, rajasic, andthamasic. Although light emanating from the same lamp,when it falls on a group of white pieces of glass, will134Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976be scattered in several different directions, we thinkthat it consists of light from several sources. If thesame light falls on a large number of coloured glasses,it appears as if it is composed of different colours. Ifthe same light falls on the ground, we will not be ableto see the light, because the ground obstructs and absorbsthe light.In the same manner, if the brilliant shining gracefrom Easwara falls on a sathwic person, he will shinebrilliantly. If the same grace from Easwara, falls on aperson with rajasic qualities, it will make him developseveral desires of the world. If the same grace falls ona person with thamasic qualities, it will not only gothrough without having any effect, but it may even losesome of its lustre.Just as the various facets of diamonds all scatterlight and throw brilliance in all directions, so also thegreatness of Krishna was scattered in all directions. Aswe cut the diamond and polish the facets, the value ofthe diamond goes on increasing.In the same manner, the culture of Bharath hasbecome more and more through greater and greaterexposure and experience. The more we experience it,the more we learn about our culture, newer ideas cometo us. We will know, more and more, about thesacredness of Krishna’s teachings if we look at themfrom the aspect of their being object lessons to otherhuman beings.If you want to remove a thorn from your foot, youwill have to do this with the help of another thorn. Youcannot use an axe to remove the thorn from your foot.To cut a diamond, you need a diamond. In the samemanner, to understand and comprehend a human being,you will have to use the essential qualities of a humanbeing. Krishna, who was born as a Yogeswara, camedown to the level of men when preaching to Arjunawho was the best among men and holding his weapon,the Gandiva. Krishna wanted to deal with Arjuna in amanner in which a human being will deal with anotherhuman being. On the very first day, Dhritharashtraasked Sanjaya who the victor will be in the battle andSanjaya replied, “Wherever there is the Lord Yogeswaraand wherever there, in his presence, is Arjuna holdingthe weapon in his hand and ready for action, there willbe victory, good, prosperity, and all that is best.” Thisclose and intimate relationship can only be understoodby Arjuna, the best among men, and by Krishna, thebest among the Avatars. Here, Arjuna represents themost deserving of human beings.So if you want to understand and comprehend theteachings of Krishna, you must either become the bestSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 135 136Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976of men or at least a person who acquires the right tounderstand them. Arjuna had the right, and he was alsothe best of men; and so he was given the darshan ofthe Universal God. We should also recognise the truthbehind the fact that this divinity, while it is associatedwith the universe, is also something which is inherentlypresent in every human being.You will have seen many trees. Certain big banyantrees look as if they are very big, and they also havemany sub-branches and look as if they are a big mansion.Such a banyan tree gives us the impression that it isvery big, having many branches; but if we take theseed, we see that it has a very small dimension like amustard seed. Is it the truth that such a big tree iscontained in such a tiny little seed or is it just anillusion on our part? No, this is not an illusion, it is atruth. But in what form is this seed seen? It is in theinfinitesimal form. If we put this tiny seed in the earth,feed and nourish it, it will sprout, become big, andgrow. The fruit, the flowers, and the leaves all comeout of this tiny seed. Therefore, it is not as if thebranches, the fruits, and the leaves are all different.They are all parts of the same seed.Thus, everything that you see in this big tree ofthe universe has all come from one seed, the seed ofdivinity. In the same manner, in this huge body ofyours, there is an infinitesimally small seed called theaspect of Atma. If you take this seed which is in you,give it nourishment, and let it grow and prosper, thenit will show the divine form of the universe. But whereshould we put this seed, how do we protect it andpromote it to grow into a big tree? Can we put this seedin our palm and pour water on it? Will it become atree? A seed will become a tree only if it is put in thesoil and watered suitably. Even in that soil, if you putthe seed too deep or too shallow, it will not become atree.In the same manner, in the soil of our heart, if wecan put the seed of God’s name, and if we can water itwith the water of prema, it will sprout into a good tree.It is in this context that a divine vision of Vishwavirathas been described as one consisting of thousands ofheads, legs, and hands. Wherefrom has this Vishwaviratvision come? It is simply the magnified version ofwhat is within ourselves. When I open my eyes, I seeso many thousands of heads; but when the eyes areclosed, I do not see even one head. When the eyes areopen, I not only see these thousands of heads, but I alsosee this wall, this window, all the photos, and everythingaround me. If I go outside and see with open eyes, onesees the mountains, the sky, the rivers, and the distantSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 137 138Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976land; but, at that instant, if one closes one’s eyes, whyis it that one does not see even a small ant in this entirecreation?If the eyes are open, we see the entire creation;and if the eyes are closed, we do not see anything ofthe creation. Thus, we conclude that this entire creationhas come from our own vision. If there is vision, thereis creation; and if there is no vision, there is no creation.Just as with extrovert vision we are able to see theexternal creation, so also with the help of inward vision,we can see the inner self. This is what Krishna taughtArjuna. It was with a view to help Arjuna develop thisinner vision, that the Lord had given him so manydirections.What does not flow is not water, what does notburn is not fire, and as in these analogies, a person whodoes not have inward vision cannot be called a humanbeing. Capacity to burn is natural to fire. Water has thenatural capacity to flow. Similarly man should have thenatural capacity of inner vision. An animal has onlyexternal vision.The Vedas have told us that what we see is onlya reflection of what exists internally. That which wesee inside or outside is essentially one, and the samething is what has been taught to us in this aspect ofVishwavirat darshan of Narayana. There is only onething and that one thing is perceived in many ways.This is what has been demonstrated in this vision andis described as Ekoham bahusyam (I am one. I shallbecome many).You go to sleep in the night, and you dream thatyou are a part of the summer camp. You see so manyother companions sitting along with you. In your dreamyou also see Swami speaking. You see the congregationand other parts of the house. You should ask who hasbrought all that there in front of you in your dream. Noone has brought them, your own mind has created theform of Swami and this mansion, your companions andall. All that is the creation of your own mind.Man’s mind alone is responsible for man’s bondageand his freedom. Krishna taught Arjuna, in the veryfirst instance, that the most important thing is the controlof one’s mind. Thus, the first thing to do is to controlyour mind. The very first thing that we must do is totry and burn away the desires that come to our mind.The desires that are in your mind, may be known toothers or may not be known to others, but are bound tocome out some day or the other. You may pretend as ifthere are no desires in your mind, but the desires willnever allow you to hide them. They will always comeSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 139 140Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976out. These desires are like fire. If you take fire and tryto hide it in a cloth, the desires will burn the cloth andcome out. The desires and thoughts of yours are boundto come out and show themselves.Krishna taught Arjuna that it was better to throwout the desires than to keep them hidden. Arjuna wastold in the very first instance that neither he nor thePandavas are the persons who were going to kill theKauravas. Neither to Arjuna, nor to the Pandavas, norto even Krishna was there birth or death. There isneither birth nor death to the essential in us, namely theAtma. Therefore it is not right to subordinate ourselvesto this body which is like a leather bag, forgetting theindestructible Atma that is within us.So long as we are human beings, it is difficult tocomprehend the difficult divine aspect taught by Krishnato Arjuna. This is the reason why Krishna came inhuman form, created a bodily relationship with Arjunaand others, and pretended as if he was the brother-in-law of Arjuna and vice versa. In the ordinary dailymatters, Krishna was always leading a sacred life. Whatwe see in the Mahabharatha or the Bhagavatha orwhat we see in the cinema do not constitute a truepicture of the life of Krishna. What we see today iscreated artificially; but if we go fully into the conductof Krishna, we will understand that he was pure,steadfast, and sincere. He was always supporting truthand practising it. That is the reason why Arjuna wasalways addressing Krishna as the embodiment of truthrather than as his brother-in-law.When the battle was over, Krishna went toDwaraka and went to the place where his father,Vasudeva, was living. Vasudeva asked him, “You havealways spoken the truth; and I would like to know fromyou, as the protector of truth, what are the true changesthat came about in the Kauravas and the Pandavas.”Even if a son is always speaking the truth, no fatherwill come forward and say that his son speaks the truthand protects the truth. In this context, we should reallytry and understand the deep significance of the fatheraddressing the son and telling him that he had alwaysspoken the truth, and protected the truth. Butunfortunately, in the books that we read and the cinemasthat we see, Krishna is depicted as a cunning and trickyperson. The picture of Krishna formed in this manneris not correct. This is not what is contained in theMahabharatha. People write such stories in order tomake money and make their stories more attractive.That our own countrymen do this and distort the truthfor the sake of acquiring money is deplorable.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 141 142Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976It is not that Krishna alone was speaking the truthand protecting truth. The Pandavas were also greatadherents of truth. The great protectors of truth, Krishnaand the Pandavas, gave this country the sacred text ofMahabharatha. The forbearance and the great breadthof vision which the Pandavas exhibited, as well as thestrength of character and determination which theyexhibited in their conduct, cannot be seen in any othercitizens of this country. Because the Pandavas hadalways obeyed Krishna, they directly imbibed fromKrishna the sacred qualities of truth and forbearance.When Ashwatthama, who killed the Upapandavas,(Pandava children) was brought before Droupadi, inspite of her great grief at the loss of her children, shemoved forward and touched his feet and paid respectsto him. It is such great qualities of truth and forbearancethat we should observe in the Pandavas and respectthem for such qualities.If the mothers of today were in such a state ofsuffering as Droupadi was, they would have pouncedon Ashwatthama and strangled him to death, even ifthey did not have the strength to do that. But Droupadihad such sterling character that in her great sufferingshe only asked, “These Upapandavas who were killedby you did not come to you in any emotion orexcitement. They did not have any weapons in theirhands. How did you bring yourself to cut their throatsand kill them when they were sleeping?” In spite of thefact that all her sons were killed by Ashwatthama, shewas telling him with great forbearance and equanimityof mind, “My husbands were the disciples of yourfather, Dronacharya. They learnt all aspects of weaponryfrom him; and you, who are the son of Dronacharya,killed my sons who should be like your disciples.” Thiswas the way in which she was pleading withAshwatthama. Bheema was unable to bear such sorrow;and because of this, he was in great emotion whichdrove him to the point of exhibiting his physical prowessto the world. In fact, he was looking at this quality offorbearance of Droupadi as a laughing matter.Bheema was greatly surprised at the peacefulattitude of Droupadi. He thought that the suffering ofhaving lost all her children had driven her to insanity,for, otherwise he was not able to understand how a truemother could show such forbearance when the personwho had killed all her children was standing before her.He said, “If you do not kill Ashwatthama, I will killhim with my fists.”Droupadi was a great woman with exemplarycharacter. If only the women of today take her as anexample and follow her qualities of forbearance andSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 143 144Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976calmness, our country will improve very much. WhenBheema, the strong person, was preparing to killAshwatthama with his fists, would it be possible for aweakling like Droupadi to go and stop Bheema? It wasonly the purity of her thought that was her strength.She had no physical strength. Then she tells Bheema,“It is not right for you to kill a person who is afraid,who comes to you asking for shelter, a person who isasleep, or a person who is drunk and has forgottenhimself. It is not right to kill such helpless people.”Droupadi was such a great woman that in order toprotect right conduct, she would even oppose herhusbands. She was not a woman who would bringdisrepute, by any of her acts, either to her husbands, orto her father, or to her sons. She did not want anyoneto get hurt by her acts.When Pandavas were preparing to go to the forest,Dharmaraja sent for Droupadi and asked her to sit byhis side. Dharmaraja told her, “Owing to certain personaldifferences between the Pandavas and the Kauravas, asituation has come about by which we will have to goto the forest.” He told Droupadi that these troubles andtribulations were something which they could not avoid,and that it was a very hard thing to be living in a forestfor twelve years and follow it up with one year inwhich they had to remain incognito. Dharmaraja toldher that the men will somehow bear the difficulties andthat it was not an occasion for women to go into theforest, and he advised her to remain back and take careof the old Dhritharashtra and Gandhari.The Pandavas had asked Droupadi to take care ofDhritharashtra and Gandhari, the two main people whowere cruel and responsible for their having to go to theforest. This is a very great quality in the Pandavas, andwe must learn a lesson from this conduct. If thePandavas really hated the Kauravas, is there anymeaning in this act; and can we justify the fact that thePandavas asked Droupadi to stay back and serve theKauravas? The moral of this is that whatever has tohappen in one’s life will happen, but to take suchinevitable events and use them to promote hatred is notthe correct thing to do, and it is not a good humancharacter.The pain which we have to experience, themisfortunes which come to us and the troubles whichwe have, are not things which arise externally, nor arethey God given. They are simply things which are theresult of our own actions. It is only as a result of one’sown weakness, that man blames someone else for thetroubles and misfortunes that he gets. This is not a rightattitude. Mahabharatha teaches us that it is not right toblame others for our troubles.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 145 146Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976You want to eat food and fruit which is very goodand tasty, but in order to get such fruit, you cannot useseeds which will give poisonous plants. The kind offruits that you get on a tree that you plant will dependon the kind of seeds that you put in. If you put in seedsof poisonous plants and expect tasty fruits, how canyou get them? The troubles that you have or the goodthat you have now will depend upon the kind of actionsyou have done in your previous birth. Not to recognisethis and blame others is not correct.The Mahabharatha has taught us a lesson that weshould regard our actions as being responsible for oursorrows or joys. But as a human being, you shouldperform whatever actions you have to perform. Thecapacities that have been given to you under the nameof Purusharthas must be fully utilised. Do not thinkthat you will achieve this or that, and do not think thatyou will be able to do great things without the grace ofGod. Do not get tired out in that process. The kind ofseeds which you have put in, which have brought youto the position in which you are today, will determinethe results that you will get later on. If the seed belongsto one kind of plant, how can you aspire to get adifferent kind of fruit? Therefore, the kind of seedwhich you use will determine the kind of fruit that youwill get, and you will have to accept that fruit. Youmay be very intelligent and clever. All your intelligenceand cleverness will not enable you to get over yourown Karma. Brahma, the creator, prepares a garland ofall the good and the bad that you have done, withoutmaking any change, and will put it round your neckand will send it along with you into this world whenyou are born.It is necessary for us to recognise this causalrelationship. We are responsible for the good that wedo and for the bad that we do, and the desires that weget are merely consequences of this. The Mahabharathahas been teaching us this lesson. While this is as it maybe, Droupadi, to maintain the reputations for herhusbands, her parents, and parents-in-law, is talkingabout this code of right conduct. She said, “I was bornto the great king Droupadi, I have become the daughter-in-law of the world famous king Pandu, I have marriedthe great Pandavas who are proud of themselves, Ihave given birth to sons who are heroes. How can I bea servant?” These words of Droupadi will move one’sheart. She wanted her parents to be proud of her, shewanted her children to feel that they are the children ofa great mother, she wanted her husbands to feel thatthey were married to a great woman, she wanted herparents-in-law to be proud of her, and she wanted toplease them. The Mahabharatha is a text of great eventsSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 147 148Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976and Droupadi herself was always behaving in a mannerin which she maintained the reputation of her greatfamily and her country.Truly Bharath can be regarded as a true reflectionof the qualities of the Pandavas and Krishna. It iscustomary for us to regard The Mahabharatha as astory of a group of people who are warmongers andwho have no respect for peace, sanctity, and security ofmankind. One can say that Krishna is the Paramatmaand has taken the five Pandavas as the five elementalsubstances which are the basis of creation and Droupadias the jiva, and has created the text of Mahabharathafor us. The first thing we should try and recognise inMahabharatha is that Krishna took the form of a humanbeing, and we should examine in what manner he gaveus the lessons of code of conduct for other humanbeings. Whatever part of Mahabharatha we may bestudying, if we regard Krishna as God, we will neverbe able to understand the inner significance of thatparticular portion of Mahabharatha. It is only when weregard and pay attention to the human aspect of Krishnaand look at the whole story from the angle of Krishnain the human form, that we will understand his greatness.All your ideas and thoughts have to be transferred tothe time when Krishna lived, into the time when thestory of Mahabharatha took place. Only then will youunderstand their true significance. If you are remainingmentally in the position in which you are now existing,it will not be possible for you to understand andappreciate the true context of the story of Mahabharathawhich took place 5000 years ago.As was told to you yesterday, worship a picture asGod; but do not worship God as a picture. Do not bringhim down to the level of a tumbler or a table or a pieceof cloth. If you want to understand Krishna, take yourselfto the position where Krishna lived and worked; but donot bring him to your position. If you want to rise highand go to a high place, it will be possible only if youread good stories and understand them. Therefore,students, boys and girls, with the help of your sacredhearts, understand the ideal lives that were portrayed inMahabharatha and put them into practice in your ownlives and follow the paths indicated in Mahabharatha.In the hope that you will be able to do this, I ambringing this discourse to a close.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 149 150Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 19769. Be Good, Do Good, And See GoodThat Is The Way To God
Do you know why you have beengiven ears? Is it for hearing allthe sounds that are uttered nearyou? No, the ears have been given to youso that you may listen to songs relating tothe glory of God.Divya Atma Swarupas,All the creation that you see emanates from theLord. That the great variety that we see around us iscoming only as a result of the change in our ownqualities is a truth that is asserted by the sacred texts.Man is sometimes very happy, sometimes he is afraid,and at other times he is courageous. These changescome about in quick succession and in a casual way.Let us examine the main reason for all thesechanges. The main reason for all these changes is thechange that comes in our own mental attitude. Theseare manifestations of one’s own qualities. Man hasthree distinct gunas or qualities. They are called sathwa,thamo, and rajo gunas. If these three qualities aremixed in a balanced manner, there will be no drasticchange in one’s nature. Sunlight is composed of sevendifferent colours. When these colours are mixed inappropriate proportions, there will be no change, andthe sun will be shining in its natural colour. On theother hand, if there is an imbalance in the manner inwhich these colours are mixed, then you will find thatsome special colours show themselves. In the samemanner, if the sathwa, rajo, and thamo gunas are mixedin balanced proportions, there will be no big change inwhat we see around us; but if there is an imbalance,and if one of the qualities has gained the upper hand,then you will find that there are drastic changes.These gunas have certain natural qualities. Thequality of sathwic nature appears to us as if it is thevery essence of peace. The rajasic quality appears to usas a mild jyothi (light). The thamasic quality appearsalso as a jyothi but covered by smoke. In these qualities,on some occasions, depending on how they are mixed,we find that there are some changes. When a mouse for152Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976example, has been saved by a lion from the trouble inwhich it has found itself, we find later on that themouse expresses its gratitude to the lion when the lionis in distress.When Sugreeva found that his own brother tookaway his kingdom, turned him away into the forest,and took away his wife, he wanted to take revenge andsought the help of Rama. This is a manifestation of hisgunas. Not only this, many attitudes such as equanimitycome out of these gunas.If we add sour buttermilk to sweet milk, we canget tasty butter and curds out of the milk. In the samemanner, sometimes bad people join good people andbecome good in the company of the good people. Menwho have good qualities sometimes transmit their goodqualities to the bad people who join them. The goodpeople in the world cause good to the bad people in theworld also.The analogy for this is found in the case of an axe,which is a bad one, when used to cut a sandalwoodtree. In this case, the fragrance of the sandalwood treecomes to the axe as well. When we mix cold waterwith warm water, we will have neither cold water norwarm water but we will get a middle temperature. Soalso, when we mix two qualities, the extremes disappearand we get an intermediate mixture.It is in this context that we can conclude that thegood or the bad, the joy or sorrow, calmness orexcitement come to man as a result of the gunas inhim. For man, it is very essential to see that his qualitiesare protected. Man should promote an appropriateadmixture of his gunas for the practice of sadhana.The life of Krishna is not an exhibition for manbut it is an ideal example. His life is to be followed bymen as a worthy example. His life was intended to bean ideal example to be put before every human being.Krishna told these words to Dhritharashtra on severaloccasions during the peace negotiations. Not only this,when Uddhava came to conduct the negotiations, itwas demonstrated that justice is something which isnatural to man. Thus he argued that everyone, when hewants to do his duty, has a right to insist that he shouldbe allowed to perform his duty. In order that man mayclaim what is rightfully and justly his, he has the rightto protect his own responsibilities and to insist onrightfully performing his duty.The Pandavas never wanted to get anything whichthey did not deserve and which they did not have theright to ask for, and the Pandavas never toleratedinjustice. Krishna told the Kauravas in very clear termsthat the Pandavas were always insisting on their rightSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 153 154Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976to both responsibilities and duties. Sometimes wemisinterpret it, and we think that he was promotingwar. What Krishna did was not warmongering. Krishnawas an ideal example, and he always insisted on one’srights and responsibilities.There is an incident which brings out that heclearly demonstrated and demarcated one’s rights andclaims. There was always a close and intimaterelationship between Krishna and Arjuna. In this contextof close friendship and taking advantage of such closefriendship, Arjuna went close to Krishna on one nightand tried to get answers for some of his doubts. Arjunaasked Krishna, “Have I got the right to get a sacred textlike the Gita taught by you, especially when I knowthat I am suffering from ego and when I know that I donot have any superior knowledge? There is the all-knowing Bhishma, who is very wise, and in his presence,I am like a small lamp in the presence of a huge light.Under such circumstances, have I the right to learn theGita from you? What is the meaning of picking me upand teaching me the Gita? Perhaps Bhishma was notsuitable because he was on the side of the Kauravas,but we have Dharmaraja who is the embodiment ofdharma, and on all counts, he deserves to be taught theGita, and why is it that he was ignored? There is alsomy elder brother Bheema who was bypassed? Whilethese superior persons Bhishma, Dharmaraja, andBheema were there, why is it that they have beenignored and I, who am immersed in seeking materialbenefits all the time, have been chosen for this; and doI have the right to be chosen like this?”Then Krishna drew Arjuna close to himaffectionately and said, “You are thinking that I, in mydivine compassion, am doing you some favour. This isnot true. You are not able to recognise the great humanqualities, and you think I am doing you a favour. Thisis not correct. As you said, Bhishma is a very learnedman; but in spite of his wisdom and in spite of hisrecognising that the Pandavas are the embodiment oftruth and they follow dharma and his accepting that theKauravas follow adharma, he has gone and joined theside of Kauravas. What is the meaning of this? I do notlike this riding two horses at the same time. I do notagree to this. You people have been regarding Bhishmaas a great man. I do not agree with this attitude ofyours. A Mahatma is one in whom the thought, word,and deed harmonise completely. A person in whom thethought is one, word is another, and deed is yet anothercannot be called a great man. He will be called aduratma (an evil person). He is unable to recognise themeaning and the significance of his action when, on theone hand, he says that the Pandavas are good peopleSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 155 156Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976and that victory is going to be on the side of goodpeople and yet leads the army of the Kauravas, whomhe acknowledges as bad people.Now, we will come to the aspect of Dharmaraja.He is one who has no forethought, and he will alwaysrepent after his action. Repentance is a very naturalquality. So, what is exceptionally great in him?Repentance is a common quality seen in many peopleand it is seen in him also. He always talks of justiceand righteousness. These do engage his attention always.He is not recognising the duty at the right point of time.An individual, who does not recognise his immanentduty, has no right to listen to such a sacred text as theGita.As regards your brother Bheema, he only hasanimal or physical strength; but he does not possess theintellectual or the mental strength. You are characterisedby forethought, more than repentance. As a forethought,you have already asked me how you could kill yourkith and kin; and even if the kingdom is won after somuch bloodshed, how you could enjoy it. You said thatit is better to beg and eat rather than get a kingdom bykilling your relatives. Thus, you have forethought. Youare not the person who runs after the kingdom. Youhave no such desire to rule over a kingdom. You haverecognised your duty. What is troubling you till now isthe aspect of your right. To some extent you are thinkingabout what is just and what is not just. Man’s duty isto be able to pursue justice and sacrifice everything inorder to behave in a just manner. Man who recogniseshis sacred duty has the right to listen to this sacred textof the Gita.”Today, the biggest drawback in human beings isthat men are not recognising what is just, and men arenot recognising their right and the duty which theyhave to perform. Man is always hankering aftersomething which is not his own and which is notrightfully his. Man is struggling to acquire variousthings in an unjust manner. Man is pushing away hisreal duty and is simply thinking of his presentconvenience.Krishna’s example and ideal is to make yourecognise your duty. His second ideal is to show peoplethat for the sake of justice, they should be willing tosacrifice everything, even life. (For the sake of justice,even life must be sacrificed.) In this context, it isnecessary for us to understand the inner meaning of theconversation between Arjuna and Krishna. WhenKrishna was conducting negotiations for peace, Arjunawas very apprehensive and he asked Krishna, “TheSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 157 158Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Kauravas are not going to accept peace in any way, sowhy are you conducting these negotiations and spendingso much time in negotiating for peace which is notgoing to come about anyway?”Krishna explained that an individual who standsby and watches dharma being overcome by adharmaand truth being destroyed by falsehood is better deadthan alive. One should not remain passive when injusticepushes aside justice. To that Arjuna asked, “Is it possibleto get Amritha, the immortal liquid, from poison? Is itpossible to put flowers in a raging fire? What is the useof talking of peace in these impossible conditions? TheKauravas have such a narrow vision; are they going tocome and accept our peace offers? It is better that youstop here. Is it possible to bring the north pole and thesouth pole together? This is an impossible task, and weshould undertake the war as everything is ready for thewar.” When we listen to these words of Arjuna andcontemplate on how Arjuna regarded peace as animpossible achievement, we can understand how muchKrishna had done and to what lengths he went in orderto negotiate for peace. But many writers and citizens ofIndia have characterised Krishna as one who nevercared for peace, not recognising the efforts that hemade for peace. They thought that he was wanting topromote war. This is not right. Arjuna, who regardedpeace as impossible said just before the battle began,“How am I going to kill so many people who are myrelatives! This is impossible. My head is reeling, let usabandon the battlefield and go home.” Here Krishnatook the contrary view, and admonished Arjuna, “Youhave come into the battlefield like a hero and now youtalk like a coward. Battle is not something which hascome suddenly at this moment. There is a longbackground for this and the preparations have beengoing on for a whole week. You have all taken out yourrusty weapons, cleaned them, and made them ready.All the arrows, which gathered cobwebs, have beencleaned. You have asked for the help of all your relationsin the battle. Having made all these preparations, whatis the meaning of all this talk of going back homewithout fighting? If you had told me this earlier, Iwould not have taken all this trouble. This is disgraceful.You are turning into a coward. You must fulfil yourduty and not become a coward.”Here Krishna taught Arjuna how he should beprepared to fulfil his duty. Here we see a conflict. Tillthen Krishna was trying to negotiate peace and avoidwar; but at that critical juncture, the same Krishna, whoSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 159 160Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976wanted to avoid war, is telling Arjuna that he must takepart in war.We must understand the inner meaning of this. Inthe first instance, Krishna wanted to establish peaceand as a result of that he wanted no loss of life in theworld. Thus he wanted to give prosperity to the world.This was Krishna’s first attempt. Later as time went on,he was insisting on justice and right and was telling thePandavas that, in the context of one’s justice and right,one should fulfil one’s duty. Thus, in the performanceof one’s own duty and acceptance of one’s right, wesee an ideal example in Krishna’s life. It is verynecessary for young students like you to understand theinner significance of Krishna’s using words like “duty”,“justice” and “right”.Today students read a large number of books whichare totally unnecessary. They read a large amount ofuseless literature which does not give them any ideals.Instead of pursuing true education which gives youknowledge and Vidya (wisdom), you are simply pursuingmaterial information and becoming vithyarthis. A fewminutes ago, talking about education, one of ourspeakers gave you the essence of what true educationshould be and gave some good examples of it. Truly, ifwe look around the country, we will get a doubt whetherthere is any education which can be called true educationat all and whether any individual can be called a teacherin the true sense of the word.I will give an example of what really happened inone of our universities. Today’s teachers are such thatthey are not willing to go into a class which they are toteach. This particular teacher put the tape recorder on,and he himself went to the staff room and was sleeping.On that day, as the lesson was given on a tape recorder,the students took down notes and they went home. Onthe second day again, the teacher brought the taperecorder, started the tape and left the classroom. Someof the students also brought their tape recorders, andthey left their tape recorders to record what the teacherwas saying through the tape, and they also left theclass. By some good fortune, the principal happened towalk into the class that day and, to his surprise, foundonly tape recorders on all the tables; and there were nostudents at all. There was neither the teacher nor thestudent. If the education is like that, can we call iteducation at all?Therefore, in order that you may developyourselves into ideal citizens, it is essential for you tounderstand and comprehend the basic aspects of ourcivilisation. In the first instance, it is very necessary foryou to understand the qualities which enable you to beSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 161 162Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976called human beings. Morality, truth, and sacredness ofyour heart and pursuit of self are the qualities whichyou should have; and these are the things which willentitle you to be called a man. We can assert, withoutany fear of contradiction, that the man who has lostfear of sin and love of God is only a man in form; andat the core, he is not a human being.God’s leelas and actions are very surprising, andan ordinary man cannot easily understand them. In thatcontext, when God himself comes down in the form ofan Avatar and preaches the essentials, many peoplewho do not understand, begin to misinterpret his wordsand actions, and the true meaning completely disappearsfrom the minds of everyone. Avatars come to propagatetruth, to proclaim truth, and to make you practise truth.There is an incident in the Mahabharatha to illustratethis. In the open assembly, the Kauravas, who werevery evil-intentioned people, wanted to put Droupadi toshame. Her powerful and heroic husbands were sittingon one side. When Droupadi was being humiliated, sherealised that her husbands could not rescue her and shewas asking and praying for help from Krishna. Howevermuch and however intensely she prayed to Krishna, hewas not to be seen at all. In many ways, she wasdescribing Krishna and his greatness. She addressedhim as one who lives in Dwaraka, as one who lives inMathurapuri and so on, but there was no response. Inutter disgust and as a last resort, she addressed Krishnaas Hrudayavasi, i.e., one who lives in one’s own heart.In the very next moment, Krishna appeared on thescene and protected her in the required manner andsaved her honour.After all the trouble was over, when they weresitting and talking like brother and sister, she askedKrishna why he had not responded to her many prayerswhen she was being humiliated in the Kauravasassembly. Krishna asked her in what manner she hadaddressed him. She replied that she had addressed himas one who resided in Dwaraka. Then Krishna said,“Oh, sister, what a mistake it was. How far was Dwarakaand how could I respond to your call especially becauseyour call had to go so far and I had to come from there.You also say that you addressed me as Mathurapurivasi.Even Mathurapuri was very far and it would havetaken a long time for me to respond to your call. Youwere in Hastinapura and you wanted to call me fromMathurapuri. How is that possible? Then you had alsoaddressed me as Gokulavasi. Even Gokula was very faraway and it would have taken time for me to respond.But when you addressed me as Hrudayavasi, as thedweller in your heart, I readily responded and came toyour rescue.”Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 163 164Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976If you write a letter to Puttaparthi, it will go toPuttaparthi, but not to Bangalore, where I will be stayingsometimes. In the same way, if Krishna was addressedas Dwarakavasi when he was really a Hrudayavasi, hewill not receive the prayer. In order to show the devoteestrue faith and determination, God sometimes does suchthings. So, at no time is a camp address more importantthan the permanent address. Then Krishna said, “I willnow give you the correct address, listen to it. Wheremy devotees sing my glory, there I am permanentlyinstalled and that is my correct address.” TheMahabharatha contains such beautiful stories as if itwere written in jasmine flowers.It is not right to keep such sacred meanings asideand go after some misinterpretations given bymisinformed people. The ideals which we have tofollow, the rights that we should claim, and the dutiesthat we have to perform are all contained in theMahabharatha and are good examples. SometimesGod’s leelas are quite surprising. As a result of suchsurprise actions, many doubts arise in the minds ofmen. There is one small example for this. On oneoccasion, the battle of Mahabharatha was very fierceand was taking place in all the corners of the battlefield.In one direction, Aswatthama had prepared thePadmavyuha. On another side Bhishma was preparingfor a terrific fight. On the other side, there were otherwarriors preparing for war. Karna was standing readyfor a fight. On the side of the Pandavas, some of thebrothers undertook to fight Karna. Dharmaraja andSahadeva took the other direction and were preparingto give battle. Arjuna was preparing to fight with otherheroes. In this way, the battle became fierce in all thefour directions. At home, in the camp, was youngAbhimanyu. Dronacharya sent a message to Abhimanyuthat Padmavyuha was ready and that it must be foughtagainst. When a message is sent inviting one to comeand fight in a battle, it is not right to refuse the challenge.If he had refused to answer the challenge, he wouldbring disrepute to his father; and in order that suchdisrepute does not come to his father, he readily acceptedthe challenge.Abhimanyu thought that if he refrained from goingto war because he was a young lad and because he didnot have his father’s permission, his father might beannoyed with him and say that he had brought disreputeto the family by not accepting the challenge. In thisconflict of ideas in his own mind, he came to theconclusion that whatever may happen, he was going tosafeguard the reputation of his father; and he went to thePadmavyuha and lost his life. Of course, Krishna knewthat Abhimanyu went into the battle and lost his life.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 165 166Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Arjuna and Krishna came back together and evenas they approached the camp, Arjuna felt uneasy andsaw bad omens. Arjuna was feeling that Abhimanyu,who usually would come to receive him, had not comethat day. There were bad omens and Arjuna felt thatthere was something wrong. Even from there, Krishnastarted preaching Vedanta. He said, “The body isimpermanent, it is made of the five material elements;and the body is sure to fall one day or the other; andthe permanent aspect is the Atma.” He also preachedabout all the relationships and said that a wife is noteven known to the husband before marriage, and a sonis not related except by marriage. We should never giveany regard to such bodily relationships; and any moment,death may occur. One must be prepared to shed one’sbody at any time.While teaching such Vedantic truths to Arjuna,Krishna asked him whether these were true or not; andon this Arjuna replied that it was the truth and, in fact,one does not know when one is going to die; and heaccepted this as truth. Krishna even asked him if hewas saying that these were the truths from the bottomof his heart, believing in them, or whether he wassaying that they were the truths simply because Krishnawas saying so. Neither Krishna nor Arjuna were peoplewho would simply speak without conviction. Arjunawas not the kind of person who would support whatKrishna said unless he felt from the depths of his heartthat it was true. Krishna then said, “If you accept allthis as truth from the depth of your heart as your ownconviction, suppose you now get the news that yourson Abhimanyu is dead, are you going to weep oraccept it in line with the Vedanta that you have nowaccepted as the truth?” Arjuna was thrown intoconfusion and he asked Krishna if Abhimanyu wassafe or not. Then Krishna said, “Arjuna, your sonAbhimanyu has attained the heaven where heroes ofthe war go.”As soon as Arjuna heard this, he never waited fora moment and immediately accused Krishna of havingdestroyed a whole family. He said, “O, Krishna! whathave you done to the Pandavas who had great faith inyou and surrendered to you? A situation has comewhere there is no continuation for the dynasty of thePandavas? He was thus accusing Krishna all the waytill they reached Hastinapura. The situation at that timewas such that whatever reply Krishna gave and whateverphilosophical truth he may have communicated, it wouldhave had no effect on Arjuna. So, Krishna simplylistened to all the abuses that were being showered onhim. While Arjuna was accusing him in many ways,Krishna realised that it was not an opportune momentSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 167 168Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976for him to retort; and he was silent all the way. Whateverquestions one may ask and whatever doubts may beexpressed, in order that an appropriate answer may begiven, a suitable time should come. Avatars will neverreply unless such suitable time comes. In an Avatar,there will never be a situation in which you can findfault with Him. The individual who accuses an Avatarwill be hurting himself in his eyes with his own finger.God is always a non-interfering witness. He will simplylook at things which take their own course. That is thereason why God is always described as one who has noqualities and attributes in an ordinary human manner.After reaching home, they found that all the relationswere very sad and were weeping because Abhimanyuhad died. But neither sorrow nor pleasure can ever bepermanent.Sorrow cannot remain all the time and happinesscannot remain for all the time. After sorrow, happinessmust come. Pain and pleasure always come togetherand it is not possible for anyone to separate them fromeach other. Pleasure alone, isolated from pain can neverbe seen. When pain fructifies, such pain will be calledpleasure. Therefore, between pain and pleasure, we talkof some pleasure and some sorrow. As time went on,Subhadra was feeling very sad. At that time, Uttarawas in the family way and was approaching the time ofher delivery. But the son, who was born to Uttara, wasalmost lifeless. The situation at that time was such thatDroupadi had become old and Subhadra also wasapproaching old age. The only way in which the dynastyof the Pandavas could be propagated was by the birthof a son to Uttara. The Pandavas were anxiously waitingfor the news concerning the delivery of Uttara’s baby.Only if a son was born, would it be good news for thePandavas.Such grief-stricken Pandavas were sitting anxiouslyand Droupadi brought a practically lifeless son to thePandavas, and she also broke down in tears. The dayon which Aswatthama and Arjuna fought with eachother they used weapons of great power and potency,which were responsible for the damage to the pregnancyof Uttara. Today when we use an atom bomb, it isreported that pregnancy is destroyed in the wombs ofmothers. This is not something which has been recentlyfound out. It was known even in those days. Today, allthe power is only that of a machine. If we let loose abomb, there is no way in which it can be retracted. Thedamage is permanently caused; but in those days, itwas more the power of the manthras. When once thismanthra has been used, it could also be retracted if sodesired. But today, if a bomb is used there is no wayof retracting. When the Pandavas looked at the sight ofSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 169 170Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976a lifeless son, they were greatly stricken, and they didnot know what to do.Dharmaraja immediately sent Arjuna to bringKrishna to the place. Krishna came there and found thePandavas in great sorrow. As a cat enjoys the situationwhen it is a matter of life and death for the mouse,Krishna was smiling when the Pandavas were literallysteeped in misery. He was talking in a very light mannerand asked Dharmaraja and Arjuna why they were sosorry and glum. At this, Droupadi brought the cradle inwhich the lifeless baby was kept and placed it beforeKrishna and asked him why he had done this tragicthing to their family. Krishna took the cradle into hishand, and he started looking at the baby and describingit in nice terms by comparing the nose to that ofAbhimanyu and the face to that of Arjuna.Dharmaraja took up the cue and said, “Yes, evenhis breath is like that of Abhimanyu.” Then Krishnaexclaimed, “Why, is there no life in the baby?” and hestarted to shake the baby vigorously, and the babystarted to cry. At that instant, the pleasure and joy ofthe Pandavas knew no bounds and Arjuna exclaimed,“Oh, Krishna, the protector of our family!” They praisedhim in that manner.Krishna smiled and came to Arjuna and said, “Beaware of whatever you are saying. Now, you say thatI am responsible for the continuance of your family.That day you described me as one who completelydestroyed your family, and today you are praising meas one who is a protector of your family. Was that thetruth or is this the truth?” Although Arjuna had forgottenwhat he had said, Krishna did not forget, and hereminded Arjuna about the old incident. “All that wedo, either good or bad, knowingly or unknowingly, willalways produce a result. So it is necessary for us to dogood so that the consequences will also be good. Whenone is born out of a mother’s womb, one does not comewith a garland. You do not have, even as a specimen,a chain of gold around your neck. There is only onechain around your neck. All the karma that you havedone in your previous births constitute the only goldchain round your neck. But that necklace is somethingwhich is not visible. In order that we do not have achain of bad actions around our neck when we areborn, it is necessary for us to recognise, as a primarylesson of the Mahabharatha, that we should do gooddeeds in our daily lives. It is in this context that it issaid, “Do good, Be good, and See good.” That alonewill take you to Madhava!”Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 171 172Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 197610. Man Should Not, At Any Time,Behave Like An Animal
Do you know why you have beengiven a human body? Is it to takeit to all the corners of the world?No, that is not the purpose. You have beengiven this body so that you maydemonstrate, with its help, the truth of thestatement that the body is intended fordoing good to other human beings.Divya Atma Swarupas!It is for us to recognise that the compassion thatall the living beings deserve from us forms the essenceof our being able to get a vision of the Atma. Thegreatest thapas is the bringing together of the compassionthat is present in all beings. The sacredness of life thathas been given to a human being is at a very high level.The life of a cow, of a horse, and of an elephant are ata lower level. These lower forms are being looked afterby the human being who is at a higher level. Sometimesthese forms are also being worshipped by the humanbeings. The reason for this is that they live a life whichis sathwic.When we look at the other categories of animalslike lions and tigers, we see that man hates them andeven tries to kill them. It is essential for us to understandthe inner meaning and significance of our trying to killsome animals while we respect and adore another classof animals. The sathwic qualities of a group of animalsrepresented by the cow, and the rajasic qualities of agroup of animals represented by the tiger, are responsiblefor this difference of approach.We know that of all the animals in this world, totake birth as a human being, is a very difficult matter.Having attained this difficult human birth, we shouldnot behave, at any time, like an animal. We shouldthink and take note of this aspect. The reason for thisis mainly the kind of food that we take. The kind offood that we take determines the kind of behaviour thatwe develop. If a tiger enters a herd of cows, then thecows cannot survive and live.So also, as in that analogy, in the heart of manthere are good and sathwic qualities comparable to the174Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976qualities of a cow. If into that group of good qualities,we send in food represented by the rajasic qualities ofthe tiger, it is impossible for the good to survive anylonger. If you put seeds in a land which is not fertile,the seeds are not going to sprout. So also in a man whohas rajasic qualities in his heart, the kind of sathwicqualities like puja or compassion cannot thrive. It,therefore, becomes necessary for man to do such thingsby which the field of his heart can be purified andcleansed. Therefore, man in this life must take courageand move forward in his journey of life.Krishna has taught in the Gita that the purity ofkarma is extremely important. The kind of work weengage in will determine the kind of fruits that we get.The kind of food that we eat will determine the smellof the belch that follows. The quality of bread that wewill be able to prepare depends on the kind of flour weuse. God never does things which do not have a goodreason behind them. God never utters words whichhave no meaning. Whatever He does, sees, and sayscarries with it an inner deeper spiritual meaning.There is a small example for this. The two armiesof the Kauravas and of the Pandavas were standing oneither side. On the side of the Pandavas, there wereseven units of armies. On the side of the Kauravas,there were eleven units of armies. It is not as if Arjunawas ignorant of the number of units on the Kauravasside and the number of units on the Pandava side.Knowing this fully well, Arjuna requested Krishna totake his chariot and put it right in the middle of the twoarmies. When Krishna asked him for the reason for hisbehaviour, he replied that he wanted to determine withwhom he should really fight, if he should fight at all.When we examine this in the context in which hemade this statement, we realise that he made thisstatement after he had gone with the intention offighting. Krishna prepared the chariot and Arjunaprepared all his weapons including the Gandiva, andthey were all set for the battle. After reaching thebattlefield, why did he change his mind? Was it hisweakness or did he become despondent? He beganasking the question as to who will benefit from thebattle and who will get prosperity from the battle. Herealised that the very people for whose sake he wasfighting the battle will probably be killed, and so he feltthat the battle had no purpose. The kings want to ruleover people and build up the prosperity of the peopleand the kingdom. If the people are going to be killed ina battle, where is the question of prosperity and akingdom? After the entire family and group of peopleare wiped out, for whose sake was he going to establisha kingdom and rule over it? Some people have describedSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 175 176Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976this as moha or attachment to his kith and kin, and theynamed the chapter Vishada Yoga.This cannot be described as a period of internalcontroversy or discussion within himself. He has enteredthis argument within himself to decide between truthand untruth, between propriety and impropriety. Hediscussed within himself the aspect that the Kauravashave been ruling unjustly, and the fact that they havebeen having untruth and impropriety on their side, anddid not, himself, want to undertake the same improprietyand untruth. There were certain distinctive features anddistinctive qualities on the side of the Pandavas,therefore, God was also on their side.Here it becomes clear to us that Krishna was onthe side of the Pandavas because of their good qualities.If we look at this situation in a somewhat superficialmanner, then we will see that because Arjuna wasthrown into this despondent and confusing situation, anopportunity had risen for Krishna to preach the sacredtext of the Bhagavad Gita. If Arjuna did not fall into anintrospective and despondent situation like that, Krishnawould not have had an opportunity to preach the sacredBhagavad Gita.Just as we know that pleasure is an interval betweentwo pains, so also in the interval between two situations,sometimes good comes about. Krishna here plays thepart of a typical human being, and by making Arjunabehave as a typical human being, Krishna created asituation whereby the Gita could be expounded. Man’slife is transient. It is momentary, and in this contextArjuna had a chance to recognise the permanent truth.The Pandavas were held up as an example by whichthe sacredness of the heart of a devotee could beunderstood. Sometimes, as a result of difficulties, thedevotees have their hearts merged in sorrow. This resultsin their ego and other bad qualities in their hearts,coming to the surface and troubling them. To get suchego, jealousy, and bad qualities out of the heart ofdevotees, God sometimes undertakes certainprogrammes.On one occasion, Arjuna performed theAswamedha Yagna and let loose the horse. Accordingto the rules of that Aswamedha Yagna, if a horse waslet out and someone else captured that horse, then theowner had to fight with the person who had capturedthe horse; and if he lost the fight, he had to forfeit hiskingdom to the victor. The Mayuradhwaja Raja caughtthe horse, and he was fully aware of the then code ofconduct regarding the horse. Krishna and Arjuna wentin search of the horse, and they found that the horsewas captured by the Mayuradhwaja Raja. Krishna andSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 177 178Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Arjuna were contemplating whether to undertake a fightwith Mayuradhwaja. Krishna told Arjuna thatMayuradhwaja was no ordinary man and that he was agreat devotee of his, and it is not easy for Arjuna tofight with him. Arjuna stated that according to the codeof conduct he had to fight with the person who capturedthe horse.Then Krishna commanded Arjuna to fight the battle.Arjuna fought with Mayuradhwaja in many ways; butit was not possible for him to defeat his opponent andeven his principal weapon, the Gandiva, was damagedin the process. As Arjuna was asking Krishna for help,he too was preparing for the fight. Mayuradhwaja wasno doubt aware of Krishna’s greatness, but the code ofconduct required that Mayuradhwaja engage in battle,and so Mayuradhwaja took out each one of his weaponsand sent them at Krishna after uttering the sacred nameof Krishna. The arrows were so hard and so powerfulthat Krishna started running hither and thither. Arjunastarted shouting to Krishna that he should use his sacredchakra; but Krishna replied that against Mayuradhwaja,neither Arjuna’s Gandiva nor Krishna’s chakra willhave any effect.Arjuna did not take this matter seriously. Hethought that Krishna was only joking and that Krishnawas really not intent on fighting. Arjuna thought that ifMayuradhwaja was really a devotee of Krishna, wouldhe undertake to fight against Krishna? He thought thatMayuradhwaja was not a true devotee.Krishna wanted to demonstrate to Arjuna thatMayuradhwaja was indeed a very ardent devotee. SoKrishna and Arjuna disguised themselves as twobrahmins and came to Mayuradhwaja’s house.According to the tradition, it was the duty of thehouseholder to receive the guests and honour them, andin this aspect there was none better than Mayuradhwaja.As soon as Mayuradhwaja saw the two brahminscoming, he himself threw away the King’s garb andwore clothes typical of the brahmins. He brought waterand washed the feet of his guests and honoured themsuitably. Mayuradhwaja requested them to be his guests.With a view to making Arjuna realise the depth of thedevotion of Mayuradhwaja, Krishna had been planningthis meeting for quite some time. When Mayuradhwajaasked Krishna and Arjuna to accept his hospitality andbe his guests for food, Krishna replied, “We do nothave the time to accept your hospitality. We have comehere with a specific problem and require your help.While coming to your house, my son has beenswallowed by a tiger and, at this time, only half thebody of my son has been swallowed and the other halfSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 179 180Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976is outside. A formless voice said that if the body of myson was to be freed, I will have to get half the body ofKing Mayuradhwaja as a meal for the tiger and then, Iwas told, my son would be set free.”As soon as Mayuradhwaja heard of this, he sawan opportunity to be of some service to his guest. Heknew very well that immortality comes out of sacrifice,and he was prepared to sacrifice his body. He knewvery well that the human body was given to him so thathe might be able to help others. He knew that thehuman body would drop off some day or the other, andso he was prepared to sacrifice his body to satisfyothers. He called his wife and son and asked them tocut his body into two halves with a sword. His wifeand son thought that Mayuradhwaja was preparing tofulfil a sacred task and so they also prepared to cut thebody into two halves. Arjuna and Krishna were watchingthis situation without even batting their eyelids once.As they were watching intently, they found thatthe left eye of Mayuradhwaja was shedding a tear.Finding that the situation was developing, Krishnawanted to test him even further and said, “What is thevalue of the gift which is given with sorrow and tearsin one’s eyes? I do not want such a gift. A gift must begiven freely and willingly.” Mayuradhwaja, who wasundisturbed and sitting peacefully with closed eyes,opened his eyes and said that he had no sorrow ingiving his body. If, at all, he had any sorrow, both eyesshould shed tears. Why is it that only one eye is sheddingtears? You must consider and understand why tears arecoming from only one eye. It is not as if Krishna didnot know the truth behind this. He only wanted to showArjuna the depth of the devotion of Mayuradhwaja.Mayuradhwaja replied and said, “Oh, Lord, this bodyis going to be cut into two parts and the right part isgoing to be gifted to you for a sacred purpose. The leftpart is crying and shedding tears because it will then bethrown away and simply become food for the crows. Itis crying because it is going to be thrown away in suchan unsacred manner.” As soon as Arjuna listened tothese words, he started to repent and realised that thiswas a lesson taught to him and that there were moreardent devotees of Krishna than himself.The world is full of devotees of varying types. Ifit was in the aspect of devotion, Mayuradhwaja wouldplace at the feet of the Lord everything that he possessed.If we look at it from the angle of a householder, wehave seen that he will honour any guest that came tohis house by giving him anything. If we look at it fromthe point of view of the proper code of conduct of aruler, Mayuradhwaja was one who would observe thisSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 181 182Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976fully. He was fully prepared to fight and establish thecode of conduct. Mayuradhwaja was thus one who wasalways prepared in any sphere of activity whether itwas worldly, material, or spiritual, and was ever readyto sacrifice and do anything. In order to proclaim thisaspect of performing one’s duty in different spheres,Krishna brought this example to the world and to Arjuna.Having passed through a period of slavery forseveral centuries and having attained our independenceby our own struggle, if we become unmindful of ourtraditions which are 5000 years old, and if we are notable to understand the sanctity of the ideals that wereestablished by the examples shown by Krishna, there isno wonder that we are in such an unfortunate situationas we are in today. Krishna was one who taught thatone should be prepared to sacrifice everything for thesake of justice. Krishna taught this in the form ofVedanta. Krishna’s teachings and ideals were not suchthat while teaching that if you get a slap on one of yourcheeks, you should be so considerate as to show theother cheek, yet you go ahead and produce an atombomb in practice for the destruction of the world. Thisirreconcilable situation between preaching and practicedid not belong to Krishna. Holding an atom bomb inone’s hand, people keep on shouting for peace. Thekind of peace which they want cannot be attained, evenif they go to the moon. All the time preparing for warand heading for agitation and revolution, we just talk ofpeace in the world. This is not the kind of philosophywhich Krishna stood for or taught.Krishna was one who undertook to bring underone rule, the eighteen different kings and kingdomsthat were existing at that time. That was the idealwhich Krishna stood for. Who was the king underwhom Krishna brought all the different kingdoms? Itwas Dharmaraja. Krishna did not want to become theking himself. If we really pay heed to the ideals ofKrishna or what Krishna did, we will not be in theunfortunate situation today when the country is dividedinto many parts.Boys and girls:Recognise the ideals of this country andDharmarajya that it stands for. Use all your physicaland mental strength to get back this sacred Dharmarajya.I hope and bless you that this should be possible.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 183 184Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 197611. The Human Body Is Like A WaterBubble On The Surface Of Water
It is easy to talk of principles and codesof conduct but it is a very difficultmatter to put them into practice.Whether it be for the young people orwhether it be to the grandfathers, it is thesame. This is the truth and the simple truththat I am giving you.Students, boys and girls!The results of your examinations as announcedtoday are indeed happy news; but so long as theeducation that you get is such that it promotes onlyignorance and does not give you the needed strength topromote the prosperity of our nation and traditions,then the education is useless. Of all the branches ofeducation, spiritual education is the real education. Whenwe compare this with the other branches of education,we can see that the spiritual education is like the oceanwhile the other branches of education are like the rivers.When the rivers go and merge in the ocean, they acquirethe depth and glory of the unfathomable ocean. In asimilar manner, when all other forms of education goand merge with the spiritual education, they acquire theform and grandeur of the spiritual education. It is onlywhen your education is combined with thapas thatthere is a possibility of the blossoming of your heartand the ennobling of your ideas.Thapas does not mean that you should give upeverything and go to the forest and stand there withyour head on the ground. Thapas is one, with the helpof which, you can make your thought, word, and deedharmonise with each other. It is only when such asacred type of education is given along with properculture, that there is a chance of the great ideasblossoming properly in you. It is only then that thenoble and good ideas that are inside you can be exhibitedproperly. Education cannot be entirely and wholly relatedto worldly matters. Education should promote yourcharacter.It is necessary for the students of today to acquiresuch sacred education and that alone will give us the186Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976good results. If today we really want to understand thehistory and culture of ourselves, then it becomesnecessary for us to learn and study the Sruthi andIthihasas, the components of our Vedanta. When weread such texts, we should take great care to see thatour own ideas, concepts, and prejudices are not injectedinto what we read. We should try to understand theoriginal content as far as possible. In the centuries thathave gone by since the creation of such texts, severalaspects have undergone a great deal of transformation.As a result of the passage of time, we find that thecontinents on the earth, the seas, and the very sourcesof the rivers have undergone great changes. A riverwhich may have flowed in a particular direction somecenturies ago will be flowing in a different directionnow. That river may have changed its course. We willfind that there is a very marked difference between thecourse taken by a river some centuries ago and thecourse taken by the same river at the present time. Butwhen the man of today looks at the course taken by theriver today, he transfers it to what is in his concept; andhe thinks that the river took the same course somecenturies ago also. This is not right.There is a small example for this. We ask ourselvesthe question, is the land which we now call Lanka thesame as the one which existed in the Thretha Yuga asthe land ruled by Ravana at the time of Ramarajya?No, this is not so. At that time, Lanka was hundreds ofmiles away from the tip of India and at that time, it wasat the equator. As time went on, and as we moved fromthe Thretha Yuga to the Kali Yuga, this particular island,which was on the equator, drifted hundreds of milesnorthwards. When we look at this island, which wenow call Lanka, we find that it has shifted to the northof the equator.It was recorded in the Greek history that thisisland, which we now call Lanka, was completelysubmerged under water when the oceanic catastrophecalled the Atlantis occurred. The Greeks were noordinary people. They were very advanced in sciencesand were very knowledgeable in many fields. Theywere describing the fact that Lanka was submerged inthe ocean and drifted away and this phenomenon wasbeing accepted by them. At that time, these peoplewere so advanced that they had travelled to the moonand designed several types of air transport and weresuch that they had mastered the science of flying.As we know, today the entire world regards thestandard of time as the Greenwich standard time. InWorld History, it is known that the astrologers of thatSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 187 188Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976time were taking the longitude passing through Lankaand when the sun rose on this longitude they took it asthe standard time for the calculation. It is on the basisof this standard of time that our people decided on thetime of the birth of Krishna, the time at which Krishnagave up his mortal body, and the dates of theMahabharatha battle, and so on. When the Pandavaslived, the time scales were determined on the basis ofthis longitude which passes through Lanka. When wetake this as the basis, we come to the conclusion thatthe period which we now call Kali Yuga started in theyear named Pramadi, in the month named Sravana, andin the fortnight named Bahula and on the day calledAshtami. According to the English calendar, this willbe described as February 20, 3102 years before theadvent of Christ. In order to bring out this aspect of thecommencement of a new Yuga on February 20, 3102B.C., our ancestors have been calling that day as Ugadi,or the day of the beginning of a new era. As this wasthe commencing day of a new Yuga, it was called theUgadi.When looked at from this angle, we should alsolearn a different aspect, although it is not very pleasant.This particular day called the Ugadi is also the day onwhich Krishna gave up his mortal body in a sacredplace of pilgrimage called Prabata near Dwaraka. Thereis a proverb, according to which we think of all kindsof extraordinary and unusual ideas when we near ourend.The Yadavas, the community in which Krishnawas living, had some such strange ideas then; and theybrought about their end themselves. Although Krishnawas preaching the acceptance of only sathwic food, theYadavas violated this sacred injunction on a holy day.When they were performing a religious ceremony, theyused articles which should not have been used andprepared food containing meat. They also partook ofalcoholic drinks and consumed these articles. On accountof such food and drink, they became intoxicated andlost their balance. They began to beat each other andthey reached a stage when they prepared to kill eachother. In this manner, they extinguished the entireYadava clan. It is in this context, bearing in mind theideals which Krishna had promulgated, that Gandhialso wanted to forbid meat eating and alcoholic drinks;but unfortunately he did not succeed.The Yadava community, which was then subjectedto this distress, lost their lives. In this battle evenVasudeva was killed. However, many Yadava women,who were not there, survived. Balarama also was killedin this battle. Within a short time, Vidura came to thatSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 189 190Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976place. When Vidura looked at that place, it struck himas a place of terror. Uddhava also reached the place atthat time. When Uddhava looked at that situation, hewas afraid that his close friend Krishna may also havegiven up his mortal body, and he was looking forKrishna’s body. Arjuna also helped Uddhava in thisquest. They were looking everywhere for the body oftheir dear friend. In that gruesome fight, they were toldthat the body of Krishna was cut and dismembered andparts thrown at different places. Arjuna and Vidurathought that they could not identify Krishna’s body. Inthat situation Vidura and Arjuna thought that it was nouse for them to live in a world in which Krishna wasnot living, and they prepared to drown themselves inthe Yamuna river. It was a time of great disaster, andas a consequence, all the air and surrounding watersbecame greatly polluted and that was polluting thewhole atmosphere.While both Vidura and Arjuna were looking at theriver, they found a blue cloth fluttering at some distanceand heard a sound from that place. Vidura was greatlysurprised and wanting to know what it was, he rantowards the sound. Under a tree, he found Krishnasitting in a very peaceful manner. It looked as if Krishnawas also preparing to give up his body, but Krishna didnot think it proper to give up his body when his friendsand relatives were so near. With a view to sendingUddhava away, he taught him the Bhagavatha andasked him to go and bring Arjuna. Uddhava appearedto be happy and wanted to share the news of Krishna’ssafety with Arjuna, and he ran towards Arjuna.Observing that Uddhava was now far away,Krishna gave up his mortal life. When Uddhava andArjuna came near the tree, they found that the bodywas no longer there. They watched this situation fortwo to three days. They felt that Krishna had decidedthat the purpose of his human existence was over andhe had given up his mortal body at that time. They thencame back to Dwaraka. Sathyabhama, Rukmini, andthe gopikas were in great sorrow as they had losteverything in their lives, and Arjuna and Uddhava wereunable to look at their suffering. Arjuna thought that itwas not good to leave the women alone at that place.So he took his Gandiva and proceeded to take them toHastinapura.On the way, the forest tribes attacked them andwanted to take away the women from the group. SinceArjuna was leading them, Sathyabhama, Rukmini, andthe other gopikas were shouting for his help andrequested him to save them from this situation. Earlier,Arjuna took part and was victorious in several battles.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 191 192Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976He had showed great strength in the battle of theMahabharatha and in the battle of Khandavavana. Arjunahad shown great courage and strength on manyoccasions.On this particular occasion, he could not even lifthis Gandiva and take aim. Then Arjuna thought, “Allthat strength shown was because of Krishna; and whenKrishna is not there, I am not even able to lift theGandiva.” He felt that although his hand had beenholding the Gandiva all these years, it was the strengthof Krishna that was using it, and he felt very helplessat that time. As Krishna was his Antaryami (innermotivator) all those years, he had felt strong; but nowthat Krishna was no longer in him, he felt like a bag ofleather.The inner meaning of this is that, so long asArjuna felt that Krishna was there in an ordinary humanmanner, he had all the strength; but as soon as he feltthat He was no longer there, he had lost all the strengthand the will to fight. Just because Krishna’s gross bodyhad left, Arjuna thought that Krishna had left him.Because he was under the illusion of identifyingKrishna’s gross body with Krishna himself, he lost allhis strength. To think that one is full of weakness is notcorrect. The correct attitude is to regard God as formless,without attributes. We should take it that God is presentin us. That should be the right attitude. So long as onehas a form, it is quite natural that he thinks of thatform; but since that form has to be forgotten some dayor the other, it is good to concentrate on the formlesssupreme and give up attachment to a form. Our Vedantahas taught us the philosophy of vairagya, or detachment,to help in this process of concentrating on the formlesssupreme power which is behind every form.It is inevitable that the jiva should leave the body;if the jiva does not leave the body, then the body hasto leave the jiva. This body is like a water bubble onthe surface of water. This water bubble is born out ofwater, lives on water, and survives on water, and finallyit gets dissolved in water. It is only when we developa correct attitude to the formless supreme power thatwe will be able to have permanent happiness.If we take a ball and hit it on a hard ground, it willrebound to the extent determined by how hard we hitthe ball on the ground. If we hit this ball on a softmuddy ground instead of hard ground, it will not beable to recoil, and in fact it will even get entangled inthe muddy ground. In a similar manner, if the pureaspect of divinity goes and hits a sacred heart, it willrebound. If, on the other hand, we have a muddy andSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 193 194Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976impure heart, when divinity impinges on such a heartit will get stuck and entangled. Therefore, purity ofone’s mind, and an exemplary life are essential. Truthand honesty are to be regarded as two eyes for us. Forthese two eyes, we have a disease of selfishness; andbecause our eyes are inflicted by this disease, we arenot able to have a pure and clean heart. Young peopleshould have purity of mind. They should take greatcare to protect truth and honesty. This was the idealtaught and demonstrated by Krishna.Krishna and his aspect of Love are known to thecitizens of Bharath. He is one who has eternal youth.We should understand the significance of saying thathe is eternally young. By saying that he is eternallyyoung, we should not imply that he has a young andyouthful body forever. This should convey to us themeaning that he has no anxiety and that he has asmiling disposition always. This kind of bliss andhappiness also gives happiness to one’s body and bodilyhealth. It is in this context, that it has been said thathappiness is union with God. Either for the decay ofthe body or for the ageing of the body, our own conductis responsible; and for our conduct, our desires areresponsible. For the sake of desires which are connectedwith the world, we should not use this body. Pain andpleasure are like clouds which move away from ourheart. So, all these desires should be regarded as clouds.It is in this context that the Vedas have comparedour minds to the moon and our eyes to the sun. TheVedas have also taught us that our heart is like a sky;and in this sky of our heart, our mind is like the moonin the sky, and our eyes and intelligence are like thesun. In this sky of our heart, our thoughts must betreated like passing clouds. Thus, in the sky of ourheart, there are millions of names of the Lord shininglike the stars; and on the sky, if we have our mindshining like the moon, that will be a correct situation.This moon, which we have compared with our mind,must be given the status of the full moon. When themind has been trained to get the form of a full moon,there will be an opportunity to correct and set right ourhearts. This sacred text of Mahabharatha has given usso many lessons which will help us make our heartcomparable to a full moon. Krishna’s ideals wantedthat you should all make your minds pure and accepttruth and honesty as the basic things on which our lifeshould be based.Basing on this, it is also correct for us to decidethe day on which he was born. That day on whichKrishna was born, according to these calculations, willcome to be the 20th of July, 3228 years before theAdvent of Christ. If this has to be put in our calendar,it will be in the year Srimukha, month by the nameSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 195 196Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Sravana, fortnight by the name Bahula, and the day ofAshtami. The star will be Rohini and the time will be3:00 a.m. after midnight. If we count backwards fromtoday, the day on which Krishna gave up his mortalbody will work out at 5078 years. If we want to checkthis, we see that 3102 B.C. and 1976 add up to 5078years. Thus, since the Kali Yuga has started, we havenow gone through 5078 years.That is also the time when Krishna gave up hislife, and that is also the day when the Kali agecommenced. This day is also the first day of the KaliYuga and we call it Ugadi. But the Kali Yuga started inthe year Pramadi and so it appears that this Yuga is fullof danger and harm. Truly, instead of calling this Yugaas the Kali Yuga, it is right and appropriate to call it theKalaha Yuga, or the age of quarrels. Whether you go toa house, a village, or a country, we see quarrels. Youngpeople of today should do such things by which thisname of Kalaha Yuga, or age of quarrels, is changed toan age of prosperity by living up to the ideals ofKrishna.It is necessary that in this world there should betwo categories of people. Without knowing pain,pleasure will not be enjoyed. Pleasure comes as aninterval between two pains. Without sorrow, you cannever understand the meaning of happiness. Althoughtwo aspects are always present, we should try andpromote good, happiness, and pleasure. In our ownbody while good blood is flowing on one side, we findthat simultaneously impure blood is also flowing. Evenin our homes, we see that while good and pure drinkingwater is brought from a pipe from one side, the uglyand bad drainage water is sent away by another pipe.They are both present in the same home. In a village ora city, while the drinking water is brought throughcertain pipes, alongside this will also be pipes whichcarry the drainage, and both will look similar and cleanexternally. In the same manner, in our mind there arealways two streams going. One will be a stream ofgood ideas and the other a stream of bad ideas, bothflowing together. But, you must make an attempt toaccept the good and reject the bad.In the world there are agitations, there arerevolutions, and these are common. In the midst ofsuch revolutions in the world, man must make an attemptto distinguish the right from wrong and separate truthfrom untruth. People who are young have to make along journey in this train which we call a society. Theolder people in this train are such that they will dropout on wayside stations. In this train of society, you arethe people who have to travel a long distance, and youSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 197 198Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976should be prepared to take the necessary steps to rectifythe defects in that train. You are to set right the faultsin this country, and you should imprint the good ideasin your mind. Today, if you think that a particular thingyour elders are doing is not right, you should notyourselves do the same thing when you grow up. Whenyou become older you should be prepared to put intoaction what you now think are the good actions of yourelders.No one amongst us wants to have the consequencesof a bad act, but yet we are prepared to continually dobad things. We only do not want to accept theconsequences of such bad acts. We all want to have theconsequences of good things, but we are not preparedto do good things. If you believe that in order to getgood consequences, you must do a good act, then thevery first thing that you must accept is to do goodthings. What you regard as sin should be kept awayand you should never participate in such actions.The harmony of the word that you utter, the deedthat you do, and the thought that you get has beenreferred to as thapas. Krishna told Arjuna that this co-ordination between thought, word, and deed is the realmeaning of thapas and that thapas cannot be interpretedas standing on one leg. In fact, Krishna describedstanding on one leg as a mere physical exercise. Theideals that were handed over to us in the Mahabharatha,the ideal and exemplary life which Krishna led areimportant to us. I am hoping that the youth will putthem into practice in their lives.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 199 200Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 197612. Man Becomes Blind By His Ego
For one who is blinded by his egoand is unable to see anything aroundhim, is life going to give him anysweetness at all? For one who never doesany good, is it going to be easy at all? Forone who is leading a sinful life, is anypleasure going to come his way? Who areour friends and who are our enemies? Whois God and who is the devotee? Who is theteacher and who is the disciple? Who is thewriter and who is the actor? Is there a wayof finding out who is what? If there is onewho has not got the intelligence tounderstand, is there anything wrong incalling him a monkey?For everyone, his own Self is his friend or hisenemy. Truly, in one’s daily life, man is establishingconnection with so many other persons. Amongst them,he thinks that some are his friends and some are hisenemies. With some, he wants to talk more and moreand spend time. With others, he does not like to continueconversation or spend any time. Because the world isfull of such dualities and contradictions, man is unableto decide what really gives him pleasure and whatreally gives him pain.When Krishna took birth, simultaneously Kamsaalso took birth. When there was Rama, there was Ravanacontemporaneously with him. When Buddha took birth,there was a Devadutta. When Prahlada appeared, therewas a Hiranyakasyapu. In this way, when good and badget mixed up in creation, a situation arises in which wecannot decide what is good and what is bad. What isthe basis of all this? Who is the object and who is thesubject? The basis or the reason for this is not somethingwhich is behind us and unseen.The ideas that come up in our own mind are thecause for all these. Those who respect us and ourideals, and those who have a concern for our well-being are considered as our relations or friends. Thosewho hate us, and those who go contrary to ourexpectations, and those who cause pain and loss to usare regarded as enemies. Truly, in this context, it202Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976becomes impossible for us to decide who our friendsand who our enemies are. On one occasion, Kabir hassaid that we should keep the company of those whoabuse us. The reason for this is that although we maycommit several sins, the people who point out our sinsare going to remove our sins by their abuse. It is in thiscontext that we say that if someone ridicules us, thenthis will result in the removal of our sin.In reality, those people who help us to get rid ofour sins are our friends. Those people who promotesins in us are our enemies. Thus, it is those who abuseand ridicule us who are to be considered as our friendsas they remove our sins. In this situation, Prahlada saidthat your own chitta is your enemy. He addressed hisfather, “You are such a capable warrior. You are able toconquer all the world but you are unable to conqueryour own sensory organs.” Therefore, in trying to control and conquer ourorgans, it is very necessary to have confidence inourselves and faith in God. For one who has noconfidence in one’s own self nor faith in God, it becomesimpossible to conquer his organs. Before we undertaketo control our senses and our organs, we should firstpromote faith in God and confidence in our own self.Without controlling our senses and organs, all theattempts that we make in order to improve our liveswill end in failure.There is a small story for this. On one occasion,when Radha was travelling to Mathura in the evening,she was alone. All the other gopikas who saw thisstarted following her. By the time she reached Yamuna,it became dark. The gopikas cautioned Radha and saidthat she should not go to Mathura in the darkness; butif she had to go, they would accompany her. With thefeeling that Brindavan belongs to all and Govinda alsobelongs to all, she agreed to take them along with her.They all went to the banks of the Yamuna, and theytook turns in rowing the boat so that no single individualgot tired. It was dark and they did not pay any specialattention to other things, and they were rowing in turns.Although they were rowing in this manner all night, yetthey did not reach Mathura. As the day dawned, theyfound that people who were residents of Gokulam werecoming to the river. The boat had been rowed all nightbut they found that they were still near Gokulam. Theyfound that they had not removed the rope which tiedthe boat to the post at the bank. Without untying thisrope, although they were rowing the boat the wholenight they remained where they were. In spite of thefact that the boat was being rowed, and in spite of thefact that water was there, and they had the strength toSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 203 204Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976move the boat, the boat did not move at all. The reasonfor this is that the rope that was binding the boat wasnot untied at all, and the boat did not move at all.In the same manner, without removing the bondagein regard to our senses and organs, we will not be ableto move forward at all. Therefore, it is necessary tocontrol our senses; but before we do this, we must firstundertake to promote love, compassion, and sacrifice.When we can fill our heart with these three qualities,our heart will blossom into a Nandanavana (garden ofmany coloured flowers). On the other hand, if we fillour heart with qualities like hatred, jealousy, and angerthen it will become a stinking pool.We should ourselves go into this matter and decidewhether we want to convert our heart into aNandanavana or an unclean stinking pool. Everyindividual must make an attempt to fill his heart withthese sacred qualities and turn his heart into aNandanavana. Truly, when we look at happy people,we should feel happy at their happiness. When we lookat suffering and trouble, we should also share theirsufferings. If we are able to develop these qualities, wewill be making our heart a Nandanavana. We mustmake all attempts to promote compassion and goodness.This is called maitri or good sense. If we develop thesegood qualities, God also will appear to be close to us.Whether we are in pain or in pleasure, in sorrow or introuble, at all times we must develop our heart in sucha way that we will be able to get Paramatma’ s Prema.On the other hand, if we have bad qualities likewanting to commit sin, wanting to listen to thingswhich we should not listen to, hurting and harmingothers, then justice, goodness, and honesty will neverremain anywhere near us. Therefore, people shoulddevelop sacred qualities. The Pandavas were such peopleand by right they enjoyed the proximity of the Lord.For the Pandavas, the life-giving breath was Krishna;and to Krishna, His body was the Pandavas. So far asthe Pandavas were concerned, there was not a singlemoment when Krishna was not present. Whatever theysaw or did, it was by the prompting and by the strengthwhich Krishna gave them.There is a small incident which may be narrated inthis context. Krishna gave up his mortal body aftercompleting the task for which he had come to the earth.In this context, Arjuna was accompanying the gopikasand bringing them to Gokulam, and they were attackedby the tribals, and there was a lot of confusion. Arjunalost all his strength and in that weakened state, hesomehow managed to come to Hastinapura. Because ofSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 205 206Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976the sacred, pure, and selfless name of Krishna whichwas present in the heart of the Pandavas, whatever theylooked at appeared to them as sacred. Because of thefact that Krishna was no longer in this world, everythingthat the Pandavas saw appeared unsacred to them.Unlike these days, if one had to send a message inthose days, either to Mathura or Dwaraka, it took monthsto reach the destination. Even before this news of thedeath of Krishna reached Hastinapura, Dharmaraja wasencountering many bad and inauspicious omens. Onone evening, when he was walking out, he found oneagriculturist returning home with a plough on hisshoulder. Dharmaraja looked at this unusual sight andasked the man why he was carrying the plough on hisshoulders. This man replied that the previous day, theplough that he left in the field had been stolen, and sohe was carrying the plough with him back home thatday. Dharmaraja was greatly surprised and agitated andbegan to doubt if Krishna was still alive, for he couldnot explain thefts in his kingdom.On another day, when he was walking in the city,he found a big steel bolt on the door of a house. He metsome people at the door and asked what this steel boltwas. They replied that the steel bolt was put there inorder to secure the door against the possible theft byother people. After listening, he was even more agitatedand surprised, and he surmised that the Yuga must bechanging; and for such events to take place Kali mustbe entering.On another occasion, he found a woman talking toa man in the middle of a street. At this sight,Dharmaraja’s head started to reel. He was astonished tofind a woman, belonging to Bharath, talking so freelyto a man on the street. He did not want to rule oversuch a kingdom at all. He quickly ordered his charioteerto take him back. When we look at these events andincidents, we can realise how dharmic Dharmaraja’srule was. How good and how kind he was can also beseen from these incidents.As Dharmaraja was thinking of these inauspiciousevents, Arjuna arrived. As soon as Dharmaraja sawArjuna’s face, he realised that there must be very badnews. Arjuna was standing in a dumbfounded manner.He could not convey the bad news to Dharmaraja.Although Dharmaraja asked several questions of Arjuna,he could not get any replies because Arjuna was ingreat sorrow and he was just silent.That Arjuna had come and that he was full ofsorrow was quickly known to all the inhabitants in theroyal mansion. The old mother, Kunthi, sent word thatSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 207 208Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Arjuna should immediately come and see her. Kunthiwas over one hundred and eighty years of age and shewas infirm. She was just sitting on a cot. As thePandavas were such that they would implicitly obeythe orders of their mother, they went to Kunthiimmediately. The Pandavas knew very well the ancientcustom according to which the father, mother, teacher,and guest were to be respected as God. In their life andconduct, they fully demonstrated this respect to theirmother, their teachers, and their guests. They did nothave a father to demonstrate their respect to a father.When the brothers touched her feet, Arjuna could notget up at all because he was so grief-stricken.Immediately, Kunthi began asking several questionsabout the welfare of Krishna, Vasudeva, and otherrelations in Dwaraka. Unable to answer her questions,Dharmaraja at once cried out that their Gopala was nomore. Kunthi was a very shrewd person and sheimmediately guessed what had happened, and she startedcrying out for Gopala, and she gave up her life. In thevery next moment, Dharmaraja ordered all preparationsfor the ritual after Kunthi’s death. He summoned Nakula,Sahadeva, and Bheema. Nakula and Sahadeva weresent to do the last rites for their mother. Bheema wasordered to make all arrangements for their going awayto the jungle.Arjuna was called and told that arrangements mustbe made to crown Parikshith as the king of the land.While the dead body was on his lap, he was makingarrangements for the coronation of Parikshith as theking, and he was also making arrangements for theirsojourn to the forest. No human beings will be able todo such things at the time of such sorrow. The Pandavasare the only persons who could be cited as examplesfor such sacred behaviour and exemplary conduct. Noone else had this courage and sacrifice. The last riteswere performed and the pundits were sent for and toldthat the coronation must be gone through immediately.They all felt that the moment was not very auspiciousand advised that the coronation be postponed, butDharmaraja insisted that they would not be able to livein a world in which Krishna was not present and theywanted to leave for the forest immediately. Thebrothers—Arjuna, Bheema, Nakula, and Sahadeva—were also of the same view. They expressed thatKrishna’s death was in reality the death of the Pandavas.They said that Krishna could not die as he was animmortal person, and the Pandavas were the ones whohad actually died. Arjuna was also arguing with thepundits that it was impossible for the Pandavas toremain in a world in which Krishna was not physicallypresent.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 209 210Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976In many ways, Dharmaraja asked the pundits totraditionally perform the coronation and insisted that ifthey did not do this, he would simply give his crown toParikshith and move away to the forest. The last riteswere completed and Parikshith was sent for.But it is written in the sacred texts that Parikshithwas crowned when he was very young and was notmature enough. This in fact was not the case. Parikshithwas thirty-five years of age. When the battle ofMahabharatha took place, it was 3138 B.C. It was thenDharmaraja’s rule also commenced, and at that time,Parikshith was present in the womb of his motherUttara. Dharmaraja ruled over the Kingdom for thirty-six years. After the battle was over, Krishna went toDwaraka and stayed there for thirty-six years. Whilethe battle started in 3138 B.C., Krishna gave up hismortal body in 3102 B.C. and there was a gap of thirty-six years; and so at that time Parikshith was of the ageof thirty-six years. He was really fit to rule over thekingdom. But so long as his father and his father’sbrothers were present, he did not agree to take over thekingdom. Those were the sacred codes of conduct thatwere present in those days. Parikshith begged his fatherand uncles to take him with them to the forest as hewould not be able to rule the kingdom well because ofhis inexperience.In those days, the code of conduct was such thatone could not disobey the orders of one’s parents,elders, or grandfather. He touched the feet of Dharmarajaand said that when so many elders were present, it wasnot correct for him to be crowned as King. Parikshithwas born in the ruling family and had every right tobecome the king, but he did not hesitate to say thatother elders should be considered first. Dharmaraja didnot agree to this but kept his chariot ready. He wantedto leave immediately after crowning Parikshith.While this situation was developing, Droupadicame out of the house and said that Krishna had savedher on many occasions and she would not considerliving even for a moment without Krishna, especially ifher husbands were not there. “When my Lord and myhusbands are both not here, I do not want to stay here.”The Pandavas exhibited to the rest of the world what anideal family should be. When we give attention to allthese incidents, we see the kind of compassionatefriendship that existed between Krishna and thePandavas.If we look at the condition of Arjuna after thepassing away of Krishna, we find that he was like alifeless body only following his brother as if a lifelessbody was being dragged. He was not even thinking ofSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 211 212Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976his dead mother, was always in constant thought ofKrishna, and was behaving like a madman. For ahundred years, wherever there was Krishna andYogeswara, there was Arjuna, the best of men. Whereverboth of them were present, there was prosperity, victory,wealth, and morality. They lived like inseparable personsfor all that time. They were different only in body; butthe ideas, thoughts, and ideals were one. Whether itwas in Hastinapura or in Dwaraka, whenever Krishnaand Arjuna came together, Kunthi, the mother, alwaysserved them food in one big plate but never in twodifferent plates. Rukmini also never hesitated to puttheir meal in one plate as if she was sharing the mealin one plate with Krishna. If Arjuna came to Dwaraka,Krishna and Arjuna kept constant company with oneanother. Krishna never spent any time with Rukmini orSatyabhama. The reason for this is that Arjuna was thebest of men and Krishna was an Avatar of the highestlevel.These two were typical representatives of Nara,the man, and Narayana, the God. In some circumstances,Nara, the man, can become Narayana; and Narayanacan appear on the earth as man. When man lives in theecstasy of the prema of the Lord, and when he isintoxicated with the thought of the Lord, he transformshimself into Narayana. But when there is injustice andill-will all over, then God will, himself, come down tothe earth as an Avatar. So the relationship between manand God is such that when man gets the grace of Godand changes himself into God, he rises to the knowledgeof Brahman. When man acquires the knowledge ofBrahman, he takes the form of Brahman. On the otherhand, when Narayana takes the form of man and wantsto help humanity, he will act like a man.Suffering from the separation from Krishna, thePandavas were moving, not noticing the presence ofeach other. All the time uttering the name of Krishna,each one dropped dead without noticing the presenceof the other. While they were moving like that, Droupadilost all her energy and realised that her end was alsoapproaching, and she shouted out to the Lord.Dharmaraja said that each of them was worried becausetheir Lord had left this earth and so they could notshare Droupadi’s grief. In that moment of great distress,the Pandavas were only thinking of Krishna and thisteaches us a lesson about the intimate connectionbetween the Pandavas and Krishna. The Pandavas werebeing protected by Krishna as eyelids protect the eyesbecause of the sacred prema which the Pandavas hadtowards Krishna. The Pandavas always had Krishna astheir companion. He stood by them in times of difficultyas well as when good fortune was theirs. He stood bySummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 213 214Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976them when they were living in the forest unrecognisedfor a whole year. He stood by them at all times. Themeaning of the aspect of true companionship wasdemonstrated by this relationship between Krishna andthe Pandavas.On the other hand, if we look at the maitri orfriendship of these days, we notice that one will becomea friend only if one sees a ten rupee note through thetransparent terrylene shirt pocket. If this is not found,there will not be any friendship. In the world today,there is no evidence of true friendship. There is no onewhom we can call a true friend. When a lake is full ofwater, the frogs gather round; and when the lake isempty, all the frogs simply disappear. So also, when aperson is prosperous and wealthy, everyone will be hisfriend; but when this wealth disappears, everyone willdisappear and no one will be a friend.All your relations will continue as relations onlyup to the entrance to the cremation ground. The onlyfriend who will continue to be with you for all time isthe divine friend—GOD. I bless you and hope that youwill learn from these sacred ideals.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 215can escape death. You may have acquired a degree likean MA or BA. You may have acquired a position inlife. You may be doing many good things on this earth.Maybe you will also be practising japa or thapa; butwhatever you may do, you will not be equal to thedevotion of devotees.One may have acquired a lot of knowledge andspent all his life in education; but what is the use ofbeing educated if he cannot shed his mean qualities.You may spend a lot of time and learn many things butyou will only become argumentative in your life. Byeducation of the type that you are having, you cannever acquire complete wisdom.Divya Atma Swarupas,If you want the security, the safety and the well-being of the country, and if the country is not to fallinto danger, then it is essential for you to develop threethings. They are: service to the country, sacrifice withoutbeing selfish, and devotion to spirituality. There is agreat need to train young people who have a strongdetermination in this regard. Today, the entire lifeappears to consist of simply imitating others. The studentis destroying his own ideas and his individuality. Astudent is becoming a slave in the process of imitatingothers.218Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976
13. Man’s Mind Is Like A Mad Monkey
The basis for the entire world is theprema of the Lord. Even if one isable to learn by heart the essenceof all the Vedas, and even if one is able tocompose poetry in a very attractive manner,yet if that person does not have a purifiedheart, he is a useless person. What othergreater truth can I communicate to you.The education of today is not real education. Itappears that the education of today is merely anavocation to enable you to make a living. While pursuingsuch a path which enables you to eke out a living, youalso promote individual selfishness. The aim of realeducation is character. That kind of education in whichthere is no sacredness and character is useless. What isthe use of acquiring so many different types ofeducation? You must try to learn that, by which youDivya Atma Swarupas, students, boys and girls!I am hoping that the students of the Sathya SaiColleges will not only excel others in getting marksand credits in the examinations but will also take careto see that there are no remarks about them. In fact, notgetting remarks on one’s behaviour is more importantthan getting marks. Therefore, I am hoping that thestudents will keep this sacred quality and bear in mindthe important requirement that they should acceptdiscipline, devotion, and duty; and that they shouldserve the country.Today, while being students and acquiring variousdegrees like M.A., M.Com., Ph.D., and so on, studentswear clothes which give the feeling that they are streetbeggars, and they have no humility at all. Today’sstudents call themselves citizens of this great countryof Bharath and they move about like beggars and hippieson the street, without any good qualities. The studentsof the Sathya Sai Colleges should set an example bytheir behaviour and see that this aspect is completelyeliminated. I am hoping that you will develop goodqualities and set an example to others.The country should be proud of you and yourqualities. You should not think that you are beingeducated only to get a degree and imitate others like aslave. You should conduct yourselves in such a waythat you bring credit to your country. You should acquiresuch education which will enable you to stand on yourlegs and not be a weak person who always depends onothers. You should not become beggars with a beggingbowl of a degree and move from office to office insearch of a job.As a student, your father and mother have broughtyou up, and the first thing that you have to do is toshow respect and gratitude to your parents. How canstudents, who cannot do this, show gratitude to theirmother country? Your parents have given you the giftof your body, of your clothes, of your entire life. If youcannot show gratitude for this, what kind of servicewill you be able to render your country?The Sai Organisations should be such that theywill look at all religions with equal-mindedness. Thereis only one religion—the religion of love. There is onlyone caste—the caste of humanity. There is only oneGod—He is omnipresent. There is only one language—that is the language of the heart. You must recognisethis truth and be prepared to propagate it in the world.It does not matter to which religion, sect, or communityyou may belong, you should accept the basic principleslike—”Mathru devo bhava. Pithru devo bhava”—andSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 219 220Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976respect your mother and father. The concept should beimplanted in your heart firmly. Yesterday you were toldthat man without God is not a man. God without manis always God. This implies that God is still God, evenif man is not there; but man without God is not human.Man then becomes inhuman.Divya Atma Swarupas,We see that animals and birds are also eating theirfood, looking after their offspring, and doing othersimilar things. Unless human beings do somethingdistinctive and different from what the animals do,what is the use of calling themselves human beings oreducated people? If we are not in any way differentfrom the animals, why should we get educated at all?We see educated men behaving like animals, why shouldthe students of today live the kind of life which insome respects is similar to that of street dogs?The first thing which students should askthemselves is what is meant by affluence in life. Thekind of pleasure and joy experienced by a Maharaja isalso being experienced by a dog in the street. Do weconclude that a dog and a Maharaja are on the samefooting? This is not correct. Man is not born merely toeke out a livelihood. Animals, birds, and other livingthings are also eating food. What kind of special effortare the animals making? They do not grow food. Theyare getting enough to eat at appropriate times. If youspend all your life in merely searching for your food,what is the use? This cannot certainly be the purpose ofyour life.Truly man’s requirements for his daily sustenanceand upkeep are very few, but the time men spend infulfilling their requirements is much larger than theirneeded demands. Time is God and so time should notbe wasted. Time wasted is tantamount to waste of life.We must save time and such saved time should be usedfor a good purpose and should be used for resuscitatingthe culture of our country. Today we talk of establishinga new society and a new culture. This is a colossalwaste of time. It is only when we can recognise andunderstand the faults that are contained in the ancientsociety and ancient culture that we will get the right toestablish a new society and culture. The culture andtraditions of our country have been applauded andpraised from time immemorial by millions of people.To regard those traditions as useless and replace themby a new society and a new culture is something veryfoolish. This kind of objective is very selfish and wantsto establish a selfish gain. This is desire which seeks topromote individual selfishness. It is not aimed at thegood of the community. The youth of the country mustmake an attempt to resuscitate our ancient culture.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 221 222Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Your life is sacred and your age is a sacred age.The period between sixteen and thirty-two is a goldenage. This is an age when you have the strength toovercome the obstacles that come in your way, to controlyour actions and thoughts. At this age, if you feelangry, jealous, or excited, you must use your strengthto control your anger, jealousy, or excitement. If at thisage, you do not have the strength to control youremotions, how and where will you get the strength tocontrol your emotions when you grow old?It is the duty of every young student to recogniseevery bad idea or thought that sprouts in his mind andexterminate it completely. Mind is like a mad monkeyand you should not surrender to it. You should controlthe mind and keep it under your direction. You shouldnot be prepared to yield to all the desires that sprout inyour mind. As soon as a thought comes into your mind,you should examine whether it is a good thought or abad thought.For example, let us look at a piece of cloth. Inreality, it is a bundle of threads; and if you examine itmore carefully, you will say that it is just cotton. Thefirst stage is cotton, the second stage is thread, and thefinal stage is the cloth. What would you do if you donot like this cloth? You remove the threads one by oneand the cloth will not be there. In the same manner,mind does not have any specific form. It is simply abundle of desires. These desires themselves come fromthe thoughts of your mind which can be compared tothe cotton. Thus the three stages are the cotton or thethoughts, the thread or the desires, and finally thedesires constitute the mind which is the cloth in thisanalogy.So we must try to diminish these desires as far aspossible. These desires are like heavy luggage in thejourney of your life. The journey of life for the youthis a very long one. If you want to make your journeya comfortable one, you will have to make your luggageless; and this bundle of desires is your luggage. Todaythe kind of desires that enter the mind of young peopleare such that even an eighty-year-old man would nothave had such desires in the older generation.There is a small example which I want to givehere. Many people of different categories come toSwami. They have so many different ideas and thoughts.Amongst these was a young sixteen-year-old boy. Heappeared very sad and dejected and full of thoughts inhis mind when I was giving him an interview. I askedhim in what class he was studying. He said that he wasnot studying and that he had discontinued his studies.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 223 224Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976I then asked him whether he was doing anything at all.He said that he had lost all his will power andconcentration. He said that for the past six months, hislife had become meaningless and disgusting. Whenasked what made him so dejected in the past six months,he said that his second wife had divorced him sixmonths ago. When we look at his age, he is hardlysixteen years and he talks of his second wife havingdivorced him. His life was so miserable that it wouldhave been better if his second wife had burnt him alive.Such a life is characteristic only of dogs. We shouldnot lead such a life. We should be proud of the fact thatour culture is very sacred and calls for respect to ourparents.It is the beauty of your heart that is important. Itis not the external beauty of the body that matters at all.When you have a pure and clean heart, you will havethe strength to cleanse the world. Young people are notprepared to respect their parents. You may ask a questionas to why one should respect one’s parents. Always,whatever actions you undertake, the reactions will cometo you in the future. It is your duty to respect yourparents for all that your parents have done for you. Iftoday, you show respect to your parents, then yourchildren will respect you when you grow up. If youmake your parents suffer now, your children will do thesame in return for you; and tears will flow from youreyes.If a student wants to lead a life of security andhappiness in the future, he must undertake to lead agood life now. For this, appropriate teachers must beprepared. The teachers should show sacred and goodhabits to the students. If there are bad habits among theteachers, the students will also take the wrong path.When these tender-hearted young students are placedin the hands of teachers, the teachers should have thedetermination to develop good habits and properthoughts. If a student is bad, he will himself be spoiled;but if a teacher is bad, several thousands of studentswill be spoiled. Therefore, in the first instance, teachersshould get good habits. Really good students arethemselves like teachers.Today students will be students for one or twoyears, and after that they go and take a job. Then thestudents are not going to touch the books again. Butteachers cannot be like that. They have to keep incontact with books all their lives. Teachers should notexhibit short temper or jealousy at any place. If thereare such teachers, they will ruin the entire communityof students. It is correct to say that teachers alone areresponsible for the students going the wrong way.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 225 226Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976There are many things which you have toexperience in the coming year. For your ideas, thoughts,and conduct going wrong, the cinemas are responsibleto a large extent. In addition to this, because the parentswitness the cinemas, these bad ideas come to thestudents.There is also an example in the sacred story of theBhagavatha. When Krishna was not at home, Arjunawent to Subhadra and was telling her all about thePadmavyuha. At that time, Krishna came in and toldArjuna that whatever was being told by Arjuna was infact being listened to by the child in the womb ofSubhadra. Because of this early lesson, Arjuna’s songot into the Padmavyuha but could not get out of it,because he had learnt only the method of getting intoit. In view of this, our tradition has been that pregnantwomen should listen only to sacred and good stories. Ithad been customary that as the pregnancy reached fivemonths, recitation of sacred stories and festivecelebrations were arranged.Unfortunately, today it has become the practiceamong pregnant women to see many cinemas. In orderto give her satisfaction, the people in the house wouldtake her to two or three cinemas a day. Looking at theimmoral pictures which have no good characters inthem, the babies in the womb will also get such ideas.The young baby acquires such bad ideas even in thewomb of the mother; and as he grows older, he beginsto add on to these bad qualities and grows from bad toworse.Unfortunately, pictures which are intended to extolthe sacred traditions are becoming rare; and the youngpeople, not knowing what to do, go and see these badpictures. If you go back into history and look at thesacredness of the women in India, you will realise theirgreatness. Instead of learning from the sacred historyof the great women in the country, we put our womenfor sale on the streets of the country. The culture andtraditions of our country were such that they haveprotected the sacredness of our women all through theyears that have gone by, and such culture is beingneglected and forgotten by us. I am hoping that thestudents of the Sathya Sai Colleges will make adetermination to resuscitate this sacred culture of ours.We no doubt need material education to carry onin our lives. We need also spiritual education so that wemay elevate our souls and lead a good life. We alsoneed the right kind of culture so that we may lead a lifewhich is appropriate to the education which we have.Education without the necessary culture is like chalkSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 227 228Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976powder. Our culture is like an electric current. It can becalled the positive of the current. Our education is likethe negative in the current. Unless this positive andnegative come together, there is no use of the electriccurrent.Our sacred Bharathiya culture should be carefullyprotected. If we find young primary school children, aswe find today, addicted to smoking, drinking, andplaying cards, can we call such a person a humanbeing? The first step is that man drinks wine; thesecond step is, wine drinks wine; and the third step isthat wine drinks man. Our students should never taketo such bad practices.On the other hand, our students should exterminatesuch bad practices and show themselves as goodexamples in the country. This kind of bad practice willsimply ruin the person and his life. Our respect isdisappearing because of these bad practices. We shouldconduct ourselves in a manner befitting our name“Manava”. Manava means one who conducts himselfin a manner by which his ignorance is removed. In thiscontext, it has been said that death is sweeter than theblindness of ignorance. Our respect to the elders mustbe shown by service and sacrifice.You may have only two dresses, but you shouldwash them and wear them clean, and then you willcommand respect. On the other hand, students go andbuy a new pair of pants, cut them in certain places andput patches. Such a person must have been a beggar inhis previous life and continues to be so in his presentlife. Amongst the students, some are becoming so lazythat they are not washing their faces daily. What issuch a lazy man going to do for his country? There aremany students who do not bathe continuously for twomonths. What kind of examples can such students set?What is it that they can do for the country? Laziness isrust and dust, realisation is best and rest. Everyoneshould think for himself whether this is good or bad.Today an unfortunate situation has developed whereif a student is approaching us, we have to stand at somedistance because he smells. Students who have acquirededucation should turn themselves into instruments ofgood for the country. Wherever there are students,there is confusion. You should make an effort to removethis black mark. This is a disgrace to the studentcommunity. You should make the determination to serveyour country in a humble way. It is only then that youwill be able to exhibit the goodness of your education.You should also be of service to others. Do not alwayshanker after leadership. Work is worship, duty is God.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 229 230Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976Work and worship are your two eyes and betweenthose two eyes, you must carry on your life.Students,You have a sacred and tender heart. You are young;do not go and enter politics. When you grow older andgain some experience, then you can enter politics andserve the country. You should take that path which doesnot cause obstruction to your education. If you joinpolitics during your education, you miss the opportunityof being of any service, and you will also miss theopportunity of being of any use to the country. You areneither a student nor you are able to serve your country.You are thus deprived of both aspects.After completing your education, if you get thegood idea of serving your country, you can join politicsand do so. As a student, you should be a Vidyarthi andseek knowledge. You should not be a vishayarthi seekingmaterial comforts. For the past ten days and more, youhave all been listening to various aspects of Indianculture from the grownups as well as from the youngerstudents. I am hoping that you will be able to put whatyou have heard into practice for the benefit of yourcountry. I bless you in that direction.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 23114. The Path Of Love Is The QuickestTo Reach God
In areas where there is no prema, plantthe seeds of prema and get the ecstasyof prema to pour out in the form ofrain in such a dry area. Get the rivers ofprema to such places. “Oh! Krishna, playyour murali in such a way that the riversof prema will flow in the hearts of men.”Pavitratma Swarupas,Boys and girls, so long as we have the illusionthat the surroundings and the material world are realities,our troubles are not going to leave us. Today, in thecontext of the present situation, young people like youshould develop faith in God and thus progress in life.You cry when you are born, you cry when you die, youcry for so many things between your birth and death.Have you at any time cried for dharma or for attainingsomething good in life? Why and for what purpose didyou cry? Did you cry for the sake of crying? We shouldnot cry and feel sorry simply to spend our time.All the effort that we make should be towardsattaining our objective and the ideal for which westand. This can happen only through love. From timeimmemorial, the love which one shows towards Godhas been called bhakthi by the citizens of Bharath. Toenable us to earn the grace of the Lord, there are somany different paths. To reach God, to be close to God,and to understand the Lord and his miracles, it is thiskind of prema and bhakthi that will help us. Bhakthihas also been used by man as an instrument in order togo closer to the Lord in some way or the other. Themeaning and significance of bhakthi is to get close tothe Lord by some means such as by showing love as afather, as a mother, as a brother, as a wife, or as a son,etc.There are other paths also for achieving the sameobjective. These paths are described as the path ofjnana (wisdom) and the path of karma. However, totake the path of jnana is a difficult matter becausecertain qualities like perseverance, wisdom, intelligence234Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976are required if you want to follow this path. So, thepath of jnana appears somewhat more difficult incomparison to the path of bhakthi. If we talk of thepath of karma, then self-confidence is very necessary.In this path of karma, one depends on one’s ownstrength and capacity, and one does not depend onGod. To follow this path of karma, depending on ourown capacity all the time, appears somewhat difficult.If we consider the path of yoga, we come to theconclusion that it requires certain discipline to gothrough the various types of yoga such as the AstangaYoga (eight-fold discipline), and also you will have tohave a correct type of guru. These other paths—thepaths of jnana, karma, and yoga are somewhat moredifficult than the path of bhakthi. The path of love is aneasy and short path. This kind of love or prema is notsomething which is fixed either on an individual, or ona community, or a specific object. It is a wide-spreadaspect. It is only when we can broaden this concept oflove that we will be able to understand and experiencethe sacredness of love and the divinity of such love.God is an embodiment of love. To reach God and tounderstand his divinity, the only path that is availableto us is the path of love.When the moon comes up in the sky, you can seeit directly. You do not require the aid of a torch light,or a petromax lamp, or any other artificial light. Thereason why you do not require another light is that it ispossible for us to look at the moon by the light of themoon. In the same manner, if we want to go near God,who is an embodiment of love, or if we want tounderstand God, it becomes possible to do so only bymeans of love which is characteristic of him. God, whois the embodiment of love, is not confined to one placeor spot. He is present everywhere, in every nook andcorner of the world. It is very essential for youngpeople to love all and to regard loving all as lovingGod, who is present in all of them. Since God isselfless, we also should promote our love in a mannerin which it becomes selfless love.To enjoy the love of God (who is selfless) in aselfish manner and confine his love to yourself is notthe right thing to do. But until we reach a certain level,we should try and experience the Lord in a limitedmanner. When we are in a limited position, and whenour own life is not broad enough, it is not possible toexperience the love in a broad manner. Therefore, thefirst step for us is to practice certain methods by whichour love can be broadened sufficiently. We have asmall example.Suppose we take a small incense stick. In thatsmall incense stick, we see fire. If you are smoking aSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 235 236Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976cigarette, you will find fire in that cigarette also. Ifthere is a forest fire on a hill, we see a big fire in thatas well. The fire that we see on the incense stick, thatwe see on a cigarette, and the fire we see in the caseof the forest fire, all constitute fire. In the feeling thatall the three constitute fire, if you bring some logs offirewood and put them on the cigarette or on the incensestick the fire will be extinguished, the firewood will notcatch fire. On the other hand, if we take even tenderand green leaves and put them in a raging forest fire,they will catch fire and burn away. In the same manner,if the fire of love in you is not broad enough, you willnot be able to sustain the great fire of love of God. Ifyou begin to talk of the all-pervading love andwidespread prema of the Lord, then there is a danger ofthe feeble fire of love in you getting extinguished.Before you can experience such equal-mindedness andbefore you can experience this love in everyone, thefirst step is to promote the love within yourself andraise it to a sufficiently high level. For this, it isnecessary for you to recognise a form and theappropriate time for this. If you do not take cognisanceof the situation and the time around you, then you willnot be able to promote prema in yourself. God’s loveis like an infinite and endless ocean. Simply becauseGod’s love is infinite and endless, you cannot carry allof it with you. What you can carry with you willdepend on the size of the pot that you take.So the first thing to do is to enlarge the size ofyour pot, and this can be done by the practice ofsadhana. In this sadhana, the first step is respect foryour mother. The bhakthi or love towards the mothershould be such that you recognise the great love andaffection with which your mother has brought you up.You must return gratitude to your mother in the form oflove or bhakthi. The mother will also show bhakthi inthe form of vatsalya (affection of mother for child), inreturn, to the love of the son. Mother will bathe, dress,and cajole the baby and put the baby to sleep. Whiledoing all these, she will be attending to her daily duties.In this way, the attachment and affection between themother and the son can be promoted. If promotedproperly, that itself can be shaped in the form of bhakthitowards the Lord.It is in this context that this type of bhakthi, ordevotion, or love between mother and son has beendescribed as Vatsalya Bhakthi in the Bhagavatha. Themother in Yasoda was looking after the Lord in theform of a baby, was dressing and cajoling him. Thisattachment was such that she used to put the baby onher lap like a jackfruit. Not only this, although KrishnaSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 237 238Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976was born to Devaki, Yasoda was looking after Krishnaas if he were her own son, and she was developingVatsalya Bhakthi towards Krishna. In spite of the factthat several gopikas used to complain about Krishna,Yasoda loved him all the more; and she never botheredabout the complaints. On one occasion when thesecomplaints became too many, the mother was not ableto hear any more; and she asked Krishna why he didnot eat what she gave him and why he had to go andsteal from other houses as if they did not have enoughcurds or milk in their own home. She was cajoling himand asking him about this in a very endearing manner.When Balarama and Satyaki came and complained toYasoda that Krishna was eating mud, she was veryconfused and asked Krishna to open his mouth. Whenthe mouth was opened, she found that the mouth wassmelling of butter instead of mud. She was in confusionthat she did not know what was the truth.Although Krishna was a tiny little boy, his greatnesswas being seen in his own mouth. He asked, “Am I achild? Or am I so foolish as to eat dust?” When a smallbaby asks such a question, we must see here that he isexpressing his own greatness in a remarkable manner.The greatness in Krishna can be seen in this answeritself. “When the whole universe is within me, is itpossible for you to feed me with some little sweet?While I am present in every jiva, is it possible for youto give me an appropriate name? While I am present inall the oceans of this world, is it possible for you togive me a bath with water?” When all the universe ispresent in him, really what is the meaning of feedinghim? When his brightness is like that of a million suns,what is the meaning of taking a lamp to see him? Whenhe cannot be understood and approached by the biggestof people in this world, how can anyone understand orcomprehend his form. In spite of hearing and seeing allthis, and in spite of being told about the greatness andthe divinity of Krishna by Krishna himself, yet themother in Yasoda was such that she always wanted tosee the young boy in Krishna and in that vatsalyaprema of a mother to a son, she was getting immensepleasure and emancipation.Therefore, if you want to get realisation, then it isnot necessary for you to follow all the various types ofbhakthi that have been described. If you attach yourselfto the Lord through one chosen path like prema, it willbe possible to realise him. Yasoda was such that shewas filled with prema at all times. She never spent onemoment separated from Krishna or not thinking ofKrishna. She used to ask if there were any bliss greaterthan being near to the tender rosy cheeks of the child,Krishna. She regarded this baby form of Krishna as theSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 239 240Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976form of the Lord, she expressed prema to that form,and thus she realised God. This has been called VatsalyaPrema (affection of a mother for a child) in ourBhagavatha.The next is Sakhya Bhakthi (Devotion to God asa friend) and this was demonstrated by the gopalas.They played with Krishna and were one with him.They never thought that he was God or an incarnationor an Avatar. They thought that Krishna was one of thegopalas and that kind of intimate relationship of beingone with the Lord is described as Sakhya Bhakthi. Theyused to play hide and seek with Krishna and regardedhim as one of their playmates, and thus they becameone with him. This was the manner in which theyexpressed their devotion to him.During the afternoon all the cattle were kept undera tree and all the gopalas and Krishna used to sit underthe shade of another tree. They would share the foodbetween them; and in this manner, a close relationshipdeveloped between them. Not only this, the gopalasnever strayed away even for a moment from Krishna,and they were always looking after the cattle. When thecattle were grazing happily, they used to come and sitwith Krishna and ask him to narrate stories. Thus theyspent every moment with Krishna. In their playing,singing, and living, they took Krishna as part and parcelof themselves and they were living together.In those days, Krishna used to play on the muralivery well. In fact, he used to play on it much betterthan any other Gopala could play. He could sendeveryone into ecstasy when he played on the murali.One of the gopalas would come to Krishna and say,“Sing, sing to my heart’s content and utter sweet wordsso that I might feel happy, take the essence of the Vedasand sing it through the golden voice of your flute andfill it to my heart’s content.” Another Gopala wouldcome and tell Krishna, “Our cows are the Upanishadsand the four feet of the cows are like the four Vedas,and out of the cows’ milk, take the Vedas and theessence of the Vedas and the Upanishads and pour itinto your flute and sing it for us.”In this manner, the gopalas moved around Krishnaand they regarded him as a friend and identifiedthemselves with him. These gopalas used to go to thebanks of the river, Yamuna, and swim in the river.When they swam, they would try to catch the legs ofthe Lord, and it looked as if the big fish was goingahead with the small fish coming behind, trying tocatch the legs of the big fish. Thus, in their daily livesthey regarded Krishna as a common human friend, andSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 241 242Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976they were enjoying the humane qualities of Krishna.Gopalas were not worried, even if their own brothersand sisters were at a distance from them, but they usedto grieve if they were separated from Krishna even fora moment. Thus, we see that the gopalas wanted to getclose to Krishna by some method or the other. Theywere not doing any thapas or puja. They were adoptingmethods of prema and love to be near Krishna.Krishna was regarded as the ocean of love, andthe gopalas regarded themselves as drops of waterwhich have come out of this ocean of love. Their solepurpose was to take their own lives and merge themwith the infinite ocean of love. So long as we hold adrop of water in the palm of our hand, it remains a dropof water; but if we take this drop of water and mix itwith the ocean, then there is no more a drop of water,as it loses its individuality and merges with the ocean.Thus, the gopalas tried to take their individual drops ofprema and merge them with the infinite ocean of premaof the Lord. What better objective can there be beyondwanting to merge with the Lord?The third type of prema is called the VirodhaPrema or inimical prema. In some way or the other,they also became close to the Lord. Kamsa, Dantavakra,Jarasandha, and Poundarika Vasudeva were examplesof such persons. They hated Krishna so much that evenduring their sleep, if Krishna’s name was heard, theywould jump in excitement. For people who have faith,a look at the form of God or hearing the description ofthe Lord, will make them joyful; but for people whoare inimical, they are such that even when they aresleeping or eating, they will always be thinking of theperson whom they hate.There was an incident when Sisupala was sittingat a place and the shadow of his leg was seen on thewall. Looking at this shadow, he was terrified becausehe thought that Krishna had come. The inimical premais such that, at all times, and under all circumstances,they are afraid of the Lord, although they think of theLord only in an inimical way. In this way, God’s nameand form get permanently imprinted in their hearts. Bysuch a close relationship, they also become close to theLord. How does it matter how you achieve your sleepas long as you sleep? Does it matter whether you sleepin the choultry or in the veranda? Fire has the qualityof burning, and it will burn you whether you touch itknowingly or unknowingly. The shining brilliance ofKrishna was such that it always purified whether onecame near it willingly or unwillingly. It does not matterhow or why one does it, but when one thinks of thename and form continuously, he gets liberated.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 243 244Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976The fourth one is called Gopika Bhakthi orMadhura Bhakthi. In this category, the gopikas alwaysthought of Krishna and they completely surrenderedthemselves, their thoughts and ideas to Krishna. Theywould say that all their wealth, their body, their mind,and whatever else they had was all surrendered toKrishna. Whatever they did, or ate, or talked was all inthe name of Krishna. They regarded their entire life asbeing dedicated to Krishna. If there was any momentof time, it had to belong to Krishna. If Krishna was notthere even for a moment, they regarded themselves aslifeless. When Krishna used to go away with thecowherds, these gopikas always used to think of himand his comfort. They were always worried whether hehad proper protection or not, whether he had slipperson or not, whether he had any discomfort of any kind,and so on. They would always think of Krishna and hiscomforts. One of the gopikas would be thinking thatoriginally Krishna was dark-complexioned and wasworried whether his visit to the forest would make himdarker because of sunburn, and was thinking how niceit would be if he would take an umbrella the next dayto protect his skin. In this way, all the time they werethinking of Gopala and his comforts. They were alwaysthinking of Gopala. During the time they were eatingtheir food, they were wondering whether Gopala wasgetting the correct food or not. While they were resting,they were thinking whether Gopala had a good place torest. Thus while they were eating, sleeping, or resting,they were always thinking of Gopala and enjoying theirown life, Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavati. So if wethink of God and if our ideas are turned towards God,we will become one with God. At all times, becausetheir thoughts were completely filled with Krishna,they were turning themselves and their bodies intobeing like Krishna.Under these circumstances, there came a newdaughter-in-law to the village of Gokula. When thisnew daughter-in-law came, the older people describedto her the beauty and greatness of Krishna. Even beforeshe came to this village, Niraja, the new daughter-in-law, knew about the greatness of Krishna and she waslonging to get an opportunity to see Krishna.Niraja’s mother-in-law was a very harsh woman.She gave the injunction that Niraja should not stir outof the house, should not attempt to see Krishna, andshould not even utter the name of Krishna. The reasonfor this is that there was a feeling amongst the peoplethat by playing various games with these girls, Krishnawas actually spoiling the reputation of various families.Krishna, at that time, was a seven-year-old boy andSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 245 246Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976there was no room whatsoever for entertaining suchthoughts; but because of certain ill-feeling, there werepeople who were spreading such irresponsible viewsand stories about Krishna. Such bad people existedeven at that time. In truth, there was no basis for suchstatements.There was a custom in that village, according towhich, Nanda was regarded as a leader of the village,and all the people used the light in Nanda’s house tostart a light in their own house. It was consideredauspicious if a light was got from the house of theleader. One day the mother-in-law of Niraja was havingfever, and, therefore, Niraja was asked to go and lightthe lamp and bring it back. She was also told that sheshould not enter the house of Nanda and not attempt tolook at Krishna. Niraja felt very happy that she had thisopportunity of going to Nanda’s house and at least lookat the sacred house in which Krishna lived. But whenNiraja went there, all her attention and all her thoughtswere immersed in Krishna; and she was waiting for theopportunity of Krishna coming there at that time.She was so immersed in the thought of Krishnathat she was unmindful of the fact that the wick wasalready lighted and that the fire had spread onto herhand. Yasoda came out and saw this, and said thatNiraja was apparently new in the village, and wassurprised to see that her hand was burning, and yet shewas not mindful of the event. At these words of Yasoda,Niraja regained her consciousness and was beggingYasoda not to tell about this incident to her in-laws asthey would only harm her if they had known about this.She explained that she was lost in the visions of Krishnawhich she saw in the flame which she was lighting.As she was saying these words, other gopikasquickly rushed in and saw this event. The gopikas whosurrounded Niraja were not silent, and they were quickin reporting this incident to all the others in the village.When the gopikas were singing like this, Niraja wasvery much afraid of the consequences and was worriedwhat her mother-in-law would say; but she felt happythat all this was not half as important as the darshan ofKrishna which she had had. She was prepared for theconsequences. Such love is the best with which toapproach the Lord. In this matter, the gopikas werethinking of the form of Krishna all the time.To all these gopikas, there was one who was likea leader and this was Radha. It was not as if Radhawanted to be the leader, but the other gopikas chose heras their leader. Whenever there was any difficulty, theywould go and tell her. Radha should not convey to youSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 247 248Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976the picture of the kind you see in cinemas or dramastoday. She was the kind of person who was always inthe thought of Krishna, and her name, itself, conveysher greatness and sacredness. If you start with “R” youget Radha, if you start with “A” you get Adhar, if youstart with “D” you get Dhara and if you read backwards,you get Aradh. This means that the very basis of Radhais the Aradhana (adoration of the Lord) of Krishna.If you really want to understand the intimaterelationship between Krishna and Radha, you will haveto note an incident which took place when Radha wentout into a bamboo thicket and was sitting in a lonelyplace. Her attachment to Krishna can be understoodfrom her words. She was sent out of the village and inagony she sings, “There is trouble in the village andthere is not a shade where I can take shelter! So I havecome and I am maintaining this life breath in myselffor your sake. This life exists for your sake. Showyourself at least in my dreams. My mind cannot resteven for a moment if I cannot see you. You are like myeyeball within myself if I am to describe you; but if Ihave to see you, you are like a small baby who isoutside me. But if I have no eyeball in me, then Icannot even look at this small baby. You are the onewho shows and you are the one whom I aspire to see.In your gross human form, will you not show yourselfto me at least once?”Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 249 250Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976
At that time, Krishna was in Mathura, where hehad gone to kill Kamsa. In that prayer of Radha, wenotice that even though there was no place for her totake shelter, yet she was maintaining the life breathsolely for the sake of Krishna. While she was engagingherself in this kind of introspection, it looked to her asif her companions were playing some games. One groupof gopikas were singing and saying that Gopala hadreturned to Repalle. As soon as she heard that song,she thought that Gopala had really returned, and shejumped out of the bamboo thicket into the hot sand andshe was running forward to meet Gopala, not mindingthe heat of the sand. Radha’s bhakthi was such that shewas always on the banks of the Yamuna, both in theheat and in the cold. In the heat, her body was gettingscorched and as the body was getting scorched shenever bothered. She always remained on the banks ofthe Yamuna braving the ravages of the heat and thecold. She was singing to the Lord, praying that heshould come to her with the jingling of the ankletswhich he used to wear at the time of the killing of thegreat serpent. She was singing in ecstasy and addressingher Lord and asking him to come to her. In suchecstasy, she dropped dead.Gopikas had such sacred ideas and had suchselfless bhakthi and selfless prema. We are unable toSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 251
understand the sacredness of their prema, and wemisinterpret all their actions and give them wrongmeanings. Because of this selfless and sacred nature ofthe bhakthi of the gopikas towards Krishna, they remainvery strongly in the minds of the people of this country,and we talk of them even today. On the contrary, we donot talk so much about Rama as he was insisting onKarma or work. He was of a different kind and wasinsisting on action, karma, or work. When we talk ofKrishna Bhakthi, we should not misinterpret it and giveit a wrong meaning. The Bhagavatha preaches thesacredness of Krishna Bhakthi. There is no hatred,jealousy, or anger in divine love; and so it can givehappiness to the entire world.Students, boys and girls,We should accept selfless prema as an essentialtype of bhakthi and promote it in our country. We mustmake it an ideal so far as our relationship with God isconcerned, and make Bharath an ideal to other countries.If there is any unsacred or selfish prema in your heart,throw it away and promote selfless divine love. I amhoping that you will do this and purify your heart.right the whole world. Your degree or diploma shouldbe within your heart. You should make a determinationto serve the country. Man is making an effort to learnand understand many different things and is onlypartially succeeding in this objective. In fact, man isinventing complicated machines; and with thesemachines he is trying to conquer the universe. Man isusing machines to get service for himself. Man travelsinto the sky and soars to the very heights of the emptyskies. He goes into the depths of the ocean; and inmany other ways, man is doing incredible things and isachieving many things. With the help of science andtechnology, he is discovering and inventing things whichare not accessible to common human beings. He isproducing many things. But come to think of it, all theachievements of man today are not things which wouldsurpass what was known at the time ofHiranyakashyapu.After acquiring all these strengths and capacities,if man does not have the wisdom to use them well, allthese inventions become useless. Prahlada told his fatherthat while he possessed the strength to conquer theentire world, he did not possess the strength to conquerhis own sense organs. We should conclude that man isable to conquer many things but is unable to understandhis own self.254Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976
15. Your Conscience Is Your MasterAnd Guide
The reputation of Bharath, which hasbeen known for centuries, has nowbeen sharpened by the teachings ofSai. You young people should take hold ofthis sharpened reputation and carry ithigher. Will the lakes get filled up just bya few drops of rain? Will you be able toquench your thirst by swallowing a littlesaliva? If you hold your breath, are yougoing to become big? Can you get coal byburning a little hair?For the past fifteen days, we have been engaged inthis sacred Karma Yoga. Just because you have spentthese fifteen days here and because you have receiveda diploma, it is not correct to think that you will setMan’s daily life begins with the sunrise and comesto an end with the sunset. Sun always rises in the eastand sets in the west. Depending on this phenomenon,man determines the direction of east and west. Whenthe sun rises above the horizon, we call it morning; andwhen it sets below the horizon, we call it evening.Every man’s life depends on sunrise and sunset. But ifwe look at the same phenomenon from another angleand realise that the earth is spherical, then all conceptsof east and west disappear. If we stand on a table andif that table shakes, we shake a little. If the bus inwhich we are travelling shakes, we shake. If the car inwhich we travel shakes, we shake; but we do not feelanything when we stand on the earth which itself ismoving at several thousands miles per hour. While thisearth of ours moves at a very fast pace, along withother planets in the solar system, we do not even feelthe motion of the earth.We see here that truth is one thing and ourexperience is a totally different thing. We imagine thatthe earth is not moving at all, although it is moving ata very fast pace. Although in truth, there is nothing likeeast or west, many eminent scientists keep saying thatthere is an east and that there is a west. Now we haveto enquire whether what we experience is truth or whatwe say is truth. Many eminent people, having gone tothe moon and come back, tell us that the moon islifeless. This is not an accurate description. On the onehand, they say that the moon is lifeless. On the otherhand, they say that all matter is composed of tinyparticles called the atoms, which are in perpetual motion.If you have a piece of matter which is composed ofatoms in perpetual motion, is it correct to say that it islifeless? There are emanations of motion that constitutethese ultimate particles called electrons, protons, andneutrons. The manner in which these ultimate particlescome together, conglomerate and form matter has beendescribed as a condensed form of energy by our ancients.Moon is also a conglomeration of these fine particleswhich constitute energy. In this context, how can wesay that the moon is lifeless?We can take another example for this. What wesee there is a wall. Why do we call it a wall? We callit a wall because it is an obstacle and we cannot see orgo through it. Since it is an obstacle, we call it a wall.But when we look at if from the scientist’s point ofview, there is an enormous amount of vacant spacebetween the atoms that constitute the wall. Althoughwe call it a wall looking at it with our bare eyes, whena scientist looks at it, he says that there is a lot of spacejust as there is a lot of space between several stars thatwe see in the sky. Thus, we undertake to get a clearpicture of many things with the help of sciences.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 255 256Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976What we see is one thing, what we experience isanother thing, and the basic truth is yet another thing.In order to recognise the basic truth, we should allmake a serious attempt. In order to proclaim such basictruth, we will have to follow three basic paths. Theyare the worldly path, the spiritual path, and the ethicalpath. Today many people make an attempt to removeall the injustice in the world, but they do not succeed.You must make a determined effort by which you canpropagate the truth and remove this injustice. We thinkthat whatever we see superficially with our eyes is thebasic, essential truth. This is not so. Behind what wesee is the real, hidden truth.Today man has three kinds of faiths. One of themis the lowest kind, and the second is of a middle kind,while the third is of the highest kind. If our prema, ourbelief and our affection are confined to our nearest kithand kin, that will be called the lowest kind of prema.On the other hand, if you go a little beyond the narrowregion of your family and extend your faith and beliefto your country and other people, then we say that it isthe intermediate kind of prema. If you treat the entireworld as one and regard all the people living in theentire world as one and extend your faith and sympathyto all of them, then it is the highest kind of prema.Thus, gradually we should move from the limitedcircle of our family to the wider circle of our countryand then move on to the broadest aspect of one world.When we talk of humanity, it should not be confined toa small community or group of people. There is onlyone caste, and that is the caste of humanity, and whenwe talk of humanity, we must extend our prema to theentire caste of humanity.You should make your own conscience secure,and you should have confidence in yourself. Yourconscience is your guide and it should dictate yourbehaviour. Either for the good or for the bad, it is yourconscience that is responsible. The guilt in you causesthe bad; the strength and confidence in you should,therefore, do such things which will promote yourconfidence in your own self. That is why I have toldyou, on some occasions, that you should follow thefour F’s. Follow the master, and that is your conscience.The second thing is to Face the devil. The third is Fightto the end. Then you should Finish the game. If youremember all these four injunctions and keepremembering them, so that they are resounding everymoment in you, there can be nothing more sacred thanthis in your life.It is not right that you are in a hurry for everythingin your life. If you are in a hurry, it will lead you intoSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 257 258Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976trouble. Depending on your capacity to think, you shouldask yourself whether what you are doing is right orwrong. You should follow the right dictates of yourthinking. Because of this hurry, you are in a confusion;and when you are in confusion, you will commit errorsand mistakes. Haste makes waste, waste makes worry.So do not be in a hurry. In your tender heart, suchsacred ideas must be implanted and you should lead agood life.Today, in the world, there are several economicproblems which are troubling us. We should also enquirefrom the spiritual angle, how these economic problemshave arisen. We should first try and understand whatthis economic problem is. Today, the availablecommodity is limited, and our desires are unlimited. Asour needs and desires are high and the availablecommodities are low, this kind of economic imbalanceis arising in the world. Many people, without realisingits significance and importance, only make attempts toincrease the commodities that are available to us. As aconsequence of that, all kinds of reactions are comingup. To take only the steps which will increase theeconomic output is not the correct thing to do. It isindeed a weak point. If you can find an easy andconvenient way of solving this problem, then you willreduce misery in the world. The shortest cut for this isto contain our desires to match the available material.If we want to increase the available material andcommodity, it involves a lot of expense and effort.If we learn to contain our needs, there is neithereffort nor expenditure. This aspect of decreasing ourdesires and needs has been described as vairagya inour Vedantic parlance. The word vairagya does notmean that you should run away from your family andsit in a forest and close your nose and put yourself tophysical torture. This is not the meaning of vairagya.The true meaning of vairagya is that you should stay inthe society, do your duties, and learn to contain yourdesires and needs. Our life is like a long journey. Inthis long journey of life, you should make an effort todiminish your needs and desires. It is part of vairagyato see that the food that you take is just sufficient andthere is no waste.Boys and girls,By reading some books, you get the impressionthat Sathwic food means milk and fruit. Sathwic foodshould not be interpreted as something which you takeby way of your mouth alone. We have five differentorgans—sabda, sparsa, rupa, rasa, and gandha—thatis your ears, eyes, mouth, skin, and nose. What yousmell, see, hear, touch, and eat will all constitute whatSummer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 259 260Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976you take in as food. It is not right to think that onlywhat you eat is important and that it is enough if thatis sathwic. You should take sathwic food through allthese organs. You should see only good things, thenalone will it be described as sathwic food. If you seebad things, that is also bad. If you smell something badthrough your nose, then it is also bad. If you touchsomething bad with your body, it means that you aretaking in something bad.If we look at it from the point of view of science,from every little part of our body several small particlesare going into our body. These particles and radiationswhich are going in by the millions are invisible andyou do not see them. It is not as if they emanate fromoutside and go inside. Even from our body, they arebeing continuously sent out. These emanations go insideas well as outside. This is the reason why there is apossibility of your getting a disease if you go to a badplace. If a place is unclean and dirty, we shouldimmediately cleanse the place and cleanse ourselves.Our students should go to the four corners of thecountry and cleanse the place and keep away fromdoctors by themselves being clean. If the aim is to dogood to others, then God himself will take care of theselfless aim of doing good to others. This is the essenceof Vyasa’s eighteen Puranas.To be able to do good to others is a great punyaand to be able to keep away from doing harm to otheris also a punya. Therefore, even if you are not able todo good, just sit quietly and keep silent; but do no harmto others. The students should take care to see that allthe five organs are without any blemish. You shouldnot see any bad with your eyes. You should not talkanything unworthy with your mouth; you should nottouch anything unclean. You should thus keep all thefive organs in a sathwic state.Students should take great care to see that they donot waste food. They should take only what they needand not waste anything. This is the greatest service thatthey can do for the country. Everything should have alimit. To exceed these limits is very harmful. If you eattoo much, that will cause mental derangement. If youeat sufficient food, it is good. You should not wastefood, and you should share your excess food withothers. If today we want to rectify the economicproblems of the country, then you should preventwastage of food; and you will be able to add to theeconomy of the country. Truly, the boys and girls whohave listened to these sacred ideals should rememberthem all their lives. It is not enough if you just listento them and then refrain from putting them into practice.These ideals should be carried by you all through yourlife, and you should put them into practice.Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976 261 262Summer Roses on the Blue Mountains, 1976