SUMMER SHOWERS INBRINDAVAN1977Discourses byBHAGAVAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABADelivered during the summer courseheld for college students atWhitefield, Bangalore, India© Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications TrustPrashanthi Nilayam, IndiaThe copyright and the rights of translation in any language arereserved by the Publishers. No part, para, passage, text orphotograph or art work of this book should be reproduced,transmitted or utilized, in original language or by translation, inany form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or by any information, storage and retrievalsystem, except with prior permission, in writing from SriSathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prashanthi Nilayam(Andhra Pradesh) India, except for brief passages quoted inbook review. This book can be exported from India only by thePublishers Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust,Prashanthi Nilayam (India).Printing rights granted by arrangement with theSri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust,Prashanthi Nilayam, India,To: Sathya Sai Baba SocietyandSathya Sai Book Center of America305 West First StreetTustin, CA 92780-3108USAISBN 1-57836-054-4Revised edition, copyright © 1998Sathya Sai Book Center of AmericaContents1. Opening Address12. God Is Beyond Description Through Words123. The Law Of Karma Is Invincible284. Lakshmana, The Devoted Brother Of Rama425. The All-pervading Atma506. Atma And Brahman Are Identical WithEach Other617. All The Characters In The Story Of RamayanaAre Ideal Examples738. Ignorance Is The Cause Of One’s Sorrow839. Sorrow Is Not Natural To Man: Happiness IsHis Nature9310. Be Good, Do Good, See Good: This Is TheWay To God10211. No One Can Separate A Real Devotee FromHis Lord11412. Ravana’s Proficiency In The Vedas Was OfNo Avail Because Of His Bad Practices12513. Talking Too Much Harms One’s Memory AndOne’s Strength13814. “Thath Thwam Asi”; Thou Art That15015. The World Is An Illusory Projection Of The Substratum OfBrahman16116. God And Dharma Should Be The TwoWheels For The Chariot Of Your Life17117. Start Early, Drive Slowly And Reach Safely18018. Clean Food Enables One To DevelopGood Qualities191iv  Summer Showers in Brindavan 197719. As The Sweetness Of Sugar Is The Same InSweets Of All Forms And Names, Divinity IsThe Same In People Of All Forms And Names19720. Wealth And Authority Do Not GivePeace Of Mind20921. When Wisdom Dawns, Ignorance And IllusionDisappear22022. Do Not Get Attached To This WorldThrough Your Desires23123. Book Learning Is Useless: PracticalKnowledge Is Useful24224. Live And Work For The GoodOf The Community Around You25325. True Yoga Should Enable You ToControl Your Mind26026. Good Company Enables You To RetainYour Goodness27227. Do Not Forget God; Do Not Believe In TheWorld; Do Not Fear Death2821. Opening AddressPavitratma Swarupas:One may have great physical strength. One may also bea great man by his achievements. One may possess many suchqualities, but if unfortunately one gets into difficulties, hisweaknesses will show up and he will not be able to achieveanything. There are several instances in the epic of Ramayanato illustrate such a situation. Ramachandra gets into manydifficulties, and at such times, it appears that everything isagainst him. We should say that unlike many ordinary people,even in those situations, he faced all of them with greatcourage, and demonstrated by his example to humanity at largehow such situations are to be met in our daily life.Although by sadhana, one can get the grace of LordRama, yet, if one does not understand and recognise the humanqualities in Him, one cannot comprehend the divinity in Himeither. It is very necessary, at the present time, to look uponRama as an ideal human being who is an example for allpeople rather than simply believe Him to be an incarnation ofGod. When we cannot understand Rama as an ideal example ofa human being, how are we going to understand Him as God?In every family, the kind of relationship that shouldexist between mother and son, between hus-band and wife,between brother and brother, has been amply demonstrated byRamachandra during His life. The entire story of Rama is suchthat all of it can be related to the daily experience in the life ofall individuals. To forget this essential aspect of the sacred2  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977story, and to attach more importance to the trivial matters inthat story, is not something which is correct.When we meet with difficulties and when we comeacross sorrow, we should take courage and we should usewhatever strength we have, in a good and appropriate manner,and face the situation bravely. Man’s life consists of ups anddowns, man’s body also consists of ups and downs. This isonly natural. It is a characteristic feature of things in naturethat they go on changing continually. If there is no change,human nature itself has no value. If there are no difficulties inone’s life, life itself will not work. If there is no sorrow, if onedoes not meet with sorrow, there is no value for one’s life. Ifthere is no death at all, even a mother cannot show affectionand love to her child.Sorrow, pain, difficulties and situations which couldbring losses, come to us in many different ways and ondifferent occasions in our lives. In such situations, we shouldnot sink. In situations which give pleasure, we should not beelated. We should have an equal mind and face all situationswith equanimity. We must take these things with anunwavering mind and attain bliss. In every life, good and badare always present together. When we look at the good, the badthings, that always exist alongside, appear to defeat the good.A bad man, when he looks at the prosperity of others, getsjealous. When a bad person looks at the happiness of otherpeople, he always feels sorry. These are qualities which showup naturally in those circumstances.We know that in the same tank full of water, we canhave lotus flowers and we can also have animals like fish andfrogs. Lotus attracts the vision of man and pleases him. On theother hand, animals in water do not please us but give usSummer Showers in Brindavan 19773sorrow. The place where both are born is one and the samething, and that is water.Amritha comes out of water. Amritha is born out ofwater. So also, poison is born out of water. Here we see thatthe birth place of Amritha as well as poison is one and thesame. It is in this context that it has been said that for both thebondage and for the liberation of man, his mind alone isresponsible. It becomes necessary that we should recognise thenature of the mind, if we wish to understand this dual partplayed by our mind.In the story of Rama, we come across many situationswhere He starts as an ideal human being and as the situationdevelops, He shows us His divinity. But many rishis took careto see that the human quality of Rama is made clear to theworld, and that the divinity of Rama is hidden under the facadeof this outward human form. We should note that if Rama wasrecognised as divinity, as God, in the very first instance, thenthe killing of Ravana would not have taken place and the restof the story would not have followed.This is the reason why, when Vishwamithra took Ramaand Lakshmana for help, he argued with Dasaratha that theabundant strength possessed by Rama and Lakshmana areknown only to a few people. He said that the infinite glory ofRama and the great power He had can be understood only bygreat men and not by ordinary individuals.Rama is all-knowing, all-powerful and omni-present.For ordinary people, it is difficult to under-stand this infinitenature of divinity. To recognise and understand Brahman, weshould ourselves be able to experience Brahman. One whocomprehends Brahman becomes identical with Brahman.4  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977If we want to understand this aspect of the Ramayana,we should ourselves experience what is contained in theRamayana and the story of Rama. In this world, there are manypeople who claim to be devotees of Rama. Is it possible todecide and to proclaim that they are all devotees of Rama?Some of these people are devotees of Raama (pleasure), someof them are devotees of Rama and some of them are devoteesof Raama. There are devotees and devotees. In this manner,people only claim and describe themselves as devotees ofRama; but in truth, to justify the claim, they do not promoteand develop that connection and that closeness with the aspectof Rama.Without any reason, we create havoc for our-selvesduring our life. But during our lifetime, the mansion of hopethat we create for ourselves is going to break and fall downsooner or later. Life is like a flower which opens out in fairweather and is bound to fall when there is a storm. During ourlife, in order that we can face such storms and survive them,we should develop courage and mental strength. All the greatpeople and great saints, who understood Rama’s divine aspect,took care to hide it from the general public. Vishwamithra andVasishta were not ordinary people. They were great saints.They were people with great courage and strength. In fact, theyhad acquired proficiency in all the different aspects of learningand wisdom. It is not as if Vishwamithra was unable to protecthis own yagna. He told Dasaratha, “It is not as if I do not havethe strength to protect my yagna, but I have come to you withthe specific purpose of letting the world know the great Rama,your son, and of spreading His reputation and your reputation.”Vishwamithra is not taking Rama just for the protection of hisyagna. We should see him only as an instrument for a higherpurpose. He has no doubt prepared the ground for theSummer Showers in Brindavan 19775destruction of the various demons, but he has also prepared theground for the marriage of Rama and Sita. Having done allthat, at a crucial time, Vishwamithra goes out of the scene. Notonly this, the situation then was such that we cannot easilydetermine whether Rama is truly divine or is an ordinaryhuman being with great qualities.Great people are often such that their attention to everyone is the same. The same attitude is dis-played by them togood as well as bad. They are truly equal-minded. If we take agood flower which gives fragrance, its fragrance is not going tochange whether we pick it up with the left hand and put it inthe right hand, or pick is up with the right hand and put it in theleft hand. It does not matter in which hand the flower is put; itgives the fragrance. The hand may change but the fragrancedoes not change.In the same manner, good and bad give a lot of troubleto the mind of an ordinary human being and make his mindsuffer. But to great people and great saints, good and bad areexactly the same. In that context Rama is an Avathar, for Hecould look at the good and bad with complete equal-mindedness. In the Ramayana, there are not only instanceswhere Rama has displayed this quality of equal-mindednessbut also instances where he displayed the absence of such aquality and thus appeared like a weak, ordinary human being.But how long could such a facade last? Only so long as hewanted to demonstrate to ordinary beings the weakness whichis characteristic of such human beings. In such situations, hecould give courage and strength to others. All the other greatmen are also like that. Just for the sake of man, for the sake ofdharma, for the sake of setting an example, great god-likesaints do things as if they were ordinary human beings toillustrate how people should behave in such trying situations.6  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977It is only when God comes amidst men as an Avathar,that He will be close to man, and will be able to set an exampleto human beings. Only then, he will be able to correct the waysof human beings. The real connection that should existbetween man and man is always demonstrated by an Avathar.Because God comes as an Avathar in human form, man is ableto see and experience some ideal examples, in real-lifesituations. It is natural in that context that God takes the humanform in Rama and creates situations where man learns thevirtue of adherence to dharma.Valmiki, the great poet, was essentially projectingRama as an ideal example to human beings. However, in manycases, he was also showing the sacredness and divinity that iscontained in Rama. In the same manner, the poet Tulsidaswrote the beautiful story of Ramayana for the sake ofpropagating the great name of Rama to the world, as anexample of an ideal human being. In the lives of these poets,there were several incidents in which the strength of the nameof Rama is seen. On one occasion, gods began to quarrelamongst themselves as to who among them was greater thanothers. In order to get a decision, they all approached Brahma.It was decided that whoever goes round the world firstwill be adjudged as the greatest amongst them. As soon as theyheard the decision, each one took his own chariot, and startedgoing round the world. Vigneswara (Ganesh) by tradition has amouse as his chariot, and because of this small vehicle, he waslingering behind and making very slow progress. At this stage,Narada appeared and asked him how long he would take at thatslow pace to go round the earth. Narada suggested thatVigneswara (Ganesh) should write the word Rama and just goround that word Rama and quickly go to Brahma.Summer Showers in Brindavan 19777Vigneswara wrote the name Rama, went round thesame and immediately went back to Brahma. Brahma decidedthat he was the best form of god. It is our tradition thatwhenever good work is undertaken, we first worshipVigneswara. This is the reason why Vigneswara is also calledGananatha; the superior one amongst all the ganas. It isbelieved that he will remove all obstacles in the work that weundertake. This has now become a part of our culture.Tulsidas demonstrated the fact that wherever you go,whatever you feel, the name of Rama is contained therein.Thus, Tulsidas reached the end of his life by proclaiming thegreatness of the name of Rama. In the Ramayana, there areseveral instances which enable you to derive the strength thatis necessary for facing various situations that come up in one’slife. Not only in worldly matters and in spiritual matters, but indaily life, every human being can perceive the grace of thisname Rama.There are three important reasons for the birth of ahuman being. These three reasons are sin, agitation andignorance. Because of the sin that we commit we get a rebirthas punishment. Because of lack of peace in an agitated mind,we get rebirth. Because of ignorance and lack of knowledge,we get rebirth. If at one stroke, we want to get rid of sin,agitation in our mind and ignorance, the only way is toconstantly think of the name of Rama.Students:In the word Rama, there are three letters. They are ‘Ra,’‘aa’ and ‘ma.’ These three components can be described asAmritha Beeja and Agni Beeja. In these three letters are alsocontained the Surya and Chandra, the sun and the moon. The8  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977letter ‘Ra’ is the letter which can be connected with the sun.The letter ‘aa’ can be connected with the moon and ‘ma’ withfire. The letter ‘Ra’ which we have connected with the sun, hasgot the potency by which to shed light and remove allignorance. ‘Aa’ which has been connected with the moon,removes your agitation and gives peace. ‘ma’ which isconnected with fire, burns out all your sins. This one nameRama will thus remove, in one stroke, all your sins, theagitations in your mind and your ignorance.Valmiki established that there is nothing greater thanthis one single name, Rama. He has also given us a way bywhich ordinary people can under-stand and get the benefit outof it. The way by which we utter the word Rama is such thatfirst we open the mouth; and out of the mouth we then send outall that is within us, which is sin; and then we close the mouthto say Rama. Nothing thereafter enters that way into yourbody.Truly, all are not able to recognise the great strengththat is contained in this name Rama. Some-times, we wonderwhether the utterance of this one simple name will remove allour sins and all our troubles. This inability comes from theweakness in us and not because of the weakness in the name ofRama. The first thing which one has to do is to strengthenone’s own faith.Today, a doubt about the existence of God is prevalent,to a large extent, in the world. We are now conducting aseminar on the Ramayana. There are many people who askwhy we need conduct any seminars on the Ramayana in thismodern age. There are people who ask why we are concernedwith the Ramayana at all. Ramayana has no antiquity ormodernity. They seem to be arguing about the compatibility ofSummer Showers in Brindavan 19779ancient traditions, and modernity and the usefulness ofthoughts about God and divinity. Why do they not arguewhether eating food, sleeping, etc., are modern ideas or oldideas? Why do they argue only about matters relating to Godand divinity?We are eating food today which we have been doing allthese days. We are looking at faces today which we have beenlooking at all these days. Are we telling ourselves, this is theface we have seen yesterday and the day before yesterday?Why do we see the same face again and again? Do we ask sucha question? This is the same stomach which we have fed withfood yesterday and the day before yesterday. Do we askourselves why we have to feed the same stomach once againtoday? In this context, there is no difficulty in understandingwhy we have to think of our traditions and customs and pray toGod everyday.The sacred stories from our ancient lore are the onlystories which are going to save us either today or tomorrow.Times may change. New epochs may come. The world maychange, but the aspect of divinity is one and the same and isunchanging. “Ekam Eva Adwiteeyam.” Truth is only one andthere is no second parallel. At the present time, we are onlyseeking things which keep on changing. Why do we not seekthings which are permanent and unchanging?Students:You are the future citizens of this country. I am hopingthat you will respect ancient culture, that you will study thelife-stories of divine personalities who had come from time totime to re-establish dharma in this ancient land. When we talk10  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977of Rama Rajya, it does not mean going back to old times. Itmeans that we are wanting our present rulers to rule thecountry according to dharma. As in the saying “Yatha Raja,Tatha Praja”—“people will be like the king and the king hasto be like the people.” Just as the ruler protects the people,looks after them, sees to their welfare; so also the peopleshould take care of the ruler, make him take the right path,look after him and his spiritual dharma. The people are like thebody with different organs making up the body. The closeconnection between the people and the ruler should be one likethat between the body and heart. Without the body, we cannothave heart. Without a heart, the body cannot survive. Theconnection between the ruled and the ruler should be such thatthey are inseparable from each other. That will be called theRama Rajya.People in those days were pure and sacred. This is thereason why they showed great reverence to Sita. A wrong wasnever condoned. Untruth was never ac-cepted. This shows thesacred strength that was present in the people. That is why, thebeginning of the destruction of the Rakshasas was establishedin those times.Several such great and sacred situations are present inthe story of the Ramayana. We should make an effort tounderstand the qualities of each individual character in the epicand try to get the lessons that Ramayana gives us. Everyindividual and every character that is depicted in the story ofthe Ramayana has stood forth as an example of an ideal personto all humanity.Even in Ravana, who is generally taken to be a badperson, Valmiki has shown certain good qualities. In someplaces good qualities of Vali also were described by Valmiki.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197711As has been stated earlier, great saints are equal-minded. Because of the saintly character of Valmiki, heshowed the weaknesses in Rama and he showed the goodqualities in Ravana. He was a selfless person. He was calledMaharishi, because he could see the past, present and future. Itis only a great saint or a maharishi that is entitled to writepoetry. Poets like Valmiki and Vyasa were maharishis.Because of this, whatever they had written has come to beregarded as permanent truth and it remained so for all time.The poetry of today has in it lots of selfishness. It isused for the purpose of promoting the selfish interests of thepoet. In the ancient days, there were several great saints whohad looked upon poetry as an instrument for achieving theprosperity of our country and the good of our people. In thefollowing few days, during which there will be lectures on theRamayana, I am hoping that our students will take some of thegreat examples from that sacred story and get them deeplyimprinted in their minds and become ideals to others.2. God Is Beyond Description ThroughWordsIt is not possible for any one to say what Brahmanis. One can at best say this is not Brahman, that is notBrahman, but no one can say what Brahman is. Truth,which is permanent, and wisdom, which is infinite, arein some ways related to Brahman. These or otherwords do not describe Brahman at all. In the samemanner, it is impossible to describe what Divinity is,what God is.The story of Rama is as sacred as it is surpris-ing.Although Vedas, Sastras, Ithihasas and Puranas have tried todescribe the qualities of Narayana, they have only succeeded insaying that this is not God, that is not God, and so on; but theyhave never been able to pinpoint and state what God is anddescribe His attributes and qualities by positive statements.However great the person concerned may be, it is not possiblefor him to say that God is like this or like that. God is beyondall description in terms of words we know and use.Many poets and many speakers could talk about God,God’s leelas, God’s powers and God’s manifesta-tions in theirwritings; but it was not possible for most of them to experiencethe true greatness of God. Till now, no one could find either anindividual or a text, which has described truly the great form ofGod. To some extent, limited by their own beliefs, based upontheir own faith, they can say God is like this. They can onlypoint a finger as we point at the moon, which we can see onlySummer Showers in Brindavan 197713from a distance. Such a description is of limited validity,within the context of their own faith and their own belief.The ancient poets and the ancient rishis, were all-knowing and so they were only talking about Paramatma in avery modest way and were describing parts of this glory. Thesegreat men had great powers, had great strength and wereselfless people, and had divine qualities in them. Because ofthese qualities and because they were all-knowing they tried topicture God in the world, to some limited extent.The poets of today also describe God in their writingsand in their poems and thus try to picture Him to the rest of theworld. But they should ask themselves the question whether athousandth of what they say in their descriptions is based ontheir own belief and on their own faith in God. We read in suchwritings that Rama is the incarnation of Narayana, that Rama isGod in human form and so on. But we are not able to get thefaith and confidence in the human form of God. Truly, if thestatements that are in such writings are put into practice, theworld will be a very good one.There is a great difference that we perceive between thepoets of today and the poets of earlier days, the rishis of todayand the rishis of the ancient lore. The rishis of those days werepicturing God in the usual way in a human form, as a humanbeing, in their speeches and writings. But in their minds and intheir faith they were regarding the human form as anincarnation of God Himself. Here we should ponder over oneaspect of the Ramayana with great care. Rama, along with Sitaand Lakshmana, entered the forest of Dandakaranya. The rishisin the Danda-karanya knew very well that Rama was anincarnation of God, and so they came to Rama and placed theirdifficulties and troubles before Him. Not only this, many rishis14  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977were killed by the demons. These incidents were brought to thenotice of Rama, and he was moved and his heart melted. Hecould not bear this any longer; and so He took a vow at thatvery instant of time and gave His word to the rishis that fromthat time, He would undertake the task of exterminating therakshasas.In this vow of Rama’s Sita noticed what is usuallyreferred to as the vow of Bhishma. Sita came and cautionedRama that He was taking a vow, which was very difficult tofulfil. Then Rama answered by saying that the Himalayas cangive up the ice on them, that the moon can give up itsbrightness and the oceans may flow beyond their boundaries,but Rama will never give up His vow unfulfilled.From that day onwards, Rama saw to it that therakshasas in the Dandakaranya were removed from theirpositions of strength, and He has been protecting the rishisfrom the hands of those rakshasas. He spent ten years in theforest fulfilling His vow and the task He took upon Himself.He was tired. He wanted to take some rest and then wanted tomove to the ashram of Rishi Agasthya. He wanted to see RishiAgasthya and ask him where he could put up a hut, and livealong with Sita and Lakshmana. In fact, he wanted to live inAgasthya’s ashram. Agasthya thought for a while, andsmilingly told Ramachandra that sixteen miles from hisashram, there was a beautiful place on the banks of the riverGodavari. He suggested that Rama can have his hut at thatbeautiful place and live there.It is not as if Agasthya did not know that Rama-chandrawas an incarnation of Narayana Himself. We should recognisethe inner meaning of the fact that while Agasthya knew verywell that Narayana Him-self came in human form and askedSummer Showers in Brindavan 197715for a place in his ashram, he suggested that Rama take up a hutsixteen miles away from his ashram. The idea that was in themind of Agasthya was that, if Rama stayed along with Sita andLakshmana in his ashram, then Sita could not possibly (as wasto happen later) be stolen. In that context, the killing of Ravanawould become even more difficult and would not have takenplace at all. Thus, the rishis had already made a master plan forthe destruction of all the rakshasas.It is at the time when Rama, along with Sita andLakshmana, was having His sacred hut sixteen miles awayfrom the Rishi’s ashram that Surpanakha came there and washumiliated. Later, the entire drama unfolds itself.Not only this, while Agasthya was wantingRamachandra to stay sixteen miles away from his ashram,Agasthya took care to see that the bow and arrows which weregiven to him by Varuna were also handed over toRamachandra as weapons. There is an important truth here.These rishis knew well when the destruction of the Rakshasaswas coming. They kept these weapons with great care in orderto hand them over to Ramachandra when time was ripe forsuch destruction.The second thing we should notice here is thatVishwamithra took Rama for the sake of protecting his yagnain his ashram. After Taataki, the rakshasi, was killed in theashram, there were two sons of Taataki who were still alive.They were Maricha and Subahu. While Subahu was killed,Maricha was allowed to go alive. There is some significancewhich we should recognise here. The reason for this is thatMaricha had a future role to play in the destruction of Ravana.So that the task of destroying the rakshasas by Rama can becompleted according to plan, Maricha was allowed to go alive.16  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977After Surpanakha was disfigured, she went to Ravanaand conveyed to him a description of Rama. Then Ravana wentto Maricha and sought his help for killing Rama. Marichaknew the power and strength of Rama. So, he described thepower and strength of Rama truly to Ravana. Maricha made itquite clear to Ravana that Rama is not an ordinary person andthat Rama is God Himself; and with His power and strength,He can achieve anything. As a result of such a description, it isquite natural, however brave and however courageous anindividual may be, that some kind of fear will naturally enterhis mind. In that context, Ravana turned back and returned toLanka. While Ravana was in that hesitant mood, Surpanakhawent again to Ravana and told him that while he is brave andbeautiful, while he had everything in his favour, that he is notable to get Sita for himself is something which is difficult tounderstand. Thus, she poisoned Ravana’s mind.When such words were heard by Ravana, he becamerather weak, succumbed to temptation and went again toMaricha for advice. Maricha again told Ravana all that had tobe told. But since Ravana was all the time recollecting what hissister Surpanakha had told him, he was not listening nor payingany attention to what Maricha was telling. In that conversation,Ravana became very angry and threatened to kill Maricha if hedid not obey his orders. Maricha then thought that anyway hewas going to die and decided that he would prefer to die in thehands of Ramachandra, rather than in the hands of Ravana.Accordingly, he accepted the orders of Ravana and took theform of a deer and went to the hermitage where Rama and Sitawere living. We notice here that if Maricha was killed earlierwhen Rama killed Subahu, then Maricha would not havefulfilled this part of his in the drama.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197717Here we see that not only did the rishis realise thedivinity of Rama, but also Rama knew that He was GodNarayana in human form. In order that He may fulfil the taskfor which He had come, He spared Maricha earlier, so thatMaricha could play his part in Rama’s master plan.These rishis, while projecting a picture of Rama toordinary persons as an ideal human being, an example for allof them, knew that they were hiding to some extent the truth ofRama as an incarnation of God. This was the reason whyVishwamithra, when he took Rama for the protection of hisown yagna, handed over all his weapons which were in hispossession to Rama. God took the human form of Rama as aleela of His. The rishis took advantage of this human form ofRama and used Him for the purpose of the destruction of therakshasas.Vishwamithra took Rama for the protection of hisyagna in the normal course. As soon as his yagna was over, itwas Vishwamithra’s duty to take Rama and Lakshmana backto Dasaratha. He did not do that. From his yagna,Vishwamithra took them to Mithilapura. There, the Bow ofShiva was broken and thereafter the marriage of Rama and Sitatook place. Thus every step taken by Vishwamithra was indeedplanned for the ultimate destruction of Ravana.The rishis of those days worked in a selfless manner,for the prosperity of mankind. In fact, they were using theirthapas and their strength for helping mankind. A human being,on the day when he can push away his selfishness, when he canpush away his ego, will really acquire his entitlement forthapas. On one occasion, when Hanuman entered Lanka andlooked at the beauty and brilliance of the city built by Ravana,he thought that there could be no one else anywhere in this18  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977world who can equal Ravana in his strength, his brilliance andhis ability. Simply because of some bad qualities in him,Ravana should have been subjected to these difficulties. Someamount of ego and selfishness in him should have degradedhim to that position.Man may be very wealthy, man may be veryprosperous, but if man suffers from selfishness and ego, he isundoubtedly going to suffer difficulties and pain. In thiscontext, we should realise that it is the duty of every humanbeing to give up his selfishness and to be able to serve others ina selfless manner. In the story of Rama, especially in Hisyounger days, the manner in which He used to respect theelders, the manner in which he used to show affection andobedience to his mothers, and the manner in which He treatedothers around Him must be taken as an impor-tant lesson andas an example to all of us. These are things which youngstudents should know very well. In Rama, we see a greatamount of humility. There were many rishis in the forest, andRama used to go and pay respects to them, but the rishis wereall the time proclaiming, apparently only as a facade for theworld, that they were very wise people, and that Rama wasonly the son of a king. The truth is that behind this facade, intheir minds, they had the greatest devotion and respect for thedivinity in Rama.When Parasurama was nearing his end, he recognisedthe divinity in Rama and he surrendered to Rama. It is not as ifthere was no good reason for these rishis to refrain fromproclaiming the powers and the strength and the divinity ofRama. The rakshasas of those days exceeded all limits ofdecent human behaviour. They were terrorising people; and theSummer Showers in Brindavan 197719rishis thought that if they proclaimed the divinity in Ramaimmediately, the destruction of the rakshasas, which was totake place at the hands of Rama, would not take place. It is inthis context that throughout the story of the entire Ramayana,from the time of the birth of Rama till the time when Ravanawas destroyed, Valmiki was describing Rama only as an idealhuman form.Rama was aware of all types of dharma. He hadintelligence which could cover every aspect of life. He coulddemonstrate the need for humility, respect and devotion underthe most trying conditions. He was a great individual whoconducted Himself and His life consistent with the conditionsprevailing around Him, at that time, in the country.Looking at the body of Ravana after his death,Vibhishana expressed unwillingness to perform the last ritesthat are usually performed. Vibhishana thought that Ravanawas a very great sinner, that he was thinking badly of Rama,the incarnation of the Lord, and that it was not right to performthe obsequies of such a person. Rama, who was anembodiment of dharma, called Vibhishana and said, “If thereis any dislike for a person, that should not go beyond his death.Let it end with his death. All hatred should disappear with thedeath of the person.” Rama asked Vibhishana, “Will you, as abrother, perform the obsequies or shall I perform theobsequies?” As soon as he heard these words from Rama,Vibhishana realised his mistake and was prepared to performthe last rites.It is because Rama knew all the aspects of dharma, heis referred to by saying “Ramo Vigrahavan Dharmaha.” (He isthe very embodiment of dharma.) Thus, Narayana, the Lord,took the human form in Rama and by His conduct and by His20  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977adherence to dharma, he demonstrated that dharma is part andparcel of the ordinary daily life of a human being. How shouldone conduct oneself in a family? How should one conductoneself towards a friend? How should one conduct oneselftowards the community? In this manner and in all aspects,Rama was translating every moment of his life to be anexample for ideal behaviour.By showing equal affection to all people, Rama used toattract all the people. In His childhood Rama spoke very little.He was conducting Himself in that manner in order to show theworld the ideal that is contained in limited speech. Limitedtalking will always promote the divine strength in one and willalso promote his memory. It creates respect for him in thecommunity. If one talks too much, it will, to an extent, destroyone’s memory. Not only this, if one talks too much, thestrength in the nerves will diminish and the person will becomesomewhat feeble. It is in this context that all great saints wereobserving the path of silence, whenever possible. By observingsilence, one can get strength. Because the youth of today talktoo much, it so happens that their memory becomes weak; andwhen they go to the examination hall, they forget what theyhave read. Amongst the many ideals which Rama has given tothe young people, the first one is to talk less. The second one isthat when you meet elders, to show them respect. The third oneis to happily obey the orders of one’s parents.Vishwamithra went and saw Dasaratha just beforetaking Rama and Lakshmana for the protection of his yagna.As soon as Vishwamithra asked for his two sons, Dasarathawas quite pleased and sent for his children. In that meetingwere Vasishta, Vishwamitra, Kausalya and Dasaratha. WhenRama and Laksh-mana came in, they first touched the feet ofthe mother, then the feet of the father, then the feet of VasishtaSummer Showers in Brindavan 197721and Vishwamithra. According to our traditional concepts, oneis asked to regard one’s mother, father, guru and guest asGods; and they set an example for this in acting thus.Students:It is not right for you to forget the traditional culture ofour country and accept something strange and foreign to us.The first thing we should attempt to do is to respect the parentsat our home and to accept willingly whatever orders they give.When the rituals in the forest were completed, Ramaand Lakshmana came to Vishwamithra and requested him topermit them to go back to Ayodhya as their work was over.Vishwamithra then told them that he had just received thenews of celebrations that are taking place in Mithilapura andsuggested that they all go and participate in the celebrations.Lakshmana, who was very smart, reacted to this andsaid that their parents had sent them for the protection of theyagna, but not to go to Mithilapura. Rama then addressedLakshmana and said that they were asked, by their parents, todo whatever Vishwa-mithra asked them to do. He, therefore,suggested that they should follow Vishwamithra and dowhatever he asked them to do. Here, we should carefully seehow much respect and attention Rama is giving to the words ofVishwamithra. Later, even at the time of Rama going to theforest, it was not Dasaratha who gave the orders. WhenDasaratha saw Rama, he was simply steeped in sorrow. Howcould Dasaratha, in that sorrow, tell Rama to go to the forest?How could he speak at all when he was steeped in suchsorrow? Recognising the situation, Kaikeyi gave expression towhat she thought was in the mind of Dasaratha. Accepting thedecision and the orders of Kaikeyi, Rama went to the forest.Here, we should recognise Rama as a person who implicitly22  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977obeys the orders of the father, whether they came directly fromthe father or indirectly, through someone else. The sacrednessthat is contained in obeying the orders of the parents and thebeneficial results that will flow by following the orders ofone’s parents is something which we should note verycarefully. By looking at it in a worldly manner, one may askthe questions, why should I continually go on respecting myparents? I have grown older, I have become an importantperson and I am strong. Why should I still respect my parents?Students:For every action of yours, there is always a re-action,there is a resound and reflection. If, in future, you want to havea life of peace and of happiness, that will depend upon the kindof action which you take at the present time only. If yourespect your parents today, your children will respect you infuture. The kind of seed, which you plant today, will determinethe kind of tree which will grow. So, if you want to be nearGod, see good, do good, be good; this is the way, the royal wayfor you to go near God. To be good, to do good and to seegood is the primary duty of every human being.Young people, the wealth which we may earn, theprosperity which we may acquire, the mansions which we maybuild are all transient and temporary. Our conduct is the mostimportant thing in our life. Our conduct is the one which laysthe foundation for our future life. It is only when we can shapeour present conduct along a proper path, that out future canhopefully be peaceful and happy. In this context, we can take asmall incident from the Ramayana as an example. Sita, whowas wanting to be close to Rama, was willing to sacrifice allher ornaments, sacrifice all her wealth and every one of herpossessions. Because of this supreme sacrifice, it was possiblefor her to go close to Rama. But in the forest at Panchavati, theSummer Showers in Brindavan 197723moment Sita developed an attraction to the golden deer, Ramabecame distant from her. If our worldly desires and worldlyattachments become stronger, we move further away fromGod. If we cut out the worldly desires more and more, we getcloser and closer to Paramatma.We are now neither here nor there. We are in themiddle. We are living in the Bhu Loka along with humanbeings. On one side there is the Divine world, and on the otherside is the Netherland, the lower world. If we develop qualitieslike lust and anger, we will move closer and closer to the lowerworld and we will become more and more distant from theDivine world. But if we travel towards the Divine world, thenwe will become more and more distant from the lower world.To attach importance to the transient pleasures is the same asmoving away from divinity.Divya Atma Swarupas:All life is so transient that it can disappear in onemoment like a bubble. All that you see in this world is transientand not true. All we see during the daytime vanishes when weare asleep. All that we see in our dream during sleep vanisheswhen we are awake. What we see and experience during theday is like a day dream, and what we see and experienceduring the night is like a night dream. In the day dream, whatwe see in the night dream is not present. Similarly, in the nightdream, what we see during the day is not present. You arepresent in the night dream, you are present in the day dream.You are present in both dreams, but the day dream is notpresent in the night dream, and the night dream is not presentin the day dream. You alone are present in both places and youshould recognise this.24  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Here is a garland, this is a bunch of flowers. I have putthe garland on my hand and the garland is moving in thismanner. This bunch of flowers is like the future and theopposite side of the garland is like the past. As the garland ismoving on the hand, what was representing future has come tothe position indicated as present. By the time it moves a littlemore, what is present becomes past. It is the bunch of flowerswhich is becoming past, present and future, but the hand isalways remaining at the same position. The hand isomnipresent. What goes on and what changes with time,becomes future, present and past. Life in future, present andpast is one, time is one and is present in all the three situations.Time is everything, do not waste time. It is in this context thattime has been described as all-important. Time is everythingand should be treated as such. It is by the change of time thatgood and bad come about. If time does not exist, there isneither good nor bad.In the spiritual sphere, it has been said “Ekam EvaAdwiteeyam.” What exists in reality is only one, there is noparallel second that exists. All other things that we see in thisworld are manifestations arising out of changing time. Man isone, but changes come in him because of changes in time.When he is ten years old, we call him a boy. When he is thirtyyears old, we call him a man; when he is seventy-five yearsold, we call him a grandfather. The different stages, describedas child, boy, man and grandfather, have come about becauseof changes in time. At all times there is only one aspect of thisindividual which is common. So also, it is by the change intime that good and bad appear. There do not exist two separatethings called good and bad. Good is simply the opposite ofbad. Absence of good may appear as bad.Students:Summer Showers in Brindavan 197725I will give an example which you commonly comeacross in your daily life. This evening we eat tasty food, somefresh fruit. When we look at the fruit, it is very good andattractive, we call it good fruit. That is true this evening; but bythe next morning, the same fruit gets digested and it becomesmatter which should be excreted and then we call it bad. Wecall a thing good this evening, we call the same thing badtomorrow morning. It is only a difference in time. Good foodor good sweets that we make today, become stale andpoisonous in three days. Here we see that a good thing by thepassage of time becomes bad. There is nothing which isintrinsically bad. Since for all these changes time isresponsible, we should take the decision that we use time in asacred manner.Divya Atma Swarupas:There is a reason for my talking to you on an examplelike this today. For our summer classes, today is the third day.For another twenty-seven days in these classes, we have tocollect sufficient amount of pleasure and happiness. In yourheart, in the vessel of your heart, you have to create sufficientspace for gathering such good material during the next twenty-seven days. Today by my talking to you at some length, I canremove all that you may have used earlier for filling the vesselof your heart and make a place so that you can fill in it thegood things that will come your way. If the head is empty, youcan put whatever you want to in that empty head. But if thehead is filled with all kinds of things, where is the place to putanything else into the head? If the head has no place in it, howis it possible to fill it at all? It won’t be possible to establishwhat is good in our dharma. In order to establish andresuscitate our ancient dharma, the students must take a vow tobring about necessary changes in their conduct. If bad ideashave already filled your head, if you have got such ears which26  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977wish to listen to bad things, if you use your eyes only to look atobscene and bad things, if you have a mind which is crooked,if you want to deceive others by your ideas and if you have aheart that can love only one person, how can good things thrivein your presence? Truth and justice must be established.Untruth and injustice must be pushed away.When you are young, you will have physical strength,spiritual strength and the ability by which you can establishgood things. If you waste this part of your life, you are notgoing to get once again this strength and time. If you let thisopportunity slip away once, it will never come back again. Theyouth that has slipped away and the water that has floweddown the stream, can never retrace their path. This time ofyour life is a very sacred age for you. You must make a sincereattempt by which you can make this part of your life verysacred. Everything in Ramayana, every incident in Ramayana,relating to Rama and Lakshmana are such that they offer goodideals even to this day, to young people. Make an attempt toregard them as ideal examples and try to follow them. Morethan worshipping God, to regard God as an ideal example of aperfect human being is important. To worship God and causepain to human beings cannot be called devotion. If you want toproclaim to the world that you are true devotees, then you mustshow that in your conduct and in your daily life.In the world, there are so many people who areeducated. But this education is not giving us the necessaryhappiness. True peace is present within your heart. To go outand search for true peace of mind is a waste of time. All thatyou wish to acquire is within you. You are God. That is why Ioften tell you that you are not one person, but you are threepersons: the one you think you are, the one others think youare, the one you really are. That is why we say that in theSummer Showers in Brindavan 197727aspect of your body, in the aspect of your mind and in theaspect of your Atma, you have three different facets of yourpersonality. In the aspect of your body, you do physical work.Take the decision to do good work. Rama was always devotedto work. It is in doing your work, that you derive happiness. Inthe aspect of your mind, promote good ideas and goodthoughts. If in these two aspects of work and worship, we takethe proper path, then comes the important role of your heart,which signifies wisdom. Wisdom is the third aspect.Work is like a flower. If we can protect the bud of thisflower, it will transform and change into a flower. The sameflower, in course of time, will ripen and will become a fruit.Without a bud, we won’t get the flower, and without the flowerwe won’t get the fruit. This is the reason why we should notregard work, worship and wisdom as three things distinct fromeach other. They are inseparably connected with each other.Whatever work you do, do it in the name of God. Do it as atask of God, then work will become worship. So I am hopingthat you will remove the bad ideas, the unsacred ideas thatfilled your heart in the past. Throw them away and fill yourheart with good and sacred ideas. We are not getting educationfor the sake of earning money. The end of education ischaracter, the end of knowledge is love. This is the reason whywe should develop our character with the help of oureducation. Money comes and goes, morality comes and grows.Young people, you now have an opportunity tounderstand the meaning of these sacred things. I am hopingthat by understanding the meaning of these sacred things, youwill be able to change your ideas, and develop good conductand good ideas. Derive examples from Rama and Rama’s lifeand thereby improve your life.3. The Law Of Karma Is InvincibleBy planting the seeds of a lemon tree, you cannotexpect to grow mangoes; and by sowing the seeds of amango tree, you cannot expect to get lemons. In asimilar manner, by doing a bad act, you cannot expectto get a good result and if you do a good deed, youcannot get a bad reaction from it. The kind of seeds yousow will determine the nature of the crop they willyield.Do not simply go on imagining that you will do this orthat and that you will achieve this or that and tire yourself outduring your life. You cannot plant seeds in one place andexpect the tree to come out at a different place. You cannotplant one seed and expect to get a different tree from that seed.Whatever the level of your intelligence may be, you must keepon doing work, with your thoughts on the Lord. The result ofall good work will only be good. Whatever work you havedone in the past, Brahma will put all that, the good and the badtogether, as a garland round your neck when you are born. Youwill be born with this garland of good and bad round yourneck, and you have to suffer all the consequences thereof.Prema Swarupas:In this world, for all the good and bad, our own actionsare responsible. The cause for your birth is your own karma.Whether you do good or bad, all that makes you take birthagain and again and experience the consequences of your ownkarma. Our dharma, the Hindu dharma, is one which has faithin the doctrines of karma, of rebirth, and of the characteristicsof an Avathar. Of all the faiths in the world, Hindu dharmaSummer Showers in Brindavan 197729alone accepts all these three doctrines. In this context ofbelieving that one’s karma is responsible for one’s rebirth, youmight get a doubt as to what karma God should haveperformed to be born as a human being. Just as for man’s birth,his good and bad karma is responsible; so also for God to takebirth as a human being, there have to be good and badcircumstances. There is an important distinction that is to benoted here. If man has done good or bad, the consequences willapply only to him. The aspect of Avathar is not exactly likethat. The bad work done by bad people and the good workdone by good people are both causes for an Avathar, Godcoming in the human form. This will become very evident tous in the story of Narasimha Avathar. The good karma ofPrahlada and the bad karma of Hiranya Kashyapa are bothresponsible for Narayana’s appearing in the form ofNarasimha. In the same manner, for every Avathar, there issome reason. The Lord takes a human form for the karma doneby others. He takes such a form out of His own free will.For the Avathar of Rama, there are several reasons.When the war between the devas and rakshasas was going on,the rakshasas sought refuge from the wife of MaharishiBhrigu. Then she was of some help to the rakshasas. Becauseshe willingly helped them to some extent, the rakshasas weresaved. When Narayana came to know of this situation,Narayana went to the wife of the maharishi in anger and killedher by cutting her head off. Then Bhrigu was suffering becauseof separation from his wife, who was killed. Bhrigu cursedNarayana that he should be born as a human being and sufferseparation from His wife in that birth. The significant innermeaning of this situation is that every action will have areaction and a reflection. Even though He is Narayana, the all-powerful God, results of His own karma will inevitably follow30  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977when He comes in human form. This is, of course, to illustratethis truth to all humanity.However, because of maya, instead of drawing thissacred lesson from this incident, we question the divinity of theLord and are not able to firmly believe that the human form isthat of Narayana Himself.In the forest, when Rama, Sita and Lakshmana werewalking, if we examine closely, we find that they are goingforward in a single line, one behind the other. We can take ourthree fingers as the three members of the party. The first, theforefinger represents Ramachandra. As Rama is movingforward, behind Him is walking Sita. Behind Sita, Lakshmanais walking. Here Rama is the Paramatma, Sita represents mayaand Lakshmana is typical of the jiva. In this situation, whenLakshmana, the jiva, wants to have a look at Rama, theParamatma, Sita in the form of maya is standing betweenthem. What should Lakshmana do in that situation? Should hebe arrogant to Sita and ask her to move away? That cannot be.If he does that, then Rama would not tolerate it. He shouldpray to Sita, “Oh mother, I want to have a vision of the divineParamatma. Please step aside for a moment and let me have avision of Paramatma.” If on the other hand, he begins to arguewith maya and he begins to command maya to step aside, thenthe result will be that he will not be able to look atRamachandra or have a vision of the divine. Paramatma isalways surrounded by maya. He wears maya as His body.Maya is part and parcel of Paramatma’s body. No one willagree to remove or cut away part of His own body. Regard Sitaas maya. Through her and by praying to her, one should beable to get a vision of Rama, the Paramatma.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197731In this context, Sita is responsible for our inability torealise the true form of Paramatma. To be able to understandHim also, Sita will be the reason. As we have already said,man’s mind alone is responsible for his liberation and for hisbondage. Here, the aspect of maya is similar to the aspect ofmind. Mind has got a special form of its own. It is our ownillusion that takes the form of our mind.Here is a piece of cloth. This is not a piece of cloth inreality. This is actually a bundle of threads. If you look moreclosely at it, it is not even a bundle of threads, but it is justcotton. If we remove these threads one by one and pull themaway, then the form of cloth will disappear; and we will notsee the cloth any more. In the same manner, mind is simply aconglomeration of desires. These desires, like threads, cometogether and constitute what may be called the cloth which isthe mind. Just as the cloth disappears if you pull away thethreads, there will be no mind left if you pull away all thedesires. The mind has no form of its own. The result is calledmukthi or liberation. This process is also referred to asdiminishing and removing our own responsibilities and desires.Our life is a long journey. In this long journey, if we carry asmall amount of luggage with us, then that journey willbecome pleasant. Many students who travel in the railwaytrains would have seen the motto, “Less lug-gage and morecomfort makes travel a pleasure.” In this life, which is like along rail journey, the desires constitute the luggage. In order tominimise the lug-gage, we should minimise the desires. It isbecause of these desires that we get into bondage. It is by suchbondages that we get sorrow and difficulties.As was mentioned the other day, Rama became close toSita because she had sacrificed everything of hers, gave upeverything and thought that Rama was the only thing which32  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977she wanted. But in Danda-karanya, at the Panchavati, becauseshe began to ask for and desire the golden deer, Rama becamedistant from her. It is in this context that we say that whenthere is kama or desire, there cannot be Rama. Where there isRama, there cannot be kama or desire. Light and darknesscannot coexist in the same place. For every human being, theresults of his own past karma, either give him happiness orgive him sorrow.In Ramayana, when Rama follows the golden deer, onehears the deceptive cries, “Ah Sita! Ah Lakshmana!”Lakshmana knows very well that these sounds have emanatedfrom Maricha. Knowing that, he did not pay any attention tothose sounds. He was looking after Sita and he was doing hisduty in want-ing to protect her. When these sounds were heardby Sita, she was terrified and was in confusion. She broughtundue pressure on Lakshmana, saying that Rama was indanger. She urged Lakshmana to go immediately and protectRama. Lakshmana knew very well the tricks and the deceitsplayed by the rakshasas. So Lakshmana told Sita, “No, youmust not believe those things; they are only tricks. No kind ofharm can ever come to my brother, Rama.” But Sita’s words,at that time, exceeded all reason. It looked as if she was notthinking clearly at all. She started utter-ing very harsh words.Lakshmana could no longer bear those harsh words. Therefore,he unwillingly left the place because he had no otheralternative. The words that Sita uttered while urgingLakshmana to go were such that an innocent person likeLakshmana did not deserve them at all. Sita was not anordinary woman. She was the consort of Narayana, Himself.She was the incarnation of Lakshmi Devi. In spite of all that,the inevitable law, by which one has to experience the resultsof one’s own karmas, was to be demonstrated here in thatsituation.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197733After the death of Ravana, when Sita was asked to gothrough the ordeal of having to walk into the fire to prove herpurity, Rama uttered several harsh words because He wantedto test her and set an example to the world. For ten months,Sita had been waiting for the vision of Rama and when Ramaappeared, He never showed any compassion, but was evenusing very harsh words. When Sita was in tears, Rama wouldshows no kindness and no compassion. On the other hand, Hewas so harsh that he said, “Sita, I will not show any grace toyou. You can choose to remain and live with Lakshmana orBharatha.” Sita was not an ordinary person. The moment sheheard such words from Rama, she realised that this was theresult of the harsh words she had used when talking to Laksh-mana. The result of one’s own karma is so invincible that onecan never escape it. This situation in Ramayana illustrates thelaw of karma very well and sets an example to human beings.It teaches human beings always to be good, to do good and seegood.In other situations also we find important illustrations.On one occasion Sita was in an advanced family-way. At thattime Rama was the ruler and in Rama Rajya, people’s wordswere given great importance by the ruler. There is a conflicthere between one’s duty as a husband and one’s duty as a king.When Rama contemplated and discussed within himself, “Ismy duty as a husband more important or my duty as a kingmore important?” He came to the conclusion that His duty as aking was more important. The duty as a husband is anindividual’s duty. The duty as a king is something which has todo with the community as a whole. After coming to thedecision that His duty as a king was more important, Hedecided to send Sita to the forest. Although the people thought34  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977that this was a harsh action, Rama never deviated from the pathof dharma even under the most trying circumstances.If we look at yet another event in the story, we find thatRama, along with Sita and Lakshmana, were seated on achariot and they were going to the forest. Dasaratha wasimmersed in sorrow, and while run-ning behind the chariot,shouted, “Stop, stop.” Sumanta, who was driving the chariotlooked at Ramachandra as if he was asking a question, “Shall Istop the chariot, following the orders of Dasaratha or shall I goforward?” Ramachandra said, “Go on, go on.” After goingsome distance, Sumanta turned to Rama-chandra and asked thequestion, “It would have been very good if I, too, had to staywith you for years together in the forest. But I will have to goback to the city and then Dasaratha will ask me, ‘Why did younot stop the chariot when I asked you to stop the chariot?’What kind of answer shall I give to Dasaratha?” Ramachandrasaid, “Oh, say that you could not hear his words.” Is that not anuntruth? No, there is no untruth in these words. There are manyreasons for this. Ramachandra has to go to the forest and thequicker he goes the better. If He delays going to the forest, Hewould be causing great sorrow and pain to His parents. Thereis another reason for this. In the battle between the devas andthe rakshasas, Dasa-ratha gave a boon to Kaikeyi and hewanted her to have that boon granted. He gave that boon toKaikeyi in his capacity as a king. In order to satisfy and fulfilthe boon that he had given to Kaikeyi, in his capacity as a king,he had banished Ramachandra to the forest. But on the day,when Dasaratha was asking the chariot to stop, with theintention of having another look at Ramachandra, he did so inthe capacity of a father. He is not uttering these orders in thecapacity of a king. This order is something which is connectedwith the relationship that exists between a father and a son,which has nothing to do with a king.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197735He told Sumanta, “You have obeyed the orders of yourking. You did not obey the orders given by my father.” Weshould observe the important distinction which Rama ismaking between king and father. If, say, a person by nameYellaya with four sons, becomes a minister, in the olden dayshe used to think that the minister had no children, but all thepeople in the country were his children and would look aftereveryone. But in these days, the moment Yellaya be-comes aminister, his four children become important. They are notrecognising that along with a position, there is a responsibilitywhen he occupies that position. Thus, if we compare thesituation today, with the situation that existed in the time ofRama Rajya, we will see a big difference.The rishis are leaders of the world. That is, they are thepath finders. In history, you may find various human qualitiesascribed to great rishis. All such qualities have always beenused by them for the prosperity of the people. Individuals, whocannot understand this truth, begin to comment and discuss theconduct of these great rishis. Rishis were always totallyselfless. All their actions were directed towards the prosperityof the people. The important events, that are contained in thesacred story of Ramayana are examples for proclaiming suchideals. Every word in Ramayana has the potency of a manthra.Rama has been showing Himself as an ideal human being.Students:You have the responsibility for the good of the country,and it is necessary for you to understand the inner significantmeaning of Ramayana. It is not right for you to think that theseare just stories which have been created by somebody, and thatthey have no rela-tion to the context of your life. These areincidents which have been narrated by Maharishis and offer an36  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977ideal to you to follow at all stages of your life, whatever thesituation may be, whatever position you may be occupying andwhatever the circumstances may be. But today, we are notmaking an attempt to keep our thought and intelligence in thecorrect path. The intelligence that has been given to you, sothat you may understand who you are, is being used tounderstand the rest of the world and not yourself.If the intelligence that has been given to you, for thepurpose of introspection and search of your Atma, is used toprocure food, there is no meaning in your life. Even the birdsand the animals are searching and procuring food. It is a shameto be born as a human being just for the sake of getting food toeat. If a mir-ror that is given to you to look at your own face isused to see the faces of others, how are you going to knowyour own face?God has gifted this intelligence to you so that you maybe able to understand yourself and to realise your own truenature. Make an attempt in the first instance to find out whoyou are. It is this enquiry that will automatically become theenquiry of self and lead to questions like, who am I? Am I thisbody? Am I this mind? Am I this intelligence? etc.When you examine each of these questions, you willrealise that you are none of these. For example, you say, “It ismy body.” When you say that, you imply that you are separate,the body is separate and that you are not the body. This truthmust be understood by you. If I take this as my kerchief, thekerchief can be thrown away at any time and I can becomequite separate from the kerchief. When you say that this is mybody, my mind, my intelligence and so on, it simply meansthat you are different from the body, the mind and theintelligence. You are in the body, you are in the mind, you areSummer Showers in Brindavan 197737everywhere, but they are not in you. They belong to you butthey are not the same as you.We should also enquire here into a small situation. Yes,they are you, but you are not they. What is the implication?When you say that you are those things, it is right. And whenyou say that you are not those things, that is also right. How isthis possible? There is a small tub of water. You are lookinginto that tub of water, and you find by reflection your image inthe water. You then say that is you. What you see as an imageis you. Then I say, no, that is not you. If you claim that theimage is you, and if I take hold of a stick and beat the image,you are not going to feel the pain. How do you then claim thatthe image is you? That is the image. That is not you. But youare that. If I abuse that image, then you will become angry. If Ibeat the image, you do not feel the pain, but if I abuse theimage, you certainly feel hurt. This means that you are in it,but are not identical with it. In the same manner, you arepresent everywhere. You are present in the image, you areomnipresent and you are divine. In this context and in theaspect of this truth, I say that you are not one person, but youare three persons. The one you think you are, the one othersthink you are and the one you really are. The body, the mindand the Atma, represent these three different aspects.This morning, one of the speakers gave the meaning ofthe letter ‘W.’ Very cleverly, he decided that ‘W’ stands forwoman. In that conclusion, it be-comes established that eitherfor the prosperity or for decline in the world, women alone areresponsible. Whether to improve the world and make it ahappy place to live in and to take it to the heights of glory,women alone are responsible. It is said in the Bhagavad Gitathat women have got a very distinctive quality in them, andthat women should get the first place in everything. Our38  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977country is described as the mother. Nature, the creation, iscompared with a mother. If we fall down and experience pain,we cry out “Amma,” we do not cry out “Appa.” In all thesesituations, in our symbolising the mother, there is a verydistinctive and special position for the woman. A woman cantake a person to the heights of glory and she can also drag himto the deepest depths of degradation.There are three sacred words: work, worship andwisdom. In all the three words, “W” is common and is the firstletter. There are also three other words beginning with “W”and which take you to the very depths of destruction: wine,woman and wealth. In the world you can see a person ofposition and of authority such as a general, commandingthousands of sepoys, or a supreme court judge, who has thepower by which he can punish in any manner that he likes. Inbig colleges, there may be thousands of students. The principalwill have such power that even at the mention of his name thestudents will be frightened. Can a general who commands allhis soldiers, a supreme court judge who can wield such anauthority, a principal of a college who can terrify thousands ofstudents wield a fraction of such authority over his wife in thatmanner? We conclude that in women, there is some divinestrength. Because of this divine strength, Sita could secureRama who is not easily available to everyone.When we hear the name of a mango from Vijayawadawhich is called the ‘Rasam’ the very name will make us feelthat it is a very attractive fruit. When we hear the name, itcreates a great attraction and we think it is a very sweet fruit.But when we actually see the fruit itself, and we want to eat it,we may get a doubt whether it is really sweet or sour? In thesame manner when we hear the name of God, then wecertainly have a great attraction to that name. But when theSummer Showers in Brindavan 197739same God, takes a human form, we begin to have doubts. Thechanges that come about in a form, a natural characteristic ofall creation, are responsible for these doubts.All that we see around us is the creation of nature. Thisis simply a manifestation of creation, and is called nature.There is a great deal of weakness in this creation, and thesource for such weakness is in the creation itself. Whereverthere is a weakness in any individual, to that extent he issimply in the form of a woman. In this world which is like astage, a man and a woman are merely actors and are playingtheir roles. However, simply because one takes the part of aman or of a woman in a play, one cannot conclude that someare men and some are women.Here is a small example. There is a girls’ college inAnantapur. At the time of the Annual Day in the girls’ college,the students stage several dramas. In a drama, whether it is thepart of a king or any other man, it is the girls who play thatpart. Whether it is the king or the queen, whether it is a man ora woman, all the parts are played only by girls. Just for thatday, they are putting on the appearance of a man or a king onthe stage, but truly, they are simply girls, they are women. Inthe drama or on the stage it is only a part that they are playing.They are in reality neither kings nor men. In the same mannerin the entire creation, the world is like a girls’ college. On thestage of the world, we are thinking that some are women andsome are men. This is simply an appearance but not true. Allpersons suffer from weaknesses like hunger, anger, jealousy,tiresomeness, etc. All these weaknesses are present in everyoneand that indicates that all are feminine. There is only one whohas not got such qualities and that person is referred to asPurusha and that is Paramatma.40  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Divya Atma Swarupas:To be able to get a vision of the Paramatma, we shouldthrow away these human weaknesses, like being short-tempered, and angry. Particularly, you young people should beable to control your anger, your hatred, your jealousy and yourlust. It is these that you must control. If you cannot make anattempt and succeed in controlling them when you are young,it will become impossible to control them when you growolder. To be able to control the senses, this is the right age. It isthese sensuous urges that destroy you and your equanimity.When you are able to control your desires, it will bepossible for you to have the entire world in your palm. If youbecome subservient to your desires and to your ambitions, thenyou will become subservient to everything around you. If youbecome a slave to your desires, then you become a slave to theentire world. But if you control and conquer your desires, youcan conquer the whole world. If you want to keep them undercontrol only apparently, the lasting results will not follow. Ifyou go and beat on the surface of an anthill with a stick, willthe snake inside the anthill die? Controlling desires onlysuperficially will not be the right thing to do. The bad ideasand thoughts that come within your body have to be controlled.Mind is like the anthill. Out of the anthill of your mind, severalpoisonous thoughts, like poisonous snakes, will be pouring out.By using sacred thoughts of God and by using quiet and calmideas about God, you should be able to put the snakes to sleep.Yours is an age which is a sacred age. To waste such a sacredage and not to get good results out of that age is deplorable.You should not desire to imitate or copy others in all youractions. If from today, you are able to get rid of such qualitiesand control your thoughts, in future you will be able to acquirestrength by which you can go close to God.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197741If such good results do not flow from attending theseclasses, what is the use of having such summer classes andseminars? If a car which has gone out of order goes into aworkshop for repairs and comes back to you as a car which isstill out of order, what is the use of taking it for repair? In asimilar manner, many damaged cars, without nuts and bolts, inthe form of young students, have been sent to this workshop ofa Ramayana Seminar, and they have come from all parts of ourcountry. When these cars return to their places, they will havesome value only if they are repaired so as to be in goodcondition. Otherwise, there is no use of coming to thisworkshop.Such of those students who have come here should notgo back in the same condition in which they have come here.They should transform themselves into ideal men and idealwomen. I am hoping that you will thus be able to set anexample to others who may follow you in the coming years.4. Lakshmana, The DevotedBrother Of RamaEven if one can repeat word by word the contents ofthe Vedas and the Vedangas, even if one has thecapacity to compose attractive poems, if he has nopurity of mind, he is sure to be ruined. What othergreater truth can I convey to you?Pavitratma Swarupas:If one wants to live a life of an animal in this world, itis not necessary for him to learn how to control his senses. Butfor man, to live like a human being, it is very necessary tolearn self-control. Just as when the horses are attached to achariot or a car-riage, the driver has to use the reins to controlthe horses so that the carriage does not go the wrong way; soalso man, to go the right way, has to control his senses byusing the discriminating power and his ability to know theright from the wrong as the reins in his hand.Animals like cattle and birds cannot change thequalities which they acquire with their birth. The lion, forinstance, is born as a cruel animal. It lives and dies as a cruelanimal. The cat is born with the quality of trapping the rats andof killing them. It lives with these qualities. Try as they may,these animals cannot change their bad and cruel qualities. Youcan make a cat sit on the chair and give it sathwik food likemilk, curd and so on, and try to convert the cat, but themoment it sees a rat, it jumps to kill the rat. Thus, the animal,which is born with cruel qualities, cannot change in spite ofour best efforts. However, man is not like that.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197743Man may be born with cruel qualities; but such aperson, by contact with good people, by living with goodpeople, in a good environment, can change his qualities. It is inthis context that it has been said that of all the living things thatare born of a mother’s womb, to have a human birth is themost difficult thing. Even if bad qualities come to man by birththere are ample opportunities for him to get rid of such badqualities by contact with good people. But by good fortune,Lakshmana is one who had good qualities by birth; and he socontrolled his senses that he had acquired further goodqualities. He was a person of good conduct and good thoughtsand was always ready to obey Rama’s orders. He wasSumitra’s son. From his very birth, during his childhood, henever knew separation from Rama. Lakshmana was such thatduring the first two days after his birth, he was not taking foodand was crying for the sake of Rama. Sumitra, the mother andDasaratha, the father, wanted to know what was the reason forthis incessant crying of Lakshmana. Dasaratha and Sumitrawere trying to give him various kinds of medical attention.They tried many tantras, manthras and yantras; but in spite ofall that, Lakshmana’s crying did not diminish at all.When this news was conveyed to Vasishta, the Guru,he thought for a moment and tried to under-stand the situationby his divine vision. He saw that the cause for this situationwas the physical separation of Rama and Lakshmana, and headvised that they both be made to sleep in the same cradle.Thus, when Sumitra took Lakshmana to the mansion ofKausalya and put him in the same cradle where Rama wassleeping, Lakshmana not only stopped crying, but also beganto take food and began to enjoy the bliss of the company ofRama. To Lakshmana, separation from Rama was as44  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977distressing and troublesome as the joining with Rama wasblissful.From that day, Lakshmana was following Rama as if hewas Rama’s shadow. Lakshmana could not sleep for a momentwhen Rama was not present. Lakshmana would not eat ifRama was not present. Wherever he went, he was alwaysfollowing Rama, as if he was Rama’s shadow. Devotion toRama was so intense in Lakshmana that he filled his heart witha feeling that everything that was present belonged in reality toRama.When Rama was banished to the forest, Kaikeyi askedfor two boons. The first one was, Bharatha her son shouldbecome the king, and the second was that Rama should go tothe forest and live there as a sanyasi for fourteen years. Therewas no place for Lakshmana in these two desires of Kaikeyi.But when Rama was preparing for the journey, Lakshmanaalso accompanied Rama. He also wore clothes of bark in thesame manner. Looking at the kind of clothes Rama waswearing to go to the forest and the kind of appearance thatRama had, Lakshmana also decided that he should wearsimilar clothes and have a similar appearance.For all the fourteen years in the forest, Laksh-manaconducted himself, as if he was one with Rama. He wasspending all his energy and time in taking care of and servingRama and Sita. Truly, if Laksh-mana was not present, howwould Rama and Sita have spent their lives? This importantrole of Lakshmana was beautifully described by Tulsidas in hisnarration of the Ramayana. Tulsidas described that when Ramawas returning victoriously to Ayodhya with his flag flyinghigh, the people of Ayodhya were reverentially saluting theflag and the pole on which the flag was flying. This descriptionSummer Showers in Brindavan 197745of Tulsidas has a significant inner meaning. The pole heresignifies Lakshmana. The pole is as important as the flag. Infact, if the pole did not exist, the flag cannot fly at all. ThusLaksh-mana became the steadfast support for Sita and Rama.In this story of Ramayana, while the Lord in human form wasplaying the role of Rama, Laksh-mana had also a veryimportant role to play. The entire life of Lakshmana wasdevoted to obeying the orders of Rama. However, on twooccasions, knowing that what he was doing was wrong,Lakshmana had to disobey the orders of Rama. The firstoccasion relates to the incident when Maricha appeared as adeer and when Maricha was being pursued by Rama, theyheard the voices of Maricha asking for Lakshmana’s help andcalling to Sita. What were the orders Rama gave on thisoccasion? Lakshmana was to remain and protect Sita. On thatoccasion, Sita spoke very harsh words and she even threatenedby saying that if Lakshmana would not go, she would commitsuicide by burning herself.On that occasion, listening to the harsh words of Sita,Lakshmana felt that if he would not leave Sita and go, someharm may come to her. In order that Sita may not harm herself,he disobeyed Rama’s orders for the first time.The second occasion: a difficult situation arose whenSita was in the family-way in an advanced stage. It becamenecessary for him to take Sita into the for-est. He did not liketo do this and yet he took her into the forest. This he did justfor obeying Rama’s orders. Again, on the occasion when Sitareturned from Lanka and when she was preparing to jump intothe fire to prove her innocence, Lakshmana was asked toprepare the fire. Although Lakshmana did not like to do this,he did prepare the firewood for the test, just for obeying the46  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977orders of Rama. Whatever difficult situation it may be, healways followed the orders of Rama.Another occasion when he had to disobey the orders ofRama was towards the end of Rama’s mortal life. Rudra, theGod of Time, came to meet Rama. Before he startedconversation, he said that no one else should enter the roomwhile they were conversing. So Rama called Lakshmana andasked him to stand at the entrance and see that no onedisturbed them. Rama realised that this was a difficult task, andthat only Lakshmana could do it effectively. At this time, whenLakshmana was standing guard, Durvasa came and wanted toenter the room. Lakshmana, who was under orders to keep outvisitors, told Durvasa in great humility that as Rama was inconversation with someone else, he should wait for a while.Durvasa, however, became very angry and threatened todestroy Rama, Lakshmana, and, indeed, the whole city ofAyodhya in a moment. Lakshmana then thought it better to letDurvasa into the room rather than invoke his anger and get theentire city into trouble. In this manner, Lakshmana spent all hislife in the service of Rama and rarely disobeyed the orders ofRama; and even when he did disobey, it was only for the sakeof others. All the work that he did was for the good of others.During the battle against Ravana, the fight betweenLakshmana and Indrajit lasted for three full days, after which,finally, Indrajit was killed. Rama came and embracedLakshmana and said that he was as happy as he would be whenhe found Sita. In the entire battle, the most difficult thing wasto defeat Indrajit. In fact, it was easier to kill Ravana. WhenRama saw that Lakshmana was victorious, he was overjoyed.To others like Vibhishana, Rama frequently stated thatit is very difficult to find a brother like Lakshmana. He hasSummer Showers in Brindavan 197747been telling Sugriva and others, that the task which he hascompleted could be so handled only because of the presence ofLakshmana, and that he, by himself, could not have done it. Iftoday, we want to understand the kind of relationship thatshould exist between brothers, we should take the example ofLakshmana from Ramayana. However, these days, the inimicalattitude between brothers is indeed very bad. One brothercannot bear the pros-perity of the other brother; they becomejealous of each other and go to the extent of even killing eachother. The sacred and good qualities of Lakshmana are be-yond description.During all the years of his service to Sita and Rama, hewas sitting at their feet and did not even look closely at Sita’sface. When Sita was being carried away by Ravana over theChitrakoota Mountain, she dropped several of her jewels sothat people could find them and convey the news to Rama.When Rama and Lakshmana became friendly with Sugriva, hebrought the jewels, which his followers had gathered andshow-ed them to Rama. At that time Rama asked Laksh-manaif he could recognise the jewels. Lakshmana said that while hecannot recognise the other jewels, he can certainly recognisethose which Sita wore on her feet. When Rama asked how hecould recognise these, he said that every morning he used to goand touch her feet; hence he was quite familiar with them.Lakshmana was looking at the wife of his brother as hisown mother and was looking only at her feet. He never lookedat her face. Lakshmana would always bend his head low if hefound some other woman coming in front of him. Lakshmanawas a person of exemplary character. The vision and the eyesof the young people today do not bend even if we bend themby force. If they use their vision for unsacred purposes, thedisturbance of the mind will surely follow. The first important48  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977sadhana is to control our vision. Lakshmana had such sacredthought and mind. If only he is taken as an ideal example andwe follow him, there will be no doubt of our own elevation.There is another example. On one night, when mattersof state were being discussed, there was delay; and Lakshmanawas returning home rather late. At the mansion of Rama,Lakshmana, Bharatha and Satrughna were all alone and bymistake Lakshmana walked into Rama’s palace. When he sawSita sleeping, he realised his mistake and quickly rushed outand fell at Guru Vasishta’s feet and prayed to him so that hecould tell him how this mistake can be corrected and atonedfor.Lakshmana had a pure heart by which he couldconsider entering a room where his brother’s wife was sleepingas the greatest sin which one could commit. Such ideals, at thepresent time, would not be seen even as rare examples. If thebrother goes out on camp, the younger brother will be takingout his sister-in-law to the cinema. Lakshmana was a greatindividual who followed a code of conduct which would set anexample to others. Although Lakshmana had a spark ofdivinity in him, this could come out and be seen only in thedivine presence of Rama. At all other times, when he wasalone, he was like an ordinary person, in fact weaker than anordinary person.Here is a small example. There is a stone from whichyou can produce fire. Even if such a stone is kept under waterfor a long time, it can produce fire when it comes into contactwith another such stone. In the same manner, divine strengthwhich is present in Lakshmana and Hanuman blossomed forthonly when they came together or when they were in thecompany of Rama.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197749When Indrajit and Lakshmana were fighting;Lakshmana fell into a swoon. Indrajit tried his best to carryaway Lakshmana to Lanka. Although Indrajit had all thestrength, he could not move Lakshmana even a little. Hanumanentered the scene and was uttering the name of Rama. Byhearing the name of Rama, Lakshmana became so alive thatLakshmana could be carried on the shoulders of Hanuman tothe camp of Rama. Lakshmana was one who had such anattachment to the name of Rama that if Rama’s name wasmentioned, Lakshmana’s strength would reappear.Lakshmana used to display his strength only in thepresence of human beings or rakshasas, but would neverdisplay even a fraction of his strength in the presence of Rama.Lakshmana had such noble and good qualities.Divya Atma Swarupas: During these few days, we have recognised andunderstood the great qualities of Rama from the story ofRamayana. We have also seen Rama’s ideals as examples forourselves; and it is only when we have understood this that ourlives can become good.5. The All-pervading AtmaThere is only one common feature for all livingthings in this world and that is the eternal spirit. In allmanifold forms of creation, in unity and in diversity, wefind only the spirit of Atma and nothing else. It is therealisation of this aspect that constitutes the essence ofall learning.Truth is something which everyone has to respect underall conditions. Truth cannot be changed by arguments, bycomments or by discussions. In the same manner, the eternaltruths contained in the Vedanta will manifest themselves as ifthey have no relation to a particular religion, to a particularsect or to a particular community.Vedanta stands for ultimate Wisdom. Here the wordswisdom and knowledge do not refer to the knowledge aboutmaterial things or knowledge about music or knowledge aboutany particular branch of learning, but it represents theknowledge of divinity. It is the knowledge and wisdom aboutAtma that will be of some use to one in one’s life. It is mostuseful for man to know himself. There cannot be anythingmore useful than knowledge of one’s own self. What do wemean by knowledge about one’s own self? It is the knowledgeof the Atma. To know the Atma and to know one’s own self isthe most useful aspect of one’s learning.What is this Atma? Is it identical with one’s body? Is itthe same thing as our mind? Is it the same thing as ourintelligence? What is Atma? Can it be identified with any oneof these things?Summer Showers in Brindavan 197751We have our eye. This eye looks at the body and looksat the various organs that compose the body. Here, it is quiteclear that the organs in the body which are being seen and theeye which is seeing them are quite distinct from each other.The eye not only looks at the body and the organs but alsolooks at everything around us—the table, the house and thesurroundings. It is obvious here that the things which are beingseen are different and distinct from the eye with which we seethese things.We have fire and that fire burns matter. It also givesbrightness. That which shines and burns is the fire. This isdifferent from matter on which it shines and which it burns.Who is this individual who looks at this matter which is beingburnt and the fire which is burning the matter? We see clearlythat what is being burnt is different from what is responsiblefor this burning. This is a table, this is a tumbler. This is akerchief. What is it that makes these things manifest andenables us to recognise them? This is a kind of light. This is aninstrument. This instrument of light is shining on these variousitems and makes those items visible to us. As in that analogy,we shall have to regard the eye as an instrument. When thiseye, an organ, is regarded as an instrument, how can weidentify this instrument with the Atma? What has been saidnow applies not only to the eye, it applies to the ear whichhears, the tongue which tastes, the hand which does work, thenose which smells. All these organs have to be regarded asinstruments. When all these organs are treated as instruments,how can the human body, which is composed of these organs,be anything other than an instrument? It becomes clear thatneither the organs nor the human body is identical with Atma.52  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Now we shall move on to the mind and enquire if thereis any chance of identifying the mind with the Atma. We cansee that mind is only a device by which one can distinguishand think. Mind is only a bundle of desires. Mind, which hasthis form of a bundle of desires, cannot be identified with theAtma.We now come to intelligence. We will notice easilythat intelligence is also an instrument, an instrument which canbe used at the command of Atma. We know the nature ofintelligence. We assume that we have a knife in our hand. Withthis knife, we make an attempt to cut a fruit. We cut a fruitonly when the knife is sharp. So, as in this analogy, we canregard the mind as a knife, and only when the mind, which isthe knife, has the sharpness, which can be referred to asintelligence, can we use the mind in a proper manner.If we have already accepted that the mind itself is aninstrument, along with the mind intelligence, which is only aquality of sharpness, which we have given to the knife is also aquality of an instrument. Can intelligence be anything otherthan a quality? If we enquire in this manner and go step bystep, it will become clear that intelligence is also like aninstrument.The next stage is life. The life, or the prana in us issuch that when we go to sleep during the night, it loses all theability to find out even whether the prana exists or not. Theprana, or the life in us, does not know whether the body isbreathing in or breathing out. In that state of sleep, because allthe sensory organs have become passive, they are not working.In those conditions, along with the organs, even this lifequality is also not working. When the master himself is notdoing any work, will the servants be active at all? In a similarSummer Showers in Brindavan 197753manner, when all the organs have become passive and are notworking, can this prana remain active? Here also it becomesclear to us that the prana should be classified as one of theorgans and is not the Atma.Then we ask the question, what is the nature of theAtma? This Atma, which is present in everyone, experiencesthe world with the assistance of the organs. Even in thedreaming state, in a very subtle manner, the Atma experiencesthe intelligence and the mind. The experience, which the Atmahas in the wak-ing state and in the dreaming state, is alsopossible in the deep sleep state. We thus conclude that thequality of Atma is such that in all the three states: the wakingstate, the dreaming state and the deep sleep state, it does notchange.In our description, these three states may have threedifferent names and three different aspects; but the Atma,during these changing states, does not change in reality. It isthe same in all the three states. We take the example of a smallplate. The plate is a silver plate. When we do not like the formof this plate, we can give it to a silversmith and convert it intothe shape of a spoon. When we do not like the spoon aftersome time, we can change that form also and make it into acup. At first it was a plate, then it became a spoon, thereafter itbecame a cup. What has changed in it is the form and thename, but the silver, the base for all the three forms, does notchange.In the same manner, like the form and the name whichhave changed in the case of the plate, the spoon and the cup,we refer to the waking state, the dreaming state and thesleeping state; but the Atma (like the base) remains unchangedin all the states. It is important to recognise this permanent54  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977truth that Atma remains unchanging. When we talk of the ‘I,’we note that there are two kinds of ‘I.’ ‘I’ in one sense is therecognition of your external human form and the body. This isthe eye with which you experience the external aspect. There isa second ‘I’ referring to the inner aspect. These two relate totwo aspects, the body and the Brahman inside the body.Between these two extremes, there is also an intermediate stateand that is the identification of the ‘I’ with the jiva in you.To say that you are identical with the jiva in theintermediate state between the body and the Brahman is likethe dreaming state. To say “I am the body” cor-responds to thewaking state. To say “I am Brahman” corresponds to the deepsleep state. The three forms, the waking state, the dreamingstate and the deep sleep state, are only different forms given tothe unchanging Atma. These are, however, simply reflec-tionsof the Atma and they cannot be identified with the Atma.There is a state which is higher than all these threestates and is referred to as the Turiya state. Here is one smallexample. We look at our own face in the mirror. You say thatthat is your face. But strictly speaking, that is not identical withyour face. What you see in the mirror is something distinct anddifferent from your face. In the image, your right eye appearsas the left eye and the left eye appears as the right eye. It is notpossible to establish the identity between the two. One shouldconclude that what you see in the mirror is only an image andnot yourself. The reason for this is that the instrument in whichyou see yourself, namely the mirror, is something differentfrom you. Here, one who sees is different from what is beingseen. It is only when what you see and what is being seen areone and the same, that you can call them identical.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197755The ‘I,’ when it identifies itself with the Brahman inyou, is what you see from the aspect of Brahman. In thatdescription, there is a description of your own self as I. Thatdescription should become a selfless description of your self tobring about true identify. It should be a selflessness in self.That is the true self. When you identify your ‘I’ with yourbody, you are saying it with an ego or ahamkara in you. Whenyou identify it with the Brahman in you, the identification isnot complete if you say it with a selfish motive. The trueidentification should be above ego and selfishness.In this context, the Atma should be regarded only as awitnessing consciousness, when alone it will be the true Atma.You are only a witness. You, through the help of your organsand your body, are witnessing all the things around you. Atmais present everywhere. There is no place in the world wherethere is no Atma. That kind of omnipresent Atma enters acontainer, a form, and through that container, the human body,it makes use of you.In order to understand and expound the true nature ofthis kind of Atma, Rama, Lakshmana, Bharatha and Satrughnawent to Guru Vasishta and started a discussion. The kind ofteaching which is contained in this exposition of Atma is calledVasishta Gita.The first step, or the negative step, is to say that Atma isnot that, Atma is not this, and in that way, we remove allpossible comparisons. In their childhood, the nature of Atmawas discussed in this manner by arguments and expositionsbetween them-selves and the Guru, and whatever they hadgiven in that form to the world is now called the Vasishta Gita.It is in this context that Rama took truth as His verybasis and in that way, He gave up the kingdom that was56  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977rightfully due to Him. He never had any aspirations forkingdoms. Ramachandra took truth as His foundation andbased all His karma on the foundation of truth. It is in thiscontext that it has been said that “Sathyam nasti parodharmah.” Different from truth, there is no dharma. There isno truth which is different from dharma.He regarded sathya and dharma as the two foundationwalls. He also regarded them as the two wheels for the chariotof His life. He propagated that with sathya and dharma, onecan carry on one’s life in this world. This is why Rama hasbeen described by saying “Ramo vigraha van dharmah.” Ramais the embodiment of dharma. Rama’s form is dharma, Rama’sconduct is truth. Here Rama, Lakshmana, Bharatha andSatrughna can be identified with the four purusharthas:dharma, artha, kama and moksha. Ramachandra has beenlooking at these four purusharthas as distinct ones. He tookdharma as the base, moksha as the destination which we haveto reach. When we have a ladder and when we want to climb tothe top using the ladder, the ladder rests on the ground as thebase. The ladder has also got a destination which we have toreach. This ladder rests on the ground of dharma and attemptsto reach the top mansion which is moksha. In between there aretwo steps, the steps of artha and kama. Both these steps, arthaand kama, are to be joined either on one hand with dharma oron the other hand with moksha. If one is to expound it in asimpler way, one can say that dharma and artha join up andconstitute one part, and kama and moksha, join up andconstitute the second part. When dharma and artha are puttogether, we see that by a dharmic life, one may acquire wealthor artha or you have the aspiration to acquire wealth for thesake of dharma. Do not have kama towards the world. Do nothave a desire to enjoy the world but have kama or the desirefor moksha. All your earnings and acquisitions should berelated to dharma and your desires to moksha.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197757Following the promise he gave to Rama on themountain of Chitrakoota, Bharatha was spending all his time inthe village of Nandigram. None of the citizens of Ayodhyacould see Bharatha who was lead-ing a secluded life inNandigram. The reason for this is that Bharatha took a vow tolead the same type of life which was being led byRamachandra, wear the same kind of clothes whichRamachandra was wearing and eat the same kind of roots andfruits which Rama-chandra was eating.After living for fourteen years in the forest and after thedeath of Ravana, Rama was returning to Ayodhya along withLakshmana, Sugriva and various other attendants. On the way,He reached the ashram of Bharadwaja. Rama knew very wellthe agony in the mind of Bharatha. Rama know that if Hedelayed even a little beyond fourteen years, Bharatha wouldprobably enter fire and destroy himself. So, Rama sentHanuman in advance to Bharatha to tell him about hisimpending arrival. When Hanuman reached Nandi-gram andtold Bharatha that Rama was coming, Bharatha was overjoyedand was in ecstasy, and he quickly made all arrangements inAyodhya for the reception of Rama. He called Sumanta andasked for his chariot to be brought. This chariot was placed onthe outskirts of Ayodhya and Bharatha was waiting anxiouslyfor Rama.As soon as Rama, Lakshmana and Sita arrivedBharatha prostrated before them and, as a result of his beingoverjoyed, he went and embraced his brother Rama and feltexceedingly happy. He made his brother Rama sit in thechariot and he himself was leading the chariot. When Ramawas sitting in that chariot and Bharatha was leading the chariotthrough the streets of Ayodhya, the citizens of Ayodhya could58  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977not distinguish between Bharatha and Rama. The reason forthis was that Bharatha was also wearing his clothes and his hairlike Ramachandra. Moreover, the brilliance in Ramachandra’sface was exactly the same as the brilliance in Bharatha’s face.Their bodies were different but their ideas, their thoughts andtheir views were identical. Bharatha was continually thinkingand uttering the name of Rama. Consequently, Rama’s formand Rama’s brilliance entered Bharatha’s body.It is said “Brahma vid Brahmaiva bhavathi.” One whohas the knowledge of Brahman will become identical withBrahman. As he was continuously thinking of Rama, he wastransformed into Rama. Citizens who came to garland Ramacould not recognise who was Rama and who was Bharatha.They put all the garlands on Bharatha thinking that he wasRama. Bharatha was quite smart and was quite alive to thesituation. So, he was telling the citizens, please garland mybrother and not me. Bharatha was so intensely devoted toRama that people could not tell who was Bharatha and whowas Rama. What we should notice here is that Lakshmana’sdevotion was apparent and was always seen easily. Lakshmanahad always attributes and qualities, whereas Bharatha wasattributeless and without gunas. Here the form-less and theform are like the two legs. Here is an example for this. This isa pillow. There is a cloth covering the pillow. Inside the clothis cotton. There is cotton inside and there is cotton on theoutside in the form of a cloth. The cloth is the quality and has aform. The cotton is without quality. Here we see that theformless is contained within the form. In the outer cloth, cottonis contained. In Vedantic parlance, we can say that the clothand the cotton are one and the same. Bharatha hasdemonstrated this simple truth.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197759They all reached Ayodhya. The citizens of Ayodhyawere extremely happy. In that happiness, they cleaned up allthe streets, made all preparations for the coronation of Rama.The next day Rama was proclaimed King and Bharatha wasproclaimed the Yuvaraja. After the ceremonies were gonethrough, Rama and Lakshmana stated that all that they haddone was for the prosperity and happiness of the people. Whilethis was the situation, a king by the name Gandharva wascausing a lot of trouble to the people in the two cities,Takshasila and Pushkalavati, of his kingdom. The people cameto Rama and Lakshmana and described their difficulties tothem and begged that somehow or other their difficultiesshould be removed. Bharatha, who recognised that the people’sprosperity and the people’s happiness is also the ruler’sprosperity and the ruler’s happiness, went along with them inorder to remove their difficulties.Bharatha challenged this King Gandharva and foughtwith him very hard for seven days and with the help of thename of Rama, he defeated Gandharva. After defeatingGandharva, Bharatha made one of Gandharva’s sons Takshaka,the king of Takshasila. The second son of Gandharva, by namePushkala, was made the king of Pushkalavati. He returned toRama and said that he does not want anything more, and thathe has no more ambition. He said that he only wanted to spendthe rest of his life at Rama’s feet.Lakshmana and Bharatha were such that they regardedtheir entire lives as belonging to Rama and their ambition wasto be nearest to Rama. All their life was surrendered for theservice of Rama.Divya Atma Swarupas:60  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977It is very necessary for you to recognise the affectionthat was shown between the brothers in the Ramayana and thesacredness of such affection. At no time and on no occasiondid the brothers of Rama exhibit any selfishness. With aselfless attitude, they were regarding that service to the peoplewas the main concern of their life. All these good qualitieswere acquired by them from their Guru Vasishta, even whilethey were young; and they shaped themselves so as to be idealsfor others in the world. It is only when we can recognise andunderstand the true nature of sathya and dharma, even whilewe are young, that we can get the most beneficial results out ofsuch an understanding when we grow older.This age of yours is a very sacred age. In this sacredage, you must make an attempt to get such good notionsimplanted in your mind. It is only when the young plant isstraight that the tree will also be straight. But if the plantbecomes crooked when it is young, the tree will also becomecrooked. If the plant is crooked, how can it change into astraight tree when it grows big?You are like tender young plants. If, at this stage, youcan get rid of all crookedness, you can grow into astraightforward useful citizen of the country. It is to give youthis chance that this opportunity has come your way. Truly,your body is like the temple of God. You should make anattempt to keep this temple sacred and clean and use it in agood manner. You are going to make your body the livingplace for the Sanathana, the age-old God.Along with your mind, you must keep your bodysacred. Along with your body, you must keep your mindsacred.6. Atma And Brahman Are IdenticalWith Each OtherBeing the tiniest among the tiny particles, andbeing the biggest amongst the infinitely large things,and being present and recognised as a witness to allthe living and the non-living things in the creation,Atma is identical with Brahman and Brahman isidentical with Atma.Pavitratma Swarupas:You cannot ascribe a time for Atma to come or go andthus place limitations on it. It is permanently presenteverywhere, and it has neither good qualities nor bad qualities.It is present as the smallest thing in the small things and as thebiggest thing in the infinitely large things.Like the burning power of the fire and the shiningstrength of the sun, Atma is all-knowing. It has no sorrow, ithas no attachment, it has no special feeling like any of the fivesenses which man experiences. It is present in all living things.It endows all living beings with an amount of wisdom calledpragnana.Atma is not visible from outside. Atma is neither visiblenor invisible. It has no special form attached to itself. It is all-pervading. This cannot be something which is either seen ornot seen, either experienced or not experienced. It is somethingwhich is neither manifested nor unmanifested. It is above allthis and beyond all description or even comprehension.62  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Atma cannot be what we can hear with our ears; whatwe can feel with any of our sensory organs. These can only bea means or instruments, in a limited sense, for understandingthe Atma.As we can experience the presence of matter with oursensory organs, the body is experiencing all the creationaround it with its senses. Like the lamp which helps one to findout things, functioning as an ancillary instrument, so also allthe organs help the body to experience the surroundings.It is not right to describe this body, which in thatmanner depends upon various ancillary instru-ments, as Atma.We now recognise that the mind, the intelligence, the body, thechitta and the Antha Karana are all distinct from the Atma.Intelligence has been given a special position, a position whichis higher than those of the senses.Here is something which can be called a clear piece ofglass or stone. It is incapable of self-luminescence. Since it hasno shining or effulgence of its own, it can shine only when it isclose to light. In a similar manner, effulgence is natural toAtma, and when the intelligence is close to it, it acquires thecapacity to shine; otherwise we see that intelligence has noshining in it.Moon does not shine by itself. The rays of the sun fallon the moon and the moon shines by reflection. In the samemanner, intelligence is not self-effulgent. As the knife can takesharpness with it, so also the knife of intelligence can takesharpness with it. Thus intelligence is also an instrument andthe sharpness, which it gets, also goes with the instrument. Inthat context also, we cannot identify Atma with the body or thesenses.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197763In order that we may discover and understand Atma,this container, the human body, can become in-strumental andcan be helpful.We can control the desires, which arise out of thesensory organs which are present in the body, by exercisingand disciplining the mind.Prema Swarupas:In the very first instance we should try to understandthe nature and attitude of the mind. Many times, I haveexplained this to you. This is a door and there is a lock on thedoor. To open the lock on the door, we put the key inside thelock. If we turn the key towards the right, the lock opens. If weturn the key towards the left, the lock gets locked. In the samemanner, our heart can be compared to a lock. Our mind is likethe key. If we put the key of our mind in the lock of the heartand turn it towards Paramatma, we get detachment; if we turnit towards the world, we get attachment. We should, in thatcontext, make an attempt to put the key of our mind in the lockof our heart and by using our intelligence turn the key towardsParamatma.There is no doubt whatsoever that even by remaining apart and parcel of this creation, we can experience the divinityin our heart. And as we mentioned earlier, if we get a tree, thefruits from the tree are important. While the fruits on a tree areimportant, in order to get such fruits we have to protect thetree, the leaves and the branches. In a similar manner, the Atmais most important for us, but we have to protect the body andthe sensory organs which help us to recognise the Atma. In thistree of creation, what is it that we are looking for? We arelooking for the fruits of liberation or moksha. In this tree, as64  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977well, there are so many branches and leaves in the form of ourrelations and attachments. The leaves which are the ideas arepresent in a large number on the tree. Our thoughts and ourdesires are like the flowers that blossom on the tree. On thesame tree is also the fruit of liberation or moksha. If we reallywant to get this fruit of moksha, we can do so only if weprotect the leaves and the branches as well. However, this isnot enough.While having the desire to reach the fruit which isvisible on the tree, what we have to do is to take care of theinvisible roots of the tree and we have to water these invisibleroots. These roots, which are invisible, can be compared withour faith and our belief in the Atma. On the roots of faith in thisAtma is based the entire tree with all its leaves and branches. Itis only when we undertake to water the roots and protect thetree, will we be able to get the fruit of moksha.The sweet rasa, or the juice that can be extracted out ofthe fruit of moksha, is our character. If this juice of characterand the faith, which is the root of the tree, are not present, thenthe tree becomes useless. Young people, if this faith does notexist in the form of roots, if the character does not exist in theform of juice, then it is no longer a tree; it is as bad asfirewood. The first thing we must do is to promote our faith inAtma, faith in one’s own self, and then we must try and reachthe fruit of liberation.Lakshmana, Bharatha and Satrughna regarded this asimportant. Faith in Atma is identical with faith in Rama, and isidentical with faith in Brahman.In the story of Ramayana, just as Lakshmana wasclosely following Rama, so also Satrughna was closelySummer Showers in Brindavan 197765following Bharatha. Such was the inseparable connection thatexisted between Bharatha and Satrughna. If Rama was notpresent, Lakshmana would not be happy at all. In the samemanner, if Bharatha was not present for a moment, Satrughnawould be in great sorrow.Like Lakshmana, Satrughna was also easily excited.When Satrughna saw Manthara, his anger was so much that hecaught hold of her hair and pulled her towards Bharatha.Satrughna was prepared to kill Manthara. On that occasion,Bharatha advised Satrughna that if he wants to get the grace ofRama, he should refrain from doing such harsh things.Bharatha said: “Could I not have punished my mother for herguilt? But if Rama comes to know that we have been cruel toour own mothers, he would send us away and would not showgrace to us.”We should see here that Bharatha and Satrughna wereprepared to cause hurt and harm to their own mothers, but theywere not prepared to displease Rama by their acts.Bharatha and Satrughna were always following Ramabecause Rama was the embodiment of dharma and they werealways wanting to please Him and earn His grace. Rama,Lakshmana, Bharatha and Satrughna were the embodiments ofthe four great qualities of sathya, dharma, shanthi and prema.In order to experience prema, man goes aboutsearching for several methods. If we really want to experienceprema we have got to understand what peace or shanthi means.If we want to follow the path of peace, we will have to acceptthe path of dharma. If we want to follow the path of dharma,we will have to accept the path of truth. Here is a smallexample. Let us take prema as the shining light. If we want to66  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977experience this shining light, we should have a bulb. If wewant the bulb to glow and experience the shining light, weshould have a connection to the bulb. By just a connection ofwire to the bulb, the bulb is not going to glow. In that wire, weshould have an electric current. Here we see that the electriccurrent can be compared to the truth, the wire can be comparedto dharma while the bulb can be compared to shanthi or peace.If we have all these three things, then only we will get prema,the light. We may have a good new bulb, we may have a wire,are we going to get light out of that? Unless there is currentinside the wire, we cannot get the bulb to glow.That is how Bharatha and Satrughna were followingRama and Lakshmana and were demonstrating their ideals inlife to the people. In this manner, when Rama became the Kingand when Bharatha was the Prince and while the kingdom wasbeing happily ruled and after all the rakshasas in Lanka weredestroyed, a very powerful son of Ravana by name Lavanasurawas still alive. Lavanasura was the eldest son of Ravana. Hehad the grace of Shiva. He had acquired the Trisula fromShiva. Depending upon the power of his Trisula, Lavanasurawas giving a lot of trouble to the rishis and other good people.The rishis could no longer bear the atrocitiescommitted by Lavanasura, and they came running to Rama andbegged Him to protect them and kill Lavan-asura. Rama knewthat this kind of prayer from rishis would come. He looked atSatrughna who willingly accepted to go and destroy theenemies. Satrughna was a very strong person and had manygood qualities. Devotion and faith were his strong points, butunfortunately, in Ramayana, Satrughna’s qualities were notdescribed to the people in a prominent manner. As soon as thiswas known to Satrughna, he went and touched the feet ofRama. He told Rama that by His grace, he could undertake theSummer Showers in Brindavan 197767task and destroy the enemies. Rama knew very well thatSatrughna was a powerful person and so he smilingly blessedSatrughna. Not only this, Rama explained to Satrughna thesecret of the weapon, Trisula.He told Satrughna that the Trisula was present in thehouse of this rakshasa. Every morning this rakshasa goes tothe forest to gather food which primarily consisted of meat.Rama advised that the rakshasa must be killed before hereturns home and begins to eat his meal. In this manner, havingobeyed Rama’s orders and having secured the blessings ofRama, Satrughna started. Overnight he rested in Valmiki’sAshram. It may be regarded as his special fortune that inValmiki’s Ashram, Sita had just at that time given birth toLava and Kusha.Satrughna saw Sita and the two children. But in hismind, he thought that this news should not be conveyed toRama as he felt that it was not proper and kept it a secret. Assoon as he left, he thought of Sita and Rama in his own mindand went to face Lavan-asura, the rakshasa. In the forest; hefought Lavan-asura and destroyed him.After destroying Lavanasura, he returned to Rama,touched his feet, and expressed his desire to spend the rest ofhis life at the feet of Rama. Rama did not agree to that. Ramasaid that he should become the king of the area that Lavanasurawas ruling earlier.For twelve years he ruled over the kingdom ofLavanasura in a manner that was giving great happi-ness to thepeople, the rishis and other inhabitants. Satrughna was unableto bear the separation from Rama for a longer period, and hewas returning to Ayodhya.68  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Thus, while returning to Ayodhya, he again spent onenight in the ashram of Valmiki. By this time, Lava and Kushawere twelve years old and Valmiki made these two boys, Lavaand Kusha, sing the Ramayana in a most attractive manner.When Satrughna was listening to the songs recited by the twochildren, he forgot himself in that happiness. He was in such anecstasy that he looked at Lava and Kusha with great pleasure.He could not believe that he was Satrughna. He behaved as ifhe was not con-nected with them and returned to Ayodhya.After returning to Ayodhya he described to Rama thegreat peace that he experienced in Valmiki’s Ashram. In spiteof the fact that Rama was in a hu-man form, He was all-knowing. He knew everything. He also enjoyed andexperienced the narration of Satrughna. But he told Satrughnathat he should not speak about this secret in Ayodhya just atthat moment.Every act of an Avathar has to be taken intoconsideration in the context of the situation and the time andthe happenings at the time in which the Avathar lives.All the rishis knew that Rama was an Avathar of God;but in order that the story of Ramayana may progress, they didnot give this secret out to others. Vishwamithra knew very wellthat Rama was an Avathar. Bharadwaja and Vasishta alsoknew very well that Rama was an Avathar. But if they gave outthe truth, then the main purpose for which Rama had becomean Avathar would not be achieved. In the same manner, it isnot possible for any Avathar to proclaim to the world that theAvathar is come, and, if so, for what purpose. That is the mayaof God.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197769Yasoda, the mother, even after she had the vision of allcreation in the open mouth of Lord Krishna, yet on account ofmaya she forgot the divine vision and she began to think thatshe was the mother and that Krishna was her son. In the samemanner, Vasishta, Vishwamithra and all other rishis kept thesecret of Rama. But when they were alone and when they gottogether, they were singing the glory of Rama amongstthemselves. When the rishis were sitting alone, amongstthemselves they used to describe the qualities of the Lord andthey said, “Can we understand you, Oh Lord? Can we explainwhat you are, Oh Lord? You are smaller than the smallestthing, you are larger than the largest thing, you are present inall the 84 lakhs of different living jivas. How can weunderstand you and explain to others what you are?”Man is steeped in maya in this manner and he cannotfree himself from maya. He forgets his origin and he does notunderstand Brahman. However, if this situation does not exist,there is no reason why Paramatma should come as an Avatharat all. What exists as a reality is only one, but what we see ismani-fold. This one thing appears to us as if it is many. What isreal is the Param Jyothi. This Param Jyothi is the Atma Jyothi.There is a small illustration for this.We have a candle light here. We cover this candle lightwith a pot which has ten holes in it. On this we also put a thickTurkish towel. In that situation, the light that is inside the pot isnot seen at all from outside. But if, slowly, we take off thetowel with which we have covered the pot, uncovering eachhole one by one, then we can see one light, another light, as theholes come out one by one. But if we remove the towelcompletely and throw it away, we look at ten different holes,and ten different candle lights. In spite of the fact that we cansee ten different lights, if at that time we break the pot and70  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977throw it away, then we realise that all these ten lights are onlyfrom one single candle. Earlier we did not see any light, butonce when the cover on the pot has been removed, we haveseen ten lights. If the pot is broken, then we again see onelight. This is the basis of your life. There is inside, as we allcan see, the Jivan Jyothi or Param Jyothi. The Jivan Jyothi hasbeen covered by the human body with ten holes in it. We haveput the thick cover of worldly desires on it. If the desires of thehuman body should be broken, then we will have the vision ofthe one Jyothi, i.e., Atma Jyothi. That has also been called theAdwaitha Jyothi. This Adwaitha Jyothi is the Jyothi of theAtma. Atma is the embodiment of bliss. You can onlyexperience the embodiment of bliss, and it is not possible toexhibit it in any other manner.Many people have tried their best to find whether thisAtma exists. If it exists, where could it be found? Since timeimmemorial, it has been the attempt to find out one’s Atma andto know what Atma is and where it is? What is the evidence forus to accept the existence of the Atma?To establish the existence of the Atma, we cannot takeeven the Vedas as the pramana. The Vedas have only dealtwith people in certain aspects relating to the world, and haveexplained what they should do in this world through variouskarmas. This is the subject matter of the Vedas. It has not beenpossible for the Vedas to establish the nature of the Atma.Here is a small story. In Ramayana, Sita, Rama andLakshmana went to the ashram of Bharadwaja. In that ashram,following the ancient practice, the women, the rishipatnis,were sitting on one side; the men, the rishis, were sitting on theother side. Unlike the manner in which people sit togethernowadays, when Sita, Rama and Lakshmana entered theSummer Showers in Brindavan 197771ashram, Sita went and joined the women and Rama andLakshmana went and joined the rishis. As Rama andLakshmana lived in the forest, they were wearing clothessuitable to life in a forest; and their shining faces were similarto those of the rishis. The situation was such that they were notable to make out who was Rama and who was Lakshmana. Onthe other hand, Sita could be recognised easily. Sita was aloneand the rishipatnis recognised her and began talking to her.They were asking questions about her life in the forest. Themen, on the other hand, went on explaining the Vedas and thediscussions centred round the Vedas.On the other hand, the women began asking questionsand whispering. They came to Sita and asked her, “Has yourhusband also come with you?” Sita replied, “Yes, I cannotcome alone, I cannot live without Him. He has come alongwith me and He is sitting along with the rishis.” The secondquestion which was asked of Sita was, “Who is your husband?Can you find him out among so many of the rishis?” Sita was avery noble and modest woman, and could not stand up in themidst of all those present and point to her husband and saywho her husband was. She simply bowed her head down andkept quiet. Even then the women did not keep quiet. Theybegan asking more questions such as: is that man, wearingsuch and such clothes, your husband? Is that man, who ishaving a peculiar hair style, your husband? The women startedpointing at several of them and asking Sita if any one of themwas her husband. But whenever a wrong person was shown,she would reply in the negative. Locating Atma should proceedin this manner.Today, many young people may have the ambition thatthey should get a wife like Sita. A young man, who wants tohave a wife like Sita, should make an attempt to be like Rama.72  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977If he behaves like Ravana, he will not deserve a wife like Sita.If a girl wants to have a husband like Rama, she shouldendeavour to be like Sita. If she is like Surpanakha, how is shegoing to deserve a Rama? So, in every family, the husbandshould be like Rama and the wife should be like Sita. If onewill assist the other, at times of difficulties as well as at timesof pleasure, like Rama and Sita, they will be happy indeed.7. All The Characters In The Story OfRamayana Are Ideal ExamplesThere is no birth and there is no death for theAtma. There is no beginning, there is no end, there isno interval separating the beginning and the end forthis eternal spirit. Atma does not die, Atma is not bornnor is it killed by any one else. It will remain as awitnessing consciousness, witnessing everything thatgoes on in this world.Divya Atma Swarupas:Man must learn to face the ups and downs of life withequanimity and equal-mindedness. Then, alone, life will have ameaning for him. Forbearance and peace will become availableonly in the ordinary run of life. In order to promote thesequalities of forbearance and peace in life, the adhyatmic way,or the spiritual path, is very necessary. Because we have for-gotten the ancient traditions and the ancient scripturesoutlining the spiritual path, life has become devoid ofcharacter.Truly, by claiming that we know everything, we arebringing some blemish on our own life. We cannot find peoplewho know everything about life. Man, who now claims toknow how to fly in the sky, has no happiness in him. What isthe reason for this?This is because he does not know himself and who hereally is. One may jump at the stars and fly in the sky, but ifthat individual does not understand his own nature, he willnever be happy. If we really want to be blissful and happy, we74  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977must know the true nature and meaning of bondage. It is onlywhen we know what bondages are binding us, can we  make anattempt to find the way to break those bondages. The biggestbondage for man is ignorance because of which he does notknow his own nature. So long as such ignorance remains withhim, he cannot get rid of sorrow. So long as he is steeped insorrow, he cannot have happiness in life. It is important to getrid of the sorrow and be happy. This process is described assadhana.Bharatha, in the Ramayana, for the sake of bliss, wassearching for the path of truth. He was in no way inferior toRama. For the protection of truth, or for the following of theright kind of dharma, or for making sacrifices when they werenecessary, Bharatha was equal to Rama.In the ordinary sequel, we regard Bharatha as the thirdstage. We first take the part of Rama, then Lakshmana, thenBharatha and then Satrughna. But if we look with care at thetype of faith each one had, we find that Bharatha comes secondin the series. In all these four brothers, we do find someapparent changes at the time of birth. It is not possible for us todetermine and say, this one is greater and that one is smaller. Itis just for man’s satisfaction that these minor differences arecreated. We are not able to recognise the divinity that ispresent in three brothers: Bharatha, Lakshmana and Satrughna.When Bharatha was at his grandfather’s place, GuruVasishta sent him a letter asking him to come back toAyodhya. As soon as Bharatha saw the letter, he felt veryhappy that he was being asked to return for Rama’s coronation.But quickly he began wondering, because if Rama’s coronationwere to take place, his grandfather would also have beeninvited. He began worrying as to why he alone was calledSummer Showers in Brindavan 197775back. In this agitated frame of mind, he and Satrughna startedfor Ayodhya. They reached the entrance of Ayodhya. Bharathawas a very smart person, and he had a keen sense ofobservation. He noticed that at the main gate there were nofresh welcoming arches. The mango leaves were all dried up,and this was symbolic of a dreary atmosphere instead ofproclaiming prosperity. He started seeing bad omens and beganwondering as to what the matter was. He found all the streetslittered with dirty pieces of matter and all the houses appearedvery unclean. This unusual situation made him think thatsomething was drastically wrong, and that some tragedy hadcome over Ayodhya.His chariot was taken straight to the mansion ofKaikeyi. As soon as he saw Kaikeyi, he could not understandthe meaning of the perplexed look which Kaikeyi had. After afew minutes, he realised that the death of his father had takenplace, and Rama had been banished to the forest. Withoutbeing able to bear the sorrow as a result of the two events, heran to his Guru Vasishta. Vasishta described to him, in detail,all that had happened.As soon as he got the details of what had happened,Bharatha became very upset. His eyes became very red. Hebecame so excited that he used very harsh words to his mother.He could not stay there even for a moment. He went straight toKausalya. Unable to bear the death of her husband and theseparation from her own son, Kausalya was in deep sorrow.Bharatha ran to Kausalya, fell at her feet and asked her topardon him, and said that he was innocent, and that he was notresponsible for what had happened. In many ways, he askedfor her pardon. Both Kausalya and Vasishta told Bharatha thathe should first perform the last rites of his dead father.76  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977It was already fourteen days after the death of hisfather. The body was carefully preserved. The kind ofpreservatives and methods by which the body was preserved inthose days were not such as we have in these days. Bharathacame to the conclusion that he does not deserve to perform thelast rites of his father. The first son, Rama, alone shouldperform the last rites. Bharatha said that in Ayodhya whereRama does not live, he cannot stay for a single moment.Here, we should see that Bharatha even forgot the griefcaused by the death of his father. Grief caused by theseparation from Rama was much more to him than the death ofhis father. But somehow, he adjusted himself to the orders ofKausalya and Vasishta and performed the last rites of hisfather. The very next day, all the necessary ingredients werecollected in order to perform the coronation of Bharatha. ButBharatha would not agree for his coronation. Bharatha said thatwhatever arrangements had been made for the coronationshould be taken along with him to the forest. He proclaimedthat, in the Ikshvaku Dynasty, it is only the eldest son that hadthe right to the throne. He being younger had no right at all.He recognised that this was the dharmic way of doingthings, and he requested Vasishta and others to let him go tothe forest. He thought that Rama’s coronation could beperformed even in the forest. He always looked to the ideas ofpeople and wanted to follow the ideas of people. So he tooksome of the people of Ayodhya with him. In this manner, alongwith the people of Ayodhya, he undertook the journey to theforest.From some distance, Bharatha saw that Rama washaving his hermitage on the Chitrakoota Mountain. His heartmelted at the sight. The sorrow that came from his heart wasSummer Showers in Brindavan 197777something which he could not bear. He noticed thatRamachandra was having unkempt hair. He was shocked to seethat Rama-chandra, who was used to sleeping on a bed of silk,was lying on a bed of leaves, bark and the ground. Rama,looked at the sorrow of Bharatha and in many ways tried toconsole him. But all the attempts made by Rama to consoleBharatha did not give him any satisfaction. Bharatha fell at thefeet of Rama and said that he would not leave his feet untilRama agreed to return to Ayodhya and accept to become theking.Even in that sorrowful situation, Rama was askingquestions in a very peaceful manner. Is every-one well athome? Is the kingdom going on well? Are the people of thekingdom well? He was asking questions with an unparalleledpeace of mind.During that conversation, Bharatha told Rama that theirfather was dead. Although Rama was the in-carnation ofNarayana, because he was in human form and in order toproclaim how one in human form should conduct himself inthat situation, Rama also appeared as if he suffered very muchat the news of the death of their father. Rama and Bharathaconsoled each other.A potter cannot make a pot with hard clay. The claymust be wet and used as soft paste. In the same manner, aftercreating a body, God has to put life into it. For putting life intothe body, the parents are made responsible. For the birth of ahuman being, the father and mother are responsible. Godfunctions only as a witness to that. To such parents, to suchfather and mother, one should repay one’s debt of gratitude.This is the reason why we are taught that mother should beregarded as God, father should be regarded as God, teacher78  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977should be regarded as God and the guest should be regarded asGod.Immediately thereafter, Rama and Bharatha went to theriver and performed the traditional rites which they do at thedeath of the father. They returned home and were talking aboutvarious things. The very next day Bharatha arranged a bigcongregation. All the people were requested to pray. Theprayers were that either Rama should return to Ayodhya andtake charge of the kingdom or, since all the sons were on thesame footing, Bharatha should also be permitted to stay in theforest along with Rama. Preparing himself for such a task,Bharatha was determined that by some means or the other, heshould take Rama back to Ayodhya. He was repeatedly sayingthat for the sins committed by his mother, he was in no wayresponsible.Rama told Bharatha that even his mother Kaikeyi wasnot responsible for this situation. In fact, they proposed toinstall Rama on the throne the very next day. Overnight, due topressure, this decision had been changed. The change in such adecision overnight must be because of divine will. It was not ahuman decision. In this manner Rama was giving some expla-nation or other to Bharatha. In spite of all explanations,Bharatha did not give up his determination. When Bharathaleft Ayodhya and went to the river Ganges, even Guha hadsome doubt about the intentions of Bharatha. Guha askedBharatha if he was taking all the attendants with him to Ramawith a view to cause some harm to Rama. Bharatha was not ina position to give any reply. Bharatha accused his mother andsaid because he was born to this woman Kaikeyi, he wassubmitting himself to all this humiliation.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197779From there, he went to the ashram of Bharadwaja. Healso exhibited some suspicions about Bharatha’s motives. Hereit became very clear how much Bharatha was devoted toRama. Bharadwaja wanted to test Bharatha. He had a bigthrone chair prepared and was arranging for a feast. The feastthat was arranged by Bharadwaja was not creating any interestin Bharatha. When his brother Ramachandra was living onroots in the forest, he would not participate in this feast. Weshould recognise the close relationship and affection thatexisted between the brothers of those days.Recognising the connection between Rama andLakshmana, Bharatha felt very sorry that Lakshmana alonedeserved to be close to Rama and that he did not get thatopportunity of being close to Rama. In this way Bharatha’sideal was to serve Rama all the time and thereby derive thegrace of the Lord. We can describe in this manner Bharatha’sdevotion and faith, and we can come to the conclusion thatBharatha’s devotion and faith were even more than those ofLakshmana. Brothers, between whom such devotion, faith andaffection exist, are very rare in this world. These brothers wereserving Rama all the time, and in that service they were settingan example to mankind. In each family, how should brothersconduct themselves? How should they treat each other?Answers to these questions were being furnished by thesebrothers.Students:It is necessary for you to recognise the kind of closeaffection that existed between the brothers in the family ofRama. You should draw a lesson from this and put this idealinto practice. We should understand the kind of ideals thatshould bind a family together. We should make an attempt, tosome extent, to remove our selfishness and practice self-80  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977sacrifice. The main teaching of Ramayana is to ask you tothrow away your selfishness and promote selfless sacrifice andgood qualities in you. Every individual character in Ramayanahas been preaching this kind of ideal life. Such an idealexample of life is very necessary today. In such an idealexample of life, we should give some respect to disciplinarymeasures. Without discipline, whatever ideal examples youmay give to your life, there is no value for them.Bharatha was not in a position to overrule Rama’sorders. Bharatha did not like to become the king and rule thekingdom. In this conflict, Rama tried to console Bharatha.Vasishta then gave a small advice which would givesatisfaction to Bharatha. Vasistha said, “You can take thesandals of Rama, and regarding those sandals as symbolic ofRama, perform the coronation for the sandals and carry on therule of Ayodhya.” He could not throw away the orders andsuggestions given by the Guru. He could not also contradictthe orders of Rama. So, with a very heavy heart, he agreed toreceive the sandals.The people of those days were also such that they willobey good orders immediately. So, they recognised the sacredheart of Bharatha and they accepted these suggestions. He tookRama’s sandals, put them on the throne, and with a heavyheart, went to the village Nandigram. In that village, heannounced that he would stay without food and without rest tillRama returns to Ayodhya. He decided and began to live a lifeof austerity in the village Nandigram in the same manner inwhich Rama was living in the forest. In this context, the rishisand elders have been telling us that the attributes and aspects ofRama and Bharatha became one and the same. This exemplaryconduct of Bharatha, by which he had accepted fully the ordersSummer Showers in Brindavan 197781of his brother, and was carrying on the rule of the country,demonstrates his greatness.If we carefully look at the main characters in the storyof Ramayana, we will come to the conclusion that God has putall this together as a drama on the stage of the world. Peoplecan learn from the numerous examples which God has giventhrough Ramayana. God will also bend Himself to help Hisdevotees. For the sake of happiness to devotees, God will beprepared to undertake any kind of trouble. Even if we blameGod, He does not feel so unhappy as when His devotees areblamed. God is above gunas. He is not affected by gunas. SoHe does not attach importance to blemish. God is omnipresent.Because He assumes some form, we believe that God is of aparticular form. That God is omnipresent is the Truth. How canwe demonstrate this Truth? Here is a small example for this.We know that earth, water, fire, air and space are thefive elements. For these elements, there are attributes.Amongst these five, the most important one is earth. Earth hasgot all the five attributes, the qual-ities of sound, form, touch,taste and smell. Because of these five qualities, the earthbecomes immobile, becomes stationary and heavy.When we go to the second element, water, it gets somemobility. In water, one of the qualities, namely smell, hasdisappeared. Only four attributes remain. Because one of theattributes has disappeared, it has acquired some mobility.When we go to the third element of fire, it has got theattributes of sound, touch and form only. Since two qualitieshave disappeared, fire has become even lighter and fire is ableto move faster than earth or water.82  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977When we go to air, it has lost three of the attributes. Ithas got only two of them, namely sound and touch. it has noform. Since three of the attributes have disappeared, air hasbecome much lighter and moves faster and freely occupies thewhole space.The last one, the fifth element is space, or akasa. Thisspace has lost all the qualities. Neither form nor touch, norsmell nor taste are present in akasa. So it has becomeomnipresent. It is so light that it is present everywhere.God has no attributes or gunas at all, and therefore, isable to be present everywhere. If space or akasa, which hasonly one quality, namely sound, is present everywhere, thenGod, who has no quality or no attribute at all, can be presenteverywhere. One may at this point get a doubt that if God isomni-present and is above gunas, how is it that the gunas arenot in Him but He is in the gunas?The moment we say that He is everywhere, it followsthat He is present in the gunas also. He is in the gunas, but thegunas are not in Him. How is this possible? For example themud is present in the pot, but the pot is not present in the mud.The pot is created. The pot has a form. The form has beengiven in an artificial way. However, if God is in His formlessaspect, it is not possible for people to easily recognise theformless aspect. So, He takes a human form, and comes to theworld. In this way, He wants to demonstrate to the people theideal path they should follow.Students:I am hoping that you will take at least one or two of thegreat ideals that are contained in the story of Ramayana andimbibe them and put them into practice in your daily life.8. Ignorance Is The CauseOf One’s SorrowA bubble of water is born out of water, it is madeup of water, it ultimately mixes with water anddisappears. As in this analogy, man is like a bubble andNARAYANA is like the source water. Man is born outof Narayana, is made up of Him and ultimately mergeswith Him. What else can I tell you? This is the simpleand elemental truth.Prema Swarupas:The jiva has three aspects: one is the spiritual, the otheris the material aspect and the third is something connected withdaily life. These three aspects resemble the deep sleep state,the waking state and the dreaming state. Just as the waves arecreated out of water and are contained in water, so also theworldly life is contained in the spiritual life.The sweetness and the coolness are qualities of water.These qualities are also noticed in the waves and in the foam.Sath, Chith and Ananda, are three attributes which may benoticed in an individual. Through the individual, they show upin his worldly life and they reflect the spiritual content in him.These aspects, the worldly aspect and the spiritual aspect areinseparably connected with each other.When we talk of the individual, we have to consider thedivinity in him or the Atma Swarupa. The basic content of theindividual or the Atma Swarupa will remain separate and willnot mix with anything else. This Atma does not need any direct84  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977evidence, and it is being felt in the world at all places and at alltimes.When a child, who has not seen the ocean at all, is toldby his parents that there is an ocean, and that they have seenthe ocean and have had a bath in the ocean, the child believesthat there is an ocean. In what he is getting from his parents,there is no direct evidence and demonstration so far as thechild is concerned. It is a matter of the child having faith in hisparents.In the same manner, men, who cannot experience Atmadirectly, do not realise divinity or the sacredness of Atma bythemselves. To such people, divine persons, sages and rishis,who have had this experience, must convey their experience.This is not direct evidence and demonstration to the ordinaryman.As the water, the waves and the foam are allinseparably connected with each other, the three aspects, thespiritual aspect, the worldly aspect and the divine aspect, areinseparably connected with each other. But depending on theenvironment and the situation which exists around, man usesone word or the other with greater appropriateness. It is in thiscontext of the triple aspect that I have often said that you arenot one person but that you are three persons: the one youthink you are, the one others think you are, and the one youreally are. There is one small example for this. Suppose apotter goes to a place and digs out some mud and makes a heapof the mud in front of his house. After some days he uses thismud, which he has collected, and makes pots, pans, and so on.As a result of what the potter had done, there is a pit in oneplace and there is a mound of mud in front of his house. As hetakes out the mud from the mound and goes on making potsSummer Showers in Brindavan 197785and pans, you find that the mound is diminishing in size andthe pots and pans are increasing in number. When we put waterinto the mud that is in the mound, it gets absorbed easily butwhen we put water into the pot, it remains unabsorbed.However, the mud that is used for making the pot and the mudthat is heaped up as a mound are the same. But the features thatare contained in the mud that comes out of the pit or thatcomes out from the mound are not the same as those of themud used for making a pot. What is the reason for this? Thereason for this is that the mud, used for making a pot, has beentreated by putting it in the fire; and because of such a treatmentin the fire, the pot has taken a definite shape and water remainsunabsorbed in the pot. After using the pot for sometime, if oneis careless about handling it, the pot gets broken; and once thepot is broken, the pieces break further and are ultimatelyreduced to dust and mud. Our body, which can be compared tothe pot, breaks into pieces and is analogous to the aspect of thedaily life. The phenomenon, which we see when the moundgoes on diminishing gradually, may be described as the aspectof divinity where we rec-ognise continual disappearance. Onthe other hand, the mud which remained unchanged in all thethree stages of: the pit, the mound and the pot, can bedescribed as representing the spiritual life. The name and theform may be different from time to time but the essence, thebasic material, remains unchanged. What does not change andcontinues to exist in all the forms and names is permanent, andthis is analogous to Atma which is present in all the threestages. In order to recognise the true nature of Atma, we haveto make several efforts. It is not as if there is no reason for ourinability to recognise the form and nature of Atma. There is asmall story to illustrate this.Ten friends came together and they wanted to cross aflowing stream. As the river or the stream was flowing fast,86  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977they were somewhat confused. However, by some effort theyreached the other bank of the river, and developed a doubtwhether they had all been able to cross the stream. Themoment this doubt entered their mind, there was also a desireto check whether all the ten people had indeed come through.One of them began counting one, two, three until nine and thenhe imagined that the tenth person was not present. Under thosecircumstances, to think that one is absent is simply the result ofhis own ignorance, because he was not counting himself. Notonly was he under the impression that the tenth person was notpresent, but he also began to feel that one of the group mayhave been washed away in the river, and they were all in astate of mourning. The feeling that the tenth person was notpresent is ignorance, and the feeling that he was washed awayby the river is a further step in their ignorance. To get thefeeling that the tenth person was even dead and gone iscomplete ignorance.At that moment another person, not belonging to thegroup, was moving in that direction and asked them what thecause of their suffering was. The reply was given that theywere ten people when they came to the river, they were tenwhen they entered the river, but when they came out of theriver they were only nine, and that the tenth person has beenwashed away and this was the cause of their sorrow. When thisperson was told the reason for their sorrow, he saw that therewere in fact ten people and so he asked them to count again inhis presence. In the recounting, it was once again one to nineand the person who was counting did not count himself, thetenth one. He was feeling very disturbed that the tenth one wasnot present. The new person who came in recognised the mis-take which they were committing. He himself started counting,one to nine and he pointed out that the tenth person (the personwho was counting) was omitting himself uncounted. They allthen recognised that the tenth person was not washed away bySummer Showers in Brindavan 197787the river, and that in reality he did not die. Simultaneously inone moment, their sorrow was removed and they were happy.What is the reason for this sorrow which they experiencedbefore? What is the reason for the happiness they areexperiencing now? Their ignorance was the cause of theirsorrow, and the removal of ignorance was the cause for theirhappiness.The moral of this story is that the non-recognition orrecognition of one’s own self, can be the cause of sorrow or ofhappiness as the case may be. Here it is also established thatthis happiness which we experience is one’s own form or one’sown self. The permanent bliss that one gets by the knowledgeof Atma has been described by several people by saying thatAtma is all-knowing and Atma is above duality. Atma is oneand not two. Atma is permanent. Atma is unwavering. Atma isabove description and above suffering. There are differentways of describing Atma but these words cannot undertake totell us the form of Atma. It is not possible for anyone toestablish its form. One can only experience this for Oneself. Itis not possible for others to give a description which enablesanother person to experience this. Here the bliss or thehappiness, which can be got out of demonstration ordescription, will not be as good as that obtained from directexperience. Thus, knowledge of this Atma can come only outof experience and cannot come out of reading books. There isone other example for this.There is the ocean. When we bring water from theocean and drink it, we find that the water tastes salty. The samewater of the ocean, because of the heat of the sun, is convertedinto vapour, forms clouds and comes down as rain and suchwater will be sweet and not salty. Where has this change fromsalty taste to sweet taste come about? The sweetness had come88  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977when the ocean water was being changed into vapour as aresult of the heat of the sun. There is a possibility, in thissituation, to recognise the difference between the sweetness onthe one hand and the salty taste on the other. This sweet wateris something which you realise with your own experience. Theknowledge that the water, which comes directly from theocean, is salty is something which we acquire by frequenthearing. The knowledge acquired by hearing and by reading isnot very satisfactory. Knowledge coming from one’s ownexperience gives real happiness. How can we get suchexperience? The knowledge that is contained in the ocean ofgrace has to be transformed by using one’s intelligence like theheat of the sun. When that vapour can be changed into clouds,it can be compared to the truth. Out of clouds of truth shouldform rain drops of prema. When the individual drops of premacome together to join, out of that will come a stream. Thisstream is the real bliss. This stream of bliss will go back againand merge with the ocean of grace. As the water, which cameout of the ocean became vapour, then became cloud and rainand went back to the ocean, so also the divine grace that comesto us turns into fruits as clouds, turns into drops of prema,drops join and become stream of prema and the stream goesback to the ocean of grace.Human beings of today are not making any attempt toget some idea of the ocean of grace. How can they transformthemselves into clouds of truth? If they cannot realise theclouds of truth, how can there be drops of prema? When thereare not even drops of prema, how do we get streams ofhappiness? The first thing which we have to accept is that thereis no dharma which is different from truth.Truth has been accepted as the very first basis. For thistruth, prema should become the support. If prema is present inSummer Showers in Brindavan 197789us, it will be possible for us to earn the grace of the Lord to alarge extent. Love lives by giving and forgiving. Self lives bygetting and forget-ting. In this context, Dasaratha is a perfectexample of one who has taken the path of truth. He has also atitle called Sathya Parakrama. There was another title forDasaratha, i.e., one who was bound by dharma. Atirathi wasanother title for him and this means one who could givehappiness to a large extent. He was also called a Rajarishi. Aking and yet a rishi shining with brightness because of theseveral great qualities in him. He was a king for the kingdomand was always taking the support and advice of eight personsof his kingdom. These eight persons were such that theyalways practised the highest dharma. The last one of theseeight persons was Somantara. He has also accepted twopersons Vasishta and Vamadeva as his Gurus. In Dasaratha’sdaily life, he was using these two Gurus as his purohits. Inaddition, when Dasa-ratha had some doubt or when he foundthat the people’s prosperity was being obstructed or when hewanted some advice, he used to have six people as hisprincipal advisers. The first among these six people wasSuyagna, the others were Jabali, Kasayapa, Pascheya,Markandeya and Gautama. These six per-sons were retained byhim as his principal advisers. He was ruling the whole ofBharath. There was no injustice, there was no untruth, therewas no crime in the whole of Bharath during his rule. At thattime he had eight ministers and six advisers. The rule of thatday was such that Dasaratha looked into the prosperity of thepeople. If we look at the situation in some depth and try tounderstand the significance and the inner meaning, we shouldnote that man has got five working organs and five sensoryorgans. Alto-gether he has got ten indriyas, and Dasarathaliterally means the human body which has got five workingorgans and five sensory organs. Dasaratha symbolises thischariot of the human body which has got ten organs. Dasaratha90  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977also attracted three gunas in the form of Kausalya, Sumitra andKaikeyi. The four Purusharthas: dharma, artha, kama andmoksha are symbolised by Dasaratha’s four sons. Dasarathawas one who proclaimed such a significant inner meaning tothe world and urged the people to lead an ideal life.Sita is the daughter of the king of Mithilapura whosename was Videha. Videha means one who has no body or onewho has no consciousness of his human body. The capital ofDasaratha was Ayodhya. Ayodhya means a city into whichenemies cannot enter. Dasaratha had such noble qualities andideals that he was carrying on the rule of his country in anexemplary manner. Sita can be identified with wisdom, andSita marries Rama or becomes one with Rama who is dharma.When wisdom comes together with dharma, in the ordinarycourse, such a good event will meet with some obstacles. It iscustomary and quite natural that every good thing is met withby some obstacles. As I state often, pleasure is only an intervalbetween two pains. If there is no pain at all, there is no valuefor pleasure. Sita is the embodiment of wisdom and she hadbeen taken away by Ravana, who symbolises selfishness andego.If one wants his little wisdom to disappear, all that onehas to do is to promote his selfishness, jealousy and ego.Ravana symbolises selfishness, jealousy and ego. To make asearch for Sita, who had been taken away by the bad qualities,selfishness, jealousy and ego, Rama, in the form of dharma,along with the other Purusharthas, i.e., artha, kama andmoksha, makes a journey. Here Lakshmana is to be identifiedwith the mind. We should notice that Rama, the embodimentof dharma, combines with Lakshmana, who is identified asmind, and goes to the forest, which signifies life. In that forestof life, Rama searches for wisdom in the form of Sita. In thisSummer Showers in Brindavan 197791context, there is an argument between the two brothers Valiand Sugriva. Sugriva can be compared to the ability todistinguish between right and wrong. Here the inability or theweakness which is called dhirathwa has been destroyed in theform of Vali; and Sugriva, who symbol-ises the ability todistinguish between right and wrong, comes out victorious.Along with Sugriva, who symbolises viveka, or the ability todistinguish right from wrong, we have Hanuman. Thecombination of Sugriva and Hanuman is like the combinationof viveka and courage. The viveka and courage went to-getherin search of Sita, the wisdom. They meet with one obstacle inthe form of an ocean of moha. Thus the ocean of moha had tobe crossed and this crossing was effected with the help ofcourage in the form of Hanuman.After crossing the ocean, they encounter the threegunas: the rajas, thamas and sathwa on the opposite bank ofthe ocean. They are Ravana, Kumbha-karna and Vibhishanarepresenting the three gunas respectively. The rajas and thethamas, Ravana and Kumbhakarna, were removed from thescene and finally the sathwa Guna gets the upper hand in theform of Vibhishana. He has been crowned the king. Aftermaking Vibhishana the king of Lanka, Rama has the vision ofwisdom, born out of experience in the person of Sita. Rama,prior to finding Sita, could be called a Brahmajnani but whenhe found Sita, symbolising the knowledge of experience, thereis a reunion of the knowledge of experience with the pureBrahma Jnana, and the culmination was the coronation, thestory which we called Sahasrartha Ramayana. This descrip-tion which has now been given can also be called AdhyatmaRamayana. It is only when we can understand thisinterpretation of Adhyatma Ramayana, there is some benefitfor us and a possibility of the realisation of the nature of Atma.If we keep on thinking of Ramayana in the human form of a92  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977king Dasaratha, a son Rama and look only superficially, howcan we know the real significance?Students:Even Rama, who had established Rama Rajya on onehistoric occasion, had to leave this world and pass away.Everything has to pass away some day. Nothing is going toremain permanently in this world. Even the Rama Rajya had todisappear and change. Everything changes with time andnothing remains unchanged. Even Harischandra, who was anardent adherent of truth at all times, had to pass away from thisworld. Nala who ruled over all the world had to pass away.Could he take even a small bit of land with him when hepassed away?Rama built a big bridge over the ocean. Do we seeRama alive now? Many people have ruled over this land, butcould any one of them take away even a small portion of theland? The only thing which you can take and which you shouldtake is the permanent grace of the Lord. A good name is allthat you should aspire for during your life.Although Rama gave up his mortal body, yet if we talkabout Rama, so many years later in this yuga, obviously thegood that Rama had done is responsible for this.We should earn a good name and we should do good.We should lead a good life. We should do good to others. Thisis the ideal which we have to hand over to the rest of the world.9. Sorrow Is Not Natural To Man:Happiness Is His NatureEvery human being is born with karma, he grows inkarma and gets liberation from karma. In fact, toeveryone work is God, and work is the cause of hissorrow and of his pleasure. In this world all sorrowsand pleasures are caused by man’s work alone.Divya Atma Swarupas:There are some qualities which are always ac-companying the jiva. His sorrows, his birth, his work, hishatred, his likes and dislikes, his lack of discriminating powerand his ignorance are qualities which are alwaysaccompanying the jiva. Ignorance gets mixed with lack ofdiscriminating power. Lack of discriminating power gives riseto attachment. Attach-ment gives rise to anger. Anger givesrise to hatred. Hatred gives rise to birth and sorrow. All thesequalities are related to each other in an inseparable manner.For sorrow, birth is responsible and for birth, one’s ownkarma is responsible. However, we may ask if sorrow isnatural to man or is it coming halfway through one’s life?Truly, if sorrow is natural to man’s life, he cannot get rid ofsorrow all through his life. There is no basis for us to think thatsorrow is a natural quality for a human being. If that is so, itcould not be got rid of by any method.Once we destroy the natural quality, then the verysubstance will also be destroyed. No man will make an attemptto destroy his own true form. For jaggery, sweetness is the94  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977natural quality and when the natural quality of sweetnessdisappears, will not the jaggery also disappear? When thejaggery and this natural quality both disappear, then jaggeryitself will not exist.The capacity to burn and the capacity to shine arenaturally qualities for fire; and when the capacity to burn andthe capacity to shine are destroyed or removed, fire also willnot exist. When both the fire and its natural qualities areremoved, then fire will disappear and will turn into coal. Theform and the natural quality are inseparably connected witheach other. By this analysis, we come to the conclusion thatsorrow is not the natural quality of man. This is somethingwhich has come accidentally from outside.There is a very good example for this. When man ishappy and getting on well, nobody will go and ask him why heis happy; but when man is steeped in sorrow, others will goand ask him why he is in sorrow. Here we see that sorrow issomething which is not natural. Happiness and bliss are naturalto us. Truly, while being the embodiments of Atma and whilebeing naturally wedded to bliss and happiness, yet because ofour connection with the external world, we sometimes sufferfrom sorrow. All sorrow is something like a passing cloud.If a mother puts the child in a cradle and if the child isplaying and is happy, then the mother does not worry at all.She will go and do her work. If after a few minutes, the motherhears the cry of the child, she will come running in confusionand in haste and will look into the cradle to discover whetherthere was an insect or a mosquito or something which causedpain to the child. Here, when the child is happy, the mothertakes it in a casual and natural manner. But if the child iscrying, she immediately thinks that there is something unusualand starts searching. Dasaratha is one who recognised thatSummer Showers in Brindavan 197795happiness and bliss are natural qualities. It is becauseDasaratha recognised that happiness is a natural quality ofhuman beings, in his own home, the four Vedas in the form ofRama, Laksh-mana, Bharatha and Satrughna were playinghappily. They are the embodiments of the Vedas. Sri Rama-chandra represents Yajur Veda which says that dharma is themost important thing and the practice of dharma is necessaryfor us during our life. Laksh-mana accepted Rama’s order asfinal and was repeat-ing his manthra in that manner; and thusLakshmana represents the Rig Veda. Bharatha was always inthe belief that singing the name of Lord Rama will givesalvation and he thus represents Sama Veda. Satrughnafollowed the advice of three brothers Rama, Lakshmana, andBharatha and attempted to destroy all the enemies. Satrughnacan, therefore, be com-pared to the Atharva Veda. Here Rama,Lakshmana, Bharatha and Satrughna respectively represent theYajur Veda, Rig Veda, Sama Veda and Atharva Veda. Theywere born as children of Dasaratha. Truly, the brilliantsunshine in the form of Rama, because it fell on the moon, themind and the city of Ayodhya; people were enjoying thecoolness of the moon and the brilliance of the sunshine comingfrom Rama. Citizens of Ayodhya were lucky that they wereliving in this scared atmosphere, playing, singing, and enjoyingthe sacredness.For all work, there will be consequences and a result.There will be an echo and a reflection for all that we do. Forthis, a good example was being demonstrated by Dasaratha. Onone occasion when he was young, he went hunting in theforest. While he was waiting at a spot during the night, heheard some sounds and being an expert hunter, he could locatethe object by the direction of the sound. He shot an arrow inthe direction of the sound, and soon he found that the arrowwhich he shot had killed the son of a rishi. He felt very sorry,96  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977and he took the dead body to the father of the boy andrequested that he be excused. When the rishi realised that hisson was dead, he was steeped in sorrow and was weeping withthe dead body by his side. In this agony, he cursed Dasarathaand said that for this sin, he would also suffer in a similarmanner and die when his son is not near him. Dasaratharecognised that whatever one does, the consequences will beinevitable and unavoidable. Dasaratha purified himself bytelling himself that he must suffer the consequences of what hehad done. Dasaratha was a rishi amongst the kings. He realisedthat sorrow is something which comes and goes and he set anexample to the world by his own life.Every individual character in the story of theRamayana has been projecting an important ideal. Not onlythis, when Dasaratha realised that he was growing old, and thathis strength and vitality were diminishing, then he showed tothe world that he should no longer undertake the task of beinga ruler.One night during his sleep, he felt thirsty and he tookout water from the jug and tried to put it in a tumbler andwanted to drink it; but he found that when he was pouringwater from the jug into the tumbler, his hands were shaking.He did not sleep that night at all. As soon as the day dawned,he sent for the Gurus Vasishta and Vamadeva. He told theGurus that the vitality and the strength of his organs hasdiminished, and therefore, he cannot rule over the country. Herequested them to make all preparations to install Rama on thethrone. Here he established the truth that an individual who hasno control over his own organs had no right to rule over thecountry. In the matter of ruling over the country, Dasaratharealised the proper code of conduct for the king, and the propercode of conduct for the people. Whoever the individual maySummer Showers in Brindavan 197797be, however great he may be, he must recognise the conditionsaround him and adjust himself to the surroundings. But incertain instances in Ramayana, especially when Rama wasgoing to the forest, it has been said that Dasaratha could notbear the sorrow, and that he fell down in a swoon. Here alsoDasaratha was proclaiming that such sorrows are incidental,and they come because of our relationship and attachment tothe human body. For an individual, there are no children beforethey were born. In those conditions, how does one understandeither the sorrow or the pain caused by one’s own son? It isonly because of the bodily relationship that the father willexperience sorrow. It is obvious here that any sorrow or paincaused by a son is something which comes halfway duringone’s life and is not natural to him.Before one is married, one does not know anythingabout the attitudes of one’s own wife. Prior to the marriage,whatever difficulty the girl may come across, the husband isnot going to worry about it. But once the marriage isperformed, even if the wife has a small pain or difficulty, thehusband also suffers great sorrow. The truth becomes clearfrom this example that these sorrows and difficulties comehalfway in our life, and that they are not natural to us. BecauseDasaratha understood this truth, he could bless Rama when hewas about to go to the forest. He could advise Rama not tohave any difficulties in the forest, and that he should comeback quickly and happily. This is the blessing which he gavebecause he knew the situation. Rama was adhering to truth atall times and because of these qualities he will have noproblems in the forest.Rama was an ideal son. It is often believed that if onehas a son, then there will be no difficulty for the father inattaining salvation. This is not always correct. Did not the98  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Kaurava king have many sons? What is the benefit which hegot out of all his sons? Suka did not have children at all, did henot get salvation? Dhritharashtra, who had one hundred sons,did not have even one son left to do the last rites for him, whileSuka attained salvation without any children. It does not followthat either good or bad will come out of the children. It is onlywhen the sons take to the right path that good will come to theparents. The son who had enjoyed the grace and kindness ofhis father should repay this with gratitude by doing such goodthings in return. For the sacred birth of a human being, theparents are the main cause. If by securing such sacred humanbirth, man does not show gratitude in return to his parents, thenit is a useless life.To establish the truth of such statements to the world, itwas Dasaratha who told Rama in Ramayana, “Go to the forestfor the sake of adhering to truth.” Dasaratha had no kind ofattachment, and he had the ability to discriminate between theright and wrong. He was not an ignorant person. Dasaratharecognised that all attachments are only relationships betweenone body and another and such is a purely worldly attachment.On one occasion when the Sage Durvasa visited Vasishta,Dasaratha was asking him for the chronology of his owndynasty. Dasaratha put the question to Durvasa with a view tofinding out whether his family will uphold truth and dharma.Even at that time, Durvasa told Dasaratha that the sons he wasgoing to have will be the embodiments of dharma, and thatthey will protect Truth and will have several good qualities.From that day, he was thinking that even if he has only oneson, that will satisfy him provided that son will bring himreputation and glory. It is in that context that it has been saidthat it is better to be a swan and live for a short time rather thanbe a crow and live for a long time. What is the use of havingbarrels of donkey’s milk? To have a spoonful of good cow’sSummer Showers in Brindavan 197799milk is better. So, even if it is one individual, if that oneindividual can spend all his time in serving the communityaround him, it is enough.When the strength of your body, the strength of yourmind, and the strength of your intelligence are good andpowerful, if you cannot use your life for helping others, what isthe use of your life? It will be a waste. You cannot lead yourlife like the oil drop on the surface of water, without touchingthe water. Your birth, your life, your mode of conduct are allconnected intimately with the community around you. If thatcommunity around you is not remembered by you and if all thetime you think of your selfish interest, you are not going to beany good at all to anyone.Truly, having been born in the sacred country ofBharath, having experienced the traditions and culture ofBharath, if you cannot imbibe the good in that culture, then lifeitself is a waste. You may listen to many discourses, you mayyourself give several discourses; but if all that you hear and allthat you say is not put into practice in your life, life itself willbecome unreal and artificial. If you simply hear about deliciousfood and delicious plates, is your hunger going to be relieved?Will the poverty of a poor man be removed if you tell himstories about money? If the capacity of several medicines istold to you, is your disease going to be cured? Is your povertygoing to be removed if you are told about all the wealth in abank? Sitting in darkness, if you simply talk about thebrilliance of a thousand candles, is the darkness going to be re-moved? So also in our heart, the darkness of ignorance andjealousy must be removed not by talking but by practice ofgood conduct. After removing this, even if you have a tinylittle bulb, it will be useful.100  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Young people, instead of telling a hundred things andtalking about a hundred things, you should be prepared to do atleast one thing and demonstrate it to others as an ideal. Truly,you should recognise the truth that sorrow, pains and lossescome halfway in your life. They are not born with you. Suchthings which come halfway will also go away halfway, andthey are not going to stick to us permanently. When we canrecognise this truth very well, all the sorrows and pains are notgoing to trouble us at all.Divya Atma Swarupas:You have been listening to several stories fromRamayana. From amongst the ideals that we have found inRama, Lakshmana, Bharatha, Satrughna and Dasaratha, at leastone or two must be picked up by you and put into practice inyour life. If you cannot do that, you will have wasted yourtime. Not only would you have wasted your time but youwould have made your life purposeless and would have missedmaking good use of the opportunity that has come your way.Do not always seek authority. What you should try and do isservice. Use your body, mind and intelligence in the path ofdoing service to others. You should recognise that this humanbody is given to you for the sake of helping others. We havebeen hearing day after day, the great ideals that have beentaught by great religious teachers. If after listening to so manygood things, there is no change or transformation in you, thenall your life becomes a waste. All the religions teach only onecommon destination, and one good sacred path. All thereligions together have taught us only good. If the minds ofmen are good, which religion is bad? The blemish and fault arein our minds and not in any religion. Rama ruled His kingdomin peace recognising that the people’s happiness is His hap-piness and recognising that the people’s prosperity is theprimary concern of the king.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977101Rama never thought that He was the king and thatpeople are under the king. He never had any jealousy or ego inHis mind. He regarded Himself as a driver who had to lead thepeople. Rama, by His own conduct, would make the people goalong the right path and demonstrate to them the ideal path. Allthat He had said or done was only for giving happiness to thepeople. For setting an example to the people and for protectingthe truth, Rama sent His own wife to the forest. If it was forsticking to truth and dharma, to Rama it did not matter whetherthe person involved was the wife He married or the son whowas born to Him.Young people, I am hoping that you will re-establishRama Rajya in this sacred country of ours. You mustsynchronise your thought, word and deed. You will bebetraying your own country, if you follow a path where yourthought is one and you utter words which are quite differentand your action is different from both of them. If you betrayyour country, your whole life will become useless. If youcannot proclaim with pride that this is your mother country,that this is your mother tongue and do your duties to them,what is the use of living? It is as good as being dead.10. Be Good, Do Good, See Good:This Is The Way To GodWithout giving up the Guna of Thamas, one cannever have a glimpse of the concept of Divinity.Without giving up the Guna of Rajas, one cannotbecome a true devotee. By accepting the Sathwik Gunaalone, can one follow the path of devotion. This is thesimple truth of the world.Prema Swarupas:Work alone can bring out the true strength in man andshow others what he is capable of. As a mirror can be used toshow us the nature of our own face, so also the kind of workthat a man does, will show up his qualities. Work will showwhether a man has thamasik or rajasik or sathwik qualities inhim. The work which man does is like a barometer. Thisbarometer of work has the capacity to assess man’s conditionand the state of his mind. In this context, we can accept thatthere is no test of human qualities more stringent than ofexamining the work which man does.From time immemorial, our ancestors have been takingto the path of work, the karma marga. By following this pathof work, they have been able to understand and realise theexistence of the Divine. Some people appear to be verysathwik, but when they undertake work, we may see thatbehind the cloak of apparent sathwik quality is present anamount of harshness. Some people in their words appear to bevery harsh and cruel. But when they undertake to do somework, they become soft and kind. Here the truth becomes clearSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977103that the true human nature of man comes out in his active workand is not to be judged by his external appearance or by wordsalone.Divya Atma Swarupas:The kind of work which wise men do may appear to bethe same as that done by an ordinary person. Although inappearance they may be the same, yet the result will bedifferent in the two cases. The work done by an unwise man isalways accompanied by a feeling on his part that he is doingwork for his benefit and he is wanting to get for himself thebenefit of that work. That kind of work is mixed up with ego,and a feeling of selfish benefit will lead to trouble and sorrow.The kind of work which a wise man does always carries afeeling which makes him identical with the divine aspect andthat the work that he is doing is being done in the name and onbehalf of God. He thinks that God is really doing the work, andthat he is only an instrument. This will always give a good re-sult and satisfaction to all.Some people demonstrate an amount of synthesisbetween their thoughts and the work that they do. Thisrepresents the true type of good human nature. The unity andthe synthesis between thought, word and deed is important.Man’s ideas, talk and action must become one. This is the truebasis of real human nature.Students:The work that you do in the spiritual sphere and thework that you do in the material sphere might appear to be thesame, but in reality when we look at it in some depth, we findthat they take two different paths. There is one small examplefor this: For a diabetic patient there appears a boil on his hand104  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977and this boil becomes worse and ultimately it leads to gan-grene. In such a case, the doctor will advise that the handshould be amputated. If his hand is not amputated, thegangrene will spread to the rest of the body and will causegreat harm. For the sake of safety of the total body, the patientshould be prepared to get his hand amputated at that point. Inanother situation, when one is wearing beautiful goldenbangles on one’s hand, a thief may come and try to take awaythe golden bangles. If he cannot get them off the hand, he willwant to cut the hand at a point and take away the bangles fromthe hand. Here we see that the doctor has used the knife to cuta hand and the thief has also done the same thing. Both of themapparently seem to have done the same thing, but what thedoctor has done is helpful and what the thief has done isharmful. There is another example for this. Owing to somewickedness, a person will go and set fire to the house in whichothers are living, and the house will burn down. The same kindof destruction by fire was also done by Hanuman in Lanka. Hedestroyed all the houses and mansions in Lanka by setting fireto them. Here the work that was done by Hanuman and thework done by a wicked individual appear to be the same, butwhat Hanuman had done has caused benefit and what thewicked man had done has caused harm. Although these tasksappear to be the same when we look at them superficially, yetbecause of the mental attitude that we have before these wordsare uttered and the action taken, the results may be different.Man’s mind alone is responsible both for his bondageand for his liberation. The final result of the work will dependon the attitude with which the work is done. Hanuman is onewho had synthesized his thoughts, his words and deed; and hecould become an important character. He was proficient in allthe different types of grammar. He was a scholar proficient inthe four Vedas and six Sastras. The scholarship of HanumanSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977105made him look at everything with equanimity and equal-mindedness. Sugriva and Hanuman saw that Rama andLakshmana were coming in their direction while searching forSita. However, Sugriva felt that Rama and Lakshmana weremessengers of Vali coming to spy on him, and do him harm.On the contrary, Hanuman, because of his very great goodqual-ity and peace of mind, told Sugriva not to be agitated, andthat he would go and find out who those people were andreport back. He advised that whatever we wish to do, weshould never be in haste. Haste is not the right natural qualityof one’s own mind. Haste always leads to waste, waste alwayscauses worry and therefore, one should not be in a hurry.Hanuman was well acquainted with these maxims and so hedid not make haste. He said he would go and find out andcome back. When Hanuman saw Rama and Lakshmana, hemet them with great humility, and with deliberate and carefullychosen words, he asked them who they were, why they came tothe forest and what their purpose was. He did all that with asteady mind and without any haste. Because Rama gave anappropriate reply to Hanuman’s query, Hanuman was verypleased and he offered to carry Rama on his shoulders toSugriva. As soon as Rama and Lakshmana sat on the shouldersof Hanuman, he felt that all his sins had disappeared. Becauseof the darshan of the Lord, he felt that all his past sins hadbeen rooted out. He became very happy the moment the divinepersonality of Rama touched his body. At once several goodideas started sprouting up in Hanuman’s mind. Hanuman wasthinking within himself that Sugriva would have found goodfriends when he meets Rama and Lakshmana. He thought thatSugriva’s desire will also be fulfilled, and he will bevictorious. ‘Yad bhavam tat bhavathi.’ One’s actions willreflect the kind of ideas which one has in one’s mind. Becauseall these good ideas were in the mind of Hanuman, the goodideas in the mind of God also synchronized with them, and the106  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977two were in unison. Immediately, Rama, who was on theshoulders of Hanuman, signalled to Lakshmana and assuredhim that because they had acquired such a good friend, theirefforts will also be very successful.Amongst messengers, there are three kinds ofmessengers. The first kind are those who take the orders of theLord, will not obey Him, but will take such actions as will gocontrary to the wishes of the Lord. The second kind are thosewho will take literally what the Lord has said and will followthem without either adding something or taking awaysomething. The results of such work will be accepted and willbe carried back to the Lord. The third kind are those who willtake the wishes of the Master and will perform the task in sucha way that the wishes will be completely and at all costsfulfilled. He will become victorious and take back to theMaster the message of victory. Rama and Lakshmana told eachother that Hanuman is the third kind of friend who will see thatthe Master’s orders are taken to a stage which will ensurevictory. Truly, Hanuman at all times, would only think ofRama and in the thought of Rama, he would not allowanything else to enter his mind. Because Hanuman knew verywell the power and strength of Rama, he was always followingthe footsteps of Rama. From the moment Rama andLakshmana sat on the shoulders of Hanuman, he began to feelthat some kind of sacred and divine strength has entered hisheart and he was feeling happy. Here he has established thefeeling that along with the body, the mind also becomesequally strong and powerful. Where there is a combination of astrong body and a strong mind, there is divinity and divinestrength. Let us take an example.Here is a wire and on this wire there is a plastic or arubber covering. Inside the outer cover there is a copper wire.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977107There is a current flowing inside it. If we simply bring anotherwire and join that wire to this, then the current will not flow. Itwill flow only when we cut the outer cover of plastic in boththe wires and join the copper. The cover of our body is like theplastic cover on the wire. Our mind is like the copper. So alongwith the body, when the mind also joins, then alone there is thedivine strength which can flow into us. It is only when thesacredness of the body and the sacredness of the mind cometogether, can there be divine strength generated. With the helpof the body, we should undertake to do sacred tasks. With thehelp of the mind, we should develop divine thought. This bodyis given to us and is intended for helping others. With the helpof the body, we should be able to do good service and help thecommunity. Whatever work we undertake, it should be donewith a feeling that it is being done for the pleasure of the Lord.Hanuman was one who had such sacred ideas, and he alwaysdedicated his work to the Lord and performed the task withsuch a feeling. After Hanuman had the divine vision of Rama,he at once undertook the sacred task of searching for Sita. Withthe help of the name of Rama and placing faith and belief inRama and in the divine strength and power of Rama, he couldjump across miles and miles of the ocean. These extraordinaryachievements on the part of Hanuman caused great surprise toothers like Jambavan and Sugriva.Here the young people should particularly understandthe implicit manner in which Hanuman obeyed Rama’s orders.Hanuman’s devotion and Hanuman’s faith have helped himgreatly to recognise the desire on the part of the master. Alongwith devotion and faith, Hanuman had great confidence in hisown self. If one has no self-confidence, one will not be able toachieve much although he has faith and devotion. One mayhave confidence in one’s own self; but if he has no devotionand faith, that too will not help him. Devotion and self-108  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977confidence are like the negative and positive. It is thecombination of these two that will enable us to fulfil our sacredthought. Here, because Hanuman had the divine notion in hisheart and the self-confidence, he could have the vision ofRama, the Lord, everywhere he went. When any order wasgiven to Hanuman, he never questioned whether he has thestrength or the capacity to fulfil the task. He had the firm faiththat the very orders of Rama will give him the necessarystrength to fulfil those orders.The first thing we should do in this context is topromote and strengthen the aspect of self-confidence. Thisconfidence in one’s own self is like the foundation at thebottom. On the foundation of that confidence, we should buildthe wall of self-satisfaction, we should add the roof of self-sacrifice. In that mansion, we should attain self-realisation.Hanuman showed the strength and necessity of self-confidencein a clear manner to the world. But today, in the context of hu-man nature, men are conducting themselves in a manner bywhich we think that they have no understanding at all of theneed for self-confidence The individual human beings havebecome so weak that they are not able to understand their ownnature, their own self, and therefore, they try to find the natureof others and find fault in others. Because such unsacred quali-ties have become many in number, man is suffering and hedoes not understand his own human nature and the quality ofhuman life is degrading.After finding Sita in Lanka and after returning to Ramaand Lakshmana and giving them the happy news, Hanuman,Jambavan, Rama and Lakshmana were resting on one side ofthe ocean. Thousands of other monkeys also joined them intheir march to Lanka. That night was a full moon night. Thecool moon and the light that the moon was giving wereSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977109showing everyone in a clear cool manner. As Rama wassomewhat tired after walking, he was resting with his head onthe lap of Lakshmana. That night no one had sleep or restbecause next morning they all had to go to Lanka, and they allhad to participate in fighting with Ravana, and so Rama andLakshmana were giving some encouraging words to all theothers. Rama who was taking rest on the lap of Lakshmanacould not keep quiet. He asked Lakshmana and Sugriva whatthey thought about the dark spot in the moon when it shines.Each one started giving his own reply. Someone said becausethe moon had separated from the earth, dust that is left on themoon is showing this blue colour. Someone else said that it isthe con-glomeration of the moon and dust on the moon. Eachone began to give his own interpretation. All the warriors inthe army, Angada, Nala and Neela, each began to give ananswer of his own. Rama was in a very relaxed and pleasantmood, and therefore, all those sitting around him began to givereplies in a very pleasant manner. Hanuman did not utter evena single word. In order to demonstrate to all others, who werearound them, the attitude and the manner of behaviour on thepart of Hanuman, Rama at the very end asked Hanuman aboutthe dark spot on the moon. Hanuman had tears in his eyes andin the heart of Hanuman, there was nothing else except Rama’sname and Rama’s form. He replied that because Rama wasputting his head on the lap of Lakshmana, the reflection of hisface in the moon’s surface was appear-ing like a dark spot onthe moon. In this manner Hanuman’s thoughts and Hanuman’swords were such that whatever he spoke about, whatever hehad seen or whatever he had thought about was only Rama andthe name of Rama. On his body, every hair was filled with thename of Rama.Hanuman was one who was, at all times, immersed inthe spiritual and the sacred name of Rama. To think that110  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Hanuman belonged to the tribe of monkeys and that Hanumanhad a very wavering mind is very wrong. Hanuman was theembodiment of the aspect of Easwara. If such divinity comestogether with another aspect of divinity, there is no doubt ofredoubled strength. In every human being, divinity is present inthe form of Atma. In order that we may understand the sacredAtma that is present in our body, we should regard our body assimply a container for the Atma. We must try to suppress and control the desires thatsurge forth from within the body. There is a small example forthis: Sometimes we go for a picnic in the garden. We createvarious comforts for ourselves, we cook our own food, we sitthere and we eat our food and relax with pleasure. In the forest,if we want to cook our food what is it that we do? In moderntimes, we take a stove, a cooker and such implements with us.In ancient times, such implements were not available. Theyused to take only some vessels and some materials necessaryfor making the food. When we want to cook the food, weprepare a hearth with three stones. On the three stones, we putthe pot. We pour water in the pot. In that water, we mix rice.Below the vessel which is resting on these three stones, we putfire. We put the fire so that the water inside the vessel may boiland the rice gets cooked. The fire, which we have put betweenthe three stones, is not directly touching the rice; but it touchesthe vessel and through the vessel it touches the water andthrough the water it goes to the rice and the rice is cooked.Here we should recognise that our life is an example in theAdhyatmic path. Life is like a forest. In this forest of life, thethree stones are the gunas of Sathwa, Rajas and Thamas. Thesethree gunas are like the three stones. In the forest of life, weput the vessel of our body on these three stones. Inside thevessel of our body, the desires that we have are like the rice.This rice is filled with prema which can be compared withSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977111water, and then we use the fire of wisdom between the threestones. That fire of wisdom will cook the rice by using thewater of prema and will drive away these desires. When thisrice is well cooked, there is no rebirth. When the desire iscompletely removed, there is no chance of getting bad desires;but one may ask the question here, is it possible to completelyremove all the desires? It is impossible. But we must make anattempt to turn this desire towards the right direction.Whatever work we may do, we must do that work with theaspect of prema and love. It is only then that we will be able toobtain sacred bliss.The secret of happiness is not in doing what one likesbut in liking what one has to do. Whatever work you have todo, you should do it with pleasure and liking. Taking this kindof prema as the basis, Hanuman was the one who always tookupon himself, with complete obedience, the orders of hismaster. He never gave room in his own mind for any doubts orany hesitation regarding the orders of Ramachandra.Today man’s life has become a bundle of doubts andhesitations. Truly, man sees things with his own eyes, but he isnot able to believe his own eyes. Some-times he believes hisears but on several occasions he is also not able to believe hisears. A weak individual who cannot believe in his own earsand eyes, how can he believe and have faith in anyone else?Young people:You are the future citizens of this country, you shouldtry and see and enjoy with your own eyes and enjoy your ownexperience. Do not make an attempt to use Western eyes,Western ears and Western thinking. Those who are citizens ofBharath should accept and recognise the conditions in ourcountry, and the needs of our country and follow a path which112  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977is consistent with our country’s ideals. The kind of culture weimbibe and the kind of path which we accept must beappropriate to our country. What is appropriate in othercountries will be suitable for those countries and not for us.Because the countries are different, the times are different andthe environment is different, it is not possible for us to lay onecommon conduct of life for all people. There is a smallexample for this:This evening, the time is 6:30 at this place and in thiscountry. You will make an attempt to go to a club; and becauseone of your friends is living in America, you want to talk tohim; and you telephone to him at 6:30 p.m. by your time; butthere is no response of any kind from him because at that timehe is sleeping in his bedroom. At this point of time, when it isearly morning in another country, it is evening in this country.That is why the appropriate conduct will depend on the contextof the country and on the time that prevails.Divya Atma Swarupas:We should recognise the sacredness of our country,Bharath; and accepting the sacred culture of this country andremembering the sacred traditions, students must be preparedto put into practice the ideal example offered by our sacredtraditions. Truth is our life, Truth is God for us, Truth iseverything for us. But if, for the sake of some selfish reason,we undertake untruth, and behave in an unjust and unkindmanner, will one’s life have any ideal to show to others?Students:The kind of ideals that are contained in the story ofRamayana are very necessary for every individual, for everycountry and for every group of people. Either for one’s sorrowSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977113or for one’s degradation, the kind of work which we do, thekarma that we indulge in is responsible. This is why we say,“Be Good, Do Good, See Good.” This is the way to God. Dogood work, see good things, live in a good manner and die as agood man.11. No One Can Separate A RealDevotee From His LordChildren who have no good qualities, educationwhich has no purpose, a community which has nomorality in it are all perfectly useless. In the samemanner life in which there is no peace of mind and anight when there is no moonshine are equally useless.Listen to this truth, Oh! courageous sons of Bharath.Students:For all people in this world, there is a common thoughtfreely expressing itself in their minds. They feel that oneshould not commit sin, one should not speak untruth and thatone should not harm others. But mere feeling and not puttinginto practice has become a feature characteristic of them.Knowing that to speak untruth is going to cause harm, yetpeople speak untruth. What is the meaning of this? Even afterrecognising that causing harm and hurt to others is going toreflect back on him some day or other, people cause harm andhurt to others. What is the inner motivation which makes onedo these bad things even after knowing that they are bad? Notonly this, man desires to get good fruit by doing punya and yetin actual practice, he does only papa. Man does not want to getthe result of committing a sin, yet he undertakes to commit asin. What is it that is inside him which promotes such action?In general, there are three kinds of qualities namely Sathwa,Rajas and Thamas. Amongst these qualities, Rajas and Thamasare difficult and very harmful. The quality of Rajas has a sonwho has demoniac features in him. His name is Kama or lust.This son, who goes by the name of Kama or lust, enters theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977115minds and hearts of several people and makes them do allkinds of bad things. He has a quality by which he can destroymany people by going near them. If this quality of Kamacomes close to a person, even his good qualities will beremoved and subdued. Ravana was a great sage. He was adevoted person. Towards the end, because of the bad quality ofKama or lust, he had done things which destroyed his entiredynasty and all his friends. Not only this, the third quality,namely Thamas has also got a son. He is a very cruel person.He is one whom we can call Anger. The moment Kama getshold of the mind of man, this other son Anger, will also gethold of him and will break the pot of wisdom which iscontained in a human being. These qualities, lust and anger, donot promote good human nature. On the other hand, theydestroy human nature and they take man to the very depths ofdestruction and barbarity.The quality of lust has no satisfaction under anycircumstances. This quality of lust has often been com-paredwith fire. Fire has also got another name called Anala. Analameans something which has no sufficiency at any time andwhich is insatiable. The mean-ing of this is, however much youmay experience and enjoy, there is no satisfaction. You willalways want more and more. As you put more and more fuelinto the fire, the fire goes on increasing. The fire can never beextinguished by adding fuel. In the same manner, by yourtrying to satisfy your desires, the desires will go on increasing.They will never decrease by satisfaction and appeasement.Without submitting himself to this kind of lust, Hanumanearned the grace of Rama.In the search for Sita, he entered Lanka, and he startedsearching for her in several mansions. If he wants to find Sita,he should look for a woman, and he has to search for her116  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977amongst women, and not amongst men. Not only that,Ramachandra gave some description which could be used byHanuman for the purpose of identifying Sita. He was lookingfor those features amongst several women. He was looking atthe eyes and ears of women who were in the king’s apartmentswith a view to see if the features given to him by Ramachandracould be found in the eyes and ears of those women. But aftersome time he found some disgust in his own mind. He came tothe banks of the ocean. When he came to the ocean, he toldhimself how much sin he should have committed by having tolook at the faces of all those women. Having looked at thefaces of so many women, he was wondering how he could goback to Ramachandra. He preferred to commit suicide bydrowning himself in the ocean rather than go back toRamachandra.For some time he thought of the sacred name of Ramaand repeated the name of Rama and purified his own mind.Recognising that Rama was present as the self, as Atma, ineverybody, if he committed suicide, it will be committingsuicide of his own self, of Rama as the Atma. He satisfiedhimself by thinking that he was only obeying the orders ofRama when he entered Lanka. He had the courage to makesuch a decision that all things done by him, only to obey theorders of Rama, will never hurt him. Then he entered AshokaVana. He was such a clear-headed person that he was quitesure that if he obeyed Rama’s orders, he will not havecommitted any sin.It is necessary for the young people of today torecognise and understand the path taken by Hanuman so thatno faults could be pointed out at the work that they do. Whenhe looked at a woman, the feeling in him was of her being hismother. He asked himself the question, could this lady be mySummer Showers in Brindavan 1977117mother Sita? That was how he was looking at any women. It isthis sacred idea in the mind of Hanuman that kept him awayfrom all sins.Not only this, in the story relating to Hanuman there areseveral incidents which are ideal examples for us. Ramawanted to proclaim Hanuman as an ideal person to the world.At the time of the coronation of Rama, he was giving presentsto various people. Although he had given presents to everyone,he did not give any present to Hanuman. This caused sometrouble in the mind of Sita. Sita was directly involved in thelife they led in the forest, and she saw how Hanuman wasalways fulfilling Rama’s orders. So she was wondering whyRama had not given any present to Hanuman, and she wassorry for this. She could not bear this injustice to Hanuman.She quietly and slowly told this to Rama; and Rama said that ifshe felt so strongly, she could give Hanuman any presentwhich she liked. She had a very valuable necklace of pearlsaround her neck. She removed it and gave it to Hanuman.Hanuman held this very valuable pearl necklace in hishand, began to remove all the pearls, one by one, from thenecklace and break them. He put each pearl near his ears andbegan throwing it away. In this way, he was throwing away allthe pearls of the necklace. Looking at this sight, Rama andLakshmana were very surprised. Sita became somewhat angry,but she knew very well the situation. She called Hanuman witha view to proclaiming to the world Hanuman’s nature, and sheasked Hanuman why he was throwing away the pearls and thusbehaving truly like a monkey?Hanuman told Sita that he was examining if bybreaking the pearl, he could listen to the name of Rama out ofeach pearl. He said that if he did not hear the name of Rama,the pearl was of no value to him and so he was throwing such118  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977pearls away. Hanuman said, even if it be a pearl, if there is nosound of Rama in it, the pearl is no better than a stone for him.Sita asked if he could hear the name of Rama even in lifelessmatter. Hanuman said that he did not want anything to remainon him if it did not produce the sound of Rama. Sita asked, inreturn, if he meant that his entire body is filled with the nameof Rama. Hanuman then plucked out one single hair from hisbody and put that hair at the ear of Rama and Sita. Sita foundthat even that little bit of hair was uttering the name of Rama.Here we see that Hanuman’s entire body was filled with thename of Rama and so where was the room for kama on thebody of Hanuman? It is an established truth that where there isRama, there cannot be kama, where there is kama, there is noplace for Rama.Hanuman established and proclaimed that to look atother women, and to talk to other women was a great sin.When Hanuman was moving about in the Ashoka forest, all therakshasas caught hold of Hanuman, tied him up and took himto Ravana. Ravana then asked a series of questions. However,Hanuman did not answer even one of them. The moment helooked at Ravana, Hanuman became very angry. Even there,under those circumstances, Hanuman undertook to tell Ravanawhat good qualities are and how one should strive to havegood qualities. He addressed Ravana and he asked him torealise at least then that what he had done was wrong. He toldRavana that in bringing Sita, he brought the mother of creationherself into Lanka and kept her imprisoned in Lanka. Hethreatened to destroy the whole of Lanka and teach Ravana alesson.Women can be compared with mothers of creation. Wecall our country motherland, we do not call it fatherland. HereHanuman is teaching young people how they should treatwomen as mother. This kind of attitude is very essential forSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977119young people today. It is only when we promote such qualitiesamongst us that we will be able to resuscitate the gloriousculture of Bharath. If we have no good quality, our entire lifebecomes useless. For the good of the world, people with goodqualities are very necessary. As one of the speakers told youthis morning, you may acquire several degrees, you mayacquire first ranks and first classes, but what is the use of allthese degrees and these ranks? Whatever education you mayhave, if you do not have the good qualities and the moralityand the ethical attitude, all your education will become quiteuseless. Truth and morality are the things which make man’sheart sacred.In the world today, there are several kinds of powerswhich we see. All power that we generally come across is theworldly power, material power and the power connected withpolitics. But of all types of powers, the most powerful one isthe political strength, which is the strength to be acquired byruling a country. In that context, we are apt to think thatdharmic strength or spiritual strength is not good enough.Students, for us to think that political power, power based uponpolitics is even stronger than the adhyatmic strength or thedharmic strength is not correct. We should have the attitudethat all these worldly types of powers are derived from divinestrength. The political powers can cause changes only on one’sbody. But the spiritual and the dharmic powers can transformand will have an effect on one’s mind. Without transformationof mind, any change in the body is not sufficient. The changeof mind today is very necessary. The political power is like thebush coat which you wear on yourself. You may wear the bushcoat today, and you may take it off tomorrow.On one day when you wear a particular bush coat, youmay feel that it appears very nice on you. The next day when120  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977you remove it, you may feel that it is ugly. Such bush coats arenot permanent. But because the effect of dharmic power andspiritual power is on the mind, whatever transformation andeffect it has produced is going to remain permanent.Divya Atma Swarupas:People like Lal, Bal and Pal had taken part in politics inmany ways, and they served the country through politics. Buthow long will their reputation or the value of their work remainin this country? Of these people, because Balgangadhar Tilak,whom we refer to as Bal, had translated Bhagavad Gita, andhad written commentaries on scriptures, his name hasremained, to some extent, in this country. However, Buddhaand Ramakrishna Paramahamsa are the names which haveremained permanently because they followed the spiritual path.Persons like Guru Nanak and Guru Gobind have helped thecountry to become prosperous and also gave spiritual strengthto the country. This is the reason why they are so muchrespected. Jesus Christ, too, worked for the prosperity of theentire mankind and gave happiness to the people. He sacrificedhis very life and that is the reason why the name of JesusChrist has remained permanently. You must recognise that allour education should not be concentrated only on worldlymatters. It should also contain spiritual and ethical aspects. It isonly when all these three aspects, the worldly aspect, thespiritual aspect and the ethical aspect come together thateducation will acquire some meaning. To make out thateducation is only for acquiring degrees is not correct. Do notbe ambitious to get only these cheap degrees. You should workfor the prosperity of the country. You must have these degreesand yet work with your own hands for the benefit of thepeople. A BA degree is like a begging bowl. Instead of holdingthe begging bowl in your hand, going from office to office,Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977121begging for a job, if you can work with your own hands andhelp yourself as well as others, it will be more useful.The purpose of establishing the present system ofeducation by the foreign rulers of this country was to make usserve those people and to make us follow and imitate theirmethods and their ways of living. The objective of thiseducation, which was given to us by foreigners, was only tofulfil their selfish needs but not for the good of our country.Education should not result in the slavery of one’s own thoughtand mind. Real education, which has significance for ourcountry, is that education which gives you the courage bywhich you go and act wherever there is injustice, unkindnessand untruth. Our education, connected with the culture ofBharath, is one which should enable you to stand on your ownlegs.We should make an attempt that, in education which isappropriate to us, the aspect of kama or lust does not enter ourmind but the aspect of prema or love does enter. With theaspect of prema, we should enter the society in this country;and we should be able to do service to the society with prema.One of the speakers this morning said that since 1000students have assembled here, you should trans-formyourselves into 1000 messengers. Truly, all the students shouldbe able to proclaim the ideals that are being taught here and putthem into practice. You should show others the path of truthand prema. You should promote the aspect of prema inyourself, and that will itself improve the relationships thatshould exist truly between man and man.To propagate such a path of truth, the story ofRamayana will help us very much. On one occasion Kausalya,mother of Rama; Anjani, mother of Hanuman, and the mother122  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977of Rishi Agasthya were all sitting together and were conversingwith each other. Here the mother of Hanuman began to ask ifthe others had recognised the power and strength of her son.She said that her son has been able to cross, in one leap, milesand miles of the ocean. The mother of Rishi Agasthya said thatwhile Hanuman jumped over the ocean, her son had swallowedthe entire ocean in one gulp. Kausalya, mother of Rama, saidthat Hanuman jumped over the ocean in one leap, andAgasthya swallowed the ocean in one gulp, and that both thesethings were done by their constantly uttering the name ofRama. She said that with the help and power of the name ofRama, Agasthya could swallow the whole ocean and Hanumancould jump over the ocean.Hanuman was a very innocent person. He had no deceitin him. Today human beings are covered by considerableamount of deceit. We think that such people are very cleverpeople. One who takes to the path of truth and one who doesnot know how to practise trickery is an innocent person.However, today we regard all such innocent persons, who donot know trickery, as people who are not clever at all and whodo not know how to get on in the world. This is not right. Aninnocent person is really a very strong person.On one day, because it was Rama’s birthday, he inviteda number of people for a feast. On that day, Hanuman was veryclose to Rama. The dinner was over and the conversation waspleasing to everyone and they left for their respective homes ina happy mood. Hanuman was always living with Rama. Hehad no house of his own. On that day, he had the desire to staywith Rama and Rama agreed to this. As the time was gettingon and the night came, Sita was taking a jug of water and wasproceeding to her bedroom. Afterwards Rama also entered theroom. Behind Rama, Hanuman also entered the room. RamaSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977123told Hanuman in a soft language that he can go and rest.Hanuman asked why he should not come into the bedroom?Sita had come. When Sita had come, why not Hanuman? Ramathen pointed out the sindura, the red paint that Sita waswearing on her head, and said that this entitled Sita to comeinto Rama’s bedroom. This implies that Rama is showing thefeature which indicates that Sita is as much as half the body ofRama. Hanuman, realising the situation, went out into the townand looked for shops in which he could get the red paint, andhe emptied all the red paint in the shops and put the red paintover his entire body and went back to Rama and said, “If asmall amount of red paint on Sita’s head could entitle her toenter your bedroom, I have now red paint all over my body,and why can I not enter your bedroom?” Here is to be seen theintense desire to be close to Rama at all times, and it is this thatmade Hanuman innocent.There is another incident which shows Hanuman’sdevotion. Because Hanuman’s devotion and faith were verysacred, whatever work he did, he was always victorious.Because Hanuman was all the twenty-four hours with Rama,he was attending to all the services which were needed forRama. Sita, Bharatha, Lakshmana and Satrughna found thatthere was no service left by which they could serve the Lord.Lakshmana, Bharatha and Satrughna one day went toSita and made a complaint and said that Hanuman was withRama all the twenty-four hours, and that he is not giving themany opportunity for doing service to Rama. They requested herto arrange that whatever services have to be done to Rama, bedistributed equitably amongst them. Then they made a long listof services to be rendered to Rama from the morning till thenext morning. They also prayed to Sita that all these servicesbe approved by Rama. Rama looked at the list and approved all124  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977the services and suggested that they be distributed amongstthemselves. He suggested that they go and tell Hanuman thatnothing is left so far as Hanuman is concerned. When thesebrothers met Hanuman, they told him that the entire list ofservices has been drawn up and that they were distributedamongst themselves. They said that no service was left for himand that he would have nothing to do from the next day.Hanuman thought for a little and thought of the nameof Lord Rama and then he asked Lakshmana that if any otherservice was left over, it may be allotted to him. The threebrothers looked at the list very carefully and came to theconclusion that nothing was left. They agreed that if anythingis left, Hanuman may take the service. Hanuman said, therewas one service, which was left over and he requested that thisbe given to him. When kings or elders or wealthy people yawn,at that time it is customary to make a noise with the fingers infront of the mouth. Hanuman asked that this service be allottedto him. From that time, Hanuman insisted that wherever Ramawent, whether it is in his bedroom or in the bathroom,Hanuman must be present. Thus he insisted, because one doesnot know when Rama will yawn. When Rama yawns, heshould be present there. Thus, it so turned out that the littleservice which was left to Hanuman necessitated his continuouspresence and made Hanuman stay close to Rama always.What we should see here is that in spite of all theattempts made by Lakshmana, Bharatha and Satrughna not toleave any service for Hanuman, it is the sacredness ofHanuman that has resulted in his getting a service by which hecan be with Rama at all times. No one can separate a realdevotee present from his Lord.12. Ravana’s Proficiency In The VedasWas Of No Avail Because Of His BadPracticesWhen a sinner finds prosperity coming his way, hefeels like challenging even the Lord. But when hisprosperity disappears, he will become humble and willbegin to see the truth.Prema Swarupas:If an individual wants to become an important person inthis world, he should have three good qualities. The first is tohave firm and unwavering faith in the need for being good.The second is to be free from hatred, jealousy and ego. Thethird is to be able to appreciate and enjoy when he sees anotherindividual or the society around him doing good work. It isthrough these three qualities that a person’s greatness willcome to be known.The ancient traditions of Bharatha have always beenrecognising and proclaiming the greatness of these threequalities in an individual. Not only does the individual’simportance get established through these three qualities, buteven the country’s reputation will become known through theindividual citizens who possess these three qualities. When wewant the country to become great and the greatness of thecountry to be known and recognised outside the country, it isnecessary that the rulers of the country also possess these threequalities.126  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Unfortunately today, people who cannot recognise thetruth in our ancient culture have been proclaiming that suchgood qualities are not essential. Such people, who are unable torecognise the values in our culture, keep on saying that ourtraditions are shackles to our progress and they act as ahindrance to the freedom of one’s own mind.They keep on saying that pilgrimages are unnecessaryand to visit great saints is only a sign of mental weakness. Allof you may not be aware that such statements are merelyplatform speeches made by persons who are in a position ofauthority and power. Sometimes, they are also politicallymotivated. Such words are uttered very superficially, withoutany depth of investigation or thought behind them.Young people should not pay much attention to suchsuperficial statements but should recognise the value of thetruth that is contained in our ancient culture and follow thesame. Wise people do not become slaves to their desires anddo not, without thinking, accept the material path whichscience and technology have provided for fulfilling theirdesires. The individuals who have succeeded in harnessingatomic power are beginning to think that even theirdiscriminating power is being swallowed up by their owninventions. They are unable to recognise the truth that the verymachines they have created and the very weapons which theyhave constructed are going to swallow their very lives. Theyare thinking that to spend their lives and resources in pursuingmatters which have no relation to their real well-being is right.They do not realise that in so doing, they are wasting theirlives.Prema Swarupas:Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977127In order to recognise man’s divinity, we must learn torespect service. Man’s duty is to serve the society of which heis a part. It appears today that all our ideas and thoughts havebeen borrowed from others. They appear to be all transient. Itlooks as if there are no permanent values at all.It is true that today Westerners have made considerableprogress in science and are acquiring mastery over the materialworld. In spite of all that, they are not able to give any reply tothe challenges posed by the sacred texts like the Upanishads.Because we have such total belief in worldly experience andthings that are based on such experience, we are unable toknow ourselves. Every individual thinks that he has achievedsome great things, and such achievements are used for thepurpose of proclaiming his own greatness and enhancing hisown reputation. Truly, without using our strength and ourintelligence in the right path, we want to use them for thepurpose of selfishly proclaiming our own greatness. We shouldundertake to promote the total good, the good of thecommunity in a selfless manner with love and prema.Today, people who are giving support to various thingswhich science produces are themselves confused whether allthose things are for the good of the people or whether they aregoing to cause hurt and harm to them. It is only when one hascomplete control over one’s own mind and one’s ownintelligence and when one believes in the truth that divinity ispresent in every human being can this scientific knowledge beof some use to him. One may possess considerable amount ofstrength in the material sense of the word, but if he does nothave the adhyatmic or the spiritual power, there is everychance of losing all that he has. Ravana did possess aconsiderable amount of worldly power and even moral power,128  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977and was a devotee of God. Yet, he fell to the lowest depthsbecause of some of his bad qualities like jealousy and anger.It is a sacred quality for one to be able to enjoy andappreciate the good in other people. Even greater than this isthe quality by which we get rid of selfishness and spend all ourresources for the purpose of doing good to others. Truly,people like Hiranyaksha, Hiranyakasapa and Ravana had manygreat qualities and considerable amount of courage. But therewas something lacking in the type of devotion and faith theyhad. So they suffered.Whatever learning and education one may acquire, it isonly when one can recognise that all learning is to enable us toearn the grace of God that our education becomes useful. Whatis the use of learning several branches of knowledge? Is itpossible for any one to change the destiny which has beengiven to him? When bad ideas fill your head, your thoughtsand your intelligence will become blunt. Because Ravana hadthe three bad qualities of jealousy, anger and ego filling hishead, he was deprived of all chances of success, although hehad several powers. For one who is suffering from ego, thepower to discriminate between what is transient and what ispermanent will be missing. One who develops jealousy willlose kindness and the ability to give freely. One who developsanger will lose all opportunity for reaching the heights ofglory, and his own possessions will disappear. His reputationand his strength will disappear at the moment when they aremost needed. Those who are near to him will become distantfrom him. For one who develops pride, everything will becomebad. Those who suffer from anger cannot achieve any result.They will also feel ashamed at the crucial time.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977129Ravana was ruling over a kingdom and his capital citywould compare well with heaven. But because of his badqualities, he lost his own happiness, his kingdom, andeverything that he had. In fact, he destroyed his own dynastyand family. He knew all the codes of conduct of a king, and heknew everything, and yet he was behaving like a monkey. Heknew several things but because he was not putting hisknowledge into practice, he became worse than one who hasno knowledge at all.When Hanuman entered Lanka, as Rama’s ambassador,and spoke to Sita, Ravana came to know of this and he orderedthat Hanuman be punished. This is quite contrary to theaccepted code of conduct of a king. To kill an ambassador or topunish one who has come as a messenger on behalf ofsomeone else is not the right code of conduct for a king of thecountry. Vibhishana tried to explain to Ravana this principleby which he should not punish one who has brought a messageand Vibhishana tried to get Hanuman released. Ravana, in fact,had so many other bad qualities and bad ideas in him, and heoften undertook to do things which he should not have done.Many times, he made attempts to kill even Sita. Mandodari, thewife of Ravana, tried to teach Ravana that to kill a woman isvery wrong, and that he was committing a great sin. The badqualities that were in him made him take always the wrongpath and subjected him to many difficulties. On one occasionMandodari went to her husband and asked him, “You know allthe dharma, and all the codes of right conduct. With all yourwisdom, why is it that you are doing wrong things? What is thematter? How can you explain? What is the inner meaning ofyour behaviour? Not only this, you have all the capacity andyou have all the strength to assume any form that you like. Onthe day when you brought Sita to Lanka, you were in the formof a sanyasi and you deceived her. Why are you taking all this130  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977trouble in order to win over the sacred Sita? If only you as-sume the form of Ramachandra, then Sita would be yours.Why did you not adopt that path?”Then Ravana replied that Ramachandra’s form was asacred and divine one. If he really took that form, how will hehave bad qualities at all? This means Ravana knew very wellthat the qualities which one will have should be appropriate tohis form. Because he had the form of a rakshasa, the qualitiesof a rakshasa were showing up. Today, people have a humanform. They appear like human beings but behave likerakshasas. There is some contradiction in this situation. Sincewe have taken the human form, sacred qualities which areappropriate to a human being should thrive within us. In wordswe may say that we are human beings, that we are devotees,that God in the form of Atma is present in us, but to put thesestatements into practice has become very rare. The first thingwe should do in this context is to correct our practice. Throughour efforts, we can achieve any great thing. The kind ofconduct which we accept and go through in our daily life willonly be reflected by our life.There is a small story. There used to be a musicscholar. Daily he used to gather a few children and teach themmusic. In his house there used to be a good custom. This wasthat his wife would not eat until he came into the house. Andafter he came to the house, they would eat together. But as theexaminations came near, he used to spend more time inteaching music to the students and giving them practicelessons. The teacher who normally would come back at 2o’clock did not turn up till 4 o’clock on one day. The wife washungry. However, she would not like to break their usualtradition. In this process she also got a little excited. By about4:00 o’clock, as the husband returned home, she kept a littleSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977131water and soap, a bowl and a bucket and asked him to have aquick wash and come so that they could eat food together asusual. In the hurry which the wife was indicating, he took a potof water, washed his face and put the soap on his face. Whenhe put soap on his face and without knowing put the pot intothe well, the pot slipped and fell into the well. Somehow hecleaned his face and opened his eyes and found that the pot andthe rope were both in the well. As soon as the pot and the ropefell into the well, be began to sing, and appeal to the Lord bysaying, “Oh Lord, the responsibility to look after me is Yours.”The wife went there to remind him that he should comequickly and he continued to sing without paying any attentionto the wife, again saying, “Oh Lord, the responsibility to lookafter me is Yours.” When the wife saw that the pot and therope were both in the well, she reprimanded the husband andsaid, “If you keep on singing in this manner, without makingany effort to retrieve the rope and the pot but putting the entireresponsibility on the Lord, how is the pot going to come out?You must make your effort to get the pot out of the well.”Although man has got certain types of strength and abilities inhim, he should not depend solely on worldly power andstrength. He should make his attempts and seek to strengthenhis attempts by winning God’s grace for himself.Ravana knew all dharma, but without putting them intopractice what is the use of having known them simply throughthe texts? All dharma, which is not put into practice, is just asbad as adharma, so also all knowledge which is not put intopractice is as bad as ignorance. Today, many young peopleknow what good work is, and they have to make an effort andparticipate in it. They do not make any effort. The first thingwe should do is to put into practice the good things which webelieve are good. By simply believing that something is good,132  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977by having faith in being good and yet not putting into practice,how can one get any result in that manner.Divya Atma Swarupas:Ravana had expertise in all the branches of learning. Healso knew very thoroughly the four Vedas. He was fully awareof the contents of the six Sastras. His knowledge of the sixSastras and his knowledge of the four Vedas (together ten) isthe inner meaning of the belief that Ravana had ten heads. It isa symbolic way of saying that he was an expert in all the tenbranches of knowledge. Ignoring this inner meaning, if wesimply keep on saying that Ravana had ten heads, in ordinarydaily parlance, we have to ask how he is going to sleep withthose ten heads? How is he going to do his daily duties withthose ten heads? This is the shortcut to making things appearridiculous. The writers and the historians may simply havedescribed him as a person having ten heads, but the innermeaning of such a description is that Ravana was having suchknowledge and deep wisdom. He, with all this strength andknowledge, was not minding the people’s security and people’shappiness. To him, his own enjoyment, his own safety, his ownpleasure were all that mattered. We should note here that, inspite of all great and good qualities, he was behaving in a badmanner. Towards the end of his life, he realised that all that hedid was sin; and the paths he had adopted were bad paths, andthat whatever Vibhishana had told him was right, and that hecould not follow the advice given to him by his wifeMandodari.However much we may repent towards the end of ourlife, it is very difficult for us to realise that such repentancecomes to us in a manner in which it cannot atone for our sins.After indulging in sins and doing bad things all through one’slife, even if one repents towards the very end, that repentanceSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977133is not of much value. It is not correct to keep on repenting andthinking that repentance will redeem us from all our sins. Alas,repentance always comes much after the event and too late todo any good to any one.Many people in the world today are in this situation.They commit sin, commit wrong and ask for pardon and thenagain commit sin, commit wrong and again ask for pardon. Inthis way, if you add and sub-tract, add and subtract all yourlife, how are you going to reach your destination with anycredit balance in your favour?Sacred-minded young people,Once you understand and recognise that a cer-tain thingis wrong, that it is a sin, then you should never knowingly goand commit a sin for a second time. Only when you canconduct your lives along a path where there is discriminationbetween right and wrong, will your life take a purposefulcourse.During the last fifteen days, you have been listening toall the good things that are contained in the individualcharacters of the story of the Ramayana. We should believethat Rama signifies the divinity that is established within ourown hearts. We should think that our own minds symboliseLaksh-mana. Our intelligence and our chitta should beidentified with Sita. The bad qualities which lead us to commitsin should be identified with Ravana. Anger, jealousy andhatred, are the qualities from which sin starts. They constitutethe birthplace for sins. We should make an attempt, by usingsathya, dharma, shanthi and prema to destroy the Ravana in usexemplified by the bad qualities.134  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977When we give room to jealousy, anger and ego, webecome a Ravana. When we follow the path of truth and thepath of dharma, we become a Ramachandra. Good and bad areresults only of the way we conduct ourselves. Rama andRavana are not separate people. They are in us and they makeus look like one or the other according to our deeds. It is in thiscontext that it has been said that both for good and for bad, ourown mind is responsible. If we conduct ourselves badly, wewill be like animals. If our conduct is good, we will be like adivine being. Young people should therefore, guide theirconduct and daily behaviour along the right path.Students:You are the future citizens of Bharath. Whether it is aworthwhile example that you are seeking for your everydaylife or whether it is an ideal that you are searching for in yourheart and mind, if only you can introduce an amount ofsacredness, then we can say that you are seeking Yogakshema.It is not a great thing to acquire good qualities, but realgreatness lies in keeping and preserving the great, goodqualities you acquire. Making a conscious effort in acquiringwhat you should acquire, namely good ideals and goodthoughts, has been referred to as yoga and then a consciouseffort to retain and use what you have acquired is calledKshema. This is Yogakshema. But today, we attach too muchimportance to our body. This body which is transient, which isuncertain, which is going to fall down one day or other, loomslarge in our view and we think that the good of such a body isYogakshema. You may protect it as long as you like but whenthe time comes, this is going to drop down and die. It is betterto live for three years or even for three days as a good person,rather than live a hundred years as a bad person. Do not be acrow and go about living for a long time. Be a swan and livefor a short time.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977135Divya Atma Swarupas:You must acquire good and sathwik qualities. You mustalso control and regulate the type of food you eat. The badqualities and the bad nature which Ravana had can be traced toa large extent to the kind of food he ate. It is in the context ofthe food that one eats, that one’s own conduct and daily life aredeter-mined. We should make an attempt to take in sathwikfood only. What is sathwik food? Do fruit and milk constitutesathwik food? No, if you drink too much milk or too muchcurd, or eat too much fruit, Thamo Guna will increase and theycannot be described as sathwik.Today it is difficult to define the true meaning ofsathwik food. We talk of taking food. How do we take food?Amongst the five sensory organs the tongue is the one throughwhich we taste and take our food. It is not enough if we take insathwik food through one of the five organs, namely the tongueonly. There are four other organs through which also weshould take care to accept only sathwik food. With the help ofour mouth, we may take only limited amounts of milk or fruit.There are other organs. What you see with your eyes must alsobe sathwik. We should not look at bad things. Bad vision willbecome bad intake through the eyes. There is a third organ, theears. What goes inside through the ears is also food. We shouldlisten to only good things. This kind of food should berendered sathwik by restricting the ears to listen to only goodsounds.There is a nose as well. Through the nose, you shouldaccept only good and clean air and not foul air. The latterconstitutes bad food. There is the skin with which we touchother things. The skin should not be allowed to contactwhomsoever and whatsoever it wants to. All these senses, the136  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977sense of sound, the sense of touch, the sense of taste, of smelland of listening, should take in good food only. Only when allthat you take in through these five organs is good, can you saythat you are having sathwik food. If with the mouth alone youtake good sathwik food like milk and curds, but you see badthings with your eyes, listen to bad things with your ears andtouch unpleasant things with your skin, how can you then callyourself a sathwik person? If you take care in regard to all theintake, not only will this be called sathwik food, but it will alsobe good for health. There is one example. A good feature ofsathwik food can be described by referring to the light mannerin which we go and sit down to take food. After taking food,we should be able to get up in the same light manner. Buttoday we call it sathwik food, we go light and sit for our meal.At the end of the meal when we get up, we are so heavy thatwe cannot get up easily. This will be called thamasik food.You should eat only a limited amount of food. That willalso be responsible for your good health. Limited amount offood gives us great ease. Unlimited food causes great trouble.In this world, there are many people who are continuouslyloading and unloading their physical system. They give nothought to enquire into the purpose of their life. Ravanabelonged to this class of people. Not only this, towards the endof his life, when he was threatening Sita, he told her that hewill give her two months time and if in that period she wouldnot change her mind, he would cut her head, cook and eat theflesh out of her head. Ravana was one who did not at allunderstand what food meant. His food consisted of unsacredmeat and drink.Divya Atma Swarupas:Since you are going to become the leaders andimportant persons, it is necessary for you to keep your healthSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977137in a proper condition through regulating your food habits. It isnecessary that in order that we may do good work our bodyshould be in a healthy condition.This is the reason why it has been said that if you wantto accept the four Purusharthas: Dharma, Artha, Kama andMoksha, a healthy body is necessary. When you take care tosee that what goes inside the body through your five sensoryorgans is good and sathwik, there is no room for bad ideas inyou. If you want to get rid of all bad ideas, you must controlyour food to a large extent. This is a good lesson which the lifestory of Ravana should teach the people of the world.13. Talking Too Much Harms One’sMemory And One’s StrengthOne’s chitta is in the form of a root for the tree ofhis life. When that becomes rotten, the whole tree willfall down and become useless. Even the sacred desireswhich constitute the branches of this tree will dry up inthat condition and cannot be fulfilled. What other truthcan I tell you, Oh! brave children of Bharath.Pavitratma Swarupas:Every human being in this world is born with threedebts. The first one relates to his being indebted to the devas,the second one is being indebted to the rishis and the third oneis being indebted to the parents or the Pitru rina. In order tokeep the body from becoming infirm and weak, devas indifferent parts are protecting the human body. Devas in theform of rasa, in the form of vitality and strength are flowing inevery organ of the human body. In this context, they are alsodescribed as Angirasa. Only when we can use such a humanbody for the purpose of doing sacred work, will the devas, whoare protecting our organs, be satisfied.If we can participate in good work which is useful tothe society, we can please the devas who are protecting theorgans of our body and repay the debt which we owe them.The next one is our being indebted to the rishis. In order thathuman beings may experience happiness and pleasure in aworldly sense as well as in a spiritual sense, the rishis ofancient times have shown many ways in which this can beachieved. Because of this we are indebted to the rishis. So thatSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977139we can understand what righteous conduct is, the rishis havegiven us from the ancient times many Sastras.The rishis were such great saints that they could showus the great ideals that are contained in the Vedas and theSastras. By following in their foot-steps, by accepting theexamples which they showed us and by imbibing the teachingsthey had given us, we will, to some extent, repay the debtswhich we owe them. Even if we do not follow and obey theirorders, at least to recognise the greatness that is contained inwhat they have given us by way of the Sastras is, to someextent, tantamount to repaying the debts we owe them.The third one is the debt towards one’s parents. You areborn through your father and he has protected you throughoutyour life. You have to repay the debt you owe him. Not onlythat, when a son is born to his father, the son should make anattempt to maintain the dignity, the honour and the reputationof his own father. We should make an attempt to preserve thefaith which our forefathers have earned. It is with a view torepaying these three categories of debts that Dasarathaundertook to perform the Aswamedha Yagna and the PutraKameshti Yagna. In the Aswamedha Yagna, the sacrificialhorse is a very sacred element. That should be a pure whitehorse without any dark patches on it. The ears should protrudeout in a beautiful manner. The hair on the neck of this horseshould also be very attractive and straight. The tail of thathorse should be so long that it touches the bottom of the feet.In the attempt to look for and locate such a sacred horse whichsatisfies the requirements, some effort is required. During theperiod of Vasanta, such a horse is let out, and by the time thehorse goes round and comes back to the place where it wasleft, one year will be over and the next period of Vasantacomes in. We should notice here that one Vasanta time has to140  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977be spent in searching for the horse, one Vasanta time has to bespent in letting the horse go, a third Vasanta time has to bespent in the horse returning to its original place. Thus theRamayana tells us that three years have been spent in theAswamedha Yagna.After spending three years in performing theAswamedha Yagna, Dasaratha undertook to perform the PutraKameshti Yagna. The meaning of the word Dasaratha has beentold to you in the past few days. Dasaratha here signifies theten organs and the body which contains the ten organs. Here,the city of Ayodhya, in this story, has got three main entrances.These three main entrances to the city of Ayodhya are to betaken as the Sathwa, Raja and Thama gunas.While the Yagnas were going on in this manner, wemust realise that the Brahma Muhurtha which is beingdescribed as Vasanta consists of two months in the year. Thetwo months have got two names, Madhu and Madhava. Duringthese two months Madhu and Madhava, the sun enters the tworasis and they are Megha and Vrishabha. In the two rasis,Megha and Vrishabha, the sun shines very brightly and it isusually quite warm. We can recognise the period by noticingthat the sun is quite strong and fierce during the midday andthat all the water that is on the surface of the earth is changedinto water vapour by this heat.The nature of the sun during the Megha rasi in theVasanta time has been compared with one’s own heart. Theprimordial sound that comes from one’s own heart has alsobeen called Viswadhara. During that time, the sun takes theform which consists of five different apartments. In the story ofthe Ramayana, the sun has always been identified with Ramahimself. These five apartments, or five layers, which we referSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977141to in the case of the sun during that period, have been namedthe Annamaya Kosa, the Pranamaya Kosa, the ManomayaKosa, the Vignanamaya Kosa and the Anandamaya Kosa. Theword Annamaya Kosa refers to the material human body. Thismaterial human body builds itself on food material, grows outof food and decays when there is no food. The next layer thatgives strength and protects the external human body is thePranamaya Kosa, or an inner layer. This part of the body iscalled the maya deha. The Pranamaya Kosa is dependent uponthe heat created in the body and enables heat to flow in thebody and thereafter blood starts flowing into the blood vessels.The next layer is called the Manomaya Kosa related tothe mind. If the Manomaya Kosa is not there, then thePranamaya and Annamaya Kosas can-not exist. TheManomaya Kosa is responsible for all kinds of thoughts anddesires. One’s mind is really a bundle of desires. To someextent, this mind or the Manomaya Kosa helps and becomes asupport to the Pranamaya Kosa. The next layer is theVignanamnya Kosa. The Vignanamaya Kosa has the functionof enabling man to get the discriminatory power by which hedistinguishes between good and bad. If there is noVignanamaya Kosa, the other layers Manomaya Kosa,Pranamaya Kosa and Annamaya Kosa will be lifeless and willnot be able to function. This Vignanamaya Kosa enables us tolearn the nature of matter and how matter functions. We shallhere give an example by which we will understand the innermeaning. This is a table and is made of wood. I am making anattempt to hit on this hard matter. When I describe this act ofmine, I say that I have hit the table with my hand. This is not afull description. The table has also hit my hand equallystrongly. The quality in you, which enables you to recognisethe conduct of the table in this act, is the Vignanamaya Kosa.This Vignanamaya Kosa enables us to recognise whatever142  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977reactions and resounds exist in all the material world. We cantake another example for this. When we open our eyes andlook at the external view, we see so many people and so manyheads. We ask if it is the eye which enables us to see all this orwhether it is the light in the eyes that enables us to see all theheads? No, the light that exists outside the eye is helping theeyes to see all this. It is the joining together of the light that ispresent in your eyes and the light that is present outside youreyes that enables you to see all the things. We may ask, justbecause there is some light, does that enable us to see all thismatter? It is not so; even if there is light outside the eyes, ifyou close your eyes, then you will not be able to see the matterwhich lies outside your eyes. If we regard that the externallight is important, by closing our eyes we cannot see thematter. If we regard that the light in our eyes is important, ifwe extinguish the external light, we cannot see the matter. It isonly when both are present that we can see the form of man. Inthis manner, the inner vision and the outer vision are togetherresponsible for our vision. This is the function of theVignanamaya Kosa. Truly, if we are perceiving all the creationwith our eyes, this creation is being seen because of our eyes.There is no creation separate from our eyes. What we see in theworld are all reflections of the forms that are formed inside byour own inner vision. If an artist is painting a picture, he is notpainting the picture straightway on the canvas. He first formsthis picture in his mind and then he puts it on the canvas withpaint. If a director of a cinema directs various actors to do thisand to do that, he takes the preliminary steps by which hethinks of this picture in his own mind and then brings theactors into the picture. Similarly, every writer thinks of thetheme in his own mind before he writes and then begins towrite out the play. So, these thoughts and ideas, which emanatewithin oneself, have been called Vignana.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977143All these things have, for their source, the life-givingtreasure. This has been referred to as the Anandamaya Kosa.We can conclude that all the four superficial kosas, theAnnamaya Kosa, the Pranamaya Kosa, the Manomaya Kosaand the Vignanamaya Kosa are all arising from the baseAnandamaya Kosa. The spirit of Atma, which is the base for allthese things, is the ananda which is at the bottom of all theseother kosas.Vasishta was a great saint who had a vision of thisananda. He experienced this ananda and knew what bliss was.This is the reason why Vasishta was always described as aBrahmarishi. Vasishta had the great good fortune ofperforming the naming ceremony of Ramachandra, of givingHim the first morsel of food, of initiating Him into studies andof performing His Upanayanam. Such a great saint with suchgood fortune will be recognised as one who has had the directvision of ananda and experienced the bliss of ananda.On many occasions Vishwamithra showed aconsiderable amount of jealousy towards Vasishta. On someoccasions, Vishwamithra also tried to kill Vasishta. Still,Vasishta was so generous that he treated Vishwamithra withgreat kindness. Such peace and such prema and freedom fromhatred and jealousy can come only to great saints who had adirect vision of ananda.Divya Atma Swarupas:You should not think that maharishis and yogis areordinary people, who are only putting on an externalappearance for some selfish purpose. You should understandthe significance and inner meaning of Vasishta who had allkinds of strength and powers in him, conducting himself as anordinary purohit in the house of Ramachandra. Vasishtaremained as a purohit in that household, not because of the144  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977wealth of Dasaratha, but because he was fully aware of the factthat Narayana Himself came in the human form ofRamachandra. He was desiring the company of Ramachandraand such sacred thoughts took him to the household.Vishwamithra was also like that. His great achievements andhis courage are indescribable by ordinary words. He had verymany potent weapons with him. He never cared for the greatweapons which he possessed in his own house. He knew thatNarayana, Himself, came as a young boy and was born inDasaratha’s household. So all that Vishwamithra did was basedon this knowledge. All the great saints knew very well thatRamachandra was the incarnation of God. Yet they would notcommunicate this information to others. They were conductingthemselves in a manner which indicated that Ramachandra wasan ideal human being, who came for the purpose of teachingideals to people. These great saints were regarding Rama as anideal human being, but knew very well that He was God,Himself. In such circumstances, it is not possible for anyhuman being today to discuss the right and wrong of what tookplace at that time. Divinity is something which one cannotestablish or understand easily.It is not possible for us to describe our ancestors whowere born earlier than us. It will not be possible for a grandsonto describe where and how his grandfather was born. So it iswith regard to great people, who were born and who livedmuch before us. How can we describe their faith in God andtheir relationship with God? There is one parallel for this.When we ask the question, who is your father? You give areply that so and so is your father. How do you know thatperson is your father? You have accepted it because yourmother has told you so. If you have no trust in what yourmother has told you, there is no chance of your believing thatthat person is your father. Just as your mother’s evidence isSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977145useful in recognising and accepting a certain person as yourfather, in order to recognise and accept the existence of God:Veda is the authority. Further, if you are asked when you wereborn, you give the reply giving the time, the date and the place.How do you know the date when you were born? For this also,the elders, your father and mother tell you the date of yourbirth and you accept it. In all these matters, only suchstatements made by people who lived earlier than you can betaken as authority. You yourself cannot con-stitute an authorityin such matters. When we take the people who lived before usas authority for this purpose, similar authority in the matter ofGod can be given only to people who understand what divinityis and who have the divine aspect in them. Only that personwho has tasted the juice of cane sugar can describe the taste ofthe juice. To some extent, by experience, one can describe thetaste, but one cannot describe its form. When we ask thequestion, how is sugar? We can say sugar is like white sand.But if someone asks you to describe the nature and the form ofsweetness in the sugar, it is not possible to do so. In a similarmanner only those people, who have immersed themselves inthe experience of God, can even have the right to attempt todescribe anything about God. Others cannot do this. God ispresent everywhere in the form of Atma. His effulgence isshining in every heart. If such effulgent Atma is not present,man cannot live in this world even for a moment. It is presentin all of them and is at the same level in all the human beings.It is possible to establish and describe that kind of divinity onlywhen we identify ourselves with divine features. Our names,our forms, our tastes, our likes and dislikes may differ fromone person to another. These are simply differ-ences whicharise out of our desires. There is one small example for this.We prepare Mysorepak, gulabjam, barfi, kheer and soon. While we have prepared so many different sweets and we146  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977enjoy them in different forms and tastes, yet we know thatwhat is contained in all these different forms is only sugar.That is the spiritual aspect. Because of taste, you say that youwant such and such a sweet and you eat it. The sugar in all thesweets is one and the same. It is only the form that differs. Inthe same manner, although God is present everywhere yet insome circumstances, at a certain time, in a certain place, in acertain person, He gives a particular experience. In a humanbody, we have a hand, a cheek, a tongue, and a nose. Throughthe nose, the hand, the cheek and the tongue, it is the sameblood that is flowing. Although the same blood is flowingthrough all these limbs, if you take a laddu and put it in yourhand, will the hand be able to taste the laddu? No. While it isthe same blood everywhere, it is the same heart that ispumping the blood, yet depending upon the place, eachcomponent of the body experiences the same thing in adifferent manner. In the same manner, although in all humanbeings there is the same Easwara, the same divinity that ispresent, yet depending upon that individual’s karma, he willexperience it in his own way. To enjoy such experience, oneshould make an effort, one should do sadhana. It is not right tofeel jealous when we look at someone experiencing some joyin life. Such bad qualities will cause harm only to ourselves.No good comes out of feeling jealous. The tongue eats iddlies,sambar and various other types of food. If the eye feels jealousand tells itself that it is also an organ of the body, and that itshould also enjoy the iddlies and sambar and if you put iddliesand sambar into the eyes, there will result a great deal of harm.The eye has the right to see, but it should not attempt to eat. Onthe contrary, thinking that the eyes have the great capacity tosee, if the mouth wants to see and begins to see, it obviouslycannot do so.Divya Atma Swarupas:Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977147It may appear to us that the eyes are different and themouth is different, but we should be able to recognise thecommon divine spirit which is in the eyes and in the mouth.We must understand the internal connection between theseorgans. We are walking on a road. The eye locates a thorn onthe road but the legs avoid the thorn and jump over it. The eyehas not gone and told the leg and warned it about the thorn. Assoon as the eye sees the thorn, the leg takes care to avoid thethorn. The eye may take the attitude that, after all, the thorn ison the road and, if some-thing happens, it is the leg that isgoing to be hurt. Why should the eye worry about it? However,the eye does not take this attitude. It helps the leg immediatelyto locate the thorn. We can look at it in a different way. Theleg has got a thorn into it. As soon as the thorn gets into theleg, it causes pain and the eye begins to water. The pain is onthe leg but tears come out of the eye. If only we look in somedepth at this inextricable connection between the eyes and thelegs, we will recognise divinity commonly present in all ourlimbs.In the same manner, certain connections which arecoming out of the spirit of Atma are present without ourknowing them. So we should never hate this spirit of Atma,which is present in every human being.Divya Atma Swarupas:We may listen to many discourses and may read severalbooks, and we may hear about divinity in so many differentplaces. Unless your heart is pure and clean, all this is not goingto bring you any benefit. All this will amount to puttingvaluable material into a pot which has several holes in it. Whatyou put in will go out of it. By a conscious effort, we shouldtry and put into practice at least one or two things which welearn. Just by hearing words, we are not going to have the148  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977vision of divinity. If you have potato and chappati on yourplate and keep on repeating the words potato-chappati, potato-chappati, that is not going to come into your stomach. If youwant to get this potato and chappati into yourself as food, thenyou must make your mouth and hand do some work. If youwant to really enjoy the bliss of divinity, then you must givework to your hands by which you do bhajans and work to yourmouth by which you sing the glory of the Lord or you mustundertake such work which may be useful to others or doservice which is free from selfish interests. You must utterwords which are happy and blissful. Even if you do not havethe right to understand and experience Divinity, at least a goodword must be uttered by you. You cannot always oblige, butyou can always speak obligingly. It is only when you can uttersacred words with your mouth and do useful work with yourhands, that you will be in a position to understand divinity.Students:By simply uttering unnecessary words and talking toomuch, you are only causing harm to your own memory and toyour own strength. In the olden days, the rishis used to observecomplete silence because of this. By adopting completesilence, the rishis were promoting divine strength inthemselves. We can certainly talk when it becomes necessary,but it is not necessary to talk and use words when it is not re-quired. Sound is a form of Brahman. Of all the eight qualitieswhich have been associated with Brahman, the first one is thequality of sound, Sabda Brahman. To some extent, if youundertake to put this into practice and not go on talkingunnecessarily, then there will be a definite improvement inyou.Great sages like Vasishta and Vishwamithra, byobserving silence, could enjoy and have the vision of theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977149Anandamaya Kosa and they could set good examples to theworld.14. “Thath Thwam Asi”:Thou Art ThatWherever there is smoke, there should be a sourcein the form of cinders and burning coal; so also for arunning train there must be someone called a driverwho is responsible for the running of that train. Evenfor the traffic lights, which come up automatically,there must be a source which makes those lightsfunction. While this is so, should there not be one whois responsible for all the creation we see around us?Pavitratma Swarupas:“Ayam Atma Brahma” means that this very Atma isidentical with Brahman. Atma is not some-thing which isdistinct from us. This Atma is present in everyone, in all livingbeings and in all things. That Atma is identical with Brahmanand has got a form which is indestructible; it is filled withsabda or sound. Om is the ekaksharam Brahman. The onesingle letter ‘Om’ is Brahman. This has, associated with it, fouraspects. These four aspects are: the waking stage, the dreamingstage, the deep sleep stage, and the turiya stage.The first aspect, in the waking stage, one is fullyawake. The waking stage is usually accompanied by the grossphenomenon, by desires connected with the material aspects ofthe world. This waking stage has got a gross form and isconnected intimately with our desires of the material world andis promoted by the five working organs and the five senseSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977151organs which we have together with the five pranas and fourother features like chitta, Antha Karana and so on. These areall present in the waking stage. This stage is also referred to asViswa.The dreaming stage has got a subtle form. This stage iscalled taijasa. Whatever one has experienced when he isawake, during the waking stage, attaches itself in some formwith the mind and continues to appear in the dreaming stage.In this stage, all the nineteen aspects, which we havementioned earlier, will still appear as subtle forms with a subtlephase.Mind, in the Manomaya Kosa and intelligence in thePranamaya Kosa, play an important role. Both the wakingstage and the dreaming stage are some-what on the samefooting and are equally important. The other two stages arequite different, the difference being one of essence. The thirdone is the deep sleep stage. This is also named as pragna. Inthis stage of deep sleep, there is no connection whatever eitherthrough the gross form or through the subtle form, with thematerial world. Here we can take the ex-ample of reflection ofthe sky in a pot. Once that pot is removed, the reflectiondisappears and the sky in the pot becomes identical with theoriginal big sky. So also in this state of deep sleep, we lose allconnection with the material world, the gross and the subtleforms; and we are independent of them. In this stage of deepsleep, the nineteen facets, which have been mentioned, areneither in the material form nor are they in the subtle form. Thedeep sleep state is quite distinct and separated from them. Inthis state, various organs of the body do not function at all.This is a very surpris-ing situation which causes usastonishment. This has also been referred to as Purna Thathwa.152  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977The next stage is called the stage of turiya. The aspectsof turiya are indescribable in ordinary words by any one. Thisstate of turiya, in its totality, reflects the spirit of Atma. As wecannot see our own eyes, so also Atma cannot see itself. Thereis a small example here: if we take a doll made of salt and askthat doll to go and experience the taste of the ocean, how isthat going to be possible? This salt doll will go into the oceanand will get lost by dissolution and merger. As in that analogy,if the jiva is looking for the Atma, he will completely mergeinto Atma when he gets close to it. Thereafter it will not bepossible for the jiva to separate himself from the Atma. Thataspect is described as omnipresence. This is also anotherfeature of Atma and it is able to be present in all the livingbeings. This state has been described as pragnanam Brahma. Ithas also been described as “Thath thwam asi” or thou art that.It is also “Ayam Atman Brahman” or Atma is Brahman. This isthe same as saying “Aham Brahmasmi” or I am Brahman.These are the four mahavakyas which constitute the spirit ofthe Vedas.There is a small example for this. From a big hill, wepick out one rock and an artisan chisels out of this uncut rock abeautiful figure of Krishna. After some effort, he will produceout of this rock a very beautiful figure of Krishna. Choosing aproper and auspicious time, he will take this figure of Krishnaand install it on a pedestal in the temple and will go onworshipping it. Here we notice that a part of the rock has beentaken out and has been installed in the temple and is beingworshipped by various people. The little remnants, the piecesof stone which are left in the rock after chiselling the figure ofKrishna, are left in the same place as the rock. No one cares forthose remnant pieces of rock. Nobody worships them andnobody thinks of those pieces as of any importance. Here, inour thought, this portion of the Krishna figure becomes oneSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977153which can be worshipped as God, whereas the rest of the rockfrom which it has come is looked upon as useless pieces. Butthese pieces of stones and their background is not like that. Theremnant pieces of rock will keep on proclaiming, “Thaththwam asi” and seem to say, “That figure of Krishna whichyou are worshipping is me, I am that.” A portion of the rockappears to us as if we can worship it, and the other portion ofthe rock appears to us as valueless. What is being worshippedas deity is something which has been created by you. The trueform from which it has been created is the original piece ofrock. As in that analogy, what we see in this world as a form issomething which has come out of the source rock. The form ofKrishna in this case has been formed from a rock. But theessence, the basic substance in the form-less, is the same in thesource rock as in the figure. Whether you take the formlessrock, the source of the idol of Krishna, or the idol itself andbeat it, the kind of sound that will come out is exactly the samein both cases. So Atma, which is the form of sound or sabda,and the sound, the Omkara, are both one and the same. Thosewho propound Vedanta have been ex-plaining this truth bysaying that the combination of “Akara Ukara Makara” isAUM, and is nothing but Brahman. Either in the gross form orin the subtle form, or in the supreme form of the Turiya, whatis contained is the same and it is Omkar.Vishwamithra recognised that this Atma, which isidentical with divinity, is present in everyone. It takes the formof pragna in the created form in order to establish the identitybetween the Jivatma and Paramatma. When we look at thestory of the Ramayana, we find that at a certain point, Vishwa-mithra comes to Dasaratha and requests him to send his sonsfor the specific purpose of protecting his yagnas in the forest.During the journey, he taught Rama and Lakshmana twomanthras, Bala and Atibala. Not only did he teach these154  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977manthras, but he also gave them all the weapons that were inhis possession and taught them how to use those weapons.After giving them all this training, he took them to Mithilapuraafter the yagna was over. It is not as if these manthras, Bala,and Atibala have something special in them. By makingappropriate changes in the Gayatri Manthra, we can get thesemanthras.While taking them to Mithilapura, he also undertookthe task of getting Rama to remove the curse on Ahalya. Afterreaching Mithilapura, he gets Rama-chandra to break Shiva’sBow and marry Sita. After the marriage of Sita, Vishwamithradisappeared that very night and was not to be seen thereafter.Thus we see that the story of Vishwamithra begins with takingRama and Lakshmana with him and performing the marriageof Sita as the foundation for the ultimate destruction ofRavana. When he came to Dasaratha, he was in the first stage.When Vishwamithra taught the manthras Bala and Atibala toRama and Laksh-mana, he took the form of Taijasa. When heundertook to perform the marriage between Sita, the Jivatma,with Rama, the Paramatma, he took the form of Pragna.When we look at these three stages of Vishwa-mithra,we understand that no one can live without being dependent, tosome extent, on the material creation around him. At that time,he is in the first stage or the waking stage, which is describedas Viswa. Later when we can acquire faith in the Divinity, thenwe transform into the next higher stage described as Taijasa. Ifwe do not stop at this stage, and if we develop the next higherstage and identify ourselves with Atma, that can be describedas Pragna. Because Vishwamithra reached this sacred stage ofPragna, he could realise that Rama was the incarnation ofNarayana Himself, and in that context he was in contact withRama. In this stage of Pragna, there will be a commendableSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977155determination to fulfil a task. That determination is permanentand unwavering. In this stage Vishwamithra developed somekind of enmity with Vasishta because Vasishta was beingdescribed as a Brahmarishi while he himself was describedonly as a Rajarishi. He was determined to see that he was alsoaddressed as a Brahmarishi by Vasishta himself. Withstandingall kinds of difficulty and never wavering from hisdetermination, Vishwamithra went into a very severe penance.He could withstand all the tests to which he was subjected byGod Himself. In the end he succeeded in being called aBrahmarishi by Vasishta himself. Because he took such a hardand difficult vow and succeeded, we call him Brahman. Thus,if we want to achieve anything, we should go into the state ofan unwavering mind and a determination without swervingfrom the objective. Vishwamithra demonstrated such sacredtruths.Amongst the lessons which Vishwamithra gave to theworld, Gayatri manthra is an important one. This manthrateaches that there is equal opportunity of spiritual achievementfor all religions, for people of all countries and people of allcommunities and all places.This manthra has something to do only withintelligence. It has nothing to do with religious activity. Wesay “Dhiyo yonah prachodayath,” and this portion of Gayatrimeans, “Blossom my intelligence, give importance to myintelligence, remove the dark-ness of ignorance and let thePragnana in me blossom out.” It prays to the Lord who ispresent at all time, (past, present and future) and who is presentat every place, to come and burn away the darkness of ignor-ance and give the brightness of knowledge. In man’s life, thereis his childhood, his youth and his old age. These three stagesof man are not distinct and differ-ent, but they are simply156  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977changes of one and the same basic content. In the childhoodthere is youth, in the youth there is old age. This aspect ofunity can be referred to as the aspect of Pragnana, andVishwa-mithra was demonstrating this. With the help of thisPragnana, Vishwamithra could even create a new universe.That is referred to as Trishanka. Ability to create somethingtotally new is an aspect of Pragnana.Not fully understanding and knowing the significanceof Mahavakyas from the Vedas—“Aham Brahmasmi, Thaththwam asi, Ayam Atma Brahman, Pragnanam Brahma,” weare misinterpreting them, and we are not able to derive the fullbenefit out of them. When we try and interpret them in as easya manner as possible, we realise that they are only telling uswhat the nature of our own self is. Pragnana enables you tostand out only as a witness and experience everything aroundyou. We say, this is my hand, this is my head, this is mytongue, and we begin to claim all this, but who is thisclaimant? For every one of these things, Veda has been tellingus the answer by saying: That is you, thou art that, I amPragnana and I am Brahman; in that way it makes you standout as a witness and not become identical with your body orhand.Students:There are many such sacred statements in the Vedas,but we are not making an attempt to under-stand these sacredstatements. Prakruthi, the material creation around us, is ourfriend. We can interpret this by saying that if we have faith, wecan achieve any difficult task. For both these, our prema is themain cause. If there is prema between you and me and even ifwe come to blows with each other, then you will interpret thatit has been for your own good; those blows have caused yourblood to circulate more freely. If there is no prema, if there isno understanding between us, even if I throw a good roseSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977157flower at you, it will be misunderstood and you will interpret itby saying that the rose has got a thorn and I have thrown therose so that the thorn may hurt you. Here the good way inwhich you interpret it, or the bad way in which you interpret it,is determined mainly by the presence or absence of prema.If you want to promote the aspects of faith andconfidence, you must promote prema in the first instance. Theduty of every human being is to develop faith and prema, andperform one’s duty with care and responsibility. On thecontrary, we are wasting our lives, filling ourselves withignorance and not making an attempt to understand the purposeof life. In one’s own childhood, one mixes up with a number ofother children and spends time playing games. When he getsinto his youth, he spends his time attracted by women. Inadolescence he will spend his time trying to earn money. Whenhe is in old age, he will begin to think of God. He keeps onsaying that he has not achieved this or that, and he keeps onfeeling sorry. In the end, without being able to give up thesedesires, without knowing what his true form is, he spends hislife in a wasteful manner and ends it in sorrow.Students:To be born as a human being is not so unsacred as allthat. Amongst all the things that are born, to get a human birthis very difficult. Not realising that and acquiring bad qualitieswill be making our life unsacred. No life is always and at alltimes filled with troubles and pains. Difficulties never comeone after another. The interval between one sorrow and anothercan be described as pleasure. Thus pleasure is always aninterval between two pains. On the contrary, we treat thisperiod between pain and pain as a period of leisure and rest.Truly three-fourths of our life is filled with happinessand only one-fourth is filled pain. But we do not take our life158  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977in that manner. We think that three-fourths is filled withsorrow and one-fourth is filled with happiness, and we getvexed and disgusted with human life and say that this humanlife is full of sorrow. This simply reflects man’s mind in aweak state. With a view to making such a weak mind strongenough, we have to accept the path of spirituality.There is a small example; we eat rice. In that process,thousands of pieces of rice cooked as food are taken inside. Wedo not pay attention to the large number of pieces of rice thatgo inside. But even if there is one piece of stone, which comesinto our mouth, we say that the rice is full of stones. Thismeans that when there is pain, we give a lot of attention andspend a lot of time thinking about the pain.We can take another example. Suppose ten years ago,one of the children got fever and as a result of that he died.After all that time, today another child gets fever. Looking atthis child who has fever now, we recall to our mind the factthat one other child had fever ten years ago and died as a resultof that fever. We feel sorry and add that sorrow to the presentsor-row and we become more and more sorrowful. Why are werecollecting and recalling sorrow that we experi-enced tenyears ago? Why do we not think of the hap-piness and thegood that we experienced in the past? We always recall thepain and the sorrow that we had experienced. At this presenttime of trouble just as we remember the pain and sorrow of thepast, if we can recall the pleasure and happiness of the pastalso, then, to some extent, we will be relieved of the pain at thepresent time. The true nature of Atma should be such that werecall the happiness and pleasure that has gone by and notsorrow and pain. The reason for this is that Atma has the formof ananda. Atma which is the embodiment of God is beautyand happiness.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977159Divya Atma Swarupas:Beauty is not present in creation, beauty is present inus, in the nature of Atma. There is one example. Sita’s mindwas filled with sorrow when she was in the Asoka Vana andRavana tried to show her many beautiful things and attract her.However, all that beauty caused no attraction to Sita. To makeSita forget her sorrow, he created several attractive things. Buton the last day, looking at a monkey who was sitting on a treeand uttering the name of Rama, Sita found great beauty andattraction and she began to enjoy the beauty of the monkey. Isa monkey beautiful at any time? But the name of Rama whichwas enshrined in the mind of Sita, joined with the name ofRama uttered by Hanuman, and the two together created theattraction and beauty, and the beauty was not in the monkey.When there is prema, whatever we may look at, it will bebeautiful and good. The young crow looks attractive to the oldcrow. We will be disgusted with the sight of a crow, but themother crow will always be happy when looking at the youngcrow. It is only a contact with our own prema that will make usappreciate and be happy. Vishwamithra always proclaimed thatthese two aspects, beauty and happiness, really come out of ourown mind.In the story of the Ramayana, every character,including that of the rakshasas as well as of the monkey, hasbeen proclaiming suitable ideals to the world. After killing therakshasas, Tataki and Subahu, Maricha was allowed to go free,and we must examine the inner meaning of this situation. IfMaricha was also killed and was not allowed to go free, therewould not have been the possibility of Ravana taking awaySita. If Ravana did not take away Sita, there would not havebeen the killing of Ravana himself. Thus, there is always amaster plan behind every act in the Ramayana.160  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Students:In this context, you should realise that for every act ofyours, you should take great care. “Sraddha van labhatejnanam,” one can get wisdom by paying suf-ficient attention.The letters contained in this state-ment should be understoodcarefully. To promote this kind of sraddha, we should alsothink of another eight-letter statement “Samsayatmavinasyate,” you must remove all doubts from your mind. Onthe one side, “Sraddha van labhate jnanam,” and on the otherside “Samsayatma vinasyate.” If we have these two state-mentsas the two limits between which our stream of life should flow,we will be happy. If one has sufficient care and sufficient faitheven if he gets a tiny spark, out of that spark he can generate ahuge fire. If one is not careful, even if you give him bigburning logs, he will push them aside; there will be no fire. Fora stu-dent who has sraddha, who has a desire to learn, even ifyou give one sacred sentence, it will be enough. We do nothave to read many books. If we want to tell others, we have toread books. If you want to realise for yourself, even onesentence is enough. To kill others, you want swords, weaponsand guns. If you want to kill yourself, even a needle is enough.So also if we want to realise the nature of ourselves, one sen-tence with prema and confidence is enough. For us to readmany books, to listen to many statements made by others andenter into argumentative conversation with each other willmean a waste of time. When you enter into such argumentativetalks, the pragnana in you will lose its vitality. Your steadinessalso will disappear. Arguments and counter arguments willalways weaken a man. To some extent, one will lose hisreputation as well.Students should quietly and silently debate withinthemselves and understand their own true nature.15. The World Is An IllusoryProjection Of The Substratum OfBrahmanA zero will get its value only if it is placed after aninteger, so also, a jiva will get some value only if it isplaced in conjunction with Divinity. This is the simpletruth. What other truth can I convey to you?Paramatma is one who is infinitesimally smaller thanthe smallest thing. Paramatma is one who is larger and biggerthan the infinitely large things. Paramatma is the totality of allthe small and all the big things in this world. It is not possiblefor anyone to describe or understand the fullness and the totalaspect of the Lord. Four blind people, who wanted to know theform of an elephant, began touching each one of its organs andwere thinking that the elephant has the same form as theparticular organ which he has touched. Human beings are notable to understand and grasp the infinite aspect of the Lord.Each one of them gets only a limited experience of the Lord,and he think that God is limited to his experience only.The leaders of various religions have been describingthis totality of Divinity in an incomplete manner. TheCharvakas have come to the conclusion that there is nostrength at all in this aspect. The Jains and the Buddhists havenot been able to grasp the really true form of this aspect. ButSankara has been describing this by words (chinmatra)indescribable, incomprehensive and so on. He has been estab-lishing that the self-effulgent Paramatma is no other than thebasic truth. He has been propagating that the illusion which162  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977man often suffers from is not separate and distinct from, but isonly a projection of, Brahman, the true substratum. He hasbeen teaching that one should believe that whatever is presentin all the living beings is simply Brahman and nothing else.The aspect of Brahman is something which is eternal, isunchanging and has not got any blemish in it at all. When wesay that it is unchanging and eternal, we also imply that it hasneither birth, nor an end. There is also an implication in itsdescription that the qualities and the gunas of the aspect ofBrahman cannot be described and understood. There is alsoanother inner meaning in Sankara’s description thatParamatma or Brahman is something which does not dependon anything else; it is perfectly and totally independent. It hasno parallel and you cannot point at something else and say thatBrahman is greater than this or equal to this. There is nothingequal to or greater than Brahman. This is the aspect of theParamatma.Just as it is quite common knowledge in the world thatmilk changes into curd easily, so also this indescribable Sakthi,or power of Paramatma, has changed itself and projected itselfas creation. We should realise that the strength of Paramatma,which has changed as a result of maya and projected itself ismaterial creation, is symbolised by Sita; and the divinestrength of Paramatma is symbolised by Rama. The marriagebetween Rama and Sita is really the confluence of Purushawith Prakruthi. As was mentioned yesterday, sinceVishwamithra understood very well the meaning of the Turiyastate, he has also understood the symbolic meaning of creation,which is Sita, and he described Sita in this manner. The state ofTuriya can be regarded by us as literally the form of Atma. If apiece of salt went into the ocean to find the ocean, it getsdissolved in the ocean and cannot come back in its originalform. So also, we learn that the jiva which wants to learn theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977163nature of Atma, when it goes there, it will get completelymerged in the Atma and cannot come back. Here, it has beenestablished that the nature and meaning of Rama is the silentinterval that exists between two primordial sounds of Om. Themeaning and the aspect of Rama should also be recognised byus, and it conveys to us the kind of connection that should existbetween one human being and another. Here we can take theexample of Divin-ity, the Brahman which is a single entity andwhich has no parallel. Its manifestations are in the form of somany different human beings. If we take a piece of glass prism,we will notice that light appears through this prism as beingmade up of so many different colours. The seven colours thatwe see through the prism are not different and distinct. Whatbasically exists is one single ray of light that is being brokeninto seven different colours because of the existence of theprism. It is not the natural form of the original ray of light.When we light the wick of an oil lamp and try to look at itfrom different angles, we can see that the light appears to us ina totally different form. All these different forms can be seen inthe light of the wick. They are not different. They are comingfrom the same source. It is in this context that in Vedanticparlance, it is said that if you take out fullness from what isalready complete and full, then what remains will also be full.Infinity, subtracted out of infinity, leaves infinity as theremainder.There is a small example: we go to a shop and we wishto buy a kilo of jaggery. From the stock which the shopkeeperhas, he will cut a small piece and will give it, after weighing akilo. The sweetness in the kilogram of jaggery which you havepurchased is in no way different from the sweetness in thesame block. The difference is only in the measure. We bring ithome, we make small pieces of this jaggery, we put it in waterand make it into sweet juice and drink it. Even when small164  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977pieces are made out of this kilo of jaggery and put into water,there is no change in the sweetness of jaggery. The big block,the kilo of jaggery, and a small piece of jaggery may differ inthe quantity and measure but the taste has not changed. Thusthe source is full, from that we have removed fullness, and wehave experienced this fullness and what remains is also full. Ifyou take fullness out of a full thing, what remains is also full.Thus the name of Rama demon-strates to us that man’s aspectsare all divine aspects. They are closely connected with theaspect of divinity.The Ramayana has been establishing that all livingbeings have their origin in God. The Upanishads have taughtus the same thing by saying that Easwara is the source of everybeing. By taking these examples from the Ramayana,Vishwamithra tells us that Sita should be regarded as thesymbol of creation and Rama should be regarded as Divinity,or the Atma, and the marriage between Rama and Sita is theconfluence between Divinity on one hand and the essence ofhuman beings on the other. Vishwamithra also showed us thatsorrows and pleasures are simply the results of union or thebreaking up of such unions. The Ramayana has also taught usthat the spirit of Atma is contained in understanding truly theresult of coming together or being separated. Here whenVishwamithra was taking Rama and Lakshmana for thepurpose of killing Tataki, halfway in their journey they heard abig noise. Rama and Lakshmana asked Vishwamithra how, in aforest, where there were not many people, such a big noise hadcome. Vishwa-mithra told them that amongst the Himalayasthere is a particular mountain called the Kailasha and on thatmountain of Kailasha there is a lake by name Manasarovar.The river Sarayu flows out of the lake Manasarovar. Anancient king who belonged to the Dynasty of Rama wasresponsible for bringing this river down to the plains, and hisSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977165name was Bhagi-ratha. Vishwamithra stated that Bhagirathabrought down the river Ganges as well and the Sarayu wasjoining the river Ganges, and therefore, the noise was so loud.Vishwamithra had implied a good spiritual inner meaning forhis statement. He regarded the word ‘Kailasha’ as symbolic ofa pure mind. Our mind has been compared to the lakeManasarovar. The outflow of several ideas from the pure andclean mind had been compared with the outflow of the riverSarayu from lake Manasarovar. He imagined that these ideasare springing as if they had pure white foam in them. Whenthese sacred ideas are emanating from Manasarovar in the formof river Sarayu and when they are touched by the rays of sun,they produce a sound, the primordial sound, OM. This sacredsound Om, or the pranava, is emanating from the heart ofevery individual. Vishwamithra explained that this is the originof the noise. You can hear this sound of pranava only in aplace which is pure. For this reason, the rishis of those daysused to leave the cities and towns and go to the forest whichwas pure and silent, for the sake of hearing this primordialsound of Om. Truly, the sound that is contained in silence is tobe identified with God.After walking some distance, they also heard a soundwhich was not very pleasant; that was causing some fear also.Rama asked Vishwamithra what that fearful sound was?Vishwamithra told Rama that the fearful sound was made byTataki, a rakshasi who was causing havoc and trouble to allrishis in the forest. He also explained that Rama was broughtthere to kill Tataki. She was called a yakshini. Since Ramaknew all the dharmas and all the secrets of things, he askedVishwamithra, how a yakshini, which cannot exercise its ownwill, could cause such harm and suggested that Tataki is only ayakshasi.166  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977 Vishwamithra gave an interesting story in this context.He described the story of Suketa who was a yaksha, who waspraying to the Lord because he had no children. As a result ofthis, he was blessed with a very strong daughter by nameTataki, the rakshasi. This Tataki married a person by nameSangalu, and after the marriage she had two sons by nameSubahu and Maricha. After some years, the husband died.Unable to bear the death of her husband, Sangalu, she becamevery much excited; and in great passion she developed anger;and with the help of her two sons, she has been all the timegiving pain and trouble to the rishis. Realising this anger andbad conduct on the part of this woman, Agasthya cursed herand said that she will thereafter conduct herself as a rakshasi.Vishwamithra narrated this story and said thatoriginally she was a yakshini; but as a result of the curse ofAgasthya, she became a rakshasi. Now she can exercise herwill over human beings. After telling Rama about this power ofthe yakshini, he took Him to Mithilapura. Vishwamithra hadalso been establishing the truth that is contained in thestatement that sin is not something distinct and unconnectedwith one’s actions. Sin arises only from the kind of work andaction that you do. God is not found elsewhere. God can befound only by the good deeds and good actions that you do.When we talk of rakshasas and wicked people, they are not tobe found elsewhere as separate entities; they are living in ourown hearts and arise from our own actions. It is in this contextthat the devatas described Ravana as having ten heads,symbolic of anger and sin, and removal of anger and sin meansremoval of Ravana or demoniac qualities. Here we caninterpret this by saying that wickedness and anger in the formof Ravana will be present in us unless we take care. Sita’saspect is symbolic vignana and pragnana or knowledge andwisdom. She is the embodiment of Sakthi. Vishwamithra, whoSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977167realised and recognised this sacred aspect of Sita, was wantingRama, the Divinity, to secure this aspect of Sita. The story ofRamayana teaches us the confluence or the coming together ofthese two divine aspects. Such a confluence is for theprosperity of the world.All the great and divine ideas that are contained withinus feel exhilarated when we look at the coming together ofthese two aspects. All the good qualities that are contained inSita were being described in terms of beautiful gems,diamonds, pearls and flowers. Everyone was anxious to go andsee the marriage of Rama and Sita. They believed that Ramawill look after people with greater joy and bliss and will givethem all kinds of weapons and strength during the marriage.When we see the meaning of the words that have been used onthat occasion, we realise that creation, with all its beauty, withall its attractiveness is in the form of Sita, who is born out ofthe earth. This beauty of creation is being described byVishwamithra in this story. The marriage ceremony of Ramashould not be regarded by us as a simple marriage where Ramamarried Sita on his own; but we should regard it as aconfluence of all the noble qualities that are born with us, withthe divine spirit of Atma which is Rama. We call this momentan auspicious moment, and that is the moment where theaspect of jiva is brought together with the aspect ofParamatma. When our mind can get fixed on God, that is alsoreferred to as an auspicious moment. Many people ask thequestion, why is it, Swami, that my mind is not getting fixedon Divinity? When we look at it from another angle, say wewant to get a girl married to a boy, we talk of issuing aninvitation which is called a Lagna Patrika. The word lagnatruly means confluence, the coming together of the jivatma andParamatma.168  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977On the night when that lagna, that confluence, tookplace between the jivatma and Paramatma, Vishwamithradisappeared from the scene. Till that merger took place,Vishwamithra was keeping the divine aspect of Rama a secret.Not only Vishwa-mithra, but also all the rishis kept it a secretbecause they wanted the destruction of Ravana to come aboutwith certainty.If, even before the marriage of Sita and before thedestruction of Ravana, they told everyone that Rama was anincarnation of God, marriage of Sita would not have takenplace; Sita would not have been stolen and the death of Ravanawould not have come about. This is the reason why from thevery birth of Rama, He was conducting Himself and appearingto people as if He was an ordinary person. At no place, at nomoment and in no circumstances did Rama proclaim that Hewas God in human form. The secret of Divinity is always likethis and is hidden until the task, which God undertakes, iscompleted successfully. When the time comes, when theappropriate situation arises, then the divine strength will alsobecome apparent to the world. Rama and Lakshmana wereaccompanying Vishwamithra and they came to Mithilapura.King Janaka knew the greatness of Vishwa-mithra, andhe realised that Vishwamithra brought some princes for thesake of handling the Shiva Dhanu, and he gave them a verygood reception. Rama was giving the impression that He wasan ordinary human being because He came walking from along distance.In Mithilapura, He was sitting alone in a room and wastrying to press His feet and relieve the pain due to walking.The doors of the room were nearly closed, but there was asmall opening. Narada, who knew all the time what wasSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977169happening, came there and looked through the opening in thedoor and found that Rama was pressing His own feet. Heloudly exclaimed, “Oh Paramatma, what has happened? Whyare You pressing Your own feet!”Vishwamithra appeared on the scene immediately andtold Narada that this secret of the incarnation of Rama must bekept carefully. He requested Narada not to bring about acatastrophe by announc-ing it openly. Vishwamithra said thatif this is done, then the marriage of Sita will not take place andthe destruction of Ravana will not come about. All the rishis,who were really liberated people, had no selfish motives. Thiskind of conduct on their part was intended to give happinessand prosperity to the people.Students!To regard the qualities of the rishis as being cheap isdue to our own ignorance. Because we are unable tounderstand the inner meaning of what they have left for us andare unable to recognise their greatness, we are thinking thatthese people were ordinary people. When we look at greatpeople from our own inferior position, we think that theirdhyana and their achievements are very small. This is so, onlybecause of your inability to grasp the greatness in them. Thedivine aspect is present in all human beings. If you regard thelittle spark which is in you as very great and are conceitedabout it, you must also feel how great the same spark, which ispresent in everyone like you, can be. You may feel that you area very big person. But this is looking at it from your ownposition. When you look at the ocean from your own position,it looks like a big thing. But when you raise your own positionhigher and higher, then look at the ocean, then you think theocean is also small. Only when you yourself can rise to a170  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977higher position, will you realise that all the living things in theworld are very small.It is in this context that Vishwamithra was teaching thepeople the great truth—Brahma sathyam, jagat mithya. Theone and only truth is Brahman. Because it is being projected asthis material creation, we see by illusion the world around us.Without milk, you do not get curds. Without curds, you do notget butter. Without Brahman, you do not get the projectedworld.16. God And Dharma Should Be TheTwo Wheels For The ChariotOf Your LifeWhether you take the pot to a well or to a big lakeor even to the ocean, the amount of water you canbring will be only all that it can contain and no more.So, also, wherever you may go, what you can achieve,will be only what you deserve and no more. This is thetruth. What other truth can I convey to you?Pavitratma Swarupas:It is not possible to make any noise with one hand only.In the same manner, if man wants to achieve something higher,without making an effort, it is not possible. If man wants to getthe fruits without making any effort, this signifies weakness onhis part. In order to achieve any result, some attempt has to bemade. It is man’s duty to put in his best efforts and the successor failure will be decided by God. By making an effort, we willbe able to achieve many things and good results. Creation andGod are not two distinct things. In our ignorance, we regardwhat really is a projection of God’s maya as the world andmaterial creation. It will appear as the manifestation of thespirit of the Divine if we act wisely and with knowledge. It isonly when we can think of both and discriminate betweenthem, will we see the difference.There is an example for this. Suppose we have learntthat, in the markets of Bangalore, there are some very sweetand juicy mangoes. Just by listening to that statement can weget the experience of eating the mango? We should go to themarket and see those mangoes. Merely by looking at the172  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977mangoes, the juice is not going to enter our mouth. In order toexperience the sweetness of the juice, we will have to take itin. In the same manner, the first step is to understand. Afterunderstanding, we also have to go and see. After see-ing, wehave to experience. As in this analogy, when we hear thewords jiva and God, it is only when we see it, go near it andexperience it, can we understand their aspects. We should alsorecognise the truth that God, alone, cannot be separatelyexisting without His own creation; and without creation, thereis no God.By our external understanding, we call this a piece ofcloth. But by some thought and understanding, we can call it aconglomeration of pieces of thread. Without the threads, wecannot get a cloth. Without the earth, we cannot have a pot.Without the gold, we cannot have any ornaments. WithoutBrahman, we cannot have any creation. Here we mustrecognise the inseparable connection between the creator onthe one hand and creation on the other hand. We should try andunderstand, make an examination of the meaning of the words“I, World and God.”In the market of this world, we will be able to collectthe fruit of jiva. Our attempts should be to reach the market ofthe world and find the fruit of jiva. In the aspect of jiva, weshould experience the Brahman or the God in it. You mustrecognise the oneness of the Brahman that is present in all ofus. You may have many different vessels of different colours,of different forms and made up of different metals, but thereflection of the sun in all those vessels is of the same sun. Inthe same manner, we should recognise that what we find asreflection in all the jivas is the reflection of only the oneParamatma. By entertaining different ideas, which areincorrect, we are making our own life very artificial. WeSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977173should make an attempt to recognise the oneness of all that ispresent in everyone. Here, in this group, we call out the nameof Ramudu and the one with that appropriate name will get upand respond saying, “I am Ramudu.” One other name is calledout as Krishna and another individual gets up and says, “I amKrishna.” While the names and forms of Rama, Krishna,Lakshmi, Narayana and Madhava look dif-ferent, yet in all ofthem, when they say, I am so and so, I am so and so, thecommon thing is the I. This aspect of I, which is present ineveryone, is the aspect of Brahman. When we ask the question,“who am I?” it will be right and appropriate to give the answer,“I am I.” This is the correct interpretation of Adwaitha.Contrary to this, even if we say “Aham Brahmasmi,” I amBrahman, we see an amount of duality. In that statement, twothings appear to us. One is the I and the other is Brahman. It isthis dualistic concept in man that gives rise to severalmisinterpretations and several doubts.Divya Atma Swarupas:The knowledge of Atma, the basic spiritual knowledge,is the one which enables us to recognise the oneness of allhuman beings. In human beings, there are four distinctvarieties which are to be recognised. The best among them arethose who can recognise the faults in themselves and the goodin others. The second category are those who recognise onlythe good in themselves and the faults in others. Worse thanthese are the people who proclaim the good that does not existin them and find faults which do not exist in others. There isthe fourth category, worse than all the other three categories, ofpersons who will always talk about the non-existent good inthemselves and will always praise themselves and do notrecognise anything else. This can also be called praising one’sown self. When we talk of praising one’s own self, one canunderstand praising one’s own self where the praise is174  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977rightfully due; but if you talk of this with ego (ahamkara), it isequal to blindness. Ravana was suffering not only from thisego but he had also other bad qualities like jealousy, anger, lustand had power based on wealth. Ravana was born to parents byname Brahma and Kaikasi. He had two brothers, with namesKumbhakarna and Vibhishana.Since the time of his birth, Ravana was a great devoteeand was also habituated to perform thapas. By continuouspenance, he earned the grace of Easwara and secured boonsfrom Him. On one occasion when he was engaged in deeppenance, Brahma appeared before him and asked Ravana whatboon he wanted. Then Ravana asked of Brahma to grant him aboon by which he will not be killed by any human being oranimal. At that time, there lived a rakshasa by name Mayura.He had built a beautiful city for himself. That city was morebeautiful than the city of Indra. The daughter of Mayura wasMandodari. Ravana married Mandodari. She had many goodqualities like shanthi, kindness and prema and Ravana neverhad any one of them in him.This daughter of Mayura, Mandodari, with all suchgood qualities, was married to Ravana. From the time ofmarriage, his wife Mandodari tried her best to communicateher good qualities to Ravana and save him, but Ravana madeno attempt to change his bad qualities. As a man reaches hisend, his bad qualities will also go on increasing. So alsoRavana’s bad qualities began to increase. His brotherVibhishana also tried to teach him several good ideals. Ravanaalso knew all about good conduct and dharma. What is the useof knowing what good conduct and dharma are if it is not toput into practice?Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977175Whatever one may learn, it is no use unless one puts itinto practice. Ravana was proficient in all the differentbranches of knowledge. What is the use of having all thesethings if he cannot use such knowledge to reach the Lord? Ifbad ideas enter one’s head, his wisdom and knowledge will dryup. In the end, Ravana lost his kingdom and ruined his entirefamily.Ravana’s brother, Vibhishana, was a great sathwikindividual. From the time of his early child-hood, he wasspending all his time in thinking of the name of the Lord.When Vibhishana was in penance, Brahma appeared and askedhim what boon he wanted. Vibhishana, in turn, said that heonly wanted to have his mind fixed at the lotus feet of theLord. He prayed that he be given the strength by which he willalways be at the feet of the Lord. Because Vibhishana had asathwik mind and a sathwik heart, he could reachRamachandra. Vibhishana gave up and broke his connectionswith his brother, his property and his wealth and reached thefeet of Ramachandra. He decided that all his wealth and all thatbelonged to him could be sacrificed for the purpose of gettingthe grace of Ramachandra. If one has complete faith in God,one can achieve any difficult task.Students:In our daily life, we follow so many different paths forthe purpose of getting some happiness and pleasure. In thisworld, there are many rich people, there are many wealthypeople, there are many strong people and there are educatedpeople; but we do not find any amongst them who enjoy peaceof mind. The Kauravas had any amount of wealth, physicalstrength and weapons but still they never derived any benefitfrom all that. If man makes himself distant from God and fromrighteousness, in what manner can he get this peace of mind?176  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Students:The true strength which one can have is the strengthwhich comes from God and righteousness. You should adoptthe two wings, namely the aspect of God and Dharma. Ourmovements in this world should be on a chariot which has twowheels, the wheels of God and of Dharma. We shouldexperience these two, God and Dharma, as ideals in our life.Dharma alone is like the heart of our life. Forgetting thissacred dharma and taking to unjust behaviour will be ruiningour own lives. We should pick out all the bad habits in us andabandon them. In their place, we should take the good from thecharacters in the Ramayana and put them into practice. Weshould try and understand the good qualities of even Ravana. Itis not as if there are no good qualities in Ravana. When he wasfully immersed in the thought of God, he was prepared tosacrifice even his entire body. He was truly a follower ofdharma and protector of dharma. The bad qualities of Ravanadid not come as natural qualities to Ravana. All the badqualities and bad thoughts came to Ravana because of a certaincurse to which he was subjected at one time. For such a curse,his own karma was responsible. The kind of work and karmathat we do will determine the consequences. The kind of seedthat we put in will determine the tree and the fruit that we canget out of it. Unknowingly, and in some ignorance, we dosome bad things. Whether we do such bad work eitherknowingly or unknowingly, the consequences are inevitable.This is the nature of karma.Here is a rose flower. There is a very nice fragrancecoming from this rose flower. Whether this flower is held inthe left hand or in the right hand, the fragrance that we get isexactly the same. This fragrance is being given not only to usbut to all other people around us. If we hold in our hand aSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977177flower which gives a foul smell, that bad smell will be comingnot only to us but to everyone near us. In the same manner, thebad qualities that were in Ravana were spreading and givingtheir evil results to the entire Lanka and they spread even toVibhishana who was a sathwik person. When Vibhishana wentto surrender to Rama and seek his protection, people likeSugriva, Angada and others, who were with Rama, askedwhether Vibhishana, who was the brother of Ravana, wouldalso not have the same bad qualities which were characteristicof his brother. The reason for this suspicion and for getting abad name was the company in which Vibhishana lived. In thiscontext, we should take great care in choosing our company.We should take care to see that we will absorb the goodqualities from the society in which we live. If we join badpeople and keep company with bad people, in a few days wewill also get into bad habits. When we join good people andkeep company with them, we will also absorb good qualitiesfrom them.The hearts of young people are tender and clean. Theyare like white pieces of cloth. On this white piece of cloth,whatever colour you may put, you will immediately see thecolour. You must make an attempt to keep your heart sacredand join such company which is sacred.Students:Having been born in this sacred country of Bharath,calling yourselves sons of this sacred country and belonging tothe Hindu religion, accepting Indian culture and Indiantraditions, if you only talk of them and do not practice them,you will be doing great injustice to this sacred country. All theyoung people should accept these good ideas and communicatethem to others by their practice. This is the proper time. Yourage, at this point of time, is the correct age. If during this age178  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977of yours, you acquire sacred ideas, there will be no difficulty inputting them into practice, when you get into your age ofadolescence and later.Students:You are the future citizens of this country. You shouldshow your good and sacred ideals not in words but in action.Instead of telling a hundred things, try and show by practice atleast one thing. It is to enable you to see the importance ofpractice that we have organised this summer course. If, afterexperiencing this sacred opportunity for a whole month, youcannot use this opportunity in a good manner, you should callyourselves very unfortunate. Many elders and manyexperienced persons are teaching you every day about the goodand sacred ideals. You should try to absorb the good ideas thatare contained in all these teachings and put them into practice.You must be such that you will use this sacred opportunity in asacred manner. Your capacity for digestion must be protectedwith great care. Many people are giving you a big feast. Fromthis daily feast, you must try and digest at least a small portionand after digesting, you must get the strength therefrom intoyour body and put it into practice. After listening to thesediscourses here, when you go back to your lodging, you shouldnot spend your time in unnecessary conversation. You shouldrecapitulate and recollect what you have listened to. It is not asif you should only utter the words that are contained in themanthra. Mere uttering the words and reading are notsufficient. You must try and recapitulate and digest it, everyword and every sound of your Omkara. All people aremanifestations of Paramatma. When such a sacred opportunityhas come your way, to misuse it is also a great misfortune.Students:Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977179The bliss that you are enjoying and the experiencewhich you are having should not turn out to be a passing one.This should change and transform into a permanent bliss. Manis always seeking happiness and bliss. He is the embodiment ofhappiness. Man should never give rise to any sorrow or pain.In the young age, sometimes you may get excited or angry.When such a situation comes to you, you should try and sitalone and give some thought to it and find out what is right andwhat is wrong. When some thought comes into your mind, youshould not immediately act with excitement. That kind ofaction will take you to great sin. Take time and discriminate;find out whether it is going to lead you to a good act or a badact, is it going to give you reputation or push you down? Thisdiscrimination is very necessary for all people.You may read many Sastras or many Puranas, but ifyou do not acquire the capacity to discriminate between rightand wrong, all these things will become useless. In our dailylife, we should conduct ourselves in an appropriate manner.We should promote a sacred life. We should establish truehuman nature. We should also absorb the nature of the Divine.It is for this reason that it has been said that of all things thatare born, to be born as a human being is sacred. After beingborn as a human being, to conduct yourselves like animals isbringing disgrace to the human birth itself.Students:You should entertain sacred ideals in your mind andtake care to see that in your daily life, you accept them and putthem into practice.17. Start Early, Drive Slowly AndReach SafelyTo begin with, white ants appear little by little, andthey grow slowly. However, in good time, the wholepiece of wood will be completely eaten away. Similarlybad qualities start in a small way; in good time, theywill destroy the individual completely.Students:It is very necessary that you control your mind. Manshould give up comparing himself with others.The hands of the clock keep on moving and we heartheir ticking noise. This sound of the clock goes oncontinuously. Between one tick and another, there is aninterval. Man’s life is also like this interval. Through man’sheart and through his blood vessels, his life stream is beating.This beat will come to an end at sometime. Truly birth isfollowed by death, and death again by birth, and so on. Weshould try and understand the secret of this life. As a man whois swimming and moving forward in a river, we should alsoforget the experiences through which we have gone in the pastand swim forward. Only if the swimmer throws back the waterwhich is ahead of him will he move forward. If he does notthrow back the water that is ahead of him, he will stay wherehe is. As in this analogy, only if man attempts to throw backthe experience which he has gone through, will he be able tomove forward. If one follows such a path, one will find that inman’s life there is no place for anger, no place for jealousy andhis life will move on pleasantly. Because man wants to goSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977181through the same experience which he has already experiencedin the past, he enters the region of hatred, because heaccumulates around him many attachments. If man reallymakes an attempt to understand his own nature and thecomparison between the clock and his heart, it will be possiblefor him to experience truth. Even after experiencing so manythings, if man does not understand his true nature, he will feelvery unhappy. He wants always to be happy, but he does notask the question whether one can get happiness in this world?Man has great faith in collecting, acquiring and amassingwealth; but he has not got the same faith in giving up andsacrificing. But he can make an attempt to develop faith in theact of giving and sacrificing. When man can develop faith andrecognises the joy of giving away and of sharing things, he willenjoy his life. If man really wants peace and happiness, hemust be prepared to sacrifice. The Vedas have told us that whatcannot be acquired through hard work, through learning,through any other means, can only be acquired throughsacrifice. We should also understand the inner meaning ofsacrifice.If the food that we eat is not excreted out and is notsacrificed, our health will be spoiled. If we do not exhale theair that we take in and send it out, our lungs will get spoiled. Ifthe blood does not keep on moving but stays at one place, thenthere will be a boil at that place. It is very necessary for us torecognise the happiness that is contained in the spirit ofsacrifice. But man always wants to have the same experienceagain and again everyday before he learns a lesson; andbecause of such bad desires, man has become so unfortunatethat he cannot even have a peaceful death, not to talk of apeaceful life. If man wants to lead a peaceful life, he mustrealise the importance of sacrifice. The truth that is contained182  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977in the statement, that immortality can be obtained throughsacrifice alone, should be understood well.In our daily life, we exhibit several bad qualities likeanger, jealousy, and comparing ourselves with others. Thesebad qualities should be given up and sacrificed. BecauseRavana had these qualities which go contrary to thepurusharthas, he became a rakshasa. Ravana may have been adevotee, may have been a very learned person, but in spite ofthis, because he had these four bad qualities which are contraryto the purusharthas: dharma, artha, kama and moksha, hebecame a sinner. To such people, whatever dharma you maypreach, it will appear as if it is wrong.Ravana was the son of Brahma, had many greatqualities, was a great devotee, earned God’s grace by hispenance; and in spite of all that, he had no peace and he did notsecure a good end for himself. He could invade the city ofKubera, defeat him and take away the Pushpaka Vimana. Thisshows that, in him, there was the quality of jealousy. He couldnot bear Kubera being greater than him. Not only this, heinvaded the city of Mayura, his father-in-law, defeated him,took away all his attendants and annexed his city which wasthe principal city of Lanka. Here one should recognise that ifthere is room for such bad qualities to grow, even though theybegin in a small way, in the end, like white ants, they willdestroy the entire life. Sometimes, because of weakness, or in astate of excitement, one does things which one should not doand, in the end, he will have to repent.Ravana, in the story of the Ramayana, is teaching alesson to the world that no one should have such bad qualitiesas he had. Ravana was a wicked person and he adopted severaltrickeries. He spoke un-truth and told Rama that he brought theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977183head of Sita while he actually brought only an artificially-created head of Sita, a deceit. He told that he killed Sita andbrought the head. Since Rama was all-knowing, he realisedthat this was a trick and told Ravana that it could not be thetruth. Similarly, he did the trick of getting the head of Ramaand showing it to Sita and telling her that he had killed Rama.Ravana could not bear the happiness of other people.The normal human nature should be to become happy bylooking at the happiness of others. There are many people inthe world who, like Ravana, take a lot of interest in anyhappiness that may come in the way of other people and whocannot bear others being happy.Yugas have gone by, worlds have changed, times havechanged, but the ideas and the behaviour of individuals havenot changed. Even if one idea and one thought change, we canaccept the trend as a sacred trend. In the Kali Yuga, there aremany gurus, many groups, many organisations, many idealsand many religions who are preaching the need for such achange. In spite of listening to all that and reading all that, ifone’s conduct and mind have not changed even an inch, itsimply means that stagnation is the result of our JanmantaraKarma. Ravana had a guru called Sankaracharya who taughthim the conduct of a king. Ravana was one who acquiredproficiency in all different kinds of action. His warriors and theleaders of his army were very strong and proficient in the art ofwarfare. His wife was a very good lady with good qualities. Inspite of the fact that he had such good teaching from such aguru, and a good wife, and a strong army, he did not changehis methods, and this simply means that it is a result of his ownJanmantara Karma. He was living in utter foolishness. In hisfoolishness, he would not accept any advice from anyone else.This foolishness is something which is a great enemy of a184  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977human being. We must also remove this aspect of foolishnessin us. On certain occasions, Ravana used to appear as a goodsathwik person and on other occasions, he used to appear as aninnocent person. Sometimes, he would pretend and appear as agreat devotee. In reality, there is no one greater than him in thematter of wickedness. He would not hesitate to harm even hisown wife or son. Vibhishana, his own brother, was a sathwik person.Yet he showed no kindness to him. He simply drove him away.The wife of Vibhishana touched the feet of Ravana and beggedhim in many ways to save Vibhishana. This lady, who was thewife of his own brother, should be like his daughter, yet hegave so much trouble to her. The significance of all thesethings is that we should not simply think that Ravana was justa person with that name. The bad qualities and the cruel ideasthat are in us are symbolic of the aspect of Ravana. The goodin us is symbolic of Rama. It is only when we can let these twoaspects confront each other and get Rama to defeat Ravana,that we can imagine that the coronation of Rama within us ispossible and has taken place.We should not think that Ravana was a person orcharacter only in the story of the Ramayana. Our whole life isa Ramayana. Our heart is a meeting place for the good and thebad. Without there being some bad, there cannot be goodalone. By the presence of both bad and good, bad will try tosuppress the good to some extent. We must make an effort tosee that the good in us is not suppressed that way.You are listening to so many good discourses everyday.Those who are giving you the discourses are doing so with apure heart, and those of you who are receiving them are alsoreceiving them with a good and tender heart. But what is theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977185result of all this? When we ask such a question, one does notfind a good answer. During the period in which you listen tothese discourses, they look very nice and attractive. But onceyou go out after listening to them, they do not appeal to youand you do not want to put them into practice. It is only whenwe can digest the food that we have taken on a particular day,can we again eat food the next day. If you eat something todayand do not digest it till tomorrow, you will suffer fromindigestion. Just as we should make an attempt to digest thefood on the same day that we eat it, so, also, whatever ideasyou listen to on a particular day should be absorbed and putinto practice the same day. It is only when you take to such apath that you will be able to have a body and mind which arestrong and sturdy.Students:In that context the story of the Ramayana, which youare listening to everyday and the ideal characters that appear inthe story, offer you important examples and you should try toput those ideals into practice. Then, only, the purpose of yourjoining the Summer Classes for a whole month in Brindavanwill be fulfilled. Whatever is heard and absorbed must be putinto practice. Whatever is over and has become the past shouldbe forgotten. You should not carry it with you. You should notbestow your thoughts and waste your time on things that havegone by. Only those which are ideals and which have to beremembered as ideals should be kept with you throughout yourlife.The pains and sorrows that come during one’s daily lifemust be forgotten, and you must leave them behind. Onlywhen you make an attempt to lead such a life will it becomefruitful. Our excitement and agitations should be suppressed inthe very first instance. When your heart is free from such186  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977agitations and excitement, the ideals that have been given toyou can enter your heart. I have already mentioned to you thatif your heart is full of various things, it will not be possible toput anything more into it. If the head is empty, then some goodthings can be put into that head. Similarly, if your heart isalready full of ideas, how can any one provide you with idealswhen there is no room in your heart? If bad ideas are in youand if your ears are constantly listening to bad things and ifyour mind is already full of bad thoughts, then dharma cannotcome anywhere near such people. If you really want dharmaand God to enter your heart, you must take care to see thatyour heart is not already filled with bad ideas. Where there isdharma, God will be present. Where there is no dharma, thedevil will be present. We should not give room to the devil.We should become deserving of the grace of God. What wehave learnt from the Ramayana and the ideal characters thatwe come across in the Ramayana should enable us to take to adharmic path and to a life as an example to others. For all thesethings, devotion is essential. If you have no devotion, it willnot be possible for you to achieve anything, nor will you havethe right to achieve anything.Whatever Vedas we may study, whatever Sastras andPuranas we may read, it is only when we can understand theaspect of prema that is contained in them that we will have theright to deserve the grace of God.When Vibhishana came to the feet of Rama and askedto be permitted to surrender, Rama called the attention of thosewho were with Him, namely Sugriva, Angada and Jambavan.Vibhishana was com-ing from a distance, loudly proclaimingthat he was coming with a view to surrender to Ramachandra.Rama told others that no matter who Vibhishana was and whathis motives were, since he was coming to surrender, it was HisSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977187duty to protect him. Once you decide and say that you belongto the Lord, then what does it matter who you are or where youcome from? It follows that the Lord is yours.Then Sugriva asked, if Ravana himself came and askedfor pardon would Rama do the same thing? Rama said that ifRavana did get such a good idea in him, He will surely protecthim and make him the king of Ayodhya itself. For us, to thinkthat this aspect of surrender is appropriate only to the olderpeople, and that young students do not have to concern them-selves with it, is totally wrong. This is the appropriate agewhen you should surrender to God. When you grow older, youwill then be able to achieve great things with God’s grace.Here is a small story. The husband and wife in a familywere doing their daily household duties in the normal way andfulfilling their obligations in this world. The wife was a verygood devotee. She used to get up early morning, pray to theLord, do her puja and in many ways served her husband byattending to whatever was needed by him. The husband wasnot given to such good habits. He used to get up late, he wouldnot wash, he used to take his coffee without washing and usedto go to his office, do his work and was always thinking thatduty is God and that there was no need to do any puja. But thewife, during her prayer everyday, used to pray to the Lord, thatsomehow or other He should instil some devotion and faith inher husband and make him utter the name of the Lord, at least,occasionally.One day, when her husband was in a happy mood, shewent to him and she said that life was a very sacred thing, butthey were living like animals. She asked if, at least once a day,they could not think of the Lord. She further told her husbandthat human life was not necessary only for earning a living.188  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977She asked if the animals and birds, in order to earn a living andeat their food, are going to the universities and gettingeducated. She said that human birth is intended for promotingdevotion and prayed that he change his way of life. He did notlike all this and told his wife that she was an innocent woman.He said, “You think I have no devotion? I have great devotionto God, but while I am in service, I am not able to spare thetime for the thought of God. After I retire, after the children getmarried and after they settle down, I will begin to think ofGod.” She thought that there was no use arguing with such afoolish person, and she just thought of the Lord and kept quiet.After one week, there was some dangerous disease which tookhold of her husband. She was taking all pains to call a doctorand give some medicine and get him cured of that disease. Thedisease became a little less virulent after a few days. On thethird day, the doctor came and gave him a mixture andinstructed that the mixture be given to him once in the night,once in the morning, and once in the afternoon as threedifferent doses. The lady thought that this is the properoccasion to teach him a lesson. In the morning, even afterbreakfast, the wife did not give the dose of mixture to herhusband. It was lunch time and even after lunch, the wife didnot give the dose of mixture to her husband. Then the husbandasked, “What is this? Two occasions have passed and you havenot given me any medicine at all.” Then the wife said, “Whyworry about taking the medicine now? You can take all thatmedicine after you are cured of the disease.” Then he asked,“Why should I take the medicine after being cured?” She thensaid that in the same manner, “When this human body is withyou, and when you are still well, and when you are sufferingfrom the disease of the worldly attractions, you should take themedicine in the form of devotion and faith in God. What is theuse of taking the medicine when you become old anddecrepit?”Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977189When the messengers of Yama come and tell you thatyour time is over and that your end has come, that you have todie; when your wife and children are weeping that you are atyour very end, is it then possible for you to think of the Lord?When you have entered your old age, after retirement when thehands are trembling and when you have become old, is itpossible for you to sit in prayer and dhyana? In order to followthe spiritual path and to be able to get some proficiency in theadhyatmic way of life, this young age in the most appropriateage. It is in this context, it has been said, “Start early, driveslowly, reach safely.” Since this is the correct age, you shouldstart from now and you should experience peace and happinessand put into practice slowly and steadily. If we begin suffi-ciently early without any agitation, we can peacefully move theboat of our body in the river of our life. We can also reach thedestination very safely. On the contrary, if we start late and ifwe begin to move fast, there will be a danger in the journey.There is one example for this: if we go early in themorning to a hotel and buy a ticket for our lunch, it does notmatter when we go for lunch. Even if you go a little late, youwill have your lunch ready. On the other hand, if you go to thehotel only when you feel hungry at 12 o’clock, it may sohappen that there is no lunch for you. Thus, if from today, youbegin to put into practice your devotion, you will be like aperson who has purchased his lunch ticket in advance in themorning. In this age of yours, you should really book yourticket for the grace of the Lord.Students:This is the right age, you should make an attempt to seethat the thoughts in you do not cause agitation and excitement.With the thought of God, you should lead a peaceful life. I am190  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977hoping that you will drive the ship of your life in a peacefulmanner.18. Clean Food Enables One ToDevelop Good QualitiesHow can a dog realise the value of fasting duringthe day? How can an ox realise the taste of parchedrice? How can one who cannot smell appreciate anyfragrance? How can a blind man realise the beauty ofmoonshine?Students:The great rishis of ancient times have handed oversacred ideals to us. From the culture and traditions of Bharath,we should pick out some aspects which are applicable in ourdaily life. The statements made by such great rishis were theresult of their own personal experience in a life full ofhappiness and bliss. The path that was taken by them can bedescribed as a golden path. The words they gave to us werewords of truth. Their experience was such that whatever theydid was only promoting the prosperity of the world and thehappiness of the people. Unfortunately, it appears that mantoday has taken a path which is quite the opposite. We thinkthat all the injunctions that are given to us by our ancestors arefull of superstitions, and that they are based on foolish andweak ideas. If there is truly a blind faith or a superstition and ifone can establish it to be so by proper reasoning, everyone willagree to that. Contrary to this, if people give a name, blindfaith or superstition, to everything which they do not like andwhich they cannot understand, this is simply to be traced to theexcitement in their own minds and such statements can be onlyselfish words uttered with a selfish motive.192  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Students:Today I am only going to tell you what the properconduct in your daily life should be and how your manner ofeating and living should be regulated. Many people,particularly those who are believers in God, think that at thetime of their food, they should repeat the 15th Chapter of theGita and by so repeat-ing, they think that they will be firstoffering the food to the Lord and then partake of the food thathas been offered to the Lord. The students who have come toparticipate in the Summer Classes know that in our hostel,prior to taking food, the students usually repeat some versesand make an offering of that food to the Lord and then eat theremaining food. We should not dismiss this as a foolish faith.We must try and experience the meaning and the contents ofthe verses.In the old days, one of the kings was performing ayagna and he assembled a number of pundits during thatyagna. Amongst pundits assembled by the king, there were twopeople who were accustomed to observing certain traditions. Inthe ancient days, the traditions were such that while travellingthey would not agree to take their food in some house or other.In the early hours of the morning, they used to collect somefood and used to carry the same in a bundle, and they wouldeat this food during the journey. When it became middayduring their journey, they reached a river and found out a treewith a good shade. They sat under the tree for their afternoonmeal. It was their habit that everyday they would think of Godand they would offer the food to God and then, only, partake ofthe food. On that day, too, they started reading the twenty-fifthverse in the Fourth Chapter of the Gita which commences bysaying, “Brahmarpanam,” (I offer this food to Brahma). Whenthis verse was repeated by them, they heard some noise fromthe Banyan tree under which they were sitting. They thoughtSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977193that on account of the breeze, one branch may have rubbedagainst another branch and noise may thus have beenproduced. They were not disturbed by the noise. They werecontinuing their prayer. They started repeating the 14th versein the 15th Chapter of the Gita. While repeating that verse,they were totally lost and com-pletely absorbed in the thoughtof God and they were thus repeating their prayer. When thisverse was repeated in that manner, they found that a Maha-purusha, (a great saint) came and stood in their presence. Theygot up and paid homage to that great saintly personality andasked him who he was. He revealed his identity and said thathe was a Gandharva and that he was subjected to a curse by arishi several years ago and he was living on that Banyan tree.He was now liberated from that curse by the prayers utteredunder the tree.This Gandharva then paid homage to these two punditsand said, “I know where you are going and I am fully aware ofyour mission. You are going to participate in a meeting whichthe king is convening. I have to repay my debt to you forhaving relieved me of my curse. I will enter into the mind ofthe king and I will see that you are benefited in many ways.”The scholars entered the congregation arranged by the king,but they found that the place was packed with many people,and they could not reach the king. So they were sitting in somecorner and were looking at the king. The words uttered bygreat saints can never become untrue. Because of the promisemade by the Gandharva, the king, of his own accord, looked atthese two scholars. The king came to them and made obeisanceto them and requested them to come to the front row and beseated. He also asked them to exhibit their scholarship. Thecongregation came to a close on that day and the king wasimmensely pleased with the scholarship exhibited by them andgifted them with several villages and saw to it that they lived194  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977happily for the rest of their lives. Here we notice that this greatsaint taught these two persons how to get over many worldlytroubles and obstacles which they came across and alsoshowed them how to acquire spiritual blessings. Thus, if onewants to take the path of spirituality, one will find that manyworldly troubles and obstacles come in the way. It is onlywhen we can overcome these worldly obstacles that are in ourway, can we take the opportunity to benefit from the spiritualpath.Because the pundits could get over the troubles andtake to the spiritual path, they returned to their own village andwere experiencing happiness through the gifts they received.The purpose of our thinking of this particular verse in the 15thChapter of the Gita is to get success in worldly matters and toget over the obstacles in the matter of pursuing a spiritual path.Here, the food we eat determines in many ways what we aregoing to get in future for ourselves. The food we eat willdetermine the type of ideas that sprout in us.While taking our food, if we use exciting words, suchideas which are related to these exciting words will sprout in usalso. The lesson that we should learn is that when we take ourbath, when we sit for dhyana or when we take our food, weshould not think of other activities and other ideas. Too muchtalk, while we take our food, will also cause harm to us. Weshould not give room to any kind of talk when we take ourfood. With a happy heart and with a sacred word, we mustundertake to utter this particular verse and then take our food.In this way, whatever has been offered to Brahman willbecome the prasad which comes to us as a gift of Brahman.The meaning of the verse is that God Himself, who isin a human form in you, is taking the food. Therefore, thisSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977195changes our food into food for God. While taking food, weshould not be excited, and we should not get into passion, butwe should eat very peacefully. Even if we cannot performjapa, thapa or yagas, at least if we take care to see that we eatin this manner, we will develop good ideas. The nature of thefire will determine the type of smoke that comes out. The kindof smoke that comes out will determine the type of cloud that itforms. The type of cloud that is formed will determine the typeof rain which the cloud yields. The type of rain determines theharvest. The kind of harvest determines the food that we getout of it. The kind of food we eat will determine our ideas. Forall our ideas, it is our food that is responsible. If we eat sathwikfood, sitting in a clean place, we will have clean ideas byeating that food. There will thus be a good possibility of ourgetting spiritual ideas.In the matter of food, there are three aspects regardingthe cleanliness of which we should take great care. One is thecleanliness of the material which we use for cooking the food.The second is the cleanliness of the pot in which we want tocook the food. We can certainly clean the materials which con-stitute the food and also clean the pot in which it is cooked.The third aspect relates to the cleanliness of the process ofcooking. This is not easily possible. Until the material getscooked to its final stage, our ideas should be good for this to beachieved.Even if there are lapses in these aspects of cleanliness,namely the pot, the materials used for cooking and the processof cooking, if we offer the food to the Paramatma before weeat, then the food will become clean. By thus offering to theLord the food that we eat, we introduce these different kinds ofcleanliness; and so our ancestors have told that these are thesteps which we must observe regarding our food.196  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Unfortunately, today when one is hungry, one does not careabout what he eats, in what hotel he eats nor what kind of foodhe eats. He will eat anything.We do not see the rishis of the ancient times anylonger. We see people who only pretend to be sacred. This isthe reason why their condition is going down, day after day, tothe very depths of degradation. It is only when we can followthe path that was laid down by the ancestors and accept theVedic dharma that there will be no doubt whatsoever for us torise high. All the gifts of villages, which were given by theking to people in return for specific services rendered, aredisappearing these days. What is the reason for this? Thereason is the change that has come about in the mode of life.Civilisation and borrowed traditions which we have acceptedare showing their consequences and results. Selfishness isgrowing while self-lessness and help to others is diminishing.The heart is becoming harsher and harsher. Intelligence is onthe rise but good qualities are diminishing. Thus all theagitation and lack of peace in the world may be traced to ourown food habits.You may be hungry. In spite of your hunger, you mustmake an attempt to get a clean place and clean food to eat.When such clean food is available, you must first offer it toGod and then eat it. Not only here, wherever you may go,when you take your food, you should remember these threeverses, utter them, offer the food to God and then take thefood. If there are some amongst you who do not know thesethree verses, you can write them down so that you will be ableto recite them and become worthy citizens of Bharath.19. As The Sweetness Of Sugar Is TheSame In Sweets Of All Forms AndNames, Divinity Is The Same In PeopleOf All Forms And NamesIn the course of a life where there are no clouds,how can we find anything special? In a life which is fullof prosperity, nothing can come which is surprising orunexpected.Divya Atma Swarupas:The devotees who recognise God, the jnanis whorecognise wisdom and the sakteyas who recognise eternaltruth, are all one and the same. This is what the Upanishadshave described by saying that truth is one, but the people whohave described it in many ways are different and diverse.When our mind contemplates on a situation, the mind itselfgives it many different forms. So, also, the primordial powerwhich is the basis of this world takes many different forms.Vedas have described this situation by saying that what existsis only one, and that is recognised by many people in diverseways.In the night, during a dream, we feel that we aretravelling in a dense forest, and that we have slept on a hardrock. At that time, what you see appears to be truth to you.You wake up from that sleep, the entire world of the dreamdisappears altogether. The experience which you have duringthe dream is a truth at the time of the dream. The experiencewhich you have during the waking state is a truth during the198  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977waking state. In a dream, it is not possible for us to recogniseanything relating to the waking state. In the waking state, it isnot possible for us to recognise anything relating to thedreaming state. In the waking state, there is no dream. In thedreaming state, there is no awareness of the waking state. Butin both these states, the dreaming state and the waking state,the life-force in you, which is described by you as ‘I,’ iscommonly present.Not only this, during your dream, you see many things,mansions, trees, fruits, and so on. Where have these mansions,trees, rocks come from? It is the life-force in us that createsthese mansions, fruits, and rocks and gives them a form. In thesame manner, the Creator puts His creative force in all thethings that He has created. This sacred aspect has been men-tioned in the Vedas by saying that the aspect of Narayana ispresent inside, outside and everywhere. All the five elementsand all the materials that come out of the five elements dependupon this one primordial strength. In all the things that we seearound us in the creation, the power or the Sakthi is one andthe same. So, in that context, if we can enter deeply intodhyana and think of something, then the Sakthi in that life-force, which is the object of your dhyana and the Sakthi in youcome together and merge into each other. The names andforms of different things may appear to be different from oneanother, but the life-force or the Sakthi which is present in allof them is really one and the same.There is one small example for this. By using meltedsugar, we prepare many different kinds of sweets. We canmake it into the shape of a fox, a doll, a box, a horse, and soon. The names and forms appear to us to be different, but thecontent of all these names and forms is one and the same, andthe common factor is sugar. From any one of these forms, weSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977199may break a small bit and put it in our mouth. What weexperience will be the sweetness of sugar which has nothing todo with the form from which this bit has been taken.All religions will ultimately teach this aspect ofoneness. While the teachings of all religions are one and aresacred, yet those who taught and preached these aspects ofdifferent religions, have created some differences because oftheir attitudes being different. To hate other religions or to lookdown on them is a very wrong thing to do. Creating differencesby stating that one religion is at a lower level and that anotheris at a higher level, simply shows your ignorance. People whohave such ideas, will begin to strengthen their faith indifferences between these religions rather than their faith inGod.You should not enter into arguments, which go into thenature of different religions, but you should recognise theessence and the commonalty between all the religions and themain goals that they point to. All the religions come together toteach one thing and that one thing is good. If your mind isgood, how can any religion be bad? Remember that allreligions teach only good things.Today, if people are taught that human nature is quitedifferent from divine nature, man is simply creating thesedifferences; and since he has not got the discriminating power,he believes them to be different. Man is God, nara isNarayana, people are Divine. Some day or other, it isinevitable that nara will become Narayana and Narayana willcome as an Avathar and will become nara. In that confluenceof nara and Narayana is the manifestation of all creation. It isthis confluence that has been described to us in three differentways, namely dualistic philosophy, non-dualistic philosophy200  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977and qualified non-dualistic philosophy. Here, the dualismrecognises two distinct things and says, “I am in the light,”whereas the qualified non-dualism says, that “Light is in me.”Adwaitha, the highest form of non-dualism says, “I am thelight.” This Divine spirit which is omnipresent is seen bydifferent people in different ways because of their varyingdegrees of attachment to their own human body.Truly, when we look at it from the aspect of the humanbody, we only think of a name and a form of that body.Depending upon one’s own background, we also decide whatis good and what is bad. To both good and bad, the Atma isonly a witness. It is in that context that it has been said that youare not one person but you are three different persons, namely:the one you think you are, the one others think you are, and theone you really are. These are the three different aspects. Whenonce we recognise the totality of truth and the totality ofdivinity, then we will experience the identity of all these threeaspects of human personality.Today, the reason for our getting these different ideasand different opinions is that there is no co-ordination betweenour thoughts, our words and our deeds. The preaching is onone footing and our notions are quite different. We teach andwe believe that these qualities, the quality of truth, the qualityof prema, the quality of ahimsa are very great and very strong;but in our daily life we conduct ourselves in a manner verydifferent from what we say. Not only this, we believe that truthis our sacred religion, but we are ready to dispense with all thisand what we do not seem to need is truth itself. Man is notmaking an attempt even to find what is good relating tohimself. Man utters the word ‘truth’ repeatedly, but he is notable to establish the truth relating to himself. This is the reasonwhy he is not becoming a total human being. When he himselfSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977201is unable to become a total human being, how is he going torise to the level of God?This morning, one of the speakers told you that man isGod and that the Lord is present in all human beings. Hementioned that from the position of being a gorilla, one couldrise to the position of being a human being. Here, we shouldrecognise that the world has disappeared from being in theform of a mineral and reappeared in the form of a tree. Thecreation again disappears from being in the form of a tree andreappeared in the form of an animal. Again the creationdisappeared from being in the form of an animal andreappeared as a human being. In that evolutionary series, oneshould disappear from being as a human being and reappearonly as God. The upward evolution is from a mineral to a tree,from a tree to an animal, from an animal to a human being,from a human being to a divine, each stage improving andlearning from its previous state.Thus, today, if man can rise to greater heights, he willbecome a divine being; but if he slips lower down, he willbecome an animal. We should always try and take the path ofpromotion and not demotion. In every human being, the aspectof divinity is present. The aspect of Atma is much closer to usthan all friends and relations. This kind of consciousness inregard to the relationship of the Atma to us should bepromoted. All our ideas should be so refined that they are notnarrow but are broad enough. We should not take the view bywhich we are concerned only with our family, our home andour self. This will be too narrow an approach to life. Our ideasshould be so broadened that we move from home to onevillage, from one village to one district, from one district toone province, from the province to the country and from thecountry to the world.202  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977In the same manner, in our dhyana, we should broadenit so that we regard the Param Jyothi which is present inourselves as the same Param Jyothi, which is present ineveryone else, and that is the same Param Jyothi which ispresent everywhere in the universe. By that feeling, we will beable to broaden our ideas and realise the meaning of thestatement that there is only one truth that exists, and that thisone thing is being seen by many people in different forms. Weare always looking at things which keep on changing. We arelooking at creation which is not permanent, and we make themistake of identifying such creation with Divinity. We do notrealise the truth.The world is only an illusory projection and God is thebasis. But to understand this situation, one has to make anattempt. This auditorium is now visible to us with all its nicewindows, all the good carpets; and it presents a beautifulappearance to us. The roof is resting on these walls as asupport. Looking at the roof and looking at the walls, we thinkthat they are the important constituents of the auditorium. Thisis not correct. We should realise that the foundations, whichwe do not see, are really the basic support for this bigauditorium. So, also, for everything that we see, there must besome basis which we do not see. In order to realise andunderstand that basis, which is not visible externally, weshould adopt the path of adhyatma. Such people who do notrecognise the existence of the very basis and who only confusethe external appearance, which is a consequence of that basis,as the truth, are really ignorant people.Today, people only see the consequences of theexistence of Sakthi and argue that there is no Sakthi and saythat there is no basis for what we see. This statement is likeSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977203saying that, in the ocean, there are waves because I see thewaves and that there is no water. They are unable to recognisethe basic truth that is contained in our ancient Vedicstatements. If we examine this carefully, it will then becomepossible and, in fact, quite easy for us to see the oneness ofDivinity.What we have to establish today is not a new society,not a new religion nor a new organisation. What we have to dois to recognise the contents of what we have already had in ourancient times and bring them up to the present day. Youngpeople, who are capable of making sacrifices, are veryessential today. Not only this, we need very urgently,courageous young people who can proclaim to the world theOmnipresence of Divinity. It is necessary to have youngpeople who can face, and fight with courage, situations arisingfrom injustice, unkindness and cruelty. It is necessary to haveyoung people who will not depend only upon worldly andmaterial benefits, but will give sufficient importance to theethical and spiritual aspects; young people who are prepared togive up imitation, give up selfish ideas and be able to serve thecommunity in a selfless manner. Young people who can, bytheir own experience, proclaim and tell others that Atma is themost important thing, are very necessary.The divinity that is present in everyone is one and thesame. Divinity is not present only in Sathya Sai Baba. You areall divine. Divinity is present in everyone. The fact thatdivinity is present in millions of people has been conveyed tous by our Vedas in a slightly different manner by stating thatGod has thousands of eyes, thousands of legs and thousands ofheads. It has also been said that you will find Him whereveryou look for Him. This is why we say that God is alwaysavailable to you, is behind you, is with you whenever you are204  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977in trouble and pain. To save you from trouble and pain, He iswith you, behind you, in you and is looking after you.One individual, on being told that God is with him andbehind him, turned back and looked for God behind his back;found none and was very much dis-appointed. This ignorantand foolish person, thinking that God will be behind him,turned round to find God. Alas! he does not understand thatwhen he turned round and looked, he was not looking behindhim and that what was behind him has now become his front.When he turns round, God is still behind his back.It is in that context that you must first strengthen yourfaith that God is behind everything. There are various steps tobe taken in this context. The first thing is self-confidence, nextcomes self-satisfaction, then follows self-sacrifice, then self-realisation. In everyone the principle of ‘I’ is self-effulgent. Heis in the form of the self-effulgent Atma in every human being.There may be millions of people in one place. In all of them,Paramatma is only one. In this apparent diversity, we mustmake an attempt to recognise the Unity.There is a small arithmetical example for this: one plusone plus one plus one plus one becomes five. This is thecorrect answer in common parlance. But you can put a numberof ‘I’s,’ I+I+I+I+I and the net result will be only one I. In thisdivine way of thinking, you should try and search for the ‘I’ ineach heart.Divya Atma Swarupas:A man is not able to promote in himself the kind ofbroad ideas that we can find even in insects and animals. Thereis one small example for this. If an ant locates sugar in someSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977205place, that ant is not going immediately to eat the sugar and fillits stomach in a selfish manner. This ant which has located thesugar will go round and collect ten more ants and all of themtogether will go and eat that sugar. Look at the broadmindednature of even a small creature like the ant. See, how selflessthe ant is and how it tries to help other ants. Not only this,when we look at a crow, we generally feel disgusted. We takea stone and throw it at the crow. Such a crow, if it finds foodanywhere, immediately begins to call other crows; and theywill all join together and eat that food. Even a crow, when itlocates some food, it wants to share that food along with othercrows, its friends and its relations. But today, if man findsanything which he can use he wants to leave others out. Ahusband leaves out his wife and thinks that his own pleasure isthe most important thing. A mother leaves out her son andwants to be so selfish and acts for herself. Because of suchbroad and sacred ideas, the ants and crows are reborn as humanbeings and the human population is thus growing from day today.Divya Atma Swarupas:You should not misunderstand and misinterpret what Isay. It is my duty to convey to you the truth as it exists. Today,the reason why the human population is increasing is becauseof the attitude of the people. For man to eke out his living, tofill a small tummy of his, God has created plenty in the world.God has created a large amount of rice, a large amount of fruit,a large amount of wheat. While such good food has beencreated by God, yet we go and eat meat and fish. And all thefish which we kill and eat are reborn as human beings.I want to give you another instance. Even a hard stonecan melt and can flow and can ultimately take the form of ahuman being. Here is one example. There is a big huge rock. If206  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977in that rock, you can bore a hole and put a seed, that seed is notgoing to sprout and become a tree. After some time, the rockgets dried up by the sun and gets soaked in the rain water andgradually crumbles and becomes dust. If in that dust, whichhas come out of that rock, we put a seed, that seed will sproutand become a plant. The plant will become a big tree. Fromthat tree, we will get fruit. Man eats that fruit. The food thathas thus gone into him again becomes a source of a newhuman birth. Here we see that a hard stone changes into softdust. Out of that soft dust, came a plant. The plant became atree and the tree gave fruits. Fruits were eaten by man and outof the co-ordination came another human being.Thus, if we enquire in some depth into these things, wewill realise that whatever the nature of that material may be,the divinity that is contained in man can transform thatmaterial into another human be-ing. As has been said in theBhagavad Gita, in addition to recognising that one God whohas no second parallel is manifested in different ways. He hasalso declared that He is the seed for all creation. All thebranches, the leaves, the fruits and all that we see on the treehave come from one single seed. In the same manner, all theforms that we see in the creation have come from one seed ofdivinity. The individual who recognises this truth becomeswise and becomes one with divinity. The individual, who isignorant and who does not recognise this truth, goes down tothe depths of ignorance.Divya Atma Swarupas:Man wants to get happiness, peace and bliss. But he isnot making efforts consistent with what he wants to have. Howdo we get bliss and happiness? It is only possible when weknow and understand what we should know and understand.We will get bliss only when we give up what we should giveSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977207up. We will get bliss and happiness only when we reach thedestin-ation which we should reach. What is it that we shouldknow? We should know the truth about the creation around us.What is it that we should give up? The feeling that the humanbody is real and permanent. What is the destination. that weshould reach? We should reach divinity which is the permanentstate of Atma. It is only then that we can experience true bliss.That is the reason why it has been said with Upanishadicprayer:From this world which is untrue, lead me to truth.From this darkness of ignorance, lead me to lightFrom death, lead me to immortality.What does that mean here? Death here means movingto rebirth and immortality connects freedom from rebirth.What is the way to immortality? Removal of mortality is theonly way to immortality. Narrow and immoral ideas like beingunjust and unkind, causing harm to others, must be set aside.What is the reason for this? One should accept that whateverexists in another person is also the same divine spirit which isin you. How can we then have jealousy or hatred towardsanother?When sometimes other people conduct them-selvesbadly, then you should pray to God that they be purified andthey should not conduct themselves badly. But do not subjectyourself to jealousy and bad conduct. I am hoping that youwould recognise the divine aspect of Atma, the one aspect forwhich there is no parallel and that you will promote yoursacred ideas.Divya Atma Swarupas:208  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977You must all make an attempt with determination to co-ordinate your thought, word and deed. It has been said that theproper study of mankind is man. It is only when you do thatand it is only when you recognise human nature, will you beable to understand true divinity. But today there is no properstudy of mankind. This is the reason why human nature hassunk down to the very lowest depths and man is notable to livelike a human being.20. Wealth And Authority Do Not GivePeace Of MindWhen clouds gather in the sky, in the vicinity ofthose clouds, there also appears a lightning. So, also,where there is proper education, in the vicinity of sucheducation, there should appear wisdom.Students:If one wants to liberate himself and reach God, or if hewants to bear the burden of life, one should see that hiseducation and his thapas become strong. The combination ofeducation and thapas makes man strong. Vidya, which manwill get and thapas joined to vidya will together make himuseful. In this world, Vidya is of two kinds. One is the materialvidya and the other is the spiritual vidya. What we call materialvidya is one which enables you to learn successfully what istaught in the colleges, acquire positions and be successful inthe worldly life. This type of vidya enables us to move fromone position in life to another. This really relates to thepresent-day world and gives you happiness in the materialworld. What all people do during their daily life is related andconnected with this type of vidya. All that they do, from thesweeper upwards to the Prime Minister, is connected andrelated to this material vidya.This type of vidya will help man to acquire comfort, tolead an easy life and to feed himself and keep him going in asmooth manner in this world. It is not appropriate to describethis type of learning by the name of vidya. It is not correct touse the sacred word vidya to describe this kind of worldly210  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977learning. We should accept that true vidya is Brahma Vidya.There are two parts in this word vidya and they are ‘vid’ and‘ya.’ When the two root parts of this word join together, we getthe word vidya. ‘Vid’ means brightness or light. ‘Ya’ meansthat which hands you. That which hands you brightness andlight and opens your eyes to wisdom is called vidya. Vidya isnot that which hands you darkness or ignorance. Avidyadenotes darkness. Absence of wisdom means darkness. Vidyadenotes light. Absence of light is darkness. Darkness coversthis light of Vidya. So, to some extent, we must use BrahmaVidya to remove this cover. Material Vidya is really a branchof Brahma Vidya. Vidya when related to the worldly matterswill be used for worldly affairs and comes from Brahma Vidyaitself. Just like the ash that comes out of fire, covers the fireitself, so also this material vidya which comes out of BrahmaVidya covers Brahma Vidya. Like the green precipitate whichcomes out of water covers the surface of water as a thin layer;like the frost that gets its origin in ice, covers the ice andmakes it frosty, like the clouds that come from the rays of thesun cover the sun itself, in the same manner, this material vidyawhich has its origin in Brahma Vidya covers Brahma Vidyaitself. Brahma Vidya is solely connected with the knowledge ofAtma.Brahma indicates Omnipresence, Brahma alsoindicates totality and completeness. In its aspect of totality,Brahma Vidya deals with the present day material world, thespiritual world and all the ethical aspects of our life. BrahmaVidya is one which also enables us to see the true form ofcreation. Citizens of Bharath today have forgotten the power ofthis Brahma Vidya which can also be referred to as AtmaVidya. They have developed faith in Avidya or ignorance andthey are bringing this into their daily life. We have to makeSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977211several concerted attempts to understand the nature of thisBrahma Vidya.In man, both divinity and animal nature are co-existent.We should make attempts that will enable us to separate thedivine nature from the animal nature in us and experience thedivine nature to some extent. Sometimes when matter, whichhas no value at all, goes and joins with some valuable matter, italso acquires some value.In this garland, there is a thread. If any one tells you totake this thread and put it in your hair or to put it round theneck of God, you will see no mean-ing in doing such a thing.Only because this thread is joined and is associated with theflowers having a fragrance, we take it while it is so associatedand offer it to the Lord or use it to decorate our hair. So also,because the animal nature in man is coexisting along with thedivine nature, the animal nature also gets some elevation. Herewe note that this useless animal nature is getting some value.But we must also enquire to what extent the value of the divinenature is being pulled down.If we offer a tumbler of water and ask any one to pay,nobody will pay half a rupee for the water. But if with half atumbler of water we mix another half a tumbler of milk, thenwe will be able to get a good price. Here, the value of waterhas gone up and the value of milk has gone down. In the samemanner, by keeping good company, it will be possible for us toget rid of our bad qualities and acquire good qualities. But ifwe go and join bad people, we will also have to accept theirbad qualities. If we wear white clean dress and if we sit with aperson like a goldsmith who works with smoke, our dress willalso become dark. Here we see a chance of our strengthbecoming weak if we go and sit in the wrong place. This is thereason why it has been said that out of good company will212  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977arise detachment. Out of detachment will arise our ability tounderstand truth.Sometimes, by the strength of the place and theenvironment, even a poor and weak thing will acquire greatstrength and value.On one occasion, Vishnu wanted to send a message,and He asked Garuda to go and deliver the message toEaswara. On the body of Easwara, serpents are used as adecoration. In view of the enmity between Garuda and theserpents, the serpents would normally run away as soon as theysee Garuda. But in this situation, something opposite hadhappened. These serpents, which are on the body of Easwara,behaved in a different manner. As soon as they saw Garuda,they began to hiss at Garuda and show some amount ofsuperiority. Garuda saw this and said, “You are getting all thisstrength because of your position. Leave your position and stepaside. I will show you what I can do to you.”So, also, ignorance and avidya, by joining with BrahmaVidya in this world, are trying to elevate themselves andproclaim to us their greatness. We should try and change thisavidya into a thapas. Thapas here does not mean standing withyour body upside down. Thapas here does not mean runningaway to the forest, closing your eyes and ears and sit-ting insilence. Thapas here really signifies giving up your ThamoGuna or the quality of thamas. This thamas, the quality ofbeing idle and lazy, is wide-spread and is dancing on the headof every human being.Here is one example for this. It is common practice, inAndhra Pradesh and other parts of India, for several people togo on pilgrimages to holy places and offer their hair to theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977213Lord. What is the meaning of giving this useless hair on one’shead and in return seeking God’s grace, which is somethingmuch more valuable? Is this because God has not got this kindof unsacred and bad hair? It is not so. It is necessary for us tolook at the inner significance of this act. The hair on one’shead is dark and symbolises this lazy, sleepy quality, or theThamo Guna in him. The significance of this act is to declare,“Oh, God, I want to give up Thamo Guna and go back as onewho is free from this quality of laziness.”In this manner, ignorance and darkness are growingenormously among people. Mere acquaintance with thecontents of several books is being given more importance andthe practice thereof being neglected. This must be calledavidya. This will not give us true vidya. The true vidya whichwe have is the Atma Vidya and by using this, one should makean attempt to understand his own inner self and thesignificance of his life. For this, some amount of thapas is veryessential. Thapas here signifies your ability to convert youractions into sacred ones by relating all work with God. Wemust try and make an attempt to give up the Rajo Guna and dosathwik work with the body, and also to do sacred service tothe community around you. Such a change with the body andalso to do sacred service to the community will be valuable.Your body should undertake such work which the sacredthoughts of your mind will direct it to do. If your mind at anytime cautions you that what you are thinking is wrong, thenyou should not allow your body to do that particular work.Also, there are the thoughts which come to your mind, and areconnected with the Thamo Guna. All your thoughts should besathwik in nature and the words you utter should besynthesised with those thoughts. The meaning of thapas is thatwhat-ever thoughts enter your mind, whatever words come outof you, whatever action you undertake to do should all be in214  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977complete harmony. When your vidya joins your thapas definedin this manner, then, only, your life will become fruitful anduseful.Divya Atma Swarupas:Whether it is the Vedas or the Sastras or the Ithihasasor Puranas, they are always telling us things which are good.They have also some ability to tell you what is on the side ofbad aspects. Just as the light, which we use for looking atmaterial things, becomes instrumental in your looking at thosematerial things, so also Vedas and Sastras are to be used asonly instruments by you, which will help you to see the divineaspect. All the Vedas, Sastras, and Puranas are like signposts,which are present in your path. These signposts will only directyou. The signposts will only tell you, if you travel this way,you will reach Madras, if you travel another way, you willreach Bombay or Prasanthi Nilayam. But those signposts arenot going to take you to Madras or Prasanthi Nilayam. Youhave to make the journey and not look at the signposts.Therefore, you must depend upon your human endeavour, andyou can only draw from the spiritual knowledge what path totake. But make the journey yourself.Here, you should undertake the task seriously andrealise the objective with patience and with effort. But if wesimply use words, it will become a wordy description of thedivine aspect and no result will follow. You may hear manythings, you may see many things, but it is only when youfollow in practice what you have learnt from seeing andhearing, will you be able to get the results for yourself.On the tree of human life, everyone is bringing out thefruit of prema. There is no life of a human being which iswithout a fruit of prema. But if one wants to really enjoy andSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977215experience the sweetness of this fruit of prema, he has toremove the skin which is on the surface of the fruit, has tothrow away the seeds which are inside the fruit, and then onlycan one enjoy the fruit. On the fruit of this prema, the skin, inthe shape of ahamkara (ego), is covering it. The bad ideas arelike the seeds in the fruit of prema. It is only when you throwaway these seeds and the skin, will you be able to enjoy thesweetness of the juice in the fruit.Unfortunately, today we do not take to the easy andclear path. We want to take to the difficult path. We have theambition to experience it, but we do not take the proper path.When you listen to Vedanta, it looks as if it is quitesimple and easy, but to put it into practice is a difficult matter.It is only in this difficult path that you will be able to enjoy andexperience the good aspects. In daily life, you always want totake an easy path and reach the destination in a simple manner.But you are not recognising the kind of obstacles in the pathwhich you choose. We are not ready to put our life and ourbody into the path of spirituality. Whatever wealth we mayhave acquired, whatever position of authority we may haveoccupied, whatever great things we may have done in aworldly way, we are not in a position to acquire peace of mind;and this is mostly needed. Dhritharashtra had all the physicalstrength, had all the wealth, and although he was resting on asoft bed he was feeling that he was resting on fire. This wasbecause he did not have the spiritual strength in him. Tounderstand this aspect of Brahman, we should take thenecessary care. We can get such knowledge only when wehave sraddha, or determination. We sometimes think thatknowledge is simply the power to discriminate between truthand untruth. That is not so. True knowledge should recognisethe oneness of what is present in everyone in this world and we216  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977should experience this oneness. I am hoping that the studentswill learn this and will also put this into practice.Students:It is true that the education that you are getting isnecessary to eke out your livelihood from day to day or to meetthe responsibilities that come to you in your ordinary life, butyou should not think that this is the end of education and theaim of all your life. Just to eke out your daily livelihood, it isnot necessary to acquire higher education. By doing manualwork of some kind, you can eke out your livelihood. Weshould not feel proud that we have reached the heights ofachievements or that we have got higher education. Theeducation that you are getting is not something which youshould be proud of. These are very poor qualities. If we canunderstand and acquire the essence, Atma Vidya, then everyother vidya will become available to you. All these materialvidyas, that we learn for the sake of the material world are likeindividual rivers. But the Adhyatmic Vidya is like the ocean.These different branches of education, which are like the riversgo and join the ocean of spiritual education, and they lose theirindividuality. That is why it has been said, “Adhyatma vidya,vidyanam.” Amongst all vidyas, Adhyatmic Vidya is the onlytrue vidya. We should try and promote the sacred prema in usif we really want to take the spiritual path and enjoy the blisswhich the spiritual path will give us. In this process, the firststep is to make an attempt to please your parents. There is avery moving story to illustrate this important aspect.After the battle of Rangoon, it so happened members ofeach family got separated from each other. Mother and son,husband and wife were separated as a result of the war. Theywere all having to move on their own. In such circumstances,when the husband took one way, the wife took the two childrenSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977217and had to take another way. One of the children was two yearsof age and the second one was five years old. Somehow. orother the mother was looking after these two children and shereached a village on the border with great difficulty. Since thatplace was filled with refugees who came from the battle area,they were not even able to beg and feed themselves. Themother used to go round and beg for some food. She used tobring the little food that she gathered and feed the two childrenand used to starve herself. After some time, when things wenton in this manner, the mother became very weak and that itselfbecame a disease for her. The mother had no strength to go outand beg for food. One day, the five-year old boy went and tookthe hands of his mother and said, “Mother, you are too weak togo and beg. You need rest. You sit under the tree. I will go andbeg for food and bring it and feed you.” When some days wenton like that, whatever food this elder boy could get, had to beused for feeding the mother and feeding the younger child; andhe himself had to starve. The mother used to insist on knowingwhat the truth was, but the boy would say that he already hadhis food. In truth, he was starving. Mother used to believe inhis statements and take her own food. After some time, eventhis boy lost the strength by which he could go and get somefood. One day he went to a house, he found that master of thehouse was sitting in an easy chair and reading the newspaper.The boy said, “I have come for the sake of begging; “Bhavatibhikshan dehi.” The master of the house recognised thecondition in which this boy was asking for food and took pityon him and said, “You come and sit here. I will bring a leafand some tiffin and you can eat here only.” The boy did notagree to that suggestion. The boy said, “I want the food to begiven in my hand. I want to take it with me.” The owner of thehouse was very surprised. He said, “You are very hungry andwhen I want to give you food, you say no, what is the meaningof this?” When the owner of the house was questioning the boy218  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977in this manner, the boy lost all his strength and fell down.When the boy fell down in a swoon, the master of the housewent close to him and he found that the boy was uttering somewords which were barely audible. The master tried tounderstand and listen to what the boy was saying. Heunderstood that the boy was saying, “I do not need food. Donot give me food. But give whatever food you can to mymother.” So saying, he lost his life.Look at this! Even at the instant of giving up his life, hesaid, “Give the food for my mother, not for me.” Do you seesuch a son these days? In this country of Bharath, there havebeen mothers who were prepared to give their lives for the sakeof their sons, and there have been many sons who wereprepared to give up their lives for the sake of their mothers.But today, in this age of modern civilisation, we do not findeither such mothers or such children. If the mother does notgive food to his satisfaction, the son is prepared to ask her tosell her jewels; and he is prepared to make her work or beg;and he will have his own way of life.In our country today, the students do not recognise anddo not understand how much trouble their parents are taking inorder to see that their children are properly educated so thatthey can come up. When the students go home from theircolleges and when the mother and the father are taking a lot oftrouble, they would simply look at them as if they are notconcerned. They would not make an attempt to help them andrelieve them at all. If the mother or father is suffering fromsome sickness and if the son is in the house, he would nothesitate to run away from the house, and go to see a picture.Students:The first thing we have to recognise as a part of youreducation is to know that the father and mother have given youSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977219this birth and this body. We owe a debt of gratitude to themand we should repay this debt. If today you do not respect yourfather and mother, in due course, your own children will treatyou exactly in the same careless manner. The kind of seed thatyou put in today will determine the fruit that comes out of thatseed tomorrow.If, in future you want to do good, you want toexperience peace and happiness, at least once now you mustundertake to do good work. In this young age of yours, youmust acquire some sacred and good qualities. You must learnto respect elders. You must learn to be useful and do someservices to the elders. As days go on, you should try andunderstand the nature of Brahma Vidya and learn its sacredcontents. It is even more important to learn how you can putthese into practice.Just as when we want to build a building, we gather thecement, the bricks and we lay the foundation; so also, I havebeen explaining to you in the past few days the nature of ahuman being and have been collecting the materials necessaryfor you to go through your daily life in future. I will explainwhat the nature of Atma is in the following days.21. When Wisdom Dawns, IgnoranceAnd Illusion DisappearThe reputation of our motherland has been knownall the world over from time immemorial. Thatreputation is now being sharpened by the Sai idealsand the Sai teachings. You young people should give ita further shining with your care and attention.Pavitratma Swarupas:Amongst the four Purusharthas: Dharma, Artha, Kamaand Moksha; Moksha takes the most important place. The otherthree take a subsidiary place. They are only steps to reachmoksha. The bliss that one aspires for by doing yagna, punyaand various other types of rituals is transient and temporary.When the good and the punya earned by any individual getexhausted, it becomes inevitable that he returns back to humanbirth. This is the reason why man should attempt to reach whatis permanent, and sustaining.Our Sruthis have taught us that only people who knowParamatma can reach Paramatma. Only those who canunderstand Brahman will become identical with Brahman. Themeaning of this is that only such people, who acquirefamiliarity and expertise in the Brahma Vidya can attainmoksha or liberation. When the moonshine is somewhat dulland when one cannot see clearly, it is quite natural that onelooks at a rope and thinks, in illusion, that he is seeing a snakeand gets afraid. Although what exists is only a rope, his ownillusion makes him think that it is a snake and he gets afraid. Inthe same manner, although Atma is not bound by connectionsand attachments in the world, yet it is natural to reflect andSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977221think that there is something material and worldly about theAtma. Our ignorance is responsible for our not being able torecognise the elementary truth that is con-tained here. Thisignorance is described by several names. It is sometimes calledthamas and sometimes called moha. These are different namesfor this ignor-ance. There are many other names like avyaktha,maya, and so on. These are words used to describe this state ofignorance. It is in the context of such ignorance that man triesto create an illusion in his own mind about what does not reallyexist. Man also tries to forget what really exists. The creationof something which does not exist is described as Vikshepana.This is also to forget what really exists. In these two things,man experiences illusion. Just as in the case of a rope mistakenfor a snake, the rope constitutes the basis, so also for all thecreation we see around us, the basis is Paramatma, the Lord.One aspect is to find that reality is covered bysomething called Avarana. For this process, there are threestates of our body: one is the gross body, the other is the subtlebody and the third is the causal body. In creation, there are twomethods. One is the individual purpose and the other is thecollective pur-pose. A tree represents an individual form andthe forest indicates the community, the totality of trees. Thehouse is an individual form. A village consisting of severalhouses is a total form. Without a tree, we cannot have a forestand without a house we cannot have a village. Here, onehuman body becomes an individual form. The combination ofseveral such individual forms becomes a total community.Without an individual form, we cannot have a total groupform. The most important characteristic of the human form isthe blood; the life blood that flows from head to toe. The totallife flow that is contained in all the individuals that make upthe community gives you the total group form.222  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977The causal body is the third aspect of the body. Thetotality of all such forms constitutes the jiva. The totality of thesubtle forms is called Hiranyagarbha. The individual form ofthe subtle is called the taijasa. The totality of the gross body iscalled the virata. The individual gross body is Viswa. Here, wehave indicated the individual gross body as Viswa, the individ-ual subtle body as taijasa, the individual causal body as theAtma. This aspect of Atma has been taught to us by presentingone and the same individual in three different forms: the gross,the subtle and the causal form.It has become common for us to hide the connectionthat exists between the five elements that constitute the basis ofcreation and of the Atma. Because ignorance covers the realityhere, it has been called avarana. This avarana is of two kinds.One is called asat, related to untruth, and the other is calledabhava related to wrong ideas. The idea that sprouts from thefeeling that the particular thing does not exist is represented byuntruth or asat. If there is a feeling that one does not knowwhether that particular item exists or does not exist, it isreferred to as abhava. This type of abhava is responsible forsamsara. Vikshepa is the main path for liberation or moksha.Manana and nididhyasana are two other processes bywhich this ignorance of asat can be got rid of. Manana consistsof thinking over or contemplation of what you listen to, andnididhyasana consists of digesting what you have taken in theform of the listen-ing. This implies that we will not get theresult just by listening. By this process, one can understand thenature of a particular aspect. Vikshepa denotes recognition ofthese two and getting rid of them. In avarana, there issomething that is being covered due to ignorance in us, andthat is the aspect of asat. What arises out of untruth can be gotrid of by listening to truth. The best way in which we canSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977223remove a doubt is to listen to people who know the truth.When such people come and tell us the existence of that truth,we can get rid of our ignorance. By listening to others, whoknow the reality, there is a possibility of our being able to getrid of this ignorance of asat. By using two other processes, (manana andnididhyasana) that is, to contemplate and digest what you havelistened to, abhava can be got rid of. This implies that we willnot get the result just by sravana or listening. By just listening,one can understand only to a limited extent the nature of theitem. But to experience it fully, two other stages, manana (thatis to contemplate on what we have listened to) andnididhyasana (absorbing what you have listened to) arenecessary. It is only after going through these three steps:sravana, manana and nididhyasana that one can remove thisignorance of asat.Divya Atma Swarupas:Because of our illusion, we are creating in our mindthings which do not exist. By lack of belief and faith, we areforgetting the existence of even what exists. Although, whatreally exists is the rope, by imagination we think that it is asnake. What is the reason for this? The reason is the darknesswhich arises in you out of your ignorance. Because of thisthought that the rope is the snake, several consequences follow.The fear that is not in you, enters you; and also you run awayfrom the situation. These consequences follow. There is nosnake there. The fear that comes into you is simply illusory andrunning away from it is also the result of illusion. Truly, if withthe help of a light, you remove this illusion and this ignoranceand you discover that there is no snake there, then you go closeto it and fear will disappear. In fact you will handle it withyour hand, take it and throw it away. In the whole world, what224  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977really exists, is only the aspect of Brahman. Because we do notbelieve in this aspect of Brahman, creation, which is only aprojection on the substratum of Brahman, appears to us as real.By proper experience, we can make an attempt to understandthis myth. Truly, once we understand the nature of Brahman,and once we get the meaning of that word, then we will be in aposition to use the right word to describe a particular situation.In a given situation, when we do not know the correct meaningof the words and when we are ignorant of the aspect ofBrahman, then we begin to give a misrepresentation.There is one small example for this. One uneducatedand unsophisticated person joins an army. By joining the army,he learns something by practice and moves forward. One day,the General, who is commanding this army, comes to inspectthe camp. On that day, the person who is the localCommanding Officer of that group was giving certaininstructions to the member of the group. This particular persondoes not understand English. The language known to thecadets in the camp is not known to the General. Nobody knowswhat kind of questions the General will ask each one of them.But the one who is in charge of this particular group has beentrying to explain to the cadets and train them in a general way.When the group leader came to this uneducated person, hetried to tell him that the General may visit the camp and askhim, “How many years have you been in this unit?” The cadethas been asked to reply that he has been in the army for twoyears. Maybe, the second question will be about his age. Thecadet was told to say that he was twenty-two years old. Thethird question he may ask will probably be whether the cadet isfeeling happier in his home or happier in this unit? Thisuneducated person was told that he should say that he feels thesame in the camp as well as at home. Unfortunately, theGeneral came to the individual and the very first question heSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977225asked was, “How old are you?” He replied that he was twoyears old. The second question was, “How many years agohave you joined this Unit?” The reply was twenty-two years.The General thought that he was in great confusion and heasked, what the matter was? “Are you mad or am I mad?” Thecadet then said, “Both are mad, both are the same.” The lessonwhich we have to get from this conversation is that in thepresence of an educated individual, an uneducated person canonly follow his symbols and signs. Unless the second person isalso an educated person, there will be no rapport betweenthem. There will be confusion and any question will only leadto a wrong and confusing answer.As in this analogy, if one wants to learn Brahma Vidya,one has to have a deep desire for that. It will be wrong for us tothink, that Brahma Vidya is like ordinary worldly education. Ifwe look at it from one point of view, Brahma Vidya is reallyeasier to learn than some of the things which we learn in theworldly sphere. If we can recognise this properly, then it willprovide an easy path for us to learn. On the other hand, if wetake a superficial aspect, that will create great difficulty for us.Today, the tendency to make comparisons betweenvarious things has increased. A very bad quality, by which youpresent the faults of others, is becoming widespread. If we canget rid of these two things, then it will be possible for us tounderstand this aspect of Brahma Vidya. What we are experi-encing usually relates only to the material world around us. Itis necessary for us to interpret and see what the subtlety that iscontained in our experience is. On the same occasion and at thesame time, both the aspect of varana and vikshepana maycome. In the illusion by which we called the rope a snake, whatreally has happened is, the existing rope has disap-peared and asnake which does not exist there has appeared in our mind.226  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Here two things have hap-pened. The rope that exists there isnot seen by you. The snake that does not exist there has comeinto your mind. Today every human being is getting intotrouble by the presence of both these illusions. He is unable torecognise the truth that, in the very individual of a humanbeing, there is the community aspect as well. This individualaspect of a human being has become permanently fixed in hismind.There is one small story. A great devotee, who was avery wealthy person, took a lot of gold and out of that gold hehad prepared several fine items, each of twenty tolas of gold.He made a fine idol of Krishna, a seat for putting that idol, anumbrella and also a cow to go along with Krishna. Each one ofthe items weighed twenty tolas, the total being 100 tolas ofgold. In this way, he was experiencing Divinity of God in theforms made of gold. Time is such that things continu-ally goon changing; and with the passage of time, misfortune came tohim and there was poverty in his house. A time had come whenhe did not have food to eat. He was driven to sell away thegold things which he was worshipping. He went to a personwho would buy these items, and he wanted to get each one ofthem weighed and find out what price he would get for eachitem. The other wealthy person who was to buy the items,weighed the idol of Krishna. After finding the weight ofKrishna, he offered to pay Rs. 10,000 for it. After that, heweighed the pedestal and he said that he would pay Rs. 10,000for that. Then he weighed the cow and he said that also willfetch Rs. 10,000. The devotee was in great pain. The devoteeasked how it is that Krishna, the pedestal and the cow will eachfetch the same Rs. 10,000? The person who was going topurchase them was obviously not going to pay more moneybecause it was the figure of Krishna. He will merely pay thecost of the weight of gold in each one of the items and notSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977227value the idol of Krishna differently from the cow. So, also, inthe case of an individual, his value will depend on the Divinitythat is in the individual and not on his wealth or hisappearance, or his material possessions. The cup, the cow, thepedestal and the figure of Krishna are only different in theirforms and in their names. The man who is going to value them,will value them on the basis of the amount of gold which iscontained in each of them, and this is the same in all of them.The basic content of all these things is gold; and although eachhas a different form, it is the same gold. In the same manner, inthis world many things appear to have different names anddifferent forms and may create different impressions ondifferent people. But what exists as a common base in all thesethings is the aspect of Brahman.Divya Atma Swarupas,It has become common to recognise each body and itsform separately, and the common divine con-tent is not seen byanyone. We are only looking at those different bodies andforms in an external way, but the real connection andcomparison between one and another is through the Atma.There is one other small example here. There was afather who had an only son. His only son was looking after thefather very dearly and was serving him with great affection. Inhis 61st year, the father passed away. This son was sitting bythe side of the dead body of his father and was crying, “Ohfather, you have left me and gone. Who else will look after mein this world?” We should examine this carefully. When hesays, “Father, you have left me and gone,” for sixty years hehas been calling that body his father. The body, which has beendescribed as his father, is still there. What is it that has goneaway? Truly, if that body was his father, the body is still thereand he can retain that body as his father. No, it is not right.228  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977What has left and what he was regarding as his father is thelife-force that was in the body and this life-force has left thebody and gone away. What has left the body is his father andthe dead body that is remaining there is not his father. It is thelife-force, or the chaitanya which entered the body that giveshim the illusory feeling that the body was his father.We see here that so long as there is life in a body, wepromote the connections and the relation-ships with that bodyare experienced, but the moment that life goes away from thatbody, we will hesitate to keep that body in our home. We willhave no attachment or affection to that body once the life-forcehas gone away. This body has taken a form which is made upof all the five elements. This is only a casual and artificialappearance. There is a distinct difference between this body,which is composed of the five elements, and the Atma which isin the body. We should get the knowledge by which we canrecognise the distinctive difference between the body and theAtma.This human birth has come to us with the purpose ofestablishing to the world the oneness that exists in all thecreation. The nature of this oneness can be recognised bypromoting the two qualities sama and dama. By promoting thequalities of sama and dama (control of mind and of the sensoryorgans), it is possible for us to recognise divinity in the variouschakras that exist between the muladhara and the sahasrara.When we understand the nature of these six chakras and alsounderstand the importance of these two qualities, sama anddama, we will know the nature of Brahman.Students:To some extent this difficult aspect which you cannoteasily understand may create some impatience in you. If youSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977229take some care and try to understand the meaning of thisaspect, then you will become successful. You have been givena human birth to enable you to understand your own nature.When you do not know the nature of yourself, how are yougoing to know the nature of the world? The aspect of divinecreation is spread and present all through the world. The life-force in this world and the life-force that exists in you areinseparable aspects of one and the same divine aspect.Although air is present every-where around you, yet we do notsee it. So also, this life-force, though present in the wholeworld, can be recognised only in some places and by somehuman being.It is in this context that the Bhagavad Gita pro-claimsthat divinity is everywhere in speech, in action, in words, andin all places. In the presence of an individual who goes onpraying and asking God, “Oh God, are you listening to myprayer?” God will exist by his side listening with His ears. Forone who prays, “Oh God, are you always with me andaccompanying me?” God will always be by his side and thedevotee can listen to the footsteps of the Lord. For one whoprays, “Oh God, are You looking at me?” God’s eyes willalways be with him. Everything is a result of your owndevotion and faith. But in God’s view, there is no differencebetween one devotee and another. “Yad bhavam tat Bhavathi,”whatever your ideas may be, they are merely reflected. Allblame and blemish are in you and in your ideas. It is not rightto ascribe any blame or blemish to God. It is not possible forany insect to survive in fire. While the blame and blemish andall contradictory ideas are really in you, to attribute them toGod is a weakness. When the capacity to experience thesethings becomes weak, then you take recourse to an alternativeand put the blame on God and begin to find fault with Him.230  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977There are some proverbs appropriate to such a situationwhich are used commonly. For instance, if one cannot singwell, one will find fault with the per-son who is the drummer.Like that, in order to condone and justify the faults andweakness that are in you, you put the blame on God. This is theway of the world. This is not right. It is man’s duty to try andsearch for the fault in him, to remove the fault and increase thesacredness in him.22. Do Not Get Attached To ThisWorld Through Your DesiresThere is a God who will answer all your prayers.Having obtained what is most difficult to obtain,namely the birth as a human being, your main objectivenow should be to find Him.Divya Atma Swarupas:The three gunas: sathwa, raja and thama, are the threeweapons which God has specially given to us in this world.Presently, because man does not know how to use theseweapons properly, we are getting into all kinds of difficultsituations. There are various circumstances which make thesethree qualities manifest themselves in different ways. The firstone is the creation around us. It is the nature of creation that itcontinually changes. This has been used as the main instrumentin the hands of God. The creation is also called Prakruthi.Prakruthi is that which continually changes.The second is avidya or ignorance. It is the opposite ofvidya or knowledge. This promotes the Thamo Guna in manand gives rise to his likes and dislikes. This will drive man tojustify the faults that are in him. This Thamo Guna has got thequality by which it can make man recognise the truth and un-truth, and sometimes make the mistake of recognising untruthas truth. It is the duty of man to remove such ignorance byvarious methods.The third one is maya. Maya creates all kinds ofsurprising things and illusions. There is nothing which maya232  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977cannot do. Maya has the strength to create the entire world andto make the world play the drama by which even to destroy thewhole world. Maya is responsible for man’s birth as well.Foolish people are born in maya, grow up in maya and endtheir life in maya. Their lives are totally steeped in maya. Whyseek such a life which is full of maya and which ends in maya?Because God wears Prakruthi as His clothes, Paramatma isalso called maya. Paramatma’s own maya is His cloak. This isthe reason why we refer to Parameswara as one who is havingmaya as His face. Depending upon the circumstances, we comeacross these three different forms. The three different forms arecalled Prakruthi, avidya and maya. These three—particularlyavidya and maya—differ only in degree and not in essence,only in name and not in the end-result. They are inseparablefrom each other and are indeed connected with each other. Ifwe can under-stand divinity and how it works, we can make anattempt to get rid of these illusions in our life.There are four different kinds of sadhana. By usingfour methods of sadhana, we have an opportun-ity to conquerthem. The first is to discriminate and distinguish betweenthings which are permanent and things which are transient. Byhaving such capacity, we can achieve a lot of good. Bylistening to the sacred Sruthi and Puranas, we should be ableto understand the meaning of “Brahma sathyam, Jagatmithya.” If we get our belief in Brahman being the truth onlyby reading books and by attending discourses and not by ourown personal experience, it cannot have a lasting effect on us.In our daily life, we are always seeing changes coming about.What we now regard as truth, becomes untruth after sometime. What we now regard as untruth, after some time may turnout to be the truth. Depending upon the situation and theenviron-ment around you, truth can change into untruth,untruth can change into truth. These changes are onlySummer Showers in Brindavan 1977233characteristic of man’s mind and arise out of man’s behaviour,but they cannot be characteristics of truth.Truth is One and will never change with time. All thosethat change should be regarded as untruth. Some things comeand go but these things which come and go are neither sath(truth) nor asath (untruth), but they are called sath-asath (truthand untruth). Why do we call such things sath-asath? Because,when they come, we think they are true, and when they go, wethink they are untrue. This combination of truth and untruth iscalled sath-asath. Another word for it is mithya, and this is thecharacteristic of many things in the world.Here, we see that the basis is the unchanging truth, andwhat has appeared to us as changing is un-truth. To this world,everything changes from moment to moment. All these arecoming into the world and going out of the world. The onlything which has neither to come nor to go is the aspect ofBrahman and that is the basis. It is possible to recognise thisbasic truth and to experience it by learning from those whoknow or from elders who had experience of such aspects. Thesecond one is to give up the enjoyment of the consequences ofyour actions. The essence of this statement is to tell us that theevents, which we consider as pleasures, are transient under allcircum-stances and the enjoyment of such material pleasures islikely to cause an illusion in you that they are good, but inreality they lead you to sorrow and pain in life.Man always wants to experience pleasure which he hasalready experienced once. At all times, and as long as onewants, if one wants to experience the same pleasures whichone had already experienced before, this would surely lead himto sorrow. All the worldly pleasures and enjoyments aretransient. It is not right on our part to submit ourselves to such234  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977transient and temporary pleasures. Our ancestors thought thatthis was like eating stale food. To eat stale food that has beenvomited by someone else is the quality of a dog and not of aman. Similarly, the desire to want to ex-perience the samematerial pleasures again and again is the quality of a dog. Tounderstand this and try and give up such desires becomes thesacred quality of man. It is very essential for us to understandthis aspect of experience in this world and make an effort toreach a stage of desirelessness.The third one relates to the sama and dama, i.e., controlof working and sensory organs. Sama will imply that you donot turn your thoughts towards the organs and sensorypleasures, but try and direct it towards knowing thesignificance of Atma. The world you see around you is acreation of your own vision. Your vision should be used to seeand realise the sacred Atma. This also means a change ofexternal vision into internal vision. It is only when we candevelop an inward vision that we will achieve detach-mentfrom the outward vision. Dama represents your having acontrol over your internal sensory organs and thus a controlover all your actions. It is only when you have no control overyour internal sensory organs will your external organs becomedominant. To be able to control these outward working organs,we should de-velop the necessary strength to control the sensesas well.If the inward sensory organs get the control over you,they become excited; and it will not be possible for you tocontrol the outward working organs. The true sadhana, in thiscontext, is the effort undertaken to control the inner sensoryorgans. If we make an effort to control directly the outerorgans, this cannot be the correct and right way of doing it. Wemust try and understand the nature of the inner organs. If theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977235inner organs are excited to a large extent, we develop defectivevision, defective hearing and faulty thinking. When yourthoughts are such that they are going to excite the innersensations and your working organs, you must make anattempt to ask, whether the consequence is going to be for yourgood or for your bad. You should constantly introspect and askif this act is worthy of being undertaken or not. Havingobtained this sacred birth of a human being and having truth inyou in the form of Atma, you should conduct yourself in amanner consistent with your status as a human being.The third sadhana is uparathi. The meaning of thisuparathi has been given by several people by say-ing that itconnotes giving up the world and becoming a sanyasi or doingonly such work for which there can be no consequences. Thetrue meaning of this word is to recognise that the mind isresponsible for exciting the inner sensory organs. Mind is themaster of your inner organs. When the mind, in the position ofa master, can put these organs along the right path, it will bepossible to control these organs by controlling your mind.Either to excite the organs or to keep them cool and relaxed,mind is responsible. If the mind, which is in the position of acontroller, is not going to control these organs, the blame restson the mind. This is why it is said that mind alone isresponsible both for the bondage of man and for the liberationof man, because mind alone controls the inner organs. Thus, tobe able to control the inner organs, we should try and put thismind of ours along the right path.To be able to put your mind along the sacred path, wemust first understand the significance of sadhana and of goodcompany. For this purpose, we shall have to undertake suchthings as japa and thapa, sadhana, yagna and yaga. If youcannot do such things, you must at least make your mind take236  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977the path of service to the community in the name of God andfor the pleasure of God. The mind should be told that allaspects that are present in everyone is the same aspect of Atma.The truth that divinity is omni-present should be impressed onthe mind. To our mind, some things may appear to be trivialand look as if they are tiny things. We should make the effortto elevate things to a higher position. But God, who is in a highexalted position, should not be brought down to the level ofthese little things.The kind of sadhana which we would do is to elevatethings from a low level to a high level. You must worship apicture as God but not worship God as a picture. This meansthat this piece of paper is God, this tumbler is God, thismicrophone is God, every-thing is God. You must attempt totake these things from a low level to the status of God.Unfortunately, today, people regard God as paper, regard Godas a tumbler, and so on. Thereby we are bringing God from ahigh position to the position of these trivial things. We shouldbe able to recognise that in every human being, the aspect ofEaswara is present, and this aspect is one and the same in all.In all these things, you should try and get the vision of yourown Atma. This is the good which uparathi can do for you.The next sadhana is called tithiksha. In this sadhana,we should try to regard all things as the creation of God anddevelop equal-mindedness. Whatever the material may be,whatever the object of your attention may be, we should notshow any distinction. We should be able to accept contrarythings like darkness and light, heat and cold in an equal-minded manner. These opposite qualities are simply comingout of changes in time. Such changes which come about onlyby a change of time are regarded as inherent changes and theySummer Showers in Brindavan 1977237do not exist permanently. Although what we see is one and thesame, we regard it as good or bad depending upon the time.Well-prepared and properly-cooked food today willbecome poison after three days. We need not go so far. We cantake an example which we see in our daily life. If we eat freshfood today, by tomorrow it gets changed into excreted matter.We may think that the food that we are eating is good. Whatwe excrete tomorrow is bad. Both good and bad are thus reallythe same, but the time and circumstances are different. In thismanner, by change of time, we are calling things good and bad;but there is no intrinsic difference.Every event will give us some pleasure and happinessand sorrow. Pain and pleasure always come together. It is notpossible for anyone to separate them from each other. Pleasurealone, isolated from pain, is never possible. When painfructifies and gives its fruit, it becomes pleasure. Pleasure hasno separate form of its own. We should promote the strength inus by which we can accept both pain and pleasure with anequal mind.It is by sraddha, or care that one can become wise. Ifyou have sraddha, it will be possible for you to acquire anyamount of wisdom. What kind of sraddha should we promote?Sraddha in vairagya, sraddha in sacred things and sraddha inhow to help the com-munity. We should also develop this careand sraddha in selfless work, in doing things which will givepleasure and happiness to others. On the other hand, it willbecome dangerous to us, if we develop sraddha in bad ideasand bad conduct. Here sraddha has been interpreted by sayingthat listening to Vedanta itself is sraddha. Vedanta means toacquire wisdom, the wis-dom relating to Brahman, to be ableto recognise what Brahman stands for, and come to the238  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977conclusion that what is omnipresent is Brahman and tounderstand the truth that there is no place where Brahman isnot present. If we can recognise this truth regarding theomnipresence of Brahman and that there is no form whichdoes not belong to Brahman, then we shall be able to rest inequanimity and equal-mindedness.Pavitratma Swarupas:The word samadhana means that whatever you may do,it should be such that it causes satisfaction in you, samadhanain your mind. If there is no satisfaction in your own self, thereis no use doing that work. Unfortunately today, although thereis no satisfaction in one’s own self, in order to causesatisfaction to the community around, several ways of doingthings are being followed. In this process, one’s whole life isbeing changed into an artificial life. What is the use of un-dertaking such actions that do not give satisfaction to your ownself? The desire should sprout from within you. In that context,with a peaceful idea, with a sacred heart and with a clean mind,you should try and plan your action. Your thought, your word,your action should all be synthesised properly and be inharmony. After acquiring a human birth, having been told tobehave as a human being, if we cannot understand the meaningand the need for this harmony, one’s life will simply turn out tobe useless.The word manava means that you should be-have in amanner which does not connote ignorance on your part. Thefeature that is characteristic of this ignorance is avidya. All thelearning that we acquire these days can really be called avidya.What you are acquiring is all for the sake of eking out alivelihood in this world. At least, some part of your learningshould be such that it will enable you to understand yourself.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977239The fourth type of sadhana is called mumuk-shatwa.Mumukshatwa has been explained by some people by sayingthat while one’s own house is burning, all attempts on his partto save himself from the burning house will be calledmumukshatwa. This means that when one is burning in the fireof his karma, entangled in the cycle of birth and death, to beable to rescue himself from that fire and save himself is calledmumukshatwa. If you are able to have detachment and notthink that some people belong to you and some people do notbelong to you, and recognise that the only truth is the Atma andget out of this fire of samsara, it is mumukshatwa. Thesadhana which enables you to decrease your attachment andyour moha is called mumukshatwa. To give up one’s desiresand experience and enjoy the bliss of detachment is calledmumukshatwa. One can also explain mumukshatwa by sayingthat it is to get rid of your sorrow and to enjoy bliss. How dowe attain this? There is an easy path. Truly, when you have anintense desire to achieve this, there is no other path easier thanthis. It is difficult for us to get attached to things. It is easy togive up things. You feel that the world is attaching itself to youand because of this attachment, it causes pain to you. If youthink that while you make an attempt to detach yourself fromthe world, the world is not getting detached from you; it iswrong. You have attached yourself to the world. The world hasnot attached itself to you.There is a small story. In this country, it has been thetradition for some people to trap monkeys. What they do is totake a big pot with a narrow mouth and put somethingattractive into that pot. They put the pot where the monkeysmove about. The monkey easily puts its hand into the earthenpot. The monkey gets the material that is in the pot into itshand by clasping it. Its fist is full of that material and the fistgets bigger and is blocked. The monkey cannot remove the240  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977hand. The monkey then thinks that someone in-side the pot iscatching hold of its hand. There is no one inside the potholding the hand. What is holding the food inside the pot is thehand of the monkey. The moment it can give up what is in itshand, the hand can come out of it. Alas! the monkey does notrealise this.In the same manner, this enormous pot of the world hasgot what may be called a selfish mouth. We enter into this potthrough this selfish mouth of the world in order to satisfy ourdesires. For that reason, we are getting caught in it. If wesimply give up what we have caught, then there is no bondage.This is called vairagya. Vairagya does not mean giving upyour home, giving up your wife and children and going to theforest. To make an attempt to decrease your desires is calledvairagya. This has also been described by saying less luggageand more comfort make travel a pleasure. If we can decreasethe luggage of desires, then our journey of life will become apleasure.Our life is a long journey. In this long journey of ourlife, we get attached to many desires in the form of luggageand the journey becomes a long and weary one. Less luggageor decreasing this luggage of desires has been called vairagyain the parlance of Vedanta.Divya Atma Swarupas:Our ambitions and attachments should be decreased tosome extent. Better than promoting your desires, promote yoursacrifice. By more desires, more attachments will come to youbut satisfaction will not come. These things always keep onadding as plus, plus, plus. By decreasing our desires and bySummer Showers in Brindavan 1977241promoting sacrifice in us, we will be able to rise to the heightsof glory and do good to our country.Those of you, who are young and youthful, shouldpromote these sacred ideas and do service to the country and toyour parents. You should resuscitate the ancient culture ofBharath. You should, by practice, become examples to others.If you take such steps, very soon it will be possible for you toraise this country to the very heights of glory, to take it back tothe time when it was known as a Thyaga Bhumi and a YogaBhumi. You must do that.23. Book Learning Is Useless: PracticalKnowledge Is Useful0h man! Just as you cannot see the stars during theday, you cannot see God in the midst of yourignorance. Because of that, do not say that He does notexist. With faith, you can earn His grace and becomeprosperous.If you do not have the necessary patience and control,what can come out of any karma that you do? What can comeout of the yoga you undertake? What can come out of evenjapa if you do not have the peace of mind during your japa?What can come out of salty land, even if you cultivate it andsow seeds into it.Prema Swarupas:Between God and God’s words, there is an inextricableconnection. God and God’s utterances are not different things.They are one and the same. When you have faith and belief inGod, it follows that you accept God’s utterances and put theminto your mind. Having believed that persons like Rama andKrishna are Avathars in this world, if you do not pay anyattention to the injunctions they gave us, it is disrespectingthem.In the case of God and in the case of manthras andplaces of pilgrimage, the amount of faith that you develop, asin the case of the doctor that treats you, will determine thenature of the results that you can get out of them. The amountof confidence that you have in the person, who is teaching youSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977243what you are learning, will determine the manner in whichwhat you learn will imprint itself on your mind. In trying toabsorb the essentials of a spiritual path, the body that absorbsthe same should be clean.When the mind is attracted by so many dif-ferentworldly matters and gets entangled in them, the good thingsthat you listen to may not enter your mind freely. In thatcontext, it is necessary that in the first instance, you turn yourmind away from worldly mat-ters and turn it towards spiritualand Godly matters. In your daily life, at all times, you areattracted by worldly matters and worldly issues. Sometimesyou may have the opportunity of listening to sacred things, butit will not be possible for them to enter your mind because ofthe prior presence of worldly issues therein. In the world today,there are many people who are believers in God and who havestudied texts like Bhagavad Gita, Puranas, Ithihasas, Vedasand Sastras. But how many of them have been able to put intopractice what they preach? How can one expect to experiencethe bliss simply by preaching and not practising what hepreaches?Divya Atma Swarupas:We do not find even one of that kind in a mil-lion.Many people who continuously perform japa and meditationand who read such spiritual texts do not appear to have anypractical experience of this at all. Truly, practices, which weonly listen to and text which we merely read without anypractical experi-ence, are all a waste of time. It is not possiblefor us to purify ourselves merely by reading books. Today thebook and the head appear to have become one. You arelearning how to convert your head into a book, but you are notlearning how to convert the narrow ideas in your head intouseful practical knowledge. The words that one utters are very244  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977peaceful words, but the actions that one indulges in are veryviolent actions. Such people who deceive others have becomevery large in number and this is the reason why our motherlandhas been suffering.Saying one thing and doing yet another thing isdeceiving one’s own Atma. Such actions bring disgrace andshame on human beings. Just by listening to things, we are notgoing to get any benefit. What we listen to, we should carefullyrecapitulate. What we have recapitulated, we should digest andabsorb. Mere listening is like cooking in the kitchen. Just bylooking at the food that has been cooked in the kitchen, ourhunger is not going to be satisfied. We should eat that food.Just by eating that food, the substance that is contained in thefood is not going to strengthen the body. You should alsodigest the food that you have taken. Sravana, or listening, islike cooking the food. Manana, or recapitulating, is like eatingthe food and nididhyasa is like digesting and absorbing thefood. It is only when we can co-ordinate these three processesthat we get the best out of the situation, and benefits will cometo us.Young people should make attempts by which theessence of the three stages in the process are not missed so thatwhat we do is of service. Today, just listening has become adisease. Man has become proud and thinks that he knowseverything no sooner than he has listened to something. This iswrong and as long as such pride and ego exist in you, youbecome unfit for learning spiritual matters. The heart of theindividual, who makes an attempt to put into practice the goodthings he has listened to, becomes the temple of God.Krishna and Arjuna, ever since they were born, wereliving together, playing with and talking to each other. ThisSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977245process continued for nearly eighty years. However, the sacredBhagavad Gita was taught to Arjuna just at the time of thebattle of Mahabharatha and not earlier. It is not as if there wereno occasions before that, when Arjuna and Krishna werespending time together. We must understand the reason forthis. Arjuna’s mind was not prepared, and he was not verydeserving of such a preaching earlier. During the battle ofMahabharatha, Arjuna said that he was not interested in thepleasures of the kingdom and fell at the feet of Krishna. It isonly at that instant of time when Arjuna sought saranagathithat he deserved to be taught the Bhagavad Gita. It is only thenthat Krishna was prepared to teach the Gita. We must acquirethe right for receiving a particular thing before aspiring toreceive the same. Today, in the moral sphere, ethical sphereand political sphere, people are wanting to enjoy positionseven if they have no right to enjoy such positions. They areonly looking at the authority and power that go with theposition, but are not giving the slightest thought to whetherthey deserve to occupy and have the right to occupy thatposition.Students:In respect of anything that you want to do, you mustfirst of all be prepared to ask the question whether you have aright to do that. It is only when you clean your mind andprepare it to accept sacred things, should you undertake to putsacred things into it. You may have read many texts but solong as you do not put into practice what you have learnt, allyour learning becomes useless. Whether they are the wordsthat you utter or actions that you indulge in, they will all lookas if they are emanating from a gramophone record or anautomatic machine.It is the duty of young students to take care that evenone or two things that you learn are put into practice, and you246  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977should become ideal examples to others by practising what youpreach. Good things which you do not put into practice, evenafter knowing them, will become useless. Why do you feelproud that you have read books, that you have gone throughthe Sastras and that you have acquired education? What is theuse of all these if you cannot put their essence into practice? Ifyou do not put your hands together and pay homage to God,what is the use of being born as a human being in this world?Having been born, you should take care to see that some usecomes out of your birth in the world.From the time you get up from your sleep, till the timeyou go back to sleep again, you spend all your time, all yourresources merely for eking out a liveli-hood. In this way, byforgetting all things about God, by forgetting what is mostimportant, what is it that you have acquired?As mentioned in the story of the Ramayana, one shouldbecome an ideal human being, an ideal king, an ideal father, anideal husband, and so on. It is only when you can demonstratean ideal life, can you say that you have justified having beenborn as a human being. On the other hand, if you become aslave to your senses, you become a slave to the whole worldaround you. Even if you live a short life, lead a good and ideallife. A long life with contaminated and impure thoughts is nogood. It is very necessary that you recognise that real educationmeans development of character.Divya Atma Swarupas:During the past one month, from several people andseveral scholars, you have acquired education that is necessaryfor understanding the spiritual traditions of this country. Youshould make an attempt to experience and enjoy the bliss thatis contained in what you have learnt. Our wealth is knowledge.Our prosperity lies in the good qualities that are in us. OurSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977247riches are our dharma. An individual who has got faith in Godmust put his faith into practice. By believing in God and yet byignoring God’s utterances and commands, you arecontradicting yourselves. Faith is not a cloak that is wornoutside for deceiving others. Such people are deceivingthemselves.The essence of education is to recognise the truth. Allbranches of learning are like the rivers. The spiritual learning islike the ocean. All rivers go and merge into the ocean. Whenthey merge in the ocean, the rivers lose their individualitycompletely. Under no circumstances should we give room toexcitement, to ego and to anger.There is one little example for this. In one village, therewas a village head who did not like Buddha. The moment heheard any words uttered by Buddha, he used to get angry. Hewas always suffering from uncontrolled anger. One day, helearnt the news that Buddha was coming to that village with hisdis-ciples. Since he was the head of the village, he issued acertain order. The order was that when Buddha came askingfor alms, no one should give him alms and all should closetheir doors. Following this order, all the people in the villageclosed the doors of their respective houses when Buddha came.The head of the village also closed the doors and was sitting inthe veranda outside the door.Buddha was all-knowing and he knew what washappening. With his disciples, he came to the very house inwhich the village head was living. Great people will never beaffected either by praise or by blame. Such people, havingdeveloped equal-minded-ness, will go right in front of thosewho are suffering from jealousy and ego. This village head wassuffering from such ignorance and pride, and Buddha went248  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977straight to him and asked for alms. The village head, who waswaiting for such an opportunity, became even more excited. Aperson who is sick will always want to take several medicines.Certain birds will always be wanting to look at coolmoonshine. Good people will always want to help the badpeople and to see that the badness in them is removed and theyare cleansed. It is only one who has a disease and is sick, thatwants a doctor. A healthy man does not want a doctor.Similarly, people who are suffering from the disease ofdisbelief can be cured by good people.With such noble ideas, Buddha, along with hisdisciples, went to the house of the village headman and said,“Bhavati, bhikshan dehi,” I have come to ask for alms. Whenhe saw Buddha and the disciples accompanying him, theheadman became very angry. He addressed Buddha and said,“You lazy man, you have collected all these people in yourcompany, and they have become lazy. You are taking themround because they do not want to work. Not only are youruining your own life, you are also ruining the lives of yourdisciples. This is wrong. In that manner, he abused Buddha andthe disciples who came with him.Buddha smiled at all this, and smiling, asked the headof the village if he could clarify a doubt for him. The headmansaid in a very loud voice, “What is your doubt? Let me know.”Buddha said, “I have come to ask for alms from you. You havebrought something in order to give it to me. If I do not acceptwhat you wish to give to me, where will it go?” The villagehead-man laughingly replied, “What a big question have youasked! If you do not wish to take what I have brought for you, Iwill take it back myself.” Buddha said that he was very happy.“I have come here along with my disciples for taking almsfrom you. You have brought abuse and you want to give it toSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977249me as alms. But I have not accepted the bhiksha you broughtfor me in the form of abuse. To whom will it go back?” Withthis, the ego of that village headman subsided. In this manner,great people and great saints go to several persons, and with aview to enlighten them, adopt different methods. By suchthings, we should not let our mind become impure. At alltimes, we should make an attempt to cleanse our mind andmake it pure. The house which we use everyday, we undertaketo clean it day after day. So also if this mind of ours, which wehave to use every moment, is not cleaned often, great damagewill result. Our mind is like a copper vessel. This copper vesselwill gather rust from moment to moment. We are using it everymoment. We should make an attempt to use the water ofrepentance to cleanse this pot of our mind from time to time.If anyone abuses you or accuses you, you should notget excited. With equanimity you should be prepared to takewhat they give you. In this sacred age of yours, excitement is avery harmful thing. If you think of the Lord for five minutes,all that excitement will vanish. These states of excitement aretransient and temporary and are not permanent. If anyoneamongst you, with an inimical feeling, accuses others, youmust be prepared to repent. One can also think of anothermethod of understanding this situation. Suppose some friend ofyours sends you a registered letter through the post. Accordingto the rules of the postal depart-ment, if you wish to receive it,you have to sign on a receipt. If you do not agree to sign,where does that registered letter go? It will go back to theaddress from which it has come. In this manner, whateverothers may say, yet, if you feel that they are not for you, and ifyou are only a witness, then nothing will come to you.Divya Atma Swarupas:250  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977You are truly only witnessing persons. Not only inregard to worldly matters but also in regard to spiritual matters,you should remain as witnesses only. But you should ask thequestion, such of us who are only to witness, wherefrom havewe come? Where do we go? If you cannot obtain an answer tothese two questions, then what is the purpose of this life? Wepost an envelope in the postbox. On that envelope, either theremust be a from address or the address to which it has to go. Ifboth of them are not present, where will the envelope go? Itwill simply be removed from the postbox and burnt. As in thatanalogy, if we do not know from where we have come andwhere we have to go, we will be discarded as useless andthrown away. If any group teacher comes and asks one of you,wherefrom have you come? If you are not in a position toreply, then he asks you, where are you going? And if you arenot in a position to reply to that also, what will then happen toyou? We have come into this world which is a mithya.Everything in this world is asking you, “Wherefrom have youcome?” All the Upanishads are asking you, “Where are yougoing? What is your destination?” The Upanishads tell youthat you are the child of immortality. You must have a firmbelief that you have come from the aspect of Atma, and thatyou will be going back to immortality.Students:In order to cleanse your minds, you should promotesacred prema in yourselves. To just keep talking of devotiondoes not fulfil the purpose of devotion. It is a mistake to thinkthat you can control your future and go on praising yourselvesthat you have devotion. Love of God is the main symptom ofbhakthi or devotion.The love between a mother and her child has beencalled vatsalya. The prema you have between each other canSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977251be called anuraga. The prema that exists between a husbandand a wife is called moha. The attachment which you developtowards your material possessions has been called iccha. Thesame prema towards God is called bhakthi. In all these aspects,what is common is prema, but all of them cannot be calledbhakthi. There may be love or prema towards a son, towards ahusband, towards friends, towards God. If you can spread theprema that you have for God and widen that prema towards allhuman beings, this will enable you to develop equal-mindedness towards all human beings. This is what has beendescribed by saying that the entire creation you see around youshould be covered by iccha. This iccha by which you canspread your prema towards every individual must bedeveloped by you. If you keep on talking of prema anddevotion and direct them towards unholy objects, you will bedeceiving God. Students should realise this.Students:It is not as if you do not know the situation in whichour country is today. The train of our com-munity has becomevery large and is moving fast. In this train, there are severaldifferent people, old people, young people, and they are all apart of it. The older people drop out at the next railway stationbecause of their old age. The young people undertake a longjourney. All the pains and pleasures that are consequent to sucha long journey will be experienced only by the young people.You must, therefore, recog-nise the problems that will becaused in this train and solve them for yourselves. Then onlyyou can travel in this train with some comfort.Students:You are truly the future citizens of this country. If atleast ten or twenty from amongst you, who have joined theSummer Course, can get good ideas and put them into practice,252  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977there is no doubt that this motherland of ours will enjoy greatglory. The great things that you are listening to, and the sacredideals that you are absorbing should not be forgotten when yougo out of this hall. Imprint these ideals permanently in yourmind and I am hoping that by so doing, you will serve thepeople and regard service to the people as service to God. 24. Live And Work For The Good OfThe Community Around YouHow can we describe the great good fortune ofpeople who are born in Bharath? God in human form isbeing born in this country again and again, and He isteaching Divinity and the Divine aspects to the peoplewho live in this country. He has been treating them likeHis friends and relations. Do you not feel this trutharound you?Pavitratma Swarupas:Man can be equated to the mind and mind can beequated with something which has the capacity to understand.If, today, we feel that the country is not what it should be, weshould conclude also that man and man’s knowledge are notwhat they should be. The country is in a bad shape, becauseman’s ideas and thoughts are not the right and appropriateones. If one can know the answer to the question, “For whosesake are we living?,” then we can certainly rectify matters inthis country. To this question, the answer that usually comes is,“I am living for my sake, I am eating for my sake, I amdrinking for may sake, I am sleeping for my sake, I am readingfor my sake.” Not only this, you often say, “I am takingmedicine for my own dis-ease, I am putting on a bandage onmy own broken leg.” In all these statements, it becomes quiteclear that this individual is living for himself, for his own goodand not for others. Not only this, if ten persons are sleeping inone room, each one has his own dream. The dream which isdreamt by one, is for himself. All the ten people are not havingthe same dream. Here it becomes quite clear that whatever you254  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977see, whatever you experience is for your own self, and not forothers.If a wife addresses her husband and says, “Now that wehave come to the decision to admit our son in the Sathya SaiCollege, should we not make some clothes for him?” If, at thatmoment, the husband has no money, he decides to borrowsome and get clothes prepared for his son. For whose sake hashe borrowed the money? For whom has he got the clothesprepared? He has done all this for the sake of his son. Aftersome time, a few of his friends come to him and tell him thatSummer Classes are being conducted in the Sathya Sai Collegeand advise him that, if necessary, he should take a couple ofdays’ leave and go and listen to those lectures. To this, theindividual may give a reply and say, “I cannot get leave evenfor half a day and how can I go and listen to the discourses inthe Summer Classes?” If the next day, his wife gets someincurable disease, then he takes leave, takes his wife to ahospital, admits her there and goes on leave for a number ofdays. For whose sake has he taken this leave? That is for hiswife. After a few days have passed again, an incident mayoccur by which he has prepared some very good food which helikes, and while the food is in his plate, he gets the news thathis son fell under a car and met with an accident on the street.Then he will give up the food that he likes. Although he ishungry and wants to eat, he will run for the sake of his son onthe street. He has given up the food which he very much likesto eat. For whose sake has he done this? For whose sake has herun into the street? That is for his son. Thus, we see that whenone sees his own people, who are dear to him, suffer from pain,he is willing to sacrifice everything. We come to understandthat he is doing nothing for him-self, but that he is doing allthese things for people who are dear to him. Will he havecomplete satisfaction if he and the close members of his familySummer Showers in Brindavan 1977255are well? Will it be possible in those conditions for him and themembers of his family to live in peace? This will not bring himcomplete peace because he lives in the society. A human beingwho is born in the society, who grows in the society, and wholives in the society, cannot for a moment abandon the society.He may say that he is doing his work for promoting his ownprospects and for looking after himself and that he has nothingto do with the society. But who has given him his job, and whois paying him his salary and looking after his comforts in life?It is the society around him.If you are under the impression that you can truly lead ahappy life, with your own family, without having anything todo with the society around you, why do you and the family notgo into the forest, get away from the society and live happily?In reality, man cannot cut himself away from thesociety. When the village in which he lives gets into sometrouble, he feels that he is a part of the village. If there is adisease like cholera or plague, then he will also be affected byall the consequences. Why and for whom is he doing this? Thisis because he has got some connection with the society aroundhim. When the neighbouring house catches fire and is burn-ing, he will go and make an attempt to put out that fire. If thereis no village, there is no house of his own. The village issustained by the society. It becomes necessary to recognise thathe is a part of the com-munity and that he is doing things forthe sake of the community as well.Today, because the individual interests in a family havetaken the upper hand, man is unable to recognise theimportance of the family in which he lives. The welfare of theentire country depends upon the states that constitute thecountry. The welfare of the states that constitute the country256  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977depends upon the welfare of the cities in that state. The welfareof the cities, depends, in turn, on the welfare of the villagesaround each city. The welfare of the villages, in turn, dependsupon the welfare of the houses that constitute these villages.The welfare of each house in the village depends upon thewelfare of the members of each family. Thus the total welfareof the whole country ultimately depends upon the welfare ofeach one of the individuals. If there is no individual, there is nofamily. If there is no family, there is no village. If there is novillage, there are no cities. If there are no cities, there is nostate. If there is no state, there is no country.We will take here one small example. In a big city likeDelhi, we have what are called social clubs. In these clubspeople of different avocations, people who are in positions ofauthority, people who are not in any position of authority, andvarious components of the society will all be moving together.When people from different strata of life are moving in theclub, spies on behalf of the state will also be moving amongstthem in order that they may collect some information fromvarious people. These spies will be prepared to spend anyamount of money in order that they may get access to thesecret information. Some people will be prepared to give awaysecret information that is required, because they are in need ofmoney.They have an idea that by acquiring money by thisprocess, they and their families can live happily. But can theybe really happy after divulging such secret information? No. Inthat context, they are causing great harm to the country. Herewe see that individuals who have the selfish idea of makingthem-selves and the members of their family happy, willundertake such mean work. If they realise that there is aSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977257community which has got to be looked after, in addition tothemselves as individuals, they will not do such mean things.Today, many people, in spite of their being educated,care for only one individual and the members of his family.They do not think that there is a community which has to betaken care of.Students:You should recognise that along with you as anindividual, there is also the society and the community. We arenot living solely for ourselves. We are not living solely for thesake of our family. We are living for the sake of the world.Even before you were born, your father and mother were there.Your father and mother were part of the society around you.Having been born into the community, how can you go awayfrom the community? This is the right opportunity for you toregard that service to the community is service to God. Wemust push away the selfishness in us and undertake the task ofhelping others.You would have read stories in which the moral is: thatGod will like those people who like the people around them.On one occasion, Abu Ben Adam was returning to his home,when he found that there was some light coming out from thewindow of his bed-room. When he looked through thatwindow, he saw that an angel was sitting in his bedroom andusing a golden pen for writing in a book. Gently, Abu BenAdam entered the room and asked, “Mother, what are youdoing?” He got the reply, “I am an angel, I am a messenger ofGod. I am writing a list of names who have shown affection toGod.” Abu Ben Adam asked if his name was there in that list.She said, “No, it is not here.” Abu Ben Adam told himself, “I258  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977am not loved by God. Have I not been devoted to God? Whatis my limitation?” He just left it at that and went to his room.On the next day, to meet some people, he went out ofhis house. When he returned back, he found again the samelight shining out of his window. He again asked, “Mother,what is it that you are writing today?” The angel replied,“Today I am making a list of people who are loved by God.”He asked, “Does that list contain my name?” The angelreplied, “In the whole list, I find only your name.” He againasked the question “For what reason is God loving me?” Thisangel, who is the messenger of God, replied, “You believe thatservice to the people is service to the Lord. You are findingGod in the people and you have identified people with God; soGod loves you because you feel that God is omnipresent.” Inyour daily life, you are saying that God is omnipresent, but youare not putting it into practice. What you should do is to regardGod as being present in everyone, everywhere and you shouldlove everyone as you love God. The right thing is to have abroad vision of God and regard Him as being presenteverywhere. To think that He is confined in some small placeis to bring down the whole status of God Himself. Becauseyour ideas are narrow and are very small, you are thinking thatGod is narrow and small.Students:Do not have such narrow ideas and narrow views. Youmust broaden your vision and regard God as being presenteverywhere; and in that context, you should serve and loveeveryone. In developing such broad ideas, young peopleshould put in all the effort possible. The young people are thesaviours of the world. Swami’s ambition and hopes rest on theyoung people. The future of the country depends upon the faithof the young people. If you turn out to be good people, theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977259country will turn out to be good. If you promote your narrowideas and keep them narrow for all the time, you will harm thiscountry.Students:Your hearts are sacred, your ideas are pure and youshould strengthen these qualities in you and serve the people.This is what you should follow.This body of yours is weak. It is made up of the fiveelements that make the world. You do not know when youhave to abandon this body. People tell us that this body willlive for a hundred years. Do not believe in that statement. Thisbody may disappear at any moment—maybe in your youth,maybe in your adolescence or maybe in your old age. It maydrop down in a forest, or in a city or on water. When and underwhat circumstances the body will drop, no one can say. Theonly thing which is certain is death. So long as the body is withyou, good use must be made of it. You must use it only forgood and sacred purposes.You have participated in sacred meetings. You havelistened to the sacred discourses from various experiencedpeople. I am hoping that you will use all your energies infuture for serving the people. That is the best way to earn thegrace of God.25. True Yoga Should Enable You ToControl Your MindWill the tanks get filled if there are a few showers?Will your thirst be quenched if you swallow a littlesaliva? Can we bloat our stomach if we hold breath fora little while? Can we get coal by burning a few bits ofhair?Pavitratma Swarupas:In this country of Bharath, from time immemorial,many Maharishis did several things to understand the secret ofAtma. Karma, bhakthi, jnana and yoga are the four majorapproaches in this search for the Atma. The paths of karma, ofbhakthi and of jnana are such that ordinary people can alsofollow them. There are other paths which can be described bydifferent names like dhyana, upasana, thyaga; but all suchpaths are contained in the path of karma. The path of yoga isnot easily accessible to common people. Scholars have beenexplaining the path of yoga in different ways, and they havebeen propagating this path in diverse ways. For most of them,what is available is only acquaintance with books and actualexperience is lacking.Many people have been following the path of yoga byvairagya or detachment and have been experiencing somehappiness. These days, several people are explaining andteaching the methods of yoga. However, in no way could theyexperience for themselves, in practice, the results of yoga. It iseasy to talk, but it is difficult to practice what you say. WeSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977261must try and understand whether the difficult path of yoga canbe followed by ordinary people at all.If we accept and follow the Sutras of Patanjali, it hasbeen said that yoga will lead to chittavrithi, that is control ofyour mind. Were there such great people in this world whohave been able to control their minds? Yes, there are suchpeople, but they are not moving amongst ordinary persons inthe ordinary way. They are concerned with their inner self.They are concerned with promoting their inner vision. To saythat there are people amongst ordinary persons who canexplain the true meaning of yoga is to state an untruth.People, who truly want to understand yoga, shoulddetach themselves from all ordinary worldly action. Yogaconnotes having a confluence with divinity and the sacredaspects of Atma. Like the river, when once it enters the ocean,loses its name, its form and its taste; so also a human being,once he joins the Atmic spirit, he will have nothing to do withthe world. If we send a doll of salt into the ocean, can it comeback again to us? This doll of salt, though it has come out ofthe ocean originally, once it goes back to the ocean, it willmerge into it and become identical with ocean. In the samemanner, for people who understand completely the meaning ofyoga, there will be no further opportunity to have anything todo with the worldly bhoga.Here all the four kosas, the Annamaya, the Pranamaya,the Manomaya and the Vignanamaya, are born out of theAnandamaya Kosa. The primary objective of the AnandamayaKosa is iccha or sankalpa. This iccha or sankalpa is mergedwith the Atma and is contained inside as Atma. Therefore,sankalpa loses all its manifestation once it merges with theinner self or the Atma. The entire world is only a projection or262  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977an image of this sankalpa. It is not possible for this sankalpa toget into an illusion by looking at its own image in the materialworld. If any one utters any word, we say, by way ofexplanation, that the word is coming from one’s throat. This isnot the truth. With one’s throat, one can utter a sound, but onecannot utter a word. The word does not come from the throat;but it starts from the mooladhara chakra, goes up to theagneya chakra and then it touches the Atma and gets its trueand proper tone from the base of the Atma and then comes outas sound. Here, in the Prana Kosa and the Mano Kosa thereare certain strings. These strings can be touched at certainplaces where there are bridges on these strings. Because thoseare being touched, sounds are produced and those sounds go toyour heart. Then, the sound will emanate as a word. Thebridges on these strings come to the notice of the mind. Peoplewho know how to play on a vina can understand the stepseasily.When one plays on the strings and touches the bridgesbelow the strings, each word and each sound take special formsand tones. Depending upon the strings on which one is playingand depending upon the bridge which one is touching, the kindof sound that emanates will be determined. While playing onone string, if one touches the bridge relating to an-other string,one will not hear any particular sound. The life-string thatstarts at the mooldhara chakra and goes up to the agneyachakra must be made to join our mind. Here, the purpose ofthe mooldhara chakra is to make the body keep erect and ingood condition. This is something which protects the body. Itis also referred to as Annamaya Kosa.The second one is the swadhyaya chakra. It has got theduty to deal with the Pranamaya Kosa and give it the much-needed heat. Because of the heat that is supplied to theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977263Pranamaya Kosa, the body survives and is protected. Not onlythis, the different organs that are contained in the body aremaintained by the heat that is generated.The third one is the manipuraka chakra. This is in thenature of a fluid. This enables the blood to flow; and afterenabling the blood to flow out of the Anna-maya Kosa, it takesout all the fluids and hands them to the body. Because of thisflow of blood in the body, it enables the body to keep healthyand passes the blood to the Pranamaya and Annamaya Kosas.The fourth one is the annahata chakra. This is in thenature of air. Not only does it enable people to breathe in andbreathe out air, but it also makes them think about variousmatters. Since this has got the property of breathing, it canshow its nature by way of air, heat, and dust. At this stage, theaspect that is contained in the Pranamaya Kosa enters theinner string and presses the inner string.The next one is the visuddha chakra. The visuddhackakra is described as having the aspects of space and of time.The sounds that emanate from us are described as words.The next one is agneya chakra. This agneya chakramakes you feel your existence. Not only this, it enables you torecognise your true form. This works in the field of pragnana.It enables you to fix the five vital airs in you and enables theaspect of five pranas to shine. The purpose of the agneyachakra is to enable you to control the five pranas.The next one is the sahasrara chakra. The sahasrarachakra has got an important function of being the very base ofall the vital points in you. This enables your iccha Sakthi tofunction. Yoga has been teaching us that the vital aspect of life264  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977exists from the 9th ring to the 12th ring in the spinal column orthe backbone.The Vedas have described that this force of life is likewhat we see when lightning comes in the clouds, and isbetween the 9th ring and the 12th ring in the spinal column. Aman can live even after losing his leg, even after losing hishand; but if his spine is broken, he cannot live. In the spinalcolumn, what exists between the 9th ring and the 12th ring isthe essence of life. This is called annahata chakra. Thepassage of air through this annahata chakra, while breathing inand breathing out, sustains life.When the rishis did not know this basic truth that lifereally exists between the 9th ring and the 12th ring in thespinal column, they were trying to control each one of thechakras starting from the mooladhara, going right up to thepragna. They were doing such sadhana by which they couldunderstand and control each one of the rings in the spinalcolumn. We should recognise that by wisdom, one gets twokinds of pragna. One relates to the world and the other relatesto the spirit. One that relates to the world enables you tounderstand what you see around you and how the materialworld goes on. We should take this to mean that even beforewe understand the form and the meaning of the external things,they are already contained within us. This knowledge whichrelates to the Atma, with which you have already seen andknown in some form within you, is now being seen as anexternal thing.I am now looking at this piece of cloth, but the form ofthis piece of cloth has already been imprinted in my mind evenbefore I see the cloth. Thus, that which establishes the trueSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977265form of what already exists as inner knowledge is the first kindof pragna.The second type of pragna is that which enables you tosee the aspect of Atma in all living beings as one and the same.This has been proclaimed by the rishis by saying “PragnanamBrahma.” This aspect of pragnana, which is identical withBrahman, is present in every individual. For man to promotehimself and his knowledge, control of senses and control ofmind are very necessary, and those are not easily done. Whatwe should do today is to see that the mind does not take thewrong path but is diverted to the right path. Many people whowant to control their senses and their minds, make severalattempts; but having become unsuccessful in their attempts,they even lose their faith in the spiritual path. Some of thembecome atheists.By the paths of sama, dama, upeksha, tithiksha,sraddha and samadhana, we will be able to under-stand thedivine aspect. We have been believing that these differentpaths are worldly paths. We have been explaining sama tomean control of the external organs, and dama to mean controlof the inner sensory organs. We have been uttering them onlyas words but have not been practising them. We do not see theright type of practice of yoga in our country today. Simply bylearning some kind of physical exercise relating to the humanbody, we call it yoga. That type of yoga is simply physicalexercise and will result in better health of the body. This is notgoing to give you the health of the Atma. We are calling thesephysical exercises yoga asanas. All these aspects relate to thebody which consists of the five elements. When the today itselfis transient, how can the work which you do with the body orthe results thereof become permanent?266  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977As a lamp helps you to see the material around you, soalso, all our organs are simply instruments with which we seethe external world. The items that are being shown to you byyour organs are impermanent. The eyes with which we seeimpermanent things are also impermanent, and even the mindwhich looks at these organs also keeps on changing.Intelligence enables us to oversee the mind and this becomesan instrument. Intelligence, too, has no self-effulgence like themoon. Only the light shining on the intelligence from the Atmacan show something. Because intelligence is very close toAtma, it is able to receive so much light. If we want to reachand under-stand the aspect of Atma which is the basis of alllife, we can do it only through prema. Like the strings of thevina, it will enable you to hear the tune and the tone whichcontrol the swara; so also the strings of life will enable you tounderstand the aspect of Atma. To try and investigate the originof the very origin will only be a waste of time. We are unableto find people who have had practical experience of themooladhara chakra and the agneya chakra; and it is notpossible to try and learn these things for one’s self. Even ifthere are some people who have the knowledge, they will notundertake to teach this knowledge. They will enjoy the blissand happiness coming from such knowledge, but they willhave no words to teach others. They can only experience butcannot express.The ichha Sakthi refers to the capacity in a humanbeing by which he transforms what exists in the chakras intothe aspect of Atma.Pavitratma Swarupas:If you really want to elevate the human nature to thelevel of the divine nature, it is very necessary for you to havethe qualities of morality and truth. We should understand howSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977267we can live with these qualities and practise what shines aspermanent truth in our life. We should co-ordinate thepermanent truth with the times in which we are living. Weneed not change the essence or the contents, but there isnothing wrong in changing the thoughts with which we live.We should only change the container, and not try to change thecontents. In this manner, if we want to cool the organs when inexcitement, the only path that is available is the path of prema.We have been hearing that the dawn of wisdom isidentical with the vision of Adwaitha. Any wise man, howeverwise he may be, when subjected to opposites, like pain andpleasure or loss and gain, is affected differently. Gandhi wasteaching the aspect of ahimsa to the people in many ways. Themeaning of ahimsa is that neither in thought, word or deedshould you cause harm to anybody. Gandhi took a vow that tillthe end of his life, he will follow this. But on one occasion,when he saw a cow suffering from pain, he could not bear it,and he advised the doctor to give an injection and end the lifeof the cow. Thus, in order to help the suffering individual, wemay sometimes have to harm him. The only way in which onecan take the path of ahimsa is to recognise the oneness of theAtma that is present in all living beings and regard them all asequal.A devotee came to a guru and requested that he begiven a manthra. The guru gave him an ashtahkshari, “Omnamo Narayana,” and asked the devotee to go. After he hadgone some distance, the guru called him back. The guru saidthat there is no use repeating the manthras verbally andadvised him to think of the form of Vishnu and then utter thismanthra. This individual agreed and was going back. After hehad gone some distance, the guru called the devotee backagain. He cautioned him that he should have the form of268  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Vishnu only in his mind and think of the manthra, and that heshould not allow the form of a dog or a monkey to come in hismind. As soon as he sat down for meditation, he began to thinkthat a dog should not come into his mind and a monkey shouldnot come into his mind. Thus, all the time, he was thinking ofthe dog and monkey, but Vishnu never came to his mind. Inthis disturbed situation, he asked himself, why the guru toldhim at all of a dog or a monkey? Is it because of the mistake ofthe guru that the dog and the monkey are haunting his mind?So he went back to the guru and fell at his feet. He said that themanthra which was given to him, and the form of Vishnusuggested along with the manthra, gave him great happiness,but when he was told about the dog and the monkey, he wascontinually being haunted by them and was not having anypeace of mind.The guru told the devotee, “I have asked you to thinkof the form of Vishnu. What does the form of Vishnu mean?Vishnu is omnipresent and if you think of Vishnu, variousthings can come to your mind and there is nothing wrong.Even if a dog comes to your mind, it simply means that Vishnuis omnipresent. If the monkey comes to your mind and youthink of it in the omnipresent aspect of Vishnu, there is noharm. I mentioned these two things to you so that you canrealise the oneness of Vishnu and his omnipresence.”Here, there is a human body. In this, you find a hand, anose, a face, and so on. All these are the com-ponents of thebody. If you separate all these things and pull them apart,where is the body? All the com-ponents and the organstogether make up the body. The aspect of Vishnu is one inwhich all these forms are combined. The rishis of ancient timeshad been teaching to their disciples this oneness by severalmethods and means.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977269Students:Truly if you have the sacred idea of acquiring thisknowledge, you must enter the society, see the oneness insociety, realise that what is present in any-one is one and thesame spirit of Atma. You must establish that the faith that is inyou is also the same faith that is in everybody else. We shouldnot be discouraged by the thought that it may not be possibleand not make an attempt at all. It is by sadhana and repeatedeffort, that one can achieve things. By a conscious effort youmust undertake sadhana. We are wasting time in severaldifferent ways. Even if we use a fraction of the time we waste,for the purpose of sadhana, there is no doubt, whatsoever, thatwe can improve our life.As the wall that is being built by a man goes upcontinuously, the one who does sadhana will keepcontinuously rising higher up. The one who does not dosadhana lives like a man who goes on digging a well and goeson continually going deeper and deeper. It is only when yourmind is not pure that it will give place to such doubts. If youhave a pure mind, there will be no room for such doubts. Onthe basis of the doubts that you have or on the basis of theunwavering mind that you have, you can decide for yourselfhow impure your mind is. Gradually, you must give up yourdoubts, you must give up your hesitations and establish somefirm truth and belief in your minds. Have there not been manyrulers who have ruled on this earth and who have felt proud oftheir glory? Where are they? Do you see them now? Havethere not been people who have done many great things?Where are they? Do you see them now? From time to time, ifwe depend upon this body, whose life is becoming less andless, day after day; and if we do not use time in a good manner,we will be wasting our lives. Man is forgetting his true nature270  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977by wanting to fulfil his sensory desires, depending upon thishuman body which is going to drop down at some time orother.Divya Atma Swarupas:As you know, a drop at the end of a leaf on a tree canfall down at any time. Similarly, our body can drop off at anytime. The moment life disappears, this body will become like ahollow bamboo. Young people should necessarily understandthe truth and follow the aspect of Atma. You should certainlyacquire the knowledge that relates to your daily life. So long asone lives, food is necessary. So long as one lives, one has to dosome work. But this cannot be the end and aim of your life.You may acquire many things during your lives, but when youleave this body and go, not one of those things will come withyou. Fixing such ideas in your mind from moment to moment,you should recognise that the body has been given to you inorder that you may do some good work and help others.This body is an instrument. Using this instru-ment anddepending upon this instrument, you should reach yourdestination. This body is a temple. It is a chariot for the jivathat is travelling in it. If we want to use a car, we think severaltimes whether the road on which we are driving is a properone. In the same manner, before putting the car of this body onthe road of your life, you should examine the nature of thatroad.This chariot is a sacred one and is to be used for travelon a sacred path and to reach a sacred destination. If we havefirm faith in this aspect, we will not agree under anycircumstances to take our body along the wrong path.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977271In order that you may achieve the four puru-sharthas:dharma, artha, kama and moksha, you must have a healthybody. To have a healthy body, you must put yourselves on aproper diet. But with some vague idea that you will acquiresomething, do not enter into this world. For the sake of a goodlife and good health, you can, in your ordinary daily life,undertake physical exertion. Do not enter a path which you donot understand. It will ruin your life. You may undertake anytask, but do it in the name of God and for His pleasure.26. Good Company Enables You ToRetain Your GoodnessJust as a rat gets trapped in the cage because it isunable to resist the temptation of the bait in the cage,so also man loses the great happiness and bliss thatcomes out of the knowledge of Brahman, unable to giveup his wanting to enjoy the many sensuous attractionsof this world.Prema Swarupas:A human being is like a seed. As a seed grows into aplant after sprouting, as the plant becomes a tree when itbecomes bigger, so also a human being is born, then he growsand changes and transforms, acquires the fullness of humannature and ultimately, through various stages, will reach hisdestination.Man has got two kinds of knowledge. One type ofknowledge is that which relates to the day-to-day world. Thesecond type of knowledge relates to the higher world, theworld of spirit. The first has been described as that which helpsyou to carry on your daily life or earn your livelihood. Thesecond one takes you to the ultimate destination, the objectiveof all life. By using the knowledge which relates to the world,you can carry on your daily life. By such a process, yougenerally enhance your reputation and your position in thesociety in which you live. You also use this knowledge inorder to fulfil your responsibilities and your duties. It can alsobe described as the knowledge which enables you to liveSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977273peacefully in the surround-ing world. By this means, you canacquire the ability and strength to live well.The second type of knowledge which relates to thehigher world, the world of spirit, enables you to answerquestions like, Who am I? Why have I come here? What is thebasis of life? What is the secret of my birth? and so on. Toenable you to answer such questions, we use the second type ofknowledge. To answer these questions, you have to see theoneness in all creation. The worldly knowledge and spiritualknowledge are really one and the same and are inextricablyconnected with each other. They are like two faces of the samecoin. They are like two wings of one bird. They are like thetwo wheels of a cart, and you must understand that these twoare not distinct or separate. We should co-ordinate these twobranches of knowledge and see the connection between themand conduct our life accordingly.Although we are deeply involved in matters relating tothe day-to-day material world, we should remember always ourconnection with the world of the spirit, and carry on our workwith full knowledge of the world of the spirit. Several times wesee a woman who returns home with a pot full of water on herhead, yet keeping her balance. So also man, although in-volvedin fulfilling his daily commitments and duties in the materialworld, should keep his attention, at all times, fixed on thematters of spirit and maintain his equanimity.While a dancer is dancing, she carefully moves herlimbs according to the rhythm and yet she pays great attentionto the essentials of her dance. So also, man, fulfilling his dailyduties and doing his daily work, must yet keep his attentionfully focused on spiritual matters. That kind of attention has274  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977become very rare these days and we do not find it even as anexample to cite.Even an individual engaged in dhyana begins to thinkof so many things, and cannot concentrate his attention on theobjective. His attention wavers. This is simply the result ofweakness in one’s own devotion. If one’s faith is strong, therewill be no doubt whatsoever in being able to acquire suchconcentration.The citizens of Bharath have learned to worship people.They have not learnt to understand them. They areworshipping Avathars like Rama and Krishna, in the faith thatGod is born in human form in this world when such an Avatharappears. They have not understood that Rama, Krishna andAvathars like that are only ideal examples of humanindividuals. Such divine people who are born in thecommunity constitute ideal examples of human beings, and themoment we learn to practise what they demonstrate, we shouldhave learnt and understood them. A weak person who is not ina position to understand even human nature and humanaspects, how is he going to understand the aspects of divinenature? It is only when we can understand Rama, Krishna, etc.,as ideal human examples, can we elevate them to the positionof divine Avathars.Today, we are worshipping such Avathars in the formof idols and photographs; but we are not following the idealsthey gave us. As we have learnt to accept that the Avathar andthe Godhead are identical, so also we should accept that theideals they have set for us should be practised.Unfortunately, today we are addressing an Avathar asGod. We keep on repeating the word ‘God’ and we worshipSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977275Him, but we do not accept His com-mands and His statements.We simply keep them aside. That kind of worship, which is notaccompanied by practice, should be regarded as mereexhibitionism and not devotion.In this world, a large proportion of people want to lookfor an easy path. They want to enjoy happiness without anyeffort. Without making any effort and without practising truesadhana, nothing can be achieved. They are unable torecognise this basic fact. Like dogs which compete with eachother and run away with a small quantity of food, theseopportunists compete with each other, and they do everythingto snatch an opportunity and run away with it.Man has lost the ability to discriminate between thepermanent and impermanent things. Because of the absence ofsuch discriminating power, man simply gets excited and acts ina state of excitement. They are not even able to recognise thatexcitement is a weak-ness in them. If their desires and theirambitions are fulfilled, they are happy and contented. If theirdesires and their ambitions are not fulfilled, they get excited.They do not even try to find out the reason why their desireshave not been fulfilled.At first, they should enquire whether the desires and theambition which they have, are those which they need and aregood for them. Unable to have the discriminating power, theydevelop desires which they should not develop. When suchdesires are not fulfilled, they begin to accuse God and put theblame on Him. Such people feel very happy if they get whatthey want and are constantly giving trouble and harm to otherpeople. Such people always look down but they never look up.Without taking any trouble and without making any effort,they want to get things which do not belong to them. How can276  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977people, who have such bad qualities, ever take a path which isbeneficial and healthy? Truly, young people like you shouldrecognise the two great and sacred qualities of morality andsacrifice. So long as we hanker after things which are materialand which are around us, our condition will be like what it is.We should make an attempt to understand and enquire intoquestions like, who is man? What is the purpose for which hehas come into this world? We keep on talking about sacrifice.We repeat the words prema and ahimsa, but do not reallypractise them. We pretend to have faith in God. We keep onexpressing and announcing that we have faith in God. If reallyyou have faith in God, you will not do such things. Whateverone does, appears to be done only for the purpose of promotinghis own selfish interest or the selfish interest of his own family.He has a narrow mind and has not got in his mind the aspect ofselfless work and wanting to do something useful for others.There are many unfortunate people who are not able toutilise the sacred opportunities that come their way. For onewho cannot enjoy happiness and bliss, what does it matter whatopportunity he gets? For a dog which can only lap out water,what is the use of a river with a large quantity of flowingwater? We really get many sacred opportunities on occasionsin our life. Without using those opportunities and discussingtheir values, we waste our time and our life.Students:For the past one month, you have learnt many thingswhich are necessary for a man to live happily. Things that youhave listened to in the past one month, and situations that youhave now come across and seen, should get imprinted in yourminds permanently. Only then, will you be able to follow thesacred path; and your life can be an ideal example to others.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977277There is a small example for this: It is quite commonthat either in excitement or in a state of temporary happiness,people take a different view at the moment. This can be calleda temporary or transient type of vairagya. There was a personin Northern India who was running a flour mill. Once he wentto a place where a good Hari Katha was being told. The authorof the Hari Katha, the story of devotion to God, stated in thevery beginning that there is no gift greater than the gift of food.He also asked, is there a God who is greater than mother orfather? Is there any moral conduct nobler than following truth?Is there any dharma greater than you showing kindness whereit is needed? Is there anything more profitable than keepingcompany with good people? Is there a greater enemy thananger itself? Is there a disease for a human being worse thanbeing indebted? Is there any wealth which is better thancontinued reputation? He further stated that the consequencesof giving food to a hungry man will be such that great goodwill come out of them.The owner of the flour mill, after listening to thesestatements, returned home and thought that by giving food toneedy people, he will benefit by some good consequences andstarted action that very day. While doing this, he had a verynarrow and sinister idea. He had a lot of wheat flour which wasrotting for several months in storehouses. He started taking outthat wheat flour and making some bread out of it so that he candistribute it to poor people. The rotten flour was so bad thateven ants and insects would not care to eat it. The wife of theowner of the mill was a very good lady. She was also a verydevoted person. She, in many ways, was telling her husband,“What is the use and what is the purpose of distributing suchwheat flour? We have so much flour in our mill. Why don’tyou take the good flour and feed only a few people? Why give278  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977bad flour to many people?” But these words did not make anyimpression on the householder.She was waiting for a good opportunity to teach herhusband a lesson and when the opportunity came one day, sheprepared bread with the same rotten wheat flour and put it inher husband’s plate when he came to eat. He was very angryand very excited. She used good and soft words and sheexplained to her husband by saying that whatever work isdone, the consequences of such work will have to be acceptedby us either in heaven or in hell. The kind of seed which weplant, will determine the nature of the plant that will come out.She said, “The kind of gift which you are giving these days isvery bad, and the consequences of such wicked acts of yourswill take you to hell, and there they will undertake to give youthis kind of bread. When such a situation comes about, youwill have to eat such rotten bread for the first time. It will bedifficult for you to do so, and it is better to accustom yourselfto eating rotten bread from now on. For you, to get good breadat that time will be impossible. In order to give you thatpractice, from now onwards I am giving you such bread.”The work that we do today will determine theconsequences that we will enjoy in the future. You must dogood work and get good out of it. Can we plant the seeds oflemon and expect to get mangoes? Can we expect to plant theseeds of mango and get lemons out of that tree? It is rightconduct for a human being to recognise this and promotesacred ideas, sacred thoughts and do sacred work now, so thathe may reap the sacred fruit in future.Students:By tomorrow, all our programmes will have been gonethrough and you have to return to your own places. When youSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977279go back to your places, in order that you may be able to showyour life as a sacred ideal example, you will have to collect andacquire the strength here. If your thoughts remain sacred onlyso long as you are here and when you go back, depending uponthat environment, if your thoughts and ideals change, truly youhave not acquired anything of a lasting nature.When your parents see you, they should see thetransformation in you and be very happy. All the bad ideas andthe old thoughts should have left you. If damaged anddilapidated cars go to a workshop and return from theworkshop in the same dilapidated condition, what is the use oftaking them to the work-shop? At least from today, all thebolts, nuts and screws that have ceased to work in you shouldbe left in Brindavan, and you should reappear outside with newbolts, new nuts and new screws. By such a change of ideas inyour heart, you should set an example so that people withwhom you come in contact should also he able to change theirhabits.Students:What we talk of as a present-day world is notpermanent. This is purely a mithya. We do not know when andat what moment and in what way, our end will come. For thesatisfaction of such a transient human body, we are devotingall our resources, all our energies. Whatever we may acquire,all those acquisitions have to be given up some day or other.Whether we live or whether we die, we should carry a namewhich is full of reputation. What remains permanently in thisworld is only your name and reputation. Do not let yourself besubdued by the thoughts. I will do this, I will do that, I willacquire this and I will acquire that. These are simply imaginarywords spoken in the air. You must make good use of the time280  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977that has been given to you by living in this society and bydoing service to the people in the country.For having joined the Summer Classes and for havingspent your time in this sacred environment, the sacredness ofthe environment should permanently get imprinted in yourmind.Divya Atma Swarupas:There is no need to establish a new society. It is ourduty to recognise what good already exists in us. Saiorganisations have no selfish interest in them. They want tohelp all religions and all jivas. They are acceptable toeveryone. They have not been established for the sake ofpromoting a name. It is not as if there are no individuals in theorganisation who are selfish. But you should not care for suchpeople and such ideas. You should become selfless and shouldjoin the organisation with a selfless spirit. So long as you are inthis environment, you may feel that these are very sacred andgood ideas. The moment you go outside and enter the externalworld, it becomes different. Your ideas are bound to changewhen you go out. But when the company outside is also good,then it is possible for you to retain these sacred ideals forlonger periods.There is a small example. If you have a pot made up ofmud containing water and if you store it for sometime, you willfind that in a few days, some of the water will get evaporated.The reason for this is that this pot of mud will exude the waterto some extent. It exudes the water because the external envi-ronment of this pot is very dry. On the other hand, if this potwhich is full of water is stored in an environ-ment of water,this water is not going to be exuded. In the same manner, whenyou have filled the pot of your heart with spiritual essence,even though you were non-believers in the beginning, becauseSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977281of that spiritual essence in the pot of your heart, you haveenjoyed an environment which is full of spirituality. If youthen go into an environment which is full of spiritual essence,your faith and belief will not get evaporated. If this can bedone for a few years continuously, thereafter, there is nodanger of the essence in your heart being diluted.You are still young. In your young minds, there is atendency to waver a little. If one wants to explain the nature ofa young man, it can be compared to the behaviour of onehundred monkeys. Taking this into consideration, when you goback, you should join the Sai Organisation and in that goodcompany, you should do good to the rest of the world.27. Do Not Forget God;Do Not Believe In The World;Do Not Fear DeathLike good food that comes to one who has beenfasting for the past ten days, like a heavy downpour ofrain that comes to fill the dried and empty tanks, like achild coming into a family which has for long beenyearning for children, like a shower of wealth on a verypoor man, has come Sri Sathya Sai in Puttaparthi,when there is a total decline of Dharma among thepeople. What better can I tell those who are assembledin this congregation?Students, boys and girls:Time is fleeting away as if it is being blown by a strongwind. So also, the life span of each one is melt-ing away like ablock of ice. However, man is simply moving forward withoutrecognising his duties. Is this the destination of man? Is this theambition of man? Is this all that he is going to fulfil in his life?Having been born in this sacred country of Bharath, havingattained a human birth which is not easily attainable, is mangoing to spend his life in this manner?To dream is just a play of one’s own mind. To beawake is again a manifestation of one’s own mind. Both thesethings are untrue. Man, unable to recognise this truth, mistakestruth for untruth and untruth for truth. Truly, this human bodyis one of ananda and bliss and has been given to us in orderthat we may have the vision of the Paramatma. The main taskof man is to recognise the secret and the truth behind life. WeSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977283are wasting our time like a man does when he cuts out sandalwood for burning and using it as coal. With a golden pot, weare trying to cook something which is very inferior. The bodythat has been given to us for the search of truth is being usedfor inferior objectives. Truly, we have to search for and find aprecious stone in dust. A precious stone cannot be found on thetop of a tree. In the same manner, the pearls of wisdom can befound only by searching for them in the human body which isjust dust. Dust thou the art and to dust thou shalt return.In this world of unrest, if we want to establish peace,we have to purify our own minds. People talk words of peacebut in action they show violence. They hold an atom bomb intheir hands and they keep on loudly proclaiming the need forpeace. Even if you reach the moon, you are not going to havepeace and happiness. In such a restless world, instead ofhaving total devotion to God, we are trying to establish furtherrestlessness.Students:All my hopes are resting on the youth. The youth oftoday are the future citizens and will be responsible for thewell-being of Bharath. The good or bad of a country dependsupon the youth.These thirty days, you have been living in Brindavanand spending your time in a heavenly man-ner. We arethinking that the Summer Classes have come to an end today.But our Summer Classes do not come to an end on any day.Till today, you have lived in Brindavan and you haveexperienced joy in Brindavan. But from today, you must makeBrindavan live in your heart. Till today, you have been sittingin the auditorium. From today you must take all the people andall that you have learnt in the auditorium into your heart. If you284  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977can promote such an attitude in you, there will be no room fordifferences amongst yourselves.Students:Any individual, who is completely healthy, will notwant to go to a doctor. A person who is healthy and whoknows that he is well will not want to have a checkup by amedical doctor. Only when one has ill health, he will go to adoctor and ask several questions about his health. Unless thereis some fault in a man, he will not want to meet anotherindividual. If today all of you have come here, it means that ineach of you there is some fault. You want to get rid of thosefaults and acquire peace of mind. You have come here to shedyour mean ideas and your impermanent thoughts and carrywith you the permanent truth. You have come here with a viewof acquiring new ideas, to acquire good ideas and make thepath of your life a rosy one. You have been on that task for thepast thirty days.Many of you are not willing to go back, but rememberthat Swami is with you. You should not have the feeling that togo back is an unwanted imposition. Sai’s ideals are like this.As a diamond has so many different facets, Sai has so manydifferent facets. He is in all of you. Although the diamond hasmany facets around, it is the central portion of the diamondthat is connected with all these facets. So boys and girls, all ofyou should develop into rays that are emanating from thecentre. You should go and establish the form of seva that youhave opted to join.The lotus has many petals in it. But all those petals areconnected with the central portion of the lotus. For Sathya Saiwho constitutes the central part of the lotus, you are all like thepetals connected with the centre of the lotus.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977285Young people, you should develop the spirit ofsacrifice. Having developed the spirit of sacrifice, you shouldfeel that there are no differences which are of religious origin.You should be able to establish the oneness of all religions. Atall times, you should attempt to be of service to others. Youmust establish and maintain the sacred culture of Bharath. Byaccepting the sacred essence of our culture which you havelearnt during the past thirty days, you have experienced a kindof bliss. In the future, as well, you must try and continue this.To forget what you have listened to, as soon as you leave thisplace, is unbecoming of human nature.Students:You must exercise great control over your mind. Youmust see that the mean desires of your mind do not get controlover you. You must serve your parents, your society and thenyour country. This is the true form of yoga. You mustexperience this kind of yoga in your daily life. You mustacquire for yourself several things, in the dharmic field, thereligious field and the spiritual field. It is not possible for anindividual to practise all those things; but you must choose afew out of them and put them into practice in your daily life.Most important is that daily, from morning till the night, youmust think of the three essential things, namely: Do not forgetGod, do not believe in the world, do not be afraid of death.These three things are essential in your life. You must forgetany harm done to you by others. So also, you must forget anygood you may do to others. If you keep on thinking in yourmind the harm done to you by others, you will in returnattempt to harm them. To harm them in return is a sin. Youshould not undertake to commit such a sin. By forgetting thegood that you may have done to others, you will not beexpecting them to do good to you in return. If you are286  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977expecting to get something in return and do not get it, you willhave to take birth again.You should strive not to participate in trans-actionsconnected with the cycle of birth and death. Unfortunately,today, several people take the spiritual path as if it is a path ofbusiness. I am hoping that you will not do such a thing. Youwill recognise the truth and make your lives fruitful andpurposeful.Divya Atma Swarupas:The bliss and happiness that you experienced hereshould inspire you to give the same kind of bliss and happinessto your friends at your place. You should not become selfish.What you cannot get either by work or by your birth, you canget by sacrifice.We must also recognise the meaning of the worddharma. We are thinking that our duty is our dharma. This isnot so. To do something which will give pleasure andhappiness to others is our real dharma. Whatever we do shouldnot cause any curtailment of the freedom which others enjoy.We should see that what we regard as bad in others isnot done by us. We should also see in what manner others arebeing respected and are conducting themselves, and ourselvesdo only such things which are regarded as respectful.Man, today, is protecting his own dignity and his ownself-respect. He does not deem it necessary to protect thedignity and self-respect of others. We are trying to locate thefaults in others with a hundred eyes. We are not making anyattempt to locate the faults that are present in us. When we cansearch for the faults that are in us and find them, then we willSummer Showers in Brindavan 1977287experience the right kind of bliss. By looking for the faults inothers, our minds becomes unsacred.The heart is like the lens of a camera. Our mind is likethe plate in this camera. The thoughts that enter our mind willget imprinted on that plate. For this reason, we must not allowany bad thoughts to enter our mind.I am hoping that you will fix your attention on suchsacred things, and you will thereby enjoy yourself. What youshould know, you have known. But if after knowing this, youdo not make any attempt to experience them, the knowledgebecomes a waste.One individual came to Socrates and said, “You are onewho knows everything.” Socrates replied, “I do not knoweverything. I know only one thing.” The individual asked,“What is the only thing that you know?” Socrates replied, “Iknow one thing and that is that I do not know anything.” Youare thinking that you know everything and when some peoplecome to you and say, “You have been attending Sathya SaiSummer Classes, do you know everything?” At that moment,you should conduct yourselves in a manner that you do notknow anything. It is only when we put these things intopractice, we may develop the feeling that we know all thesethings. If we have such a feeling that we know everything, thenit will appear as if it has come from books; and it had betterremain in books. I am hoping that what you have learnt fromthe books, you will be able to put it back into your head, andafter putting it back into your head, you will be able to practiseit.Students:When you go back to your respective places, youshould try and promote some connection with Sri Sathya Sai288  Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977Organisation. The important changes that have come about inyour conduct in life should be demonstrated to your parents.In the old days, when the students were return-ing totheir homes after completing their education, the rishis used totell them various good things like, “Respect your mother asGod, respect your father as God, respect your teacher as God,tell the truth, follow the path of dharma.” They were protectingthese statements as if they were precious gems given to them.Throughout their lives and till the end of their lives, thesestatements remained as their weapons and they weresafeguarding them.These days, as well, I am hoping that you will havethese sacred statements in your mind. Take them as importantand develop yourselves into future citizens working for yourmotherland. The first step is to love your father and mother. Assoon as you return from here, you must start accepting theorders of your parents. It is only when you respect yourparents, that your children will respect you as parents in future.If you slight your parents today and do not respect them,exactly the same kind of neglect and lack of respect will cometo you in future from your children.Students:While the parents have given you all kinds ofprotection, sacrificing their comforts for looking after you, ifyou in turn show a disrespectful attitude to your parents, God,also, will be displeased with you. Parents fulfil your materialwants and desires; and if you cannot respect and love them,how are you going to respect and love God? How can youplease God if you cannot please your own parents?Summer Showers in Brindavan 1977289I am hoping that you will not forget what you havelearnt here, that you will recapitulate them and keep onthinking of them. Animals have no inner vision. They haveonly external or outward vision. But we are not animals. Weshould develop the inner vision. Even an animal, which has noinward vision, comes back to its resting place and begins toruminate and digest its food after it has taken its food. If wehuman beings, who have both inward and outward vision, donot recapitulate and digest what we have listened to, we willbecome worse than animals. What you have learnt should enterinto your blood vessels, and all the time it should manifestitself from your interior. I am hoping that you will rememberall the good things that you have listened to during your stayhere and put them into practice in your daily life and enjoy thebliss thereof and be of some service and help to the communityaround you.