SUMMER SHOWERS INBRINDAVAN1978Discourses ofBHAGAVAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABADuring the summer course held forCollege students at Whitefield.Bangalore, India© Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications TrustPrasanthi Nilayam, IndiaThe copyright and the rights of translation in any language arereserved by the Publishers. No part, para, passage, text orphotograph or art work of this book should be reproduced,transmitted or utilized, in original language or by translation, inany form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or by any information, storage and retrievalsystem, except with prior permission, in writing from SriSathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam(Andhra Pradesh) India, except for brief passages quoted inbook review. This book can be exported from India only by thePublishers Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, Pras-anthi Nilayam (India).Printing rights granted by arrangement with theSri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust,Prasanthi Nilayam, India,To: Sathya Sai Baba SocietyandSathya Sai Book Center of America305 West First StreetTustin, CA 92780-3108USAISBN 1-57836-055-2Revised edition, copyright © 1998Sathya Sai Book Center of AmericaContents1. Opening Address12. God Comes In Human Form To Help Men ChangeThemselves For The Better83. Bhagavatha Is A Sacred Text Which Can Cater ToThe Needs Of Everyone124. Vyasa And Narada Are Like Man And God195. Narada Was An Immortal Spirit256. God Is Not Happy Unless He Gives You Some Oc-casional Sorrow327. There Is No Blemish In God; We See Our OwnFaults Reflected In Him408. God’s Creation Around Us Has A Great Deal ToTeach Us499. Whatever God Does, It Is Always For Our OwnGood5510. Anger Destroys One's Wealth and Prosperity6311. Love Lives By Giving And Forgiving7112. All Our Sorrow Is Our Own Creation7913. Pain And Pleasure Always Go Together8714. Man Always Becomes Good Or Bad By The Com-pany He Keeps9515. God’s Grace Can Burn Away Mountains Of Sins10216. Radha Is An Inseparable Part Of Krishna Even AsWhite Colour Is An Inseparable Part Of Milk11017. At The Time Of One’s Death, It Is The Body ThatIs Discarded11918. Concentration During Meditation Can Lead You ToThe Lord’s Vision12719. Education Should Promote Humility In The Edu-cated Person13720. Non-believers Have No Direct Experience Of Di-vinity Nor Have They Read About It In Books14621. By Talking Too Much, We Make The TongueCommit Four Sins15422. The Noblest Quality Of Womanhood Is Compas-sion16223. The Creator And His Act Of Creation Go On For-ever16924. Krishna Was An Infinite Ocean : Gopikas WereSmall Tributaries Merging In The Ocean17325. Service To Man Must Be Regarded As Service ToGod18226. Good Health Is Our Greatest Wealth19227. Religious Scriptures Have Not Been Written ForMaking Money20028. Good Health Is Man’s Greatest Wealth20729. God Is Like A Kalpa Tharu Which Can Fill AllYour Wants21430. History And Culture Of One’s Motherland Are LikeOne's Father And Mother22531. Brahman Is Ananda : Anando Brahman23432. Control Of Senses Is Most Important For YoungStudents2411. Opening AddressIn this sacred country Bharath, the quality of forbear-ance has been the greatest of our traditions. Adherence totruth has been one other important ideal. What can be sweeterthan the widely accepted custom in this country according towhich, we respect the loving aspect of the mother. Further, ourhonour is more valuable to us than even our life. We are pre-pared to give up our lives to protect our honour. Alas! we areforgetting these ideals today and accepting in their place, for-eign ideals. We have forgotten our own culture. What else canI tell the citizens of this country? Like an elephant which doesnot know its own strength, the citizens of this country do notknow their strength.Good ideas, good conduct, and adherence to truthshould result from our education. That which promotes theseaspects is indeed true education. Only those who acquire thesequalities can be called truly educated people.Educators, authorities of education, patrons of education,students and teachers:Today, in our country, spiritual values have disap-peared, dharma has declined, adherence to truth is not foundanywhere, demoniac features like cruelty, unkindness, lack oftruth and egoism have spread everywhere. At one time, thiscountry was known all over the world for Dharmic conduct.Like the parents who feel sorry when they look at the impropereducational attainments of their children, the motherland ofIndia feels very sad when she looks at us, who have lost faithin our spiritual traditions. In order to pacify this motherland ofours, it is the duty of the young students to do service to the2 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978community and learn the right things which education is ex-pected to teach them. The country does not merely consist ofdust and land. It consists of people who live in it. Studentsshould recognise that setting right the country means settingright the people and putting them on the proper path. The firstnatural outcome of education should be the ability to do someservice to the country and re-establish the spiritual values inthe country. We should thus show that we have a leadership ofthe world in this aspect.The value of an individual depends on his culture.One’s culture is a very sacred aspect and has been inheritedfrom our ancestors. We cannot interpret or understand culturesuperficially. It has a very deep meaning. It is the first duty ofevery individual to give up bad conduct in his daily life andimprove his daily habits. The deservedness by which you willbe entitled to become useful citizens of the country should beacquired while you are students. In the entire life of a humanbeing, the most important period is the period of being a stu-dent. A student is like the root for the tree of his life. Recog-nising such truth, you should lead the life of a student happilyand learn good lessons from it.Today, the government has got neither the ability northe right to correct people. The sacredness by which the peoplecan correct themselves is not present in them. People have alsolost their capacity to correct the government. When we look atit from the spiritual angle, we do not see, either in the rulers orin the ruled, the capacity by which they can set themselvesright. The reason for this is that people have not corrected theirlives, when they were young, in a manner in which their lifecould become useful when they grow older. It was due to theirinability to recognise what kind of conduct would have madethem useful when they grow older. In that context, the studentsSummer Showers in Brindavan 19783must now realise that they should introduce the necessary cor-rectives in their lives, even while they are young, so that theirlife can become useful when they grow older. Students shouldhave in their hands the future of this country. Wherever theygather, they should see that there is calm and peace and thatthe community respects them. The place where students gathershould become a symbol of peace and happiness. This is theright symptom of good education. The main reason by whichstudents of today have lost their dharmic traditions is theircontact with western civilisation. They are not seeing thingswith their own eyes. They are not experiencing things withtheir own mind and heart. They are borrowing the eyes of oth-ers and they are borrowing the thoughts of others. They aremaking their life imitative and artificial. Students: it is verynecessary for you to recognise that youths are like the roots ofthe tree of life. The manure and the water which we have togive must be given to the roots and not to the branches orleaves. We always, no doubt, keep in mind peace and happi-ness—which are like branches and leaves—and forget that wehave to give importance to dharmic conduct which is like theroots. In that context, we should realise that manure and waterin the form of morality and dharmic conduct should be ac-cepted and practised when one is a student. Unfortunately, thepure, tender and good hearts of the students are being agitated,polluted and ruined by political leaders for their own selfishpurposes. They are thus ruining the entire future life of youngstudents. The life of a student is very valuable. The entire fu-ture of a country depends on the good conduct of its students.We should realise that all the leaders of today were atone time students. If you want to become leaders at a later age,the sacredness that will make you good leaders must be culti-vated at this young age. Politics is good in its own way, but itis not good for young students. After you finish your student4 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978career, you can decide for yourself what is good for you. If youenter politics while you are a student, you will not be able todo well in either of the fields. This is neither right nor good foryour conduct. In the political sphere, it is not as if there are nopetty feelings like jealousy, ego or anger which drive you to abad or a wrong path. The political sphere is such that it pro-motes differences between people. It is not bringing aboutunity among the people. Lust is like a demon, jealousy is like amadman and ego is dreadful. These have become a part of ourdaily life, and so we are not able to make much good out of ourlives. Man is losing the human qualities inherent in him, be-cause he is filled with ego. He does not understand his trueform. He is also not making an attempt to understand his fel-low human beings. This ego is such a bad quality that it hasruined even gods and angels and not only human beings. Whenthis ego enters the minds of students, the very fundamental as-pect of education disappears from them. Education gives youhumility, and humility leads you to deservedness which in turnwill give you wealth. Wealth should enable you to take thedharmic path. Therefore, students should first learn to be hum-ble and conduct themselves with humility. Today, although thestudents learn very little, they feel very proud. Because of this,they are losing the broad hearts that they should have. Educa-tion is not intended to simply amass wealth. It is intended toreveal the true and sacred nature of life. Not only this, the re-spect that students can command and the honour which theyhave in the society will depend on the qualities which they ex-hibit. What is most important to man is his character. When thestudents can promote character in themselves, they will be ableto do good to the country. I am also hoping and asking theeducation minister, who is present here, to see that in allspheres—the worldly sphere, the dharmic sphere and the moralsphere—that good things are taught and that the tender mindsof the students are protected. The students today take a lot ofSummer Showers in Brindavan 19785trouble to acquire a degree but they use that degree for ekingout a livelihood. Are they spending even a small fraction oftheir time for promoting good qualities in themselves? Do notbe proud of your meagre education and think education is in-tended only to get you a degree. It is intended to enable you todo service without ego and help your country and your peopleto prosper. We are converting the sacredness of education intothe form of a begging bowl. It is very necessary to inculcate asense of values in the students and train them to smilingly andwillingly sacrifice for the prosperity of the country. So long aswe depend on the attractions of the world, we cannot escapethe predicament in which we are today. When we are preparedto sacrifice fully, our prosperity will grow. We must becomewarriors who are prepared to do active work. The country can-not prosper by having a number of lazy people. Without wast-ing our time and life, we should be able to take to the path ofspiritual enquiry and promote the sacredness of this greatcountry of Bharath. After spending thousands of rupees andgiving a lot of trouble to our parents to get a degree, we arethen turning this degree into a begging bowl, and we go fromoffice to office for a job. We should become people who canstand on their own legs and resources. It is the first duty of thestudents to learn to value hard work. We must show our grati-tude to our parents and then develop the determination to servethe community. The happiness and safety of the country shouldbe your first aim. You must recognise that the true meaning ofeducation is to give satisfaction to your parents and to yourcountry. This will bring prosperity to the country.I am happy that the Governor and the Education Min-ister are here to participate in the opening ceremony of ourSummer Course on Indian Culture and Spirituality. I am hop-ing that you will be able to draw inspiration and learn goodideals from the course and put them into practice. Today we6 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978see that wherever students gather there is agitation and unrest.This is because they are not able to understand the true mean-ing of education. It is not right to join as students in a collegeand to run after sensory pleasures with that excuse. They jointhe college for education, but are they getting true education?The students join with one objective and attain a different ob-jective. If the students have a problem, they have the right togo and meet the authorities and discuss. But you do not havethe right to cause harm and damage to others.From tomorrow, you will listen to elders speakingabout the unity of all religions and the sacredness of Indianculture. I hope that you will carry great ideals from here andput them into practice. You should strive to bring back theglory to this sacred country that it had enjoyed in the past.2. God Comes In Human Form ToHelp Men Change Themselves For TheBetterA great deal of information and knowledge arecontained in the books. Our heads are, however, filledwith dust. Education is being used only for eking out alivelihood. Oh children of Bharath, listen to this truth.Students:In our sacred traditions, we have many important andsignificant stories which are full of meaning. It is our misfor-tune that the students in this country are not able to see thissignificance. Bhagavad Gita means that it is the song of God.Devotees of God have also been called Bhagavathas. Vyasahas divided the story of Bhagavatha into twelve parts. Eachpart is called a Skanda. This is a sacred story which has beengiven to men in order to liberate them from bondage. Thisstory of Bhagavatha has been taught by Vyasa to Suka who inturn gave it to the people. Maharishi Suka was the son of Ma-harishi Vyasa. Suka learnt the Vedas thoroughly from his fa-ther Vyasa. The Vedas and Vedangas have been divided intofour parts called Samhitas. While describing the sacred storiesof the contemporaries of Suka, Vyasa was also writing thestory of Bhagavatha. The Kauravas and Pandavas were livingat the same time and the battle between the Kauravas and Pan-davas and the moral contained therein were written by him asthe Mahabharatha. Mahabharatha was also described as thefifth Veda. He realised that it is difficult for ordinary and un-learned people to understand God. To facilitate realisation ofGod, by such ordinary people, he also wrote another text calledBrahma Sutra. He has also established the truth that bliss can8 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978come only in the thought of God and not by any other process.He established that bliss and happiness are simply embodi-ments of God and that they cannot be found elsewhere. Blissand happiness can be given only by God, and he who thus se-cures them is called a devotee. The close relationship that ex-ists between a devotee and God has been described in Bha-gavatha. It is not an easy matter to understand this. In the con-text of the difficulty in understanding the Brahma Sutras, healso produced the eighteen Puranas explaining the nature ofdivinity. He was feeling sorry that in spite of his best efforts inpromoting divinity, there was no easy manner in which the sor-row of the people could be removed. He spent a lot of time intrying to find out ways and means of making ordinary and illit-erate people happy. While Vyasa was contemplating on suchissues, Narada approached Vyasa and said that the onlymethod by which man can attain happiness is by describingand singing the glory of God. From that day, Vyasa started de-scribing the leelas of the Lord.Year after year, we experience some kind of heat, coldand rain. Because of these seasonal changes, certain changesoccur in our ideas and even in our health. It is also known to usthat with changing seasons, we listen to cuckoos singing, wesee the mangoes ripening and so on. Every year, the seasonscome back at about the same time and give us the same kind ofexperience. Taking this cycle into consideration, the Mahar-ishis tried to explain to us about the Yugas. The season that hasgone by returns to us twelve months later; the day that hasgone by returns to us eight days later and so on These arecommon experiences. If today is a Friday, after another weekwe again get a Friday. If this is the month of May, again aftertwelve months we get the month of May.Summer Showers in Brindavan 19789Taking this into account, the Maharishis divided timeinto four Yugas called Kritha Yuga, Dwapara Yuga, ThrethaYuga, and the Kali Yuga. These will keep coming back againand again. In these, the word Kritha indicates four times, andthe word Thretha indicates three times. The Dwapara signifiestwo times, and Kali gives us an authoritative unit of measure-ment. According to them, 4,32,000 years is the basic unit andrepresents the number of years in a Kali Yuga. Two times thisor 8,64,000 years represents the Dwapara Yuga. Three timesthis basic number of 12,96,000 years is the measure of ThrethaYuga. Four times this measure, namely, 17,28,000 years refersto Kritha Yuga. By adding all these, we get 43,20,000 yearsand this refers to a Maha Yuga. After a Maha Yuga, the KrithaYuga will start again. In this manner and by assigning suchmeasures, they interpreted time.From time to time, in these Yugas, God was appearingas an Avatar for the purpose of showing divinity that is con-tained in human beings, and for setting an exemplary life as anexample. It has been said that God takes a human form so thathe is accessible to human beings and gives them happiness.The birds and animals are experiencing the limitations whichhave been laid out for them. A human birth is the most sacredone among the 84 lakhs of different jivas in this creation. Toattain such a sacred birth is a great fortune indeed. Man has aspecial distinctiveness. We have to see and understand the dif-ference between birds and animals, on the one hand, and manon the other hand. Animals are born with cruelty as a natureand they also spend their lives with cruelty. We may give a lotof training to the animal, but it is impossible to bring about alasting change in its habits. It may conduct itself according tothe training during the period of the training, but it will notgive up its cruelty. Man is not like that. Even though he maybe born with cruelty, he can get rid of it by an attempt or Sad-10 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978hana. It becomes clear that what does not and cannot take re-finement is an animal and what can take refinement is man. Tofacilitate such refinement and transformation in human beings,God takes birth in human form from time to time. This refine-ment can be brought about by different methods at differentperiods of time. In Kritha Yuga, the method was Dhyana. Inthe Thretha Yuga, the method was Yagna, in Dwapara Yuga, itwas Archana and in the Kali Yuga, prominence is given toNamasmarana. These are the royal paths available to humanbeings for changing themselves. In the Kritha Yuga, the Ma-harishis, through thapas, used to attain moksha or vision of theLord. The Maharishis who enjoyed such divine experienceused to mix with the people so that their divine experience canbe conveyed to the people who lived at that time.In the Thretha Yuga, God appeared as a human being inthe form of Rama; and by using his own family as an example,he tried to set up an ideal dharmic conduct characteristic ofthat age. At that time, it was also established that Rama wasthe embodiment of Love and Lakshmana was the embodimentof compassion and that it was the confluence of Dharma andcompassion that makes a good human being. This is truedharma. We are believing that rituals constitute dharma. It isnot our daily practices or rituals that constitute true dharma. Itis the compassion that is generated in a pure heart that consti-tutes the base of true dharma. This is also the most importantbasic quality of a human being. One must make an attempt tofollow the dictates of one’s own conscience. By such conductand example, Ramachandra corrected the entire humanity. Bythe time Dwapara Yuga came, God in the human form ofKrishna set an ideal example of love for the people. This as-pect of Krishna attracted all people. These were such that peo-ple lost themselves in the happiness and bliss generated by theAvatar of Krishna. Krishna was looking after, with tender af-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197811fection, the needs of the people at that time. The great truththat is contained in the Avatar of Krishna has been communi-cated to us in the Bhagavatha. This Avatar of Krishna showedthat we should never forget God whether we are in sorrow orpleasure, pain or joy, poverty or affluence. Droupadi, who lostall her sons and who was in great difficulties, showed greatforbearance and affection when speaking with Aswathama.The Bhagavatha teaches us that it is not right for a devotee tothink of God only at times of difficulties and completely forgethim at times of happiness. In fact, all Avatars convey a verysignificant lesson, and you must make an attempt to understandthe inner meaning that is conveyed to us in such lessons.3. Bhagavatha Is A Sacred TextWhich Can Cater To The Needs OfEveryoneWhat we say does not exist, exists. What we sayexists, does not exist. In truth, there is only one thingthat exists at all times; and that is God—the omnipres-ent God. Without God, there is nothing in this Uni-verse.Pavitratma Swarupas:Srimad Bhagavatha can be described as a mansion oftwelve floors or skandas, and Narada has given a name foreach of these skandas. Although all the skandas are equallyimportant, there is one which may be regarded as the most im-portant and which constitutes the basic for all other skandas.That has been called the Vasudeva Upasana. The other elevenskandas are based on this Vasudeva Upasana which is like thefoundation. This word Vasudeva means God and it also repre-sents the Deva who is resident in every Jiva. This Deva residesnot only in every Jiva but is also the basis for all creation. Anindividual in whom all thoughts, words and deeds are fullysynchronised can truly be described as a Bhagavatha. All ac-tions of a Jiva must be directed towards Vasudeva. It is impos-sible for us to seek directly the unmanifested form of God.Since you have a body, with a form and a name, it is very dif-ficult for you to recognise the unmanifested form of God. Solong as you have attachments in the world, it becomes possiblefor you to comprehend the Lord only through a name and aform. In this context, Bhagavatha has also taught us thatVasudeva Upasana means the comprehension of the Lord withthe help of a name and a form. It is thus necessary for us to doSummer Showers in Brindavan 197813things, see things and hear things only in the context of Vasu-deva. It is the divine aspect alone that we will really find in allplaces. That individual who has understood the aspect of Atmadeserves to do this Sadhana. Following the tradition of the Ve-das, it has become common for us to recognise the importanceof time and to worship time as a sacred entity. In this aspect oftime, we divide a year into twelve months and to sanctify thesetwelve months, God’s name is also spelt out in twelve letters as“Om Namo Bhagavate Vasu-devaya.” Here, we see that theGod of time has twelve letters. It is in this context that Vyasahad composed the Bhagavatha in twelve skandas.The Kali Yuga is a measure of time. It constitutes ameasure for measuring the Kritha Yuga, the Dwapara Yugaand the Thretha Yuga. There are certain rules prescribed forthe use of this measure of time. The measure in time for KaliYuga is four lakhs thirty-two thousand years (4,32,000 years).The Dwapara Yuga is two times this unit or 8,64,000 years.The Thretha Yuga is three times or 12,96,000 years. TheKritha Yuga is four times or 17,28,000 years. The periodwhich consists of all these four Yugas together is described asthe Maha Yuga. The Maha Yuga, therefore, has 43,20,000years. The difference between the duration of a Kali Yuga andthat of a Maha Yuga is the addition of an extra zero to the for-mer at the end. Just as the days, months and seasons repeatagain and again, the Yugas also repeat again and again periodi-cally. During the confluence of these Yugas and at the time oftransition from one to another, various components of creationlike mountains, rivers, habitations, etc., undergo majorchanges. The aspects of dharma also change when the Yugachanges. As a result of these changes several good thingsmight change into evil.14 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978In this context, four categories of people were recog-nised. They are Thapasvi, Maharishi, Brahma-rishi and Rajar-ishi; and each one, depending on his background and capabil-ity, was following a certain code of dharma. For the story ofBhagavatha, a rishi by the name of Sami is the chief architect.By his attainments, he was a Brahmarishi. He had a son by thename Sringi who was a Thapasvi. Brahmarishi Sami knew allabout Brahman and was living in a state of equanimity andequal-mindedness. He used to take pain and pleasure, sorrowand joy, blame and praise with the same attitude and was un-moved by events. He was meeting them with the same de-tachment. He had several disciples and along with them, hewas immersed in the study of the Philosophy of Adwaitha. Hewas living in a state of total surrender to God and was enjoyingthe bliss of divinity. His son Sringi was also a great individual,but he could be called only a Thapasvi. He did not have theability to discriminate between things. Although he was a per-son with great strength, he did not acquire the right to give acurse. On one occasion, he lost his equanimity due to angerand cursed king Parikshith, himself a great Rajarishi. Here, wefind two types of faults. A fault, committed with full knowl-edge, will cause a great deal of harm to the world. On the otherhand, a fault committed accidentally and without full knowl-edge will cause harm to the individual only but not to theworld. Parikshith was a great king who was in a state of totaldevotion and surrender to God. Parikshith committed a mistakeunknowingly and so the consequence was to affect only himand would not bother others. His mistake was committed un-knowingly and without a bad motive. At this act of Parik-shith’s, Sringi lost control over himself and gave a curse toParikshith. This curse, coming as it did under such circum-stances, caused a great deal of harm to the entire kingdom.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197815Be that as it may, the origin of Bhagavatha, the mean-ing of Bhagavatha and its objectives are clearly laid out in thefirst skanda itself. This great text of Bhagavatha commencedwith Narada, and Vyasa contributed a great deal to it. Sukabrought about the culmination. During the interval of timebetween the commencement by Narada and culmination bySuka, several stories got attached to Bhagavatha and they con-stitute the contents of the succeeding eleven skandas.The conversation between Droupadi and Aswathamaconstitutes an important event in the Bhagavatha. The sacredstory of the surrender to Uttara, the divine praise of Krishna byKunthi, the advice which Bhishma gives to Dharmaraja in theform of shanthiparva and finally the teaching which Krishnagives to Arjuna in the form of Bhagavad Gita are all greatevents of the Bhagavatha. The Uddhava Gita, the story ofPrahlada, the story of Kuchela and several other episodes re-lating to great devotees constitute the essence of the Bha-gavatha. In reality, the text of the Bhagavatha is extremelysweet. Human beings who have experienced the sweetness ofBhagavatha will not have rebirth. It is because of this, thatPothana said that even the very act of his writing the Bha-gavatha in Telugu is the result of the great good that he haddone in his previous life.Pothana felt that he had the great good fortune of de-scribing the leelas of Lord Narayana himself, who had come inhuman form. In the Bhagavatha, the aspects of bhakthi, or de-votion, and surrender to God are the most important oneswhich we should recognise. In both these, the aspect of premais fully exemplified. Prema signifies the sweet thoughts thatare generated in one’s own mind. The Bhagavatha is also likemilk, a sacred extract that has been taken out of all the Vedas.In this context, we should realise that there are many great16 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978people who attained salvation from the story of the Bha-gavatha. The Bhagavatha should not be regarded as a textwhich depicts only the story of the gopikas. There are only afew individuals who are capable of recognising the sacred as-pect of the prema that is contained in the Bhagavatha and canindeed become intoxicated and elevated by such thoughts.Thinking of the name of Krishna, one can lose one’sconsciousness. Thinking of Brahma, one can become identicalwith Brahma. So also, by constantly thinking of Krishna, onecan become identical with the Lord. It is not easy to describethe exact nature of the Bhagavatha. It can cater to the averageperson, to the seeker of truth and also to the highest intellec-tual. Bhagavatha has the ability to cater to everyone. A mangotree can give you only mangoes, a lime tree can give you onlylemons but Bhagavatha can give everything to all its seekers,depending on the latter’s desires and yearnings. There is asmall example for this.There was a wealthy businessman who went abroad.He had four wives and he wrote letters to each of them askingwhat they wanted him to bring when he returned home. In re-ply, the eldest wrote that she would be very happy if he re-turned home safely and in good health. The second wife re-plied that she would like to have some medicines that wouldhelp her get over her illness. The third wife was always inter-ested in reading some spiritual texts, and she wrote that shewould like to have spiritual texts belonging to the foreigncountry. The fourth wife had very mundane qualities, and sheasked the husband to bring back some saris and jewels of thelatest fashion. All the letters reached the husband and hebrought all the items needed and gave medicines to the secondwife, spiritual texts to the third wife, saris and jewels to thefourth wife and himself sat in the residence of the first wife.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197817This made the other wives very jealous. The wealthy individ-ual explained that as the eldest wife only wanted him, he wentto her and as the others had material requests, he gave themvarious items as per their requests.In a similar manner, we may imagine that Paramatmahas four wives by the names—Arthi, Artharthi, Jijnasi andJnani. The Lord satisfies the requirements of each of the firstthree, and He, Him-self, sits in the heart of the Jnani.Paramatma will only give you the fruit of your work and notthe work itself. Depending on your karma and your deserved-ness and your prayers, God gives you the fruit of your action.In many ways, Bhagavatha teaches us lessons of great impor-tance. On one occasion, even Kuchela was doubting Krishna.He thought that although Krishna was his childhood friend, aslater he became a very rich and powerful King, Krishna maynot even recognise him. Kuchela was very agitated. However,Kuchela’s wife never had such doubt, and she encouraged himto go and see Krishna, who has a very broad mind, and wouldnot forget his friends. God is such that He will give value toone’s own mind and purity of character. He will not give anyvalue to external appearances. After passing through suchdoubts and several tribulations, Kuchela entered Krishna’smansion. Krishna welcomed him heartily and honoured him.Even without being asked, Krishna gave a lot of mate-rial wealth and a lot of grace to Kuchela. The moment God’sgrace spreads, one will even forget his own desires. After this,Kuchela returned to his own home and to his great surprise,found his poor home transformed into a big mansion. He ex-plained to his wife how Krishna looked after him and said, “Hereceived me as if He was longing to meet me, and He showedsuch kindness that He appeared as kindness and compassionpersonified. He accepted a small quantity of parched rice from18 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978poor Kuchela and gave us this large mansion.” If you give theLord even a small quantity, He returns it back several fold. Ifyou are willing to take at least one step forward, God will taketen steps towards you to receive you. Only when you directyour vision towards God, can He direct His vision towardsyou. If you are looking in some other direction, what is the useeven if God looks at you? There is a small example for this.When you are right in front of me, you can look into my eyesand I can look into your eyes. If you are far away and arelooking in a different direction, how can I look at you and howcan you look at me?Krishna was one who always directed His vision to-wards His devotees, and the Bhagavatha is the story ofKrishna. This Bhagavatha describes how Krishna gave su-preme bliss to different gopikas by appearing before each ofthem in a form which each liked most. He thus demonstratedthat the diversity of forms is indeed the unity of God. ThusBhagavatha tells us about the oneness which we should see inthis diversity. The story is full of love and will give you thecontents in a manner in which you can assimilate the same. Itis my hope that you can understand and absorb at least a partof what you listen to.4. Vyasa And Narada Are LikeMan And GodIf a person’s desires are all fulfilled, his devo-tion to God strengthens. If his desires are not fulfilled,his devotion weakens and he even neglects God alto-gether.Pavitratma Swarupas:Vyasa wrote the sacred Bhagavatha which is often re-ferred to as the fifth Veda. Vyasa was a great individual whocould overcome all human weaknesses like anger, greed andlust; and so, he could write, this great text. Today you willlearn some facts about Vyasa. He was given to yogic practicein life, and one day he was sitting on the banks of a river andwas in a very depressed mood. He was thinking about timewhich was fleeting away and was feeling that his life span wasmelting away like a block of ice without any worthwhileachievement. He was trying to understand how he should leadhis life. Although he had studied and understood all the Vedasand Puranas, he was worried that his writings and teachingswere not giving peace and happiness to the people in theworld. He realised that all his knowledge should have beenused to give peace and prosperity to the world, and he felt un-happy that it was not being utilised for this purpose. At thatmoment, Narada entered the scene. Narada was the son ofSaraswathi, and Vyasa was sitting on the banks of river Saras-wathi and thinking of these problems. Saraswathi signifies theform of the latent unspoken word. This Saraswathi is like thetraditional river which is believed to be flowing in an unmani-fested form. Narada as an individual was representing Saras-wathi. There is an inseparable connection between the mani-fested and the unmanifested aspect of Saraswathi. Ordinarily,20 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978in the mind of a human being, thought processes are generatedand he then speaks out. The words that we hear are the mani-fested words representing the unmanifested Saraswathi. Thestream of thoughts, that arise in his mind are given the shapeand form of the spoken word. Bhagavatha has been proclaim-ing the inseparable connection between the manifested and theunmanifested forms. The two aspects, namely the manifestedand unmanifested are closely related like the object and its im-age. Narada taught Vyasa that all the texts and scriptureswhich do not contain a praise of the leelas of the Lord arehollow and have no life in them. They will not attract people atall. Acquaintance with all the books and the scholarship thatone might possess are meant for attracting the world, but theywill not be able to attract and purify your own mind. If whatone writes can give him purity of thought and liberation fromworldly attachments, that can be regarded as a proper text.Sweetness is a natural quality of sugar; but if we just have aknowledge of this fact, we will not know that sugar is indeedsweet. This experience relates only to the palate, and yourtongue alone can identify the sweetness of sugar. The sweet-ness of sugar is not known to sugar itself. It is only when thereis an individual who, through his palate, has experienced thesweetness of sugar, can the sweetness of sugar be realised. Asin the analogy, the ananda or bliss associated with God will beknown only to the individual who seeks such ananda and bliss.It is the devotee who seeks and enjoys the experience ofananda and not God. Narada told Vyasa that he had only writ-ten about such happiness, but he had not experienced it. Na-rada then told Vyasa that from that day he would have the ca-pacity to sing the glory of God and advised that Vyasa shoulddo this and derive bliss and joy.Singing of a bhajan is usually associated with singingwith a rhythm. In reality, if we can give a form to what is con-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197821tained in Sama Veda, that itself can be described as bhajan. Alltypes of tunes have their origin in Sama Veda. Narada also toldVyasa that if such a sacred song is sung with proper feelingand devotion, then the significance of the song will also beclear. The sacredness of divine nature that is present in eachindividual can be experienced in the form of a song. There is asmall example for this. When two individuals are talking witheach other, one individual enters the other in the form ofsound. This concept of an individual entering another in theform of sound is not clearly understood today. When you areface to face with God and think of His name and glory, theform of God will enter you. It is in this context that the Sastrasand Puranas advise you to spend all your time in the thoughtof God and in singing His glory. We are, therefore, told thatGod is present in all living things, and that all living things intheir turn are present in the divine. If several people gather andsing the glory of God in a congregation, then prajnana, orknowledge of God, will come to everyone in the gathering.The sacred work of Vyasa was such that it demonstrated theunity amidst all the diversity in creation. Narada used the wordambhoja in the present context and that means a thing that isborn in water. Not only man, but all living things are born fromwater. All trees and everything else is born from water. Even ifwe have a small seed, it can sprout only if it is in contact withwater. If there is no water, even this seed will perish. In thiscontext, Narada said that the human body must be regarded asa lotus. All texts and writings in relation to God will consist ofa lotus implying that such a text is a lotus coming out of a lake.The state of our mind is compared to a lake that contains twoswans represented by the aspects of Soham. This sound of So-ham proclaims “I am That” and demonstrates the oneness of allcreation. The swan always symbolises purity in our tradition;and when we compare this aspect to that of Soham, we wish tobring out the purity in all creation. This implies that in the ma-22 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978nasarovar or the mind of man, which is like a lake, the identitybetween man and God should be promoted. Because of suchsacred teachings from Narada, there was a divine feeling inVyasa which enabled him to write the sacred text of Bha-gavatha. Because Narada removed all the doubts from themind of Vyasa, Narada was taken as guru and that day hassince been referred to as Guru Pournima. As the role of theguru is to remove ignorance from the dark minds, it is also re-ferred to as the coming of Pournima or brightness. The Vedashave compared the mind to the moon and the eye to the sun.What we see directly and readily is the moon or the reflectionof our own mind. With the help of a guru, the mind can becleansed and the spots and blemishes removed, and so this dayis to be referred to as Guru Pournima.We generally use the word heart to signify the physicalheart and the life force that is responsible for all action, but thisis not so. The heart should not be interpreted as somethingwhich is localised at one spot in the body. The totality of thelife force in a human being is to be referred to as the heart. Ifwe talk of America, does it mean that my heart has travelled asfar as America? In total reality, the life force in you can becompared to the heart. This has been called maha prajnanaand has been demonstrated to us as the form of Brahma. In oneof the maha vakyas “prajnanam Brahma,” prajnana has in factbeen identified with Brahma. Narada took the position of aguru and used Vyasa to explain the function of a guru and inthis context, this day is also referred to as Vyasa Pournima.Today there is also another event of exceptional sig-nificance. From the authority we can get from the Vedas, webelieve that buddhi is superior to all other sensory organs.Compared to buddhi, the Atma is in a higher position. BuddhiSummer Showers in Brindavan 197823and Atma are so close to each other that buddhi gets its illumi-nation from the Atma. The mind is in a higher position than thesensory organs. Buddhi is in a higher position than the mind.The effulgence of Atma falls directly on the Buddhi; and there-fore, if we follow the dictates of our Buddhi, we can controlour sensory organs. In this context, this day is also described asBuddha Jayanti. Thus Guru Pournima, Buddha Jayanti, andVyasa Pournima are like the confluence of the three sacredrivers. It is in this context that in the Purusha Sukta, it has beensaid that we must bring these three aspects together and offer itto Lord Shiva. Because of these sacred teachings of Narada,Vyasa undertook a pledge that from that day, he would writethe story of Krishna and his divine leelas. He was occasionallyasking Krishna, “Are you not satisfied with the excellentscholarship that I have achieved and the manner in which I ampraising you?” Vyasa asked such questions because he wasstill proud of his scholarship and his achievements. The arro-gance of his intellectual achievement was responsible for thisego. The ego that has its origin in anything else can be re-moved; but if the ego is acquired because of one’s scholarship,it cannot be easily removed. Education and scholarship shouldenable you to get rid of your ego; but if the same education andscholarship generate the ego in you, how can this be removed?The ego that one gets by thinking that he is a very learned per-son is the biggest obstacle in the way of his getting divine en-lightenment. However, this has a welcome aspect because onlywhen such obstacles arise can man attempt to remove hisfaults. Out of happiness, we will never get happiness. It is onlyout of troubles that we get happiness. Even if you want tomake good ornaments from gold, you will have to put it intofire and subject it to a high temperature. In a similar manner,God creates several difficulties for people and subjects them tomany tests before letting them realise His sacred and divineaspects. This is particularly so with people who suffer from an24 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978intellectual ego. We have to note here that Vyasa wrote theBhagavatha and all the Puranas, but he never put any of thethings about which he wrote into practice. He attained greatefficiency in communicating his ideas to others, but he did notattempt to put them into practice. Vyasa, who recognised thisfault in himself, prayed thus to Krishna, “Can we find out yourdivine nature, Oh Krishna? You are smaller than the smallestand bigger than the biggest. How can we describe your great-ness?” He further wrote, “It is said that you reside in the heartsof all the 84 lakhs of jivas in creation without being separatedfrom them.” Here, we should notice that while he pronounceshis knowledge about some aspects of God, he also expresseshis doubts in other aspects. At this stage, Narada told Vyasathat there should never be a doubt in one’s mind about any as-pect of the divine. It is not without reason that I have spent somuch time telling you about Vyasa today. It is only when youhave confidence in the speaker, will you have confidence inwhat he says. Only when you understand the thinking on thepart of those who wrote the Bhagavatha and on the part ofthose who figure in the text of the Bhagavatha can you under-stand the sacred text itself. It is in this context that I have givenyou the full life story of Vyasa and of Narada. Vyasa and Na-rada are like man and God. Vyasa is asking the questions andNarada is answering them. If we understand this relationshipbetween Vyasa and Narada, we can appreciate the innermeaning of the Bhagavatha. Tomorrow we shall hear about thelife story of Narada and from then on, we shall learn about theleelas of Krishna.5. Narada Was An Immortal SpiritIron, when it comes in contact with dust, willgather rust. When it comes in contact with fire, it willget rid of rust. Thus, company with others will result indifferent consequences which depend on the type ofcompany. This word of Sai is a statement of truth.Pavitratma Swarupas,The moving and non-moving contents of creation are offour different categories described as Para, Pasyanti,Madhyama and Vaikari. If we carefully look at the detailedmeaning of these types, we find that the first three are unmani-fested and are present in a latent form. The fourth aspect whichrelates to birth, death and the changing features of life and liv-ing things in creation, relates to only a quarter of the contentsof creation. The other three parts are connected with immortal-ity. While those features connected with immortality really oc-cupy three parts of the total, yet we give a great deal of impor-tance to whatever relates to our daily life. It is in this contextthat our ancient rishis have taught us that “Viswam Vishnuhu.”This implies that the entire creation is only a manifestation ofVishnu. Narada was an individual who fully realised this les-son. Narada was the son of a servant woman who was workingin a house where the Vedas were being continuously recited. Inorder to celebrate a certain function, the householder of thehouse, where Narada’s mother was working, invited a largenumber of rishis. The occasion was the celebration of the foursacred months during the rainy season; and during this period,all actions and thoughts were to be sacred. During those fourmonths, while the celebrations were going on, Narada wasgiven the task of attending to the needs of the guests in thathouse. At that time, Narada was six years old. Sitting with therishis, he was concentrating with a single-minded devotion on26 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978the Vedas that were being recited. He was accepting the ordersof the rishis without any question and putting them into prac-tice. He used to eat the food that was left by them in theirplates, accepting it as prasad. Once in a way, the mother usedto look at him and feel sorry for him and the manner in whichhe was gathering his food every day. After the four-monthscelebrations were completed, the rishis were preparing to de-part for their own homes. Narada was not willing to stay be-hind and desired to go with them. However, as Narada was stillvery young and was looked after affectionately by his mother,they did not think it right to take him along with them but in-stead they taught him various sacred aspects of the Lord. Theytaught him a twelve-lettered mantra namely, “Om namo bha-gavate vasudevaya, om namo bhagavate pradyumnaya, omnamo bhagavate aniruddhaya, om namo bhagavate sankar-shanaya” which the six-year-old Narada was reciting withconcentration. They also taught him that the entire creationwas indeed transient and was only an image, in that it was theprojection of Lord Vishnu. They also advised him that desiresare bondages. Just as wanting to get something is a desire,wanting to get rid of something is also a desire. The ego relat-ing to the concept of “I” is as much an ego as feeling the ab-sence of “I.” Where there is a feeling of “I,” God cannot existand where God is present, a feeling of “I” cannot be talked of.These two are mutually contradictory and exclusive words.They taught Narada that he should not allow any confusingthoughts to arise in him but that he should develop the thoughtonly of divinity and nothing else. From that day, Narada wasconcentrating on the thought of God and deriving happiness.While he was carrying on his life in this manner, one day whenhis mother went to a cowshed in the twilight early morninghours, she was bitten by a dark cobra and she died instantly.Narada was present and saw with his own eyes the strugglethat his mother had to go through at the time of her death. ThisSummer Showers in Brindavan 197827was the first test for Narada. He looked upon the event as oneof the leelas of the Lord and did not feel dejected at the deathof his mother. He pretended as if he was happy. The owner ofthe house came and asked him why he was happy. To this Na-rada said, “All these days my mother was constantly thinkingand worrying about me, and I am happy that this has nowcome to an end and that there would no longer be this attach-ment.” He was thus happy because the mother will no longerhave the problem of worrying about him, and she will nolonger suffer because of this attachment. If the mother wasalive, she would be concerned and agitated about Narada. Na-rada was happy that this link was broken.The very next day, Narada left for a long northern so-journ and was travelling through thick and fearsome forests.He was constantly hearing the roar of wild animals, and at thattime he was only seven years old. At all times and at all places,he was chanting the name of Hari. He was not giving anythought to his food or his rest. He was only asking himselfwhen the day, on which he could have the vision of the Lord,would come. His body was growing weak. His skin wasgrowing rough and tough. His voice became weak; and in thatcondition, he heard some kind of a heavenly voice address himthe question, “For what purpose are you struggling like this?Are you wanting to see me?” It further went on to say, “Thosewho want to have a vision of me must give up all desires. Thedesire to have my vision may be a sacred desire, but to travelin such places for securing my vision is a desire that should notbe there. Further, you are struggling with the desire that youshould have the Lord’s vision. So long as you have this ego of“I,” you will not have the vision of the Lord. There is the sa-cred saying that the whole world is the abode of Vishnu. Youare forgetting this truth. You do not have to travel long dis-tances to have the divine vision. You have not yet completely28 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978cleansed your mind.” Narada quickly understood that he wastaking a path which was the wrong one and felt that he shouldtake the correct path. Although he was quite young, his knowl-edge at that time was quite profound. God will never look atthings like age, scholarship, richness or sex or community. Hewill only recognise the agitation of and the depth of yearningin the mind. In our epics, the stories of several great peoplehave been told, and those stories amply bear out this truth. Towhat reputed family did Valmiki belong? In what well-knownvillage was Narada born? What was the wealth that Kuchelahad? What was the age of Dhruva? What was the age of Sa-bari? What was the discriminating power that Vidura had?What was the knowledge that Hanuman had? When we look atthese instances, we will come to the conclusion that age,wealth, sex, reputation and strength are not the determiningfeatures for securing the grace of the Lord.After listening to the divine voice, Narada went and satunder a tree. Soham, which is giving out and taking in of thebreath, is an aspect of God. Although Narada had no completeknowledge of the Vedas, he regarded the taking in of breath asthe aspect of Sama Veda and the giving out of breath as that ofRig Veda. In this manner, while he was practising what wasprescribed in the Vedas, he came to the end of his life. Thebreathing stopped and he joined the eternal. Narada then ac-quired a new life form. Our Puranas tell us that Narada uses atambura and moves about in the universe singing the glory ofthe Lord. This is only symbolic; and we should regard Naradaas taking the spinal column as representing his veena, thenerves or the nadis as strings of this veena and the breathing inand breathing out of the Harinama Smarana, and the new formof Narada is pictured as continuously uttering the names ofGovinda and Narayana and moving all over the space. Naradadoes not signify an ordinary human form. We should regardSummer Showers in Brindavan 197829the continuous breathing in and breathing out of our life sys-tem as the celestial form of Narada. The word Nara meanswater and it connotes Prajnana. As the entire water of a rivergoes and merges in the sea, all the rays of prajnana, that ema-nate from Narada, go and merge in the ultimate form of Brah-man. Prajnana comes from Brahman and since these raysmerge into Brahman, it has been said “Prajnanam Brahma” inthe Maha Vakya. Narada was establishing the truth that thisaspect of Brahman should always be present in our spinal col-umn in the form of Omkara. This is the natural sound and isnot something that you get by producing an artificial sound.We should regard Narada as one who is eternal andpresent at all times, producing celestial music. In each Kalpa, aYuga called the Dwapara Yuga comes again and again. Theother three Yugas, Thretha Yuga, Kritha Yuga and Kali Yugaalso come again and again in a cyclic manner. We should notregard Bhagavatha as something that happened in the Dwa-para Yuga which has just gone by. Vyasa should not be inter-preted as just one individual who existed in one DwaparaYuga. Any individual who can explain in detail the signifi-cance of the Bhagavatha should indeed be regarded as aVyasa; and in every Kalpa, at the end of the Dwapara Yugathere will be a Vyasa. The story of Bhagavatha must be re-garded as having happened in the very first Kalpa and in thefirst Dwapara Yuga. This has been taught by Brahma to Na-rada and then by Narada to Vyasa. In that manner, in eachKalpa and in each Dwapara Yuga, the incidents have been co-ordinated and preached. It is not right to think that Bhagavathais something that happened in a particular Yuga about fivethousand years ago. Similarly Krishna is not someone who wasexisting in the Dwapara Yuga that has just gone by. In theMaha Yuga, Thretha Yuga and in all other Yugas too, the as-pects of Krishna existed. Indeed, that individual who can sat-30 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978isfy your yearning pertaining to the divine can be calledKrishna. Such a view of Krishna leads us to the concept whichwill remove the darkness in our minds and brings enlighten-ment. The word Krishna can be elaborated by saying, Krushitee iti Krishnaha. He will plough the field of our heart and sowgood seeds in the form of good thoughts. You can also think ofan aspect of Krishna as the one which gives you happiness.Thus, karsha tee iti Krishnaha, krushi tee iti Krishnaha, kushatee iti Krishnaha are three different aspects of Krishna. Theseare three different forms of Sath, Chith, and Ananda and theseare present in all the Yugas. Because of our approach beinggenerally very narrow, we are thinking in a narrow manner thatKrishna is an individual and that he was the son of Devaki andVasudeva. Similarly, it is not necessary to think that Ramabelongs to the Thretha Yuga alone and that he is the son ofDasaratha and Kausalya. Our Puranas have taught us that whatgives us Rama or attraction and bliss is the aspect of Rama.We should not think that the Avatar of Rama or of Krishna areconfined to the Dwapara Yuga or the Thretha Yuga. Theycome always in all the Yugas and help humanity. After thisKali Yuga, there will be another Maha Yuga; and the DwaparaYuga and Thretha Yuga will repeat themselves, and the aspectsof Rama and Krishna will come again. This is the manner inwhich events and situations will come in a cyclical form. If wehave Tuesday which comes to us today, the same Tuesday willagain come on the eighth day from now. It is not right to thinkthat that is a different or a new Tuesday. The same Tuesday iscoming again. What we call the rainy season now, will comeagain after a year. It is not an entirely different season. Thesame season is coming again. When we talk today as the timeof Vasanta, it will come again after some time, and all theseaspects repeat themselves after some time.However, the youth of a man that has gone by and thewater that has flown down a river cannot come back again. ItSummer Showers in Brindavan 197831is, therefore, important that we make an effort to make use ofour youth in the proper way. You should make good use of theopportunity that has come your way. Narada is the form ofSath, Chith and Ananda; and by thinking of the sacred aspectsof Bhagavatha, as told by Narada, we can get peace of mind.The three aspects of Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara aremerged together in this sacred Bhagavatha, and we must makean effort to understand this. Whatever Narada has said or done,he had done for the good of the world. We generally think thatNarada is one who simply creates trouble. This is not correct.Whatever Narada had done, it was for helping the human be-ings. In this way, he has been teaching people that so long asthere is ego, one cannot think of approaching God. There areseveral sacred incidents in Bhagavatha and the most importantone is Droupadi’s equal-mindedness. There are other aspectstoo, like Kunthi’s adoration of the Lord, Bhishma’s sacredteaching, etc., and we will discuss such sacred aspects fromtomorrow6. God Is Not Happy UnlessHe Gives You SomeOccasional SorrowOne who is building a wall will keep goinghigher and higher. One who is digging a well will keepgoing deeper and deeper.Pavitratma Swarupas:In the context of divinity, man is continually agitated.He makes several different attempts to recognise the Atma andtries to locate nobler and higher ideas. Sometimes, forgettingthis sacred aspect of the Atma, he spends a lot of time in thepursuit of matters relating to external objects. The former re-quires inner vision and the latter requires external vision. Thesacredness of Bhagavatha consists in harmonising one’s innervision with his external vision and making him see the unity ofthese two aspects. Because of their wealth and physicalstrength, the Kauravas were blind to the might of Krishna.Jarasandha was very proud of the fact that he was born in asect higher than the Yadava sect in which Krishna was born;and being blinded with such ideas, he could not recognise thegreatness of Krishna. The pundits, having lost their wisdom intheir scholarship and because of the unreal ideas they createdin their own minds, were not able to recognise Krishna’s di-vine personality. The pride that comes from their birth, the egowhich comes from their wealth and the arrogance which comesfrom their education also rendered several other people inca-pable of recognising the greatness of Krishna. God’s actionscan be described as leelas. No one can determine the nature ofsuch leelas. It is also not possible to understand them. Onlyafter the event has taken place, can one realise its significance.Because such leelas are generally covered by Maya, man is notSummer Showers in Brindavan 197833able to recognise the divinity that is responsible for them. Be-cause of this maya alone, man again is not able to recognisethe divine connection between man and man. All attachmentarises because of maya. If there is no maya, the progress ofmankind itself will come to a standstill. In any respect, maya isnot bad. In fact, maya is a very helpful thing to the individualwho understands the different aspects of maya. For one whodoes not understand the same, it can bring about great harm. Infact, maya is very necessary for man and can be made the royalpath in the search for God. For an individual who does not un-derstand the aspect of maya, it will be a very difficult path.Take the example of a cat. When it catches hold of its kitten, itdoes so to take it to a place of safety. On the other hand, whenthe same cat catches hold of a rat, it is for the purpose of kill-ing the rat. For those people who do not understand the aspectof divinity, maya is like a cat catching the rat. For those whounderstand God, maya will be a great help like the cat whichtakes hold of the kitten. This maya is in fact a tool of God andtherefore God is sometimes described as one who wears mayaas His cloak. This maya is basically responsible for mainte-nance, dissolution and creation. At such times and such places,depending on the circumstances, the behaviour of maya willchange. Maya is something similar to an electric current. Wecan use this current for running a fan or lighting a bulb. It canbe used for running several machines and useful devices. Be-cause the electric current is so useful, if you catch hold of it toshow your gratitude, you will be killed immediately. Thus, cur-rent does good and also does harm. In this world, we cannotfind a place where there is no maya. Buddha said that all thisworld is really transient and that there is nothing of permanentvalue in it. In that context, we should realise that all that wesee around us is in reality the leela of the Lord. Whatever wemay do, we must also regard it as a leela of the Lord and expe-rience the truth in this way.34 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978The Pandavas lost their kingdom and wealth and werewandering in the forest, but they were always thinking ofKrishna, and Krishna showered his grace on such Pandavas.Although they lost the power of wealth and position, they hadthe strength of faith in the Lord and so they received the graceof the Lord. Bhagavatha has been teaching us that it is mostessential for human beings to have the strength that comesfrom dharma and faith in God. The battle was over andKrishna who was responsible for the victory was returning toHastinapura along with the Pandavas. After some time,Krishna was planning to return to Dwaraka. When Kunthiheard of this intention of Krishna, she came running to him.She held both the hands of Krishna, and addressed him bysaying, “You are the protector of the weak and those who arein trouble. You have taken care of my children and given megreat good fortune. You have given us your help at a timewhen we needed it most. I was under the illusion that the mostimportant thing was love and attachment. I have now realisedthat this is in fact the most poisonous quality. It has been myfortune to enjoy your love. There is nothing greater than yourlove. When I was young, I uttered the manthra taught to me byDurvasa and had a son born to me through the Sun God. Fear-ing the criticism which is likely to come from the society, Idiscarded my young son Karna. From that day, I have beensuffering because of the loss of my son. After having marriedKing Pandu, I was travelling in the forest along with my hus-band. By the kindness and grace of some gods, I bore threesons—Dharmaraja, Bheema and Arjuna. To my sister Madri,there were two sons—Nakula and Sahadeva. However, Madriended her life along with our husband. I was worried that if Ialso die along with my husband, there will be no one to takecare of these young children; and with this kind of attachment,I was looking after the children. By the grace of the rishis, ISummer Showers in Brindavan 197835came to Hasthinapura and from that day onwards, the cruelKauravas were giving us all kinds of trouble and they even at-tempted to kill my children by setting fire to the house inwhich they lived. They tried to humiliate Droupadi, the good-hearted daughter-in-law of mine. On all these occasions, fromthat day to this day, you have been looking after my childrenand guiding them and consoling them. You are like a brother,father, mother, relation and God to my children. I will not bedeluded and deceived by your five-foot-long human form. Youare truly God and there is no doubt whatsoever. You are thesource of my pleasure and comfort. Pleasure is always an in-terval between two pains; and in-between all my troubles, youhave been a great source of comfort. You have taken care of allof us for all this time, and I cannot live without you even for amoment. How can I now agree to your going away toDwaraka. I pray that you should stay for a little longer andteach the inexperienced Dharmaraja, the art of ruling over akingdom.” We should notice here that she addresses Krishna asMadhava. Ma means Lakshmi and it also means Maya. Theword Dhava means master. In this sense, Krishna is the masterof Nature, Lakshmi and maya. God is an independent entity inall aspects. Several people say that God should be like this andconduct himself in a particular manner, but this is not possible.For one who is above gunas, how can there be any particularqualities? For one who is formless, how can there be any limi-tations of form? God may take any form and may have any gu-nas, and he may perform any action that he likes for the benefitof the world. This will be determined as a reaction to the ac-tions of the devotees; and depending on the prayers of thedevotees, God will take a particular form. Suppose we build ahouse in a small place. The house has been constructed in theallotted place and there is no external place available. Al-though there is no place available outside, there is enoughplace for the owner to move about within his own house. In a36 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978similar manner, the universe is the mansion of the Lord; and hemoves about freely in all places. This is the reason why, whena door that cannot be opened is asked to be opened, we see asmile in Krishna’s face. When the entire universe is His man-sion, what is the fun in searching for the main door of thismansion. When the Lord himself is always behind me, wheream I to search for the main door and where am I to look for theLord? Play on the strings of the Lord’s name and concentrateon the Lord in Kailasa. That is the main door to the mansion ofthe Lord. Our heart filled with ananda is really the Kailasa andthe Lord has all the right to move about in our heart. Kunthirecognised that God dwells in her heart. Before this realisation,she was under the illusion that attachment and moha were im-portant human qualities. She also recognised the truth that forone who realises the greatness of the Lord and relies on him,there is no danger of any kind. God is not happy unless hegives you some occasional sorrow. Even the mother will not behappy unless the child cries heartily. Even while kissing thechild, the mother twists the cheek of the child and then kisseshim. In the same manner, God also causes several troubles andtests and then will please you. It is because of this, Kunthi saidto Krishna, “It is your nature to play on the veena happilywhen your devotees are in discomfort and crying!” God makesyou cry only to give you extreme happiness after that. We willbe able to eat more food, if we are hungry, and are able to di-gest well. If the food we take is not digested, how can we eatmore food? In this manner, at first God gives troubles, sorrowand pain and then after your digesting these, he gives happi-ness and bliss. In this context, we must realise that it is notpossible to easily understand the divine actions of the Lord.Only those who can experience them will be able to enjoythem, and others can never understand this. Because of someexternal troubles, we think God is a very unkind person. Thisis not so. Actually God is preparing you to receive eternal hap-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197837piness. Material pleasures are momentary and transient. Be-cause Kunthi recognised this basic truth, she could not bearseparation from Krishna.A small instance will enable us to recognise the inten-sity of Kunthi’s love towards Krishna. After Krishna’s Nir-vana, Arjuna was returning to Hasthinapura in a very dejectedmanner and even as he was walking back, he witnessed a largenumber of bad omens. As soon as Arjuna reached the palace,he gave the news of the Nirvana of Krishna; and all the Pan-davas were grief stricken. Although Arjuna was a very strongperson, he could not even draw his bow after the Nirvana ofKrishna. Then Arjuna realised that all his strength by which hewon the battle of Mahabharatha and by which he burnt downthe Khanda Vana was in reality the strength acquired by hisproximity to Krishna. He realised that he had no intrinsicstrength of his own. Arjuna was also wondering how he couldconvey the sad news to the old blind mother. As they enteredthe mansion, Kunthi was informed that Arjuna was coming.Because of her old age, it was natural that she could not see orhear properly. As soon as she realised that Arjuna was coming,she thought that Arjuna was bringing news of Krishna. She be-gan to shower a number of questions on Arjuna and wanted toask many questions about Krishna. Arjuna was greatly worriedas to how he could convey the news to Kunthi. Unable to givea reply to her questions, Arjuna cried out and said that Krishnawas no longer alive. As soon as she heard of this sad news, sheleft her life as if she was going in search of Krishna. She couldnot live for even one moment without Krishna. Pandavas alsohad great affection for Krishna and they were no ordinary peo-ple. The Pandavas were like the five pranas for Krishna andKrishna was the mainstay of Pandavas. On one occasion,Dhritharashtra told Krishna that he should not show any extrapartiality to the Pandavas because to him, the Pandavas and the38 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978Kauravas were equally important. To this Krishna repliedwithout fear or favour and said, “There is no comparison what-soever between the Pandavas and the Kauravas. I will now tellyou the kind of connection I have with the Pandavas. Dhar-maraja is like the head in the body; Arjuna is like the shouldersof the body; Bheema is like the stomach of the body and Na-kula and Sahadeva are like the two legs; and in such a body, Iam the heart and the moving force. Without a body, the heartcannot exist and without a heart, the body cannot exist. Such isthe inseparable connection between me and the Pandavas.”Krishna who had given such a reply was treating the Pandavaswith great affection and, in turn, the Pandavas were treatingKrishna as their life-moving force. In fact, at all times, in painand pleasure, in joy and sorrow, in ease and difficult times,they were always thinking of Krishna and leading their lives.That is why, when the Pandavas were told of the Nirvana ofKrishna, they were greatly agitated and disturbed. The kind ofdetachment they developed towards the world after this inci-dent cannot be found in any other household. Dharmaraja tookthe head of the departed mother on to his lap. He addressedone of his brothers and asked him to make arrangements forthe last rites of the mother. He asked another brother to makearrangements for the coronation of Parikshith, and he asked yetanother brother to make arrangements for their departure to theforest for leading a secluded life. On one side, he was makingarrangements for the last rites of his mother; and on anotherside, he was arranging for the coronation; and on another side,he was preparing to lead a detached and secluded life. Such acombination of events is very unusual and singular. It is thelove which the Pandavas had towards Krishna that is responsi-ble for this. Bhagavatha has been teaching the people of theworld this sacred devotion of the Pandavas. Krishna was agreat individual who had an intense and affectionate feelingtowards the Pandavas. Therefore, you should make an attemptSummer Showers in Brindavan 197839to understand the sacred acts of Krishna in the true perspective.The Krishna that we see depicted in the cinemas and dramas oftoday is not the true Krishna. In fact, he is sometimes depictedlike a modern college student with many unsacred ideas anddoing several irresponsible acts. Truly, the aspect of Krishna isvery sacred and his actions are full of divine love. These sacredactions of Krishna, which are seen at many places in Bha-gavatha, must be well and properly understood by all of you.7. There Is No Blemish In God;We See Our Own FaultsReflected In HimOh! Students of today, if you indulge in harshwords and bad deeds, the results will come back onyou. This word of Sai shows you the true path.Pavitratma Swarupas:The clouds gather in the sky and they disperse becauseof the breeze. So also, problems of the world gather and sepa-rate out if the conditions are favourable. It is not easily possi-ble for any one to forecast the result of a particular action. It isalso not possible for anyone to say what shape things will takeas time passes. Everything, in a way, depends on time. Time isa form of God. In that context, we should try and do all ourwork in such a way that it will be of benefit to us in appropri-ate time. After the battle of Mahabharatha was over and whenDharmaraja got the privilege of ruling over Bharath, Krishnanoticed that Dharmaraja always had a serious countenance. Atthat time, Krishna asked Dharmaraja why he was so sorry anddejected when he attained victory in the battle and became theunquestioned king. Then Dharmaraja replied, “Oh, Krishna!For the benefit of one individual, it is a great sin to kill somany others. In that context, to have killed and destroyed gu-rus, brothers, cousins and friends is a great sin committed byme. Even if I suffer hell for millions of years, my sin will notbe atoned. I have been responsible for the death of so manypeople. What is the happiness that I can enjoy by giving painand trouble to so many others? Only an individual who giveshappiness to others and enjoys happiness himself can be a sa-cred individual. One who gives pain to others and enjoys hap-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197841piness is indeed a great sinner.” When Dharmaraja repliedthus, Krishna laughed and said, “Oh, Dharma-raja, you talklike an ignorant man. It is the Dharma of a king to destroy eviland give prosperity to the people in the kingdom. It is your re-sponsibility to keep your kingdom safe and happy. The pros-perity of your people is in your hands. While fulfilling such atask, there is always a justification in punishing those who goagainst you.” Dharmaraja knew all the Sastras and the Vedasand Krishna was surprised to find that, in spite of his learning,Dharmaraja permitted himself to lapse into a mood of distress.He advised Dharmaraja that to get over his sorrow, he shouldperform the Aswamedha Yaga. Dharmaraja was surprised andasked Krishna, “If you wash mud with water, will not the wa-ter also become muddy? If you wash a pot, which is used tostore liquor; by using liquor, will the unsacredness of the potdisappear? In order to get rid of the sorrow that I have got bycommitting sin, should I perform Yaga in which I have toagain kill? I am not interested in the kingdom nor am I inter-ested in performing the yaga. In fact, I do not even want thisbody, give me permission to leave this body.” Krishna realisedthat Dharmaraja was in a state of total frustration, and he toldArjuna that they should both go and see Bhishma who is in thelast stages of his life. Krishna called all the other Pandavas andalong with Droupadi, they went to see Bhishma.As soon as he saw the Pandavas and Krishna, Bhishmawas overjoyed. Bhishma summoned the Pandavas close to himand was expressing his happiness. Addressing Dharmaraja, hesaid, “How fortunate are we that the almighty Lord has takenhuman form and is moving amongst us.” The Pandavas weresometimes under the illusion that Krishna was only a relativeof theirs, and in the context of such a relationship, Krishna,though he was God, was regarded as an ordinary human being.We frequently suffer from such an illusion. It is not possiblefor anyone to easily understand the leelas of God. God’s ac-42 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978tions cannot be comprehended and easily described. This isbeyond human thought and mind. Truly, when divinity appearsin human form, we think that he is like an ordinary human be-ing and assess him in comparison with an ordinary human be-ing. Bhishma was very pleased that he had the unique fortuneof having Krishna’s presence at that time. He said, “Truly, thewords of God always represent truth and, whatever he does isan act of dharma. His words constitute truth and his actionsconstitute dharma. There is nothing in this world which hewants or which he has to do. All actions of his are undertakenfor the good of the people. Our duty is to do what he asks us todo without question. We have no right or the capacity to ques-tion or enquire into the actions of the Lord. Can anyone decideor lay down principles as to how small children should conductthemselves or play? Small children have no selfishness andego. They can smile, play or cry just as they like. In the samemanner, Paramatma who is above gunas is like a small baby.No one has the right or authority to decide or lay down as tohow he should conduct himself. Whatever he does, it is for ourgood. In the eyes of God, there are no differences between oneand another. In this context, he neither gets angry nor pleased.The Pandavas did not fight the battle, nor did they plan thebattle. Victory cannot be ascribed to them. Krishna is the onewho made them fight and achieve victory. It is very difficult tounderstand his leelas. At least from now on, realise this truth,overcome your sorrow, be happy and realise your part andyour duty.” Arjuna also was telling Krishna that it is better tobeg for food and live than to achieve victory by killing allthose who are near and dear. Krishna, in a prophetic manneraddressing Arjuna said, “What is ordained by fate is inescap-able. Justice will be done, victory will go to the righteous ones.Truth will survive. Selfishness will be destroyed. This is thedharma of all times. Know now that a father, who had a hun-dred sons, has not got even one son left to do the last rites forSummer Showers in Brindavan 197843this dead body.” Here we see that Krishna had a master plan inwhich he has all our lives under control. He looks after all ofus and has control over the past, present and future. In thatcontext, Krishna told Arjuna that what is ordained had to bedone. There is no escape. At that time, Bhishma was advisingDharmaraja as to how and in what manner a king should lookafter his people, how he should be a good king and so on. Hewas also telling him how he should conduct himself accordingto the Varnasrama Dharma and through what steps manshould realise divinity. When Krishna was preaching such sa-cred things, several experienced rishis also came to listen tohim. While such sacred teachings were being given byBhishma in a peaceful manner, Droupadi laughed loudly. Thiswas very unbecoming of her, and the Pandavas felt hurt andashamed and also angry to a certain extent. All other rishis feltvery surprised, but no one understood why she laughed.Krishna was the only person who knew the reason for this. ThePandavas angrily stared at her. Bhishma called Droupadi in aloving manner and addressing Dharmaraja he said, “Droupadiwould never laugh without reason. She has a very sacred heart.She will never do anything disrespectful when talking to eld-ers. She always conducts herself with great humility. Let herexplain why she laughed loudly.” He called Droupadi and toldher that if she explained why she laughed, her husbands will besatisfied. Addressing Bhishma, she said, “It is necessary foryou to teach dharma to those who have moved away from thepath of dharma. The advice you have just been giving is verynecessary for people who have taken the wrong path and whosuffer from ego and pride. All this preaching is not necessaryfor my husbands who have been leading righteous, sincere andhonest lives, showing respect to elders. Why is it that you didnot preach these things to the Kauravas when they humiliatedme and behaved in an unjust manner?” Bhishma then re-sponded by saying, “Droupadi has asked a valid question.44 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978Having lived with the cruel and wicked Kauravas and havingeaten their food, all my blood was contaminated. All the dhar-mic principles were buried deep under such blood. When yourhusband shot me with an arrow, all the bad blood had flownout and the dharmic principles are now coming up.” Themeaning and moral of this story is that the kind of food wetake will determine the kind of thoughts and the kind of bloodthat will form in us. Even people who are basically good willhave bad thoughts if they eat unsacred food. That is why wesay that the kind of food that we take will determine the kindof thoughts that we get, and the kind of thoughts we get willdetermine our conduct. While Bhishma was preaching the needfor sacred conduct, uttarayana had set in. Bhishma was wait-ing for nearly fifty-six days for this sacred time. He looked atthe divine and compassionate face of Krishna. Bhishma’s eyesmet those of Krishna. He was addressing him and saying, “Oh,God in human form, who lives in Dwaraka, you have the ca-pacity to grant birth to people, sustain them and bring abouttheir end; you have assumed various Avatars to take care ofyour devotees.” Saying thus, Bhishma gave up his life. By thispraise and description from Bhishma, once again the Pandavasrealised that Krishna was indeed divine. Even earlier, they re-alised his divine nature, but being under the influence of maya,sometimes they used to regard him as their brother-in-lawrather than as a divine person. This maya makes people dovarious things, both good and bad. Truly, if the Pandavas werenot subjected to such maya, they would not have been able toexperience Krishna for such a long time. If they readily recog-nised Krishna as God, they would not have done all that theyhad actually done because of ignorance. Divinity always bringsabout unions and separation. Man’s actions are influenced byattachment. Here, attachment should be interpreted as desire tohave something. For this, the basis is generally a worldly de-sire. For such desires, the sensory organs are important. How-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197845ever much is your experience, you will want to have more andmore. Whatever the extent of experience it may be, you are notsatisfied. Here, in order to get detachment, the only process isone of sacrifice. This is something that is closely connectedwith good company. This good company has got certain ancil-laries like good ideas, good habits, etc. To recognise humannature, the proper path is to move on from a state of attach-ment to a state of vairagya and from there to a state of love.You should have attachment towards the Lord and detachmenttowards the world. The reason for this is that the entire worldis just transient. Whether it is in sorrow or pleasure, joy orpain, we should be able to think of God with an equal mind.Such a quality should be developed by us. Bhishma was an in-dividual who knew very well the sanctity of such an equal-mindedness.On one occasion, during the war, one of Bhishma’s ar-rows hit Arjuna and the blood that was flowing out of Arjuna’sbody was dripping on Krishna. The entire body of Krishna wasdrenched in blood. When Arjuna saw this, he was under theillusion that Krishna was really suffering. As a result of hislove towards Krishna, Arjuna became somewhat weak anddejected. Krishna, immediately realised this and said, “Arjuna!Why are you so weak? Will you carry on the fight or shall Icarry on the fight?” Saying this, Krishna jumped out of thechariot. He announced that he would kill Bhishma and gotdown from the chariot. Then Bhishma said, “When you leapand jump out from the chariot, the gold and diamond rings onyour ears are shining brilliantly. The radiance is beautiful andfills the whole space.” Bhishma prayed that the same Krishnawho came to kill him should save him. Such was the equanim-ity and equal-mindedness of Bhishma. We should see here alsothat when Krishna was coming to kill him, Bhishma did notpray to Rama or Shiva to save him. He prayed to Krishna him-46 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978self. His faith was so firm that he believed that Krishna was theone who would save or kill. No one else had the capacity to dothis. When this situation came, there was a great transforma-tion in Arjuna. The reason for this is that at the beginning,Krishna said that he would not fight in the war but would onlybe a charioteer. Arjuna was worried that if Krishna now par-ticipated in the battle, his word would lose its value. Arjunathen immediately resumed fighting, so that he would not be thecause of dishonour to Krishna. As soon as Krishna saw this, heagreed and said that he pretended as if he was going to fight sothat he can get back Arjuna into the fight. Whatever the Lorddoes, he does it with a purpose. He never does anything to de-ceive others or put up a show. We generally do not try and rec-ognise our own faults, and we make an effort to find fault evenwith God. However much you may try, you can never findfault with or a blemish in God. His heart is clean and his ideasare sacred. As we see our own image in a mirror, we see ourown faults in God. We should realise that God is like a cleanand pure mirror. Whatever you see in the mirror, all those areyour faults and not those of God. For the protection of peoplein the world, God takes a human form from time to time.Bhishma recognised the truth that Krishna was God, and as aresult of that recognition, he was showing up the Pandavas asideal human beings for the rest of the world. Bhishma Stotras,the praise of the Lord by Bhishma, have been giving strengthto the Pandavas.Krishna had always been telling people that divinityexists in everyone and that the omnipresent divinity is the samein all creation. He, in that manner, taught them to give up jeal-ousy, ego and such qualities. Jealousy and ego are demoniacqualities that come in the way of man’s spiritual progress.Only when we can eliminate jealousy and ego can we call our-selves true human beings. There is no objection to desiring andSummer Showers in Brindavan 197847asking for what you want, but you should not feel jealous ofwhat others have. By teaching the gopis and gopalas in thismanner, he was showing them the divine path. Krishna’s sa-cred leelas are infinitely deep and not understandable. Unlessyou learn the significance of these teachings and put them intopractice, all this description of Krishna’s qualities would be awaste. Krishna used to look upon all the creation with an equalmind. Here, you might get a doubt as to how he undertook tokill and exterminate forty lakhs of the Kauravas army, if in-deed he looked upon all creation with an equal mind.There is an example for this. If there is a cancerousgrowth in your body, you will find a large number of germsand bacteria in the wound. This is a condition, as a result ofwhich, the entire body may deteriorate and become cancerous.At that time, a doctor will decide to cut away or amputate thatpart of the body that has become cancerous. Under those con-ditions, what is important is that the person should be operatedupon and the doctor will decide the course of action. He willnot worry about the lakhs of germs that are present in the can-cerous growth. The alternatives are: is it good to perform theoperation and save the patient or is it good to cancel the opera-tion thinking that thereby, he will save millions of germs?Since these germs are going to cause more trouble to manyother people by infection, it is necessary to kill them. Thissame dharma was followed by Krishna. This is to say that theworld had a boil of cancer in the Kauravas. As a result of theaction of the Kauravas, the world came to a situation wherethere was adharma and unjustness, and the world itself wouldhave been destroyed. At that time, Krishna realised that thedisease had crossed all limits and he got ready for the opera-tion. Here he accepted the Pandavas as the compounders andhe performed the operation in the form of a war. In this opera-tion, the forty lakhs of germs in the form of Kauravas and their48 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978supporters were killed. This act is for the prosperity and thegood of the world. This was not done for a selfish interest.Krishna said in the very beginning that the Kauravas were bornto bring disrepute and harm to a royal family. To this situation,Suta’s son Karna added fuel. On top of this, there is the furtheraggravation caused by the wicked Sakuni. This forest fire hasspread all over and now there is no solution other than an ava-lanche of arrows. The kind of fire is such that it is going to de-stroy the entire forest. A fire that has spread everywhere can-not be extinguished with a small quantity of water. There mustnow be a downpour of arrows for the sake of peace and thegood of the world. Whatever God does, he does it for our owngood. It is necessary for us to recognise and accept that all ac-tions of God are indeed for our good only.8. God’s Creation Around Us Has AGreat Deal To Teach UsGurus and Students:If man has to attain salvation, he requires Vidya andthapas. Vidya is of two kinds. One is the Vidya relating to theexternal situation. The other is the Vidya relating to the internalsituation. The first one enables you to eke out a living and thesecond enables you to reach your destination. We have to dis-cuss and come to a conclusion as to what constitutes trueVidya. The kind of education that we are getting today in theschools and colleges cannot be called true Vidya. This willonly lead you to occupy some kind of a position and lead yourdaily life without too much trouble. This may also be describedas education that enables you to eke out your livelihood. It re-lates to the material world. From the sweeper upwards to thePrime Minister, they will all be working to eke out a liveli-hood. There may be a difference in position and status, butwhat all these people do will be related to the material world.Brahma Vidya is something that will take man to hisultimate destination. In this world and in the spiritual world, inyour life now, and after this life, what gives you happiness andbliss is the Brahma Vidya. What we call Brahma Vidya is su-perior to all other types of education. All types of education arelike the rivers while the Brahma Vidya is like the ocean. Allthe rivers go and merge in the ocean, all types of educationlead us to Brahma Vidya. What we call Brahma Vidya demon-strates the aspects of Para Brahma. This teaches you aboutPara Brahma. But, thapas takes you and merges you in ParaBrahma. The ability of an individual to convey the meaning ofAtma and Para Brahma to the seekers makes him a guru. A50 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978guru really means a great person. When we talk of the great-ness of the guru, we mean the capacity of the guru to experi-ence the aspects of Brahman and teach them to others. So,when we talk of the position of the guru, it cannot mean whatwe generally talk of today. Here the “gukara” is somethingthat is above gunas and “rukara” signifies something which isabove a form. The guru must thus be able to experience crea-tion without being affected by the form and the gunas in thecreation. We should try, through Sadhana, to acquire the posi-tion of such a guru.Thapas does not mean running away from a home anda family and living in a forest by eating leaves. This cannot bethe true meaning of thapas. It also does not constitute thapas ifyou stand upside down like bats. One aspect of real thapas re-fers to our ability to bring your thought, word and action intoharmony. You should be able to unify your work, mind andtalk. Thapas gives you the ability by which you can do this.Vidya, which we have identified with Brahma Vidya andthapas will enable one to experience Brahman. To a guru, boththese things should be like his two eyes. If we want to clean acloth that has gathered dirt, we need clean water as well assoap. Similarly, if we want to get rid of the dirt that has gath-ered in our mind, we need Brahma Vidya as well as thapas.Generally, we think that an ordinary person cannot acquireBrahma Vidya. Brahma Vidya gives you the ability to controlyour mind and action and turn them toward God. It has beenestablished that this creation is filled with Easwara. It is not agreat sacrifice to give away one’s material possessions. It istruly great to be able to give up one’s self. Bhagavatha is sa-cred in teaching these aspects. The guru that comes in thisstory and the disciples that sit at the feet of such a guru aregood examples; and if we can understand them, it will lead usto the right path. Krishna is the central figure for Bhagavatha.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197851Arjuna was also a principal character in this play. Arjuna is anideal example of a disciple. Krishna is an ideal guru. Here, thebest of human beings, Arjuna, is the disciple; and the greatestof Gods, Krishna, is the Guru. Arjuna holding the Gandiva isthe disciple. Krishna the Yogeswara is the guru. It is not easyto find another parallel to such a confluence of a guru and adisciple. Bringing such a disciple and a guru together andteaching the sacredness of this confluence to the people ofBharath is the basis of Gita. Guru is a person, who can wakeup a sleeping and ignorant devotee, by the alarm bell of pra-jnana. The guru keeps saying, “Awake, arise, wake up to thefact that you are not an ordinary human being but that you aredivine.” This is the work of a true guru. One who is called aguru should have himself had the experience of Para Brahma.Once upon a time, one individual undertook a journeyand on the way, he met a big river. Since the river was new tohim, he did not know how wide or deep it was. While he wasfeeling that there was no one to help him, he found two peoplesitting under a nearby tree. When he asked them about thedepth of the river, they said that it can be crossed easily andthat it was not very deep. When he examined these peoplecarefully, he found that one of them was lame and the otherwas blind. The blind man cannot see the river and the lameman cannot walk. He thought it is foolish to try and cross theriver based on the assurances of the blind man or the lameman. This was very prudent behaviour on his part.Today, we want to cross the river of our lives alongwith a heavy luggage in the form of a family. There are severalgurus who, like the blind and the lame, neither understand thedepth of the river nor the effort involved. This is the reasonwhy there are several unsacred actions entering the conduct ofthe students. If, therefore, we can put the gurus in the proper52 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978path, the students will not pursue the wrong path. It is in thiscontext that the Sathya Sai Bala Vikas gurus, with their sacredhearts and their experience, should train the students carefully.There will no doubt be a good future for Bharath. The BalaVikas gurus should take into their minds at least one or twogood things and teach them to the children. It is said that forour life, there are twelve gurus. It is not as if these twelve gu-rus have twelve forms. The different aspects of teaching are tobe identified with the twelve forms. To be born is a guru, tolive on the earth is a guru, to be happy is a guru, to be strong isa guru. It is not right to have a guru only in the school or col-lege. Even when we do business, there is something to learn.When we cultivate land, there is something to learn. In thisway, everywhere there is something for us to learn; and in fact,the entire world is like a university. Not only this, all the crea-tion around us is in the position of an important guru. Withoutany difference of caste or creed, the tree proclaims equality ofevery one. The mountains are teaching to us that we should nothave so much attachment to and care of our body by showinghow patiently they can stand in rain, sun and cold. The birdsteach us to be unmindful of the changing days. The world isnot permanent. The family is only an illusion. So says the manwho is leaving the world after death. You have no right to keepon saying that this belongs to you or that belongs to you. Thecreation around you keeps on reminding you that nothing be-longs to you. If you really want to understand nature, creationis the best school. The guru is Sripati himself. All that is con-tained in the creation—the mountains, the trees, the rivers—areteaching us constantly. The education that nature around usgives us is much more than the education given by a guru or amother or a father. Therefore, if we can really understand thesecret of the creation around us, our minds will not go after theattractions of the material world. There is nothing more won-derful or awe-striking than God’s creation.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197853Students: if we want to produce a spoon or a cup, wemake a mould and from that mould, we keep on producingmore and more copies of the same piece. We try to duplicateeverything. In God’s creation there are millions of individuals,millions of insects, mountains and trees. Do we see any onepiece of creation resembling identically any other piece? Eventwins, born from one mother will be different in some way orthe other. They will never be completely identical. There is nosimilarity between one piece and another. All these flowers arejasmine flowers, but there is no complete identity between onejasmine flower and another. Can there be anything more star-tling than this? How many lessons can this teach us? Who cancreate such things? This is great work of God. If we can makean attempt to understand this aspect of God, we can understandeverything. A guru who can make us alive to this situation isvery necessary today. Teachers, who understand the ParaThathwa or the aspect of God are very necessary. The gurus ofBala Vikas should make an attempt to teach the students withlove, forbearance and with a sacred heart. The guru should notbecome a lazy person. If our own children are children born tous out of kama, the children who come to us as students mustbe treated as children of prema. We must treat them with moreaffection than what we show to our own children. We shouldnot treat them differently. Our teachers must have an equal-mindedness and should not give place to any difference due tocaste, religion and such other aspects. In the training camp thathas just been held, you have learnt several new things. Youshould regard this as a great opportunity. We should regardinculcating the idea of service in the minds of the children ofthis country as a sacred task. I am hoping that the teachers willundertake to help the students and thus help to re-establish theancient culture of this country. You must go on teaching thechildren from the beginning, the essence of our Vedic state-54 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978ment, “Mathru Devo Bhava, Pithru Devo Bhava.” We shouldalso teach the children that they should conduct themselveswith humility when they meet their elders. We should teachthem that whatever they eat, they should eat it after offering itto God. In the absence of such practice, the conduct of thechildren is taking a very distorted path. To some extent, thechildren are shaping themselves on the lines of the conduct oftheir mothers. In the ancient days, the ideas and thoughts of thewomen were very sacred. At the time when the women were inthe family way, they used to listen to many sacred stories likethe story of Prahlada, or of Markandeya, or Dhruva or Krishna.In these days, the situation is such that women in the familyway see three cinemas a day. As a consequence, all the badideas contained in a cinema enter their mind and the childrenborn are “Cinema Children” full of wrong ideas and emotions.It is very difficult to correct and reform such children. We willhave to undergo a lot of trouble in this task, but it is necessaryfor the sake of our country and of our people. In this largeworld, each one of you is like a tiny screw or a bolt. We mustmake an attempt, without ego, to learn our responsibility anddo our duty. We should not give room to any ego. When thereis ego, you cannot be a good guru. I am hoping that you will beable to put the decisions taken by us into practice and teachgood things to the children.9. Whatever God Does, It Is AlwaysFor Our Own GoodGood education is only that which teaches usuniversal peace and enables us to shed narrow ideasand promotes the ability to live together in unity. Whatwe see during the day, will disappear during a dreamin the night. What we see during a dream will disap-pear during the day. Our experiences are so transient.Pavitratma Swarupas:  Students,The bamboos in a thicket that grow densely in a forestmay rub against each other and this will start a fire. The firethat is so generated will become bigger and bigger as a resultof breeze. Gradually the fire will become a big forest fire de-stroying the entire forest. So also some human beings, as a re-sult of their educational attainments, power, wealth and posi-tion develop a great deal of ego. Because of this ego, they willbe giving a lot of trouble to good people and sadhakas aroundthem. In order to protect such good people and re-establishdharma, God takes a human form from age to age. Such Ava-tars appear again and again and help human beings, by leadingan exemplary life and demonstrating how to lead a good life.Such a human form of divinity in the Dwapara Yuga, is theform of Krishna. At the end of the battle of Mahabharatha,Krishna entrusted the kingdom to Dharmaraja who performedthe obsequies of Bhishma. He saved the child in the womb ofUttara and after ensuring peace and prosperity everywhere, leftfor Dwaraka. Since Krishna was determined to return toDwaraka, there was no alternative except to bid him farewell.56 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978On the chariot, along with Krishna, were also travellinghis disciples Uddhava and Satyaki. Behind the decorated chairon which Krishna was sitting, Arjuna was holding a diamond-studded umbrella giving shade to Krishna. While Krishna wasthus travelling, he forbade Dharmaraja from giving any help.Nevertheless, Dharmaraja sent a large retinue to make ar-rangements on the way. While passing through each country,the king of that country welcomed Krishna and in due course,Krishna reached Dwaraka. The king of Suradesa was surprisedby the strength of Krishna and gave a number of gifts toKrishna. The citizens of Dwaraka, as soon as they learnt thatthe battle of Mahabharatha was over, were expecting Krishna’sreturn to Dwaraka. They were preparing to receive Krishna.Like a young child looks anxiously to get into the embrace ofthe mother, the citizens of Dwaraka, the young children ofDwaraka and the gopikas of Dwaraka were all looking forwardto the return of Krishna. As the young calf which keeps onyearning for the mother cow as the day draws to a close, thepeople of Dwaraka were yearning for the return of Krishna. Allthe gopikas, unable to bear the separation from Krishna, hadgiven up their food, had given up decorating themselves andwere anxiously moving about looking for the return ofKrishna. As a poor man who is hungry cries out for food, thegopalas were crying out for Krishna. When the citizens ofDwaraka were in this condition, Krishna approached Dwarakaand sounded his conch. As soon as this sound was heard, theearth shook, the mansions shook and all the people jumped injoy. In one moment the whole of Dwaraka was smiling. Thechariots and horses were already in full preparation and theyall went to receive Krishna. All the elders, Ugrasena, Akrura,Vasudeva and Balarama went to the city frontiers. They werewaiting outside in order to welcome Krishna. The royal roadsof Dwaraka were overflowing with people. The women werestanding on the terraces of the mansions and shedding tears ofSummer Showers in Brindavan 197857joy. On the roads and in the crowds, the victories of Krishnawere being praised. As soon as he reached his mansion, he waswelcomed with Mangala Harati. He was received with greatjoy.The mothers were expectantly waiting for him. In ad-dition to Devaki, Vasudeva had five other wives. Withoutgiving any thought to Krishna’s age or status, all the fivemothers went and embraced him. At the time of the battle,Krishna was eighty-four years old, Devaki was looking afterKrishna as if he was a small boy. We should see here that al-though Krishna was quite old, the motherly affection makesDevaki take Krishna close to her. She could not keep awayfrom Krishna too long. Devaki asked him about the safety ofPandavas. The other mothers also came and embraced him.Although they were his stepmothers, they were all attracted byhis friendliness and affection. Such love is Krishna andKrishna is such love. They are not two distinct things. This as-pect of Krishna was very much enjoyed by the citizens ofDwaraka and the citizens of Hastinapura. Those who havebeen used to experiencing this kind of love will never want tohave anything different. Will those who have tasted sweetdates want to eat tamarind in their place? All the gopis andgopalas who enjoyed Krishna’s prema had no desire to enjoyany other type of prema.After all the questions were answered, Krishna pro-ceeded into the inner apartments to meet the gopikas. It is herethat we have to carefully assess the actions of Krishna. He hasthe form of ananda. There is no scope for anything else in hisform. Although he used to pretend that he was living in a fam-ily like an ordinary person, it was not so in reality. You mightshape gold into different ornaments and give different names,but the basic thing is the same gold in all of them. Although58 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978God might undertake different actions for the world, he is ba-sically Ananda Swarupa. Whether it is in friendship or in at-tachment or relationship, the only quality that he demonstratedwas ananda and nothing else. For those who experienced thesesituations, it may look as if it is in different forms but forKrishna there is no difference at all. With a view to give hap-piness to the devotees, he might conduct himself in differentways but he always had a feeling of grace in his mind. He rec-ognised the ideals in women. If he appeared in the house ofone gopika first and later in the house of another gopika, heknew that he will then be the cause of a certain amount of jeal-ousy. In order to avoid this among the gopikas, he demon-strated that he can take different forms at the same moment. Atthe same time, a thousand and one hundred and eight gopikaswere longing for the grace of Krishna in Dwaraka. Krishna si-multaneously entered the houses of all the one thousand onehundred and eight gopikas. It is in this context that he taughtthem that all the forms that exist everywhere are forms of God.Here, there is an opportunity for us to see the difference be-tween Radha and the other gopikas. Each one of them had thefeeling that Krishna should belong to her and not to any otherwoman. This was a narrow outlook. They always conductedthemselves with the feeling that Krishna belonged to them andto no one else. Radha is different. Her thought was not likethat. Radha used to feel that Brindavan belongs to all and thatGovinda belongs to all. Radha always proclaimed the feelingthat Govinda was as much divine to her as to any other. Shehad an equal-minded approach. In this way, when Krishna en-tered all the houses at the same time, each gopika used to feelthat Krishna first entered her house. They were all thus im-mersed in happiness. The gopikas were anxiously waiting for along time for the vision of Krishna. During this time, they gaveup food, they gave up proper dress, they gave up decoratingtheir hair. In such a neglected state, Krishna could not recog-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197859nise them. They refused to wear jewels or use flowers becausethey felt that they should not do so when Krishna was notthere. As soon as they saw Krishna, they shed tears. Here, thetears became decoration for their faces, and it showed the factthat there is no better decoration for one’s face than tears ofjoy. It is their gunas that have been giving them their beauty.In Kannada there is a poem which says that the houses consti-tute the beauty of the village; the lotus constitutes the beauty ofthe lake. For the sky, the moon is the best decoration. Simi-larly, for a woman, good qualities are the best decoration. Inthis manner, for these gopikas their tears of joy became theirdecoration. Krishna saw the gopikas in this condition and hiseyes were glowing with compassion. He started conversingwith them. He asked one gopika if the deer that she wasbringing up was coming up well. He asked another gopika ifthe peacock that she was bringing up was keeping well. In thismanner, Krishna was asking about the welfare of various hu-man beings and animals. They realised that his compassionspread equally to all living things. Easwara is present in all theliving beings in God’s creation. This was the truth spread byKrishna. Not only this, as soon as the gopikas saw Krishna,they forgot all their troubles; but Krishna was asking about thesafety of the gopikas. The Atma Swarupa is one who is able togive you happiness under all conditions of both pain andpleasure. So, Krishna was giving happiness at all times. Thisaspect of his was described by calling him a Nitya Brah-machari. As all the rays come from the same sun, here allkindness seems to come from Krishna. All the jivas have comefrom one source, and they have to merge into the same onesource. Krishna proclaimed that he is present in all the livingcreation. Without being able to understand these broad aspectsof God, we sometimes inject our own narrow ideas and appre-hensions when we picture God. God’s aspect is such that it isever ready to take you along the royal road on which you can60 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978see him. Our life is like a taxicab and we try to go into bylaneswith this taxi. In that context, our thought of going into bylanesand God’s presence on the royal road do not go together. Thethoughts that we get by looking at the cinemas and thethoughts that we get by looking at the books written about himare very different from the true nature of Krishna. All thesethoughts are merely man’s creation according to his ownimagination. But God is always permanently present in onesingle concept. In action, he may demonstrate different anddiverse aspects coming from the one single form. The impor-tant strength which God has is the strength of love. His life isfull of Ananda. In this type of divine ananda, there is no roomfor any impurity coming in. “Ekam Eva Adwaitiyam, Brah-man.” What exists is only one and that is Brahman. There is noparallel to this. Krishna has shown this path of truth and he hashimself set an example. His prema is the destination for every-one. However, for the prosperity and good of the world, hemay undertake some action which might appear as being dif-ferent. He will never undertake any action unless it is intendedfor the good of the world. The gopis and the gopalas wereamong those who recognised this basic truth.Radha exhibited the totality of the stream of love orPrakruthi has taken the form of Radha. If Radha was attachedto Krishna and Krishna was attached to Radha, it simply meansthat Paramatma and Prakruthi were attached to each other.This is a silver tumbler. It is not possible for us to remove thesilver from the tumbler. Because, the silver and the tumblerhave joined together, we call it a silver tumbler. In the samemanner, it is not possible to separate Radha and Krishna fromeach other. Because Prakruthi and Paramatma are identicalwith each other, it is one single entity. Without Prakruthi orcreation, there is no Krishna, without Krishna, we will not beable to see creation. We cannot have a cloth without the threadSummer Showers in Brindavan 197861and the thread without the cloth. The oneness of the cloth andthe thread exemplifies the aspect of Radha and Krishna. I havetold you many times that Radha does not simply mean theform of a woman. It is something far more important. The lan-guage develops as a confluence of several letters. The letterscome together to form a word. In the word, Radha we have theletters R-A-D-H-A. When we commence with A we get Adhar;when we commence with D we get Dhara and in reverse di-rection it reads Aradh. Thus, the word Radha means, one whoconstantly chants the name of the Lord. Everyone who doesthe aradhana can be described as Radha. The word does notrelate to a feminine gender indicating the name of a woman atall. Krishna’s aspect demonstrates that there is no such differ-ence at all in the presence of divinity. In this manner, Krishnahas been spreading the concept of pure love. Only when wecan exterminate jealousy, will we be able to develop pure love.There is no objection to desiring what you want, but it iswrong to develop jealousy at what others have. In this manner,Krishna was showing the divine path to the gopis and gopalas.All of Krishna’s actions are essentially divine. Unless we un-derstand this, we will not be able to know the true aspect ofKrishna. He was looking at living creation with the same atti-tude. Here, you may get some doubts as to why such a personcaused the killing of nearly forty lakhs of Kauravas. There isone simple explanation for this. In a human body, if there is acancerous growth and in this growth there will be millions ofdisease-carrying germs. Because of these germs, there is a pos-sibility of the entire body being infected and becoming cancer-ous. At that time, a doctor will decide to amputate that part ofthe body which has become cancerous. The doctor will notworry about his having to exterminate millions of germs. Hisprimary concern is to perform the operation and save the pa-tient. Is it good to perform the operation and save the patient oris it good to think that by performing the operation, he will be62 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978killing millions of germs and therefore give up the operation?Since the germs may cause harm to many other people, thedoctor will decide to kill all the germs. I have already men-tioned earlier that the same dharma was implemented byKrishna.At that time, there was a cancerous growth in the formof Kauravas. As a result of the actions of the Kauravas, therewas a lot of adharma and injustice. The world itself was beingdestroyed. The situation was such that the cancerous growth, inthe form of Kauravas, was going to damage the entire body ofthe world. Krishna recognised that this disease had crossed alllimits. He then got ready to perform the operation. He used thefive Pandavas as compounders and performed the operation inthe form of the battle of Mahabharatha. In this operation, theforty lakhs of germs were exterminated. This act was for theprosperity and good of the world and not for a selfish end. Inthe very beginning, Krishna said, “These people are born tobring blame and blemish to a good royal family. Their wicked-ness is growing like a forest fire and friendship with Karna, theson of Suta is helping it spread further. The wind, in the formof Sakuni, was giving this forest fire more support. That fire ofwickedness has spread everywhere. If peace of the world is tobe established, it cannot be unless there is an avalanche of ar-rows. This forest fire is very severe and to stop such fire, wecannot use a small quantity of water, we have to use a heavydownpour in the form of arrows.” Krishna did what he did, forthe good of the world.Whatever God does, it is always for our own good. Allhis actions are intended for our good. It is necessary for us torecognise this truth and conduct ourselves accordingly.10. Anger Destroys One's Wealth AndProsperityIn the human body, which by itself has no value,is located securely the sacred and priceless jewel ofAtma. This word of Sai is a statement of truth.The human body is made up of five material elementsand it has to fall sometime or other. The Atma that resides inthe body, unlike the body, is permanent and sacred. This sa-cred aspect of Atma has neither birth nor death, nor attachment.If we think deeply and well, we will realise that God, in theform of Atma, is residing in every human body.Prema Swarupas:Any person who has an attachment to this human bodycannot easily understand the unmanifested God. The humanform of one’s own body will always be wanting to perceiveGod in a manifested form, preferably resembling his own. Wegenerally get the opportunity to recognise the unmanifestedaspect of God only through a manifested form. Bhagavathagives you the sacred opportunity by which you can understandthe unmanifested God. The purpose of Bhagavatha is to teachus the sanctity of the inner Atma. In order that we may havesome vision of the inner Atma, Bhagavatha has been teachingus Upasanas in the form of three steps. These are VishnuUpasana, Vasudeva Upasana and Narayana Upasana. Thefirst one—Vishnu Upasana—recognises God in all people whohave a form and a name. This aspect has been described to usas the “Swarupa of virat” in Bhagavad Gita. It has been re-ferred to as the “Viswarupa Darshana” or the manifestation ofGod in the form of creation. The meaning of this was also64 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978taught by Bhishma to Dharmaraja when the former was lyingon the bed of arrows. The Bhagavatha demonstrates that theentire creation is in fact an aspect of Vishnu. Bhagavatha tellsus that Vishnu is present in all forms of creation, at all timesand in all places. We may say that this path is an easy path tofollow for ordinary human beings. Since God is present in allliving forms, it enables us to regard every human being assome form of God.The second step is the Upasana of Vasudeva. In this,we have to experience God, not only in all human beings, butin all our actions and work. Here, we should make an attemptto recognise the aspect of God in all our actions connectedwith all things which have a name and a form. This is not suchan easy path, because human beings are filled with qualitieslike lust, anger, jealousy and hatred and they also have attach-ments. These qualities are such that they will not enable one tothink of God. When we see an individual doing bad things, notonly will we regard that individual as a bad individual butthere is also a chance of bad ideas coming into ourselves. Un-der those circumstances, it becomes very difficult to acceptsuch an individual and the act that he performs as sacred or di-vine. In order that we may not give room to such unsacredsituations, we will have to develop the aspect of divinity in us.Just as a human being coiled up by a python struggles to gethis hands and legs free, so also a human being caught up inqualities like anger, lust, greed and hatred has to struggle tothink of God and recognise divinity in all that he sees. Thus theVasudeva Upasana is a difficult matter to follow.The third step is the Narayana Upasana. This step notonly enables you to experience divinity in the action as well asthe form of individuals, but will also enable you to see theoneness of all creation. This will lead you to get the experienceSummer Showers in Brindavan 197865of Atma. It will enable you to establish the unity that is presentin all creation, through the recognition of the aspect of Atma.This will enable you to accept that there is no difference be-tween different forms of divinity. There are three great indi-viduals in Bhagavatha, who symbolise these three types ofUpasana.King Parikshith, a Rajarishi, symbolises the first kindof Upasana. Sringi a great Thapasvi belongs to the secondcategory of Upasana. Sami, the famous Brahmarishi representsthe third type of Upasana. The totality of the experience ofSami, Sringi and Parikshith is the essence of Bhagavatha.These three types are truly the forms of the three gu-nas—Sathwa, Raja and Thamas gunas. Bhagavatha is a textthat has harmonised these three aspects and demonstrated theoneness of divinity. Having received the protection of Krishnaeven while he was in the mother’s womb, Parikshith was avery learned person and was governing his kingdom verywisely. It is natural that we get a doubt as to how such a goodand noble king could lose control over himself in a fit of angerand place a dead snake over the shoulders of Sami. Howevergreat a man may be; however great a devotee he may be, hewill lose control over himself when he gets angry. Anger is thegreatest enemy of man. In a fit of anger, Parikshith put a deadsnake round the shoulders of Sami, but this cannot be treatedas a wanton act of arrogance or carelessness. It was a genuinemistake committed in a weak moment. When Parikshith foundthat the rishi Sami and the other rishis did not care to receivehim and attend to him, he was very agitated; and while return-ing from there, he picked up a dead snake and put it round theshoulder of Sami. This enraged Sringi, son of Sami, who sawthis a little later and as he saw King Parikshith leaving the ash-ram, he cursed him saying, “Within seven days, Parikshith willbe killed by a snake bite.” Here, we should recognise that what66 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978happened was a passing state of Parikshith’s anger, and there isno cruelty or evil intention in his action. However, when Sringisaw this, he became very angry and in his anger, he cursed theking. The king was not aware of this curse. Here we must care-fully examine the reason for Sringi’s curse and understand howDharma really works in such situations. If a righteous and be-nevolent king commits a mistake unintentionally, the conse-quences will affect only the king and not the people. In theking, who was a Rajarishi, there is a little of rajas left andhence he was angry in a weak moment. Sringi brought about alot of confusion, because as a result of his curse, the peoplewill also suffer and remain unprotected. Thus the conse-quences of the king’s fault were also affecting the people. Infact, Sringi had no right to curse. Here we notice that a personlike Sringi, who has no right to curse, gave a curse. Indeed, thisis the subtle aspect of Dharma. The fact that a good and nobleking lost his temper and insulted a Brahmarishi and the factthat a rishi gave a curse though he did not have the right to doso are symbolic of the decline of the accepted norms ofDharma. Indeed, at this time was the advent of the Kali Yuga.Here we see that as a result of Kali, certain blemishes arecoming into Vasudeva Upasana and Vishnu Upasana.When Sami came out of his deep meditation, hequickly realised all that had happened; and he took steps toreprimand his son. He said, “The king is a very noble and kindman and he takes good care of all of us. Just because in a weakmoment, he did something rash, you should not have cursed.By this act of yours, you have lost all the good that you haveaccumulated because of your thapas. Have you undertaken todo all your thapas only to misuse it in this manner? In thiscontext, it appears natural for the king to occasionally lose histemper in this manner, but a thapasvi like you should not havelost balance and given the curse. Our kingdom will now beSummer Showers in Brindavan 197867without a leader, it will be like a night without a moon.” Afterreprimanding his son in this manner, he thought it best to sendword to king Parikshith and let him know the nature of thecurse. He also undertook to tell king Parikshith about the evilconsequences of anger. “One’s wealth and prosperity will bedestroyed by anger. It will destroy whatever honour and repu-tation that one has. It will separate him from his own people.By pride and anger, everything will be destroyed and one whohas anger will not be able to achieve anything. He will be hu-miliated. He will always be committing sin and everyone willadmonish him. Anger will promote sin.” Having told Parik-shith about the evil consequences of anger, as conveyed bySami, the messenger further told the king as from Sami, “It isquite natural that you lost your control at a weak moment, butit was necessary for you to attempt to overcome your angerand behave in a responsible manner. Instead of overlookingyour mistake and controlling himself, a sacred thapasvi likemy son cursed you that you will die by a snake bite withinseven days. During these seven days, think of the Lord alwaysand promote the goodness in you.” As soon as Parikshith heardthese words from Sami, his own mind was completely trans-formed and he conveyed his respectful pranams to Sami, theBrahmarishi, and said, “This is not a curse to me, it is a greatgift. I cannot escape the consequences of my karma and what Ihad done. I am grateful to you for making me realise this.”From that day, Parikshith was thinking of God by giving up theresponsibility of his government to his ministers. As soon asthis news of the curse was known, several rishis and otherscame to see Parikshith. They were praying to God that kingParikshith who had a noble and sacred heart could be sparedfrom the curse and that he should live long. But, the curse ofthe thapasvi could not be atoned and Parikshith was makingpreparations for the end. The great Brahmarishi Sami, who hadconsiderable equanimity, was also praying for the well-being68 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978of Parikshith. Although Sami, for external purposes, had con-nections with the world; yet in his mind, there was no attach-ment at all. He merged completely with the Atma. There is nodifference between such a Brahmarishi and divinity.On one occasion, after the battle, Dharmaraja went toKrishna’s mansion to tell him about his despondency and de-spair. At that time, Krishna told Dharmaraja all the detailsabout the future of Parikshith. He told him how Parikshithwould acquire a great name and fame and how he wouldachieve far greater glory than all his predecessors. He also toldhim how, because of a curse from a saint, Parikshith wouldlose his life by a snake bite. While talking thus to Dharmaraja,Krishna suddenly lapsed into a brief silence and Dharmarajawas totally confused. After a few minutes, Dharmaraja askedwhy Krishna thus became silent in the middle of the narration.Krishna said that he had to go and respond to the call ofBhishma who was lying on his bed of arrows. Those who havea sacred heart will be able to get the Lord’s grace by prayingsincerely. There is no difference between a sacred mind andGod. A prayer from a sacred person will go straight to theLord. Such people are embodiments of wisdom and they areforms of Adwaitha. They had enjoyed the oneness with divin-ity. They firmly believed that there is only one truth in theworld and that there is no parallel truth. Such people are al-ways in a state of great ecstasy and are really like children.That is why, it is said that the state of a child, of a person whois in great ecstasy, and of a mad man are alike. Because of theconsequences of excitement of one’s senses, man sometimesforgets his true nature. Truly man seeks only ananda. He isalso intrinsically a selfless person, but by the pressure of hissensory organs, he gets attached to material desires and he for-gets God. For the benefit of such people and with great loveand affection, the aspect of Krishna is being taught by Bha-gavatha.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197869Prema Swarupas:We should make an attempt to realise that all the namesand forms that we see in this world are only reflections of God.We should also recognise that all creation is a part of God. Weshould not be led away by the differences in names and formsand forget the essential unity amongst all these. On one occa-sion, Narada began to doubt the sincerity of the gopikas and heasked Krishna, “The gopikas are not well educated, they do notknow the Sastras or Vedas and they even appear uncivilised,how do they appreciate the aspect of God? Only people whohave risen above the stature of Gunas can understand divinity.How can others who are immersed in mundane qualities andthoughts understand God?” Then Krishna said, “The nature ofgopikas is very sacred. Even if their mothers-in-law are scold-ing them and their husbands are sharpening their knives topunish them, they will not open their mouths; and they will notbe afraid. In the minds of the gopikas, Krishna’s image isprinted like a print on a paper. As it is not possible to separateKrishna from the heart of the gopikas, what is the use of all theeducation? Can anyone escape the consequences of fate? If badideas enter one’s mind, there is no hope for him.” You cannotplease the Lord by your education or by reciting the Vedas. Hecan be attracted only by sacred prema. The scholarship thatyou acquire is only for the head; and if you do not put it intopractice, of what use is your scholarship? There is plenty oflearning in the books, but all the hearts are full of dust. Thereis nothing that we can get from the books. You have to readthese books only for eking out a livelihood and filling yourbelly. Only pure prema will enable you to understand the Lord.That is why our scriptures have taught us that you cannot getimmortality by your wealth or by your education, and that youcan get it only by your good qualities and sacrifice. By sacri-fice, you can attain immortality; but if you are immersed in70 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978“Bhoga” you will only get “Roga.” Students, you should un-derstand the true meaning of sacrifice. This is why Thyagarajasaid that we should knowingly utter the name of the Lord. Ifwe do not let out the air that we breath in, our lungs will getspoilt. If we do not let out the food that we take in, our bodywill get diseased. Even if our blood does not constantly flowfrom place to place, there will be a boil on the hand. Youshould understand the good that will come out of sacrifice. Weshould use our education only for good activities.Every moment is passing into a new moment whetherwe use it well or not. If time does not move on, days will notchange, life span will not reduce and there will be no change.Because time is moving on, our life is changing. If we areswimming, we must make an attempt to push back the waterthat is in front of us. If we do not push back the water, we can-not move forward at all. We must sacrifice in all spheres oflife—moral, spiritual, ethical and political. Divya Atma Swaru-pas: our pains and pleasures are like passing clouds and theyare momentary. We should not fill our life with such transientpleasures. When Parikshith realised that his life was going toend in seven days, he was always thinking of the Lord. Be-cause he had such a sacred heart, Suka the great rishi came tosee him. If our mind is pure, sacred Paramatma will likewisehimself come to see us. It is very necessary to make your heartpure and sacred to achieve anything good.11. Love Lives By GivingAnd ForgivingIf one always thinks of blame and blemish, hismind will become impure and restless. If one alwaysthinks of good qualities, his mind will become peacefuland rested. If one’s thoughts are always full of God, hewill become one with God. This is the word of Saiwhich describes the truth.Pavitratma Swarupas:Man’s mind will take a form determined by histhoughts. One’s mental condition depends on his thoughts andhis circumstances. It is in this context that it has been said thatthe result of any action by you will depend on your state ofmind. Many people in this world will want to get the divinevision of the Lord. In the process, they will become devoteesof the sacred Bhagavatha. It is not possible to attain this state,just by wanting to do so. It is easy to wish for, but very diffi-cult to experience that kind of bliss. It is easier to prescribe andpreach than to put into practice. It is better to show even onething in practice rather than simply speak about a hundred dif-ferent things. In this mansion of bliss and happiness livesKrishna in Dwaraka. To experience this divine bliss and hap-piness, many devotees actually go to Dwaraka. Gopikas andgopalas are such devotees. All people cannot get easy entranceinto this mansion of bliss. There are four entrances to this man-sion. For each of these four entrances, there is one watchman.There are three stories to this mansion called Ananda Bhavana.These three stories are Sathyam, Shivam and Sundaram. Thefour main entrances are being watched by four watchmen inthe form of Sama (control), Vichara (enquiry), Santrupthi72 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978(contentment) and Vairagya (detachment). Unless we satisfythese guards, we cannot enter the mansion, or alternatively weshould be closely related or connected with Krishna himself,the divine resident inside the mansion. We can enter the man-sion, if we have the right to do so. If one does not belong toone or the other of these two categories, one cannot enter themansion. Sama is one who is guarding one of the entrances.This word means control of inner sensory organs. On manyoccasions, we hear the words Sama and Dama. The wordDama means control of external organs. Sama means controlof inner organs. Here, we can understand the word Sama assignifying control of sensory organs. For one who can controlhis inner senses, the external organs do not give any trouble atall and these external organs easily come under control. Forone who is not able to control the inner senses, the outer or-gans also cause a lot of trouble. If one gets the strong feelingthat he should not see anything external to him, he will not seeanything even if his eyes are open. If one is determined not toeat anything, he will not eat the food however attractive it maybe. It is the inner senses that provoke the external organs. Thuscontrolling the inner senses is a difficult matter; but if we areable to do this, we can easily control the external organs. Forone who is born as a human being, whether he works in theworldly sphere or spiritual sphere, the control of the organs isvery essential. This discipline will give all of us a lot of happi-ness. In many instances, the government generally takes im-portant steps. When the prices go up, it will take steps to con-trol the prices. There is a speed limit for the buses in which wetravel. The trains also travel with a restriction on their speed.Thus, even in our daily life, various kinds of disciplinarymeasures are necessary. In this context, if our organs too arenot kept under control, we will encounter great difficulty. Wehave to recognise that these sadhanas, intended to keep ourdesires under check, are intended for our safety and are not justSummer Showers in Brindavan 197873foolish measures. It is true that it is a difficult matter to controlour sensory organs. Thus, in this process of sadhana, weshould not waste our time in the wrong direction. Like thegopis and the gopalas, if we are able to direct our vision to-wards the Lord and perform all our actions with love and  tothe Lord, then we can achieve happiness. The path of self-control is thus not an easy one. However, if we can take thepath of prema, we can acquire control and enter the mansion ofGod.The second entrance is guarded by vichara or enquiry.This has been explained in the Bhagavad Gita as the capacityto differentiate good from bad, and the aspect of the Atma fromanatma. Even in a small matter like eating a banana, unless weare able to discriminate between what can be eaten and whatshould be discarded, we cannot enjoy the fruit. The ability toseparate the good from the bad is essential to man. Even if wewant to cook food from rice, we must first separate out thestones from the rice. If we want to use vegetables for preparingfood, we have to see that the bad portion of the vegetable isidentified and discarded. In a similar manner we should firstdistinguish between the permanent and the transient things.When you say that “this is my body” it is clear that you are dif-ferent from your body. Therefore, it becomes quite clear thatyou are indeed Atma and not merely the body. You must dis-tinguish truth from untruth. At any moment, the body is likelyto drop down and die. To regard such a transient body as apermanent truth is not correct. There is an example aboutwhich I told you many times. This is a silver tumbler. If I donot like it, I can go to a silversmith and have it converted into asilver plate. After using it for some days, if I do not like it, Ican again get it changed into a cup. Thus the tumbler has beenchanged into a plate; and the plate has been changed into acup; but in all these, the silver is the common factor. The form74 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978may have changed but the base is always the same silver. Thebasic unchanging aspect of Atma is the same in all the differentforms. Bhagavad Gita has been describing this as the realknowledge. Kshetra is the body, or the residence, andKshetrajna refers to the divine aspect which lives in the body.Here we should understand the difference between the resi-dence and the person who resides in the residence. We willfirst understand the usage of these words. The word Kshetraconsists of the two letters ‘Kshe’ and ‘tra.’ While in Kshetra-jna there are three letters ‘Kshe,’ ‘tra’ and ‘jna.’ In the wordKshetrajna the extra letter is ‘jna.’ Because of this extra letter‘jna,’ it refers to one who has jnana or who is wise. When suchjnana resides in the Kshetra it is referred to as Kshetrajna. Sothe body by itself has no wisdom, but the God who lives in thebody has all the wisdom and makes the body perform all ac-tions. The individual who recognises the identity of God andthe one who is resident in the body will be able to enter themansion of God.As you learn to control your organs, wisdom will dawnon you; and this wisdom will enable you to understand the as-pect of the Atma as distinct from anatma; and you can enter themansion. As your discriminating power arising out of this wis-dom grows and you realise the divinity of the Atma, you willautomatically get self-satisfaction or contentment, and you canenter the mansion. But is man having self-satisfaction or con-tentment today? No, he is never satisfied. He always asks forsomething more. There is a small example for this. An individ-ual who is very hungry will pray for a small quantity of food.If by some good luck, he gets a small quantity of food, he willthen aspire for some clothes; and if he has both these, he willwant to have a home. Once he gets a house, he will want to getmarried and after that he will want a job. When he gets a child,he will want a promotion in his job. Is there any limit to man’sSummer Showers in Brindavan 197875desires? For a man who originally did not have anything to eat,this is indeed too much to ask for and such desire is only lead-ing one to ask more and gather more worry. On one occasion,Sankaracharya was asked, Who was a poor man and who was arich man? He said, “He who is a satisfied person is a rich man,and he who has many desires is a poor man.” To be satisfiedwith what you have is to seek entry to God’s mansion throughthe third entrance. Whether we meet with sorrow or with hap-piness we should be satisfied and regard it as God’s gift in ourown interest and develop a spirit of satisfaction and equal-mindedness.The fourth entrance to this mansion is guarded byVairagya or detachment. Once a person is fully satisfied, hewill naturally get Vairagya. This detachment should not besomething that you get when you do not possess anything.When a person has all the comforts and all the wealth and inthe full understanding of their transient nature, if he gives upthese material acquisitions, then it can be termed as detach-ment. Physically, leaving one’s home and family and goingaway to a forest cannot be called Vairagya. To be able to curbyour needs and limit them and to be satisfied with them is realVairagya. For example, if you have a bag full of rice in yourhouse and you want to feed yourselves for a month with thatrice, how do you know that you are going to live for a month.If you get a child today, you start saving in order to send himto America for higher education after another twenty years.What is the meaning of this? How do you know what will hap-pen in the next moment? You should therefore aspire to enjoyonly that which is yours at the moment. Do not yearn for andrun after more and more things. You can remain in the familybut do not have the family in you. Describing this aspect,Ramakrishna Paramahamsa said, “You may put a boat in thewater, but you should not put water in your boat.” You shouldlive in the world but do not accumulate things for the future76 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978and get yourself worried. True Vairagya refers to doing yourduty at a particular time and to think of what is relevant at thattime. This was also described by the poet Vemana, by saying,“Talk about what is happening at this moment and do not talkabout the future and hurt others.” If we cultivate this aspect,you will develop true Vairagya. Do not make the distinction bysaying that this belongs to you and that belongs to God. In re-ality, everything belongs to God and you should develop sucha feeling. If we want to enter the mansion of Krishna and expe-rience his divinity, you must travel along one of these paths. Ifyou can acquire Sama or self-control, you can easily developthe aspect of enquiry or discrimination. Through this, you candevelop the aspect of satisfaction and even without yourknowledge or making an effort, you will get Vairagya or de-tachment. If you cannot develop the aspect of Sama, youshould at least make an attempt to think that the entire creationis filled with prema or divine love. The gopis and gopalas haveexperienced this love. On one occasion, Narada thought thatthe gopikas were very unsophisticated and so he attempted toteach them some Vedanta; and with this objective, he enteredBrindavan. The gopikas were immersed in the thought ofKrishna and at all times they were only talking of Krishna. Alltheir actions were full of thoughts of Krishna. Narada went tothe gopikas and said, “You are not at all learned in the featuresof divinity, I will teach you the royal and sacred path to reachthe divine; come and listen.” The gopikas looked at Naradaand asked him to say whatever he had to say quickly so thatthey do not waste too much time. Narada said that Vedantacannot be taught so easily and asked them to listen patiently.Then the gopikas said that they neither have the time nor thepatience to listen to him and said that they were always onlyinterested in the thought of Krishna. They therefore consideredlistening to the Vedanta as a waste of time. There are manypeople who preach Vedanta but cannot put it into practice.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197877They asked Narada if he was putting his teachings of Vedantainto practice. They said that they do not want Vedanta that isnot put into practice. The gopalas had the pure aspect of premain them.Krishna reached Dwaraka and on the first two days toldthem about the details of the battle of Mahabharatha. He sum-moned all the gopis and gopalas and others. They all assem-bled anxiously and were waiting to listen to Krishna who ad-dressed them and said, “All these days, I have been away fromDwaraka because of the battle of Mahabharatha, have you hadany difficulties and problems and have you experienced anysorrow? Are you and members of your families doing well?Are your prayers going on without hindrance?” He was thusmaking enquiries about their problems and comforts. All therishis, citizens and others said that they had no problems andthat everything was going on well except for one aspect.Krishna was divine and he could read the minds of the people.He laughed and asked them what their problem was? They saidthat their big problem was the absence of Krishna and that theywere unable to bear the separation from Krishna. They prayedthat Krishna should not go out of Dwaraka again. He assuredthem that he would not go out from Dwaraka; and from thenon, for a period of thirty-six years, he did not move out ofDwaraka. Krishna is the divine Lord who yields to the prayersof the devotees. The Lord has no blemish at all in him. He islike a mirror and he simply reflects your own thoughts. If youthink that God is not talking to you, it is simply your fault. Ifyou think God is not associated with you, it is your fault. Youshould behave in such a way that God can stay in you and withyou. God has neither likes nor dislikes. He is merely a wit-nessing consciousness. All these are the distortions and con-tortions of your own mind. The best that you can do is to offera pure heart to the Lord. Through the path of prema, you can78 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978make the Lord come to you. You should transform yourself insuch a manner and make your heart a field of love. If there isno love in your heart, God cannot reside there. If Krishna hasto stay in your heart, you must make your heart completelypure and fill it with love of God. Then the Lord can play hisMurali in your heart. If your heart is clogged up with dirt, theLord cannot play a Murali. From the tree of Love you will getfruits of love and not sour fruits. If you can cultivate the tree oflove, you can get the sacred divinity easily. The path of love isthe only path to God. Love is God, Live in Love, all is right.Let others live in Love, Love lives by giving and forgiving,self lives by getting and forgetting. Love is selflessness, andself is lovelessness. Love is everything. This should be yourapproach to the Lord. This aspect of Love is the most impor-tant one for today’s youth. The absence of such love is respon-sible for bad qualities like anger, lust, jealousy, etc. It is essen-tial that you should promote love in your hearts. Your lifeshould be full of love and you should imbibe the sacred cultureof Bharath and promote a peaceful atmosphere in your country.12. All Our Sorrow Is Our Own Crea-tionA knowledge of Atma will be available only tothose who have very pure minds. Even a saint cannotacquire this. This word of Sai is a statement of the pathof truth.Pavitratma Swarupas!In this world, man gets happiness out of a thing ofbeauty. When we look at a beautiful flower, happiness is gen-erated in us. When we look at a beautiful bird or a nice house,we feel happy. We have to carefully consider whether suchhappiness is permanent or transient. A nice rose flower makesus feel very happy; but by the evening, the rose will fade away;and by the next morning the petals will fall and then it does notgenerate as much happiness. In the same way, every object ofbeauty can only generate temporary happiness in us. We haveto understand carefully where one can find permanent andlasting happiness. This can only be found in the aspect of Atmaand in the thought of God. We can get permanent happinessonly from things that are permanent. Out of things that aretransient, we can never get happiness which is permanent. It isonly after experiencing such permanent happiness will we gettrue bliss. We cannot go on searching for such a bliss at allplaces. If we do this, it will be like going to a fish market insearch of diamonds. We can find only fish in a fish market andnot diamonds. Since this world is temporary and all life in it isuncertain, we cannot find permanent happiness in this world.One student went to an astrologer and asked him abouthis future. The astrologer said that the line of education in the80 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978boy’s hand was quite big and strong. The student felt very ex-hilarated and lost himself in that happiness. After some time,the astrologer said that the student will acquire a very highreputation in his life. The student was even more happy at this.The astrologer later said that he would earn a lot of money andbecome very rich. After some time, the astrologer said thateverything was fine but that he would have a very short span oflife. The student was very worried because there was nomeaning in having everything but only a short life span. Wemay have a lot of wealth, a lot of influence and power; but ifwe do not have the awareness of Atma close to us, it is as goodas having a short span of life. The gopikas recognised this needfor getting permanent happiness. We must also recognise thatwe can get permanent happiness only from permanent things.The gopikas undertook to perform a special KatyayaniVratam, on a particular Monday in the Month of Kartika. Weshould recognise the significance of performing this sacredVrata. They said, “We are not aspiring for an impermanent andillusory form. We are aspiring for attaining sacred Krishnawho is the embodiment of permanent unchanging truth. Justbecause he is in a physical form, we will not be deceived intobelieving that he is impermanent. Just like the clothes that weare now wearing, God has decided to take that particular hu-man form in this Yuga. The Yugas may change but our Godwill not change.” The gopikas clearly recognised the divinityin Krishna. Depending on the age of the individual, he is de-scribed as being in his childhood, youth, adolescence, or oldage. However, for Krishna it is always childhood or youth.This was beyond all human comprehension. He is immortal,and he is always full of peace, and in this way he representseternal beauty. Although he used to be dark in complexion, hisappearance was very attractive. The divinity that was presentin him was responsible for this. This is not so in all human be-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197881ings. It is a distinctive divine quality. The gopikas realised thatthey can find true beauty in this aspect only, and so they un-dertook to perform this sacred Vrata. They wanted to get himas their Natha or husband. By passage of time, men by theirway and nature, have forgotten the true meanings of words andaccepted false meanings. We generally think that the wordhusband (or Natha) means one in the position of a husband to awife. But, in actual fact a husband in this context means onewho takes care of the person. Their feeling was that Krishnaalone can bear the burden of taking care of all of them, andhence they desired him as their husband. The sixteen thousandand one hundred and eight gopikas treated Krishna in thismanner. To think of all these gopikas as the wives of Krishnais not correct. For God, who is present in all living beings, whois the husband and who is the wife? All such bodily relation-ships cannot be ascribed to God. Gopikas are pure divine re-flections of the Atma. They were people who surrenderedthemselves to Krishna. Sixteen thousand and one hundredeight gopikas were living in Dwaraka with such a feeling.Here, we should enquire whether their happiness has arisenfrom worldly feelings or from the permanent aspect ofKrishna. In their concept, there cannot be anything in thisworld that is beautiful unless it is permanent and associatedwith the divine. They were experiencing both these aspectsonly in Krishna. If there is no oil in a lamp with a wick, therewill not be any light. If there is no current inside the bulb, therewill be no light. When there is a pralaya or a doom, even thesun and moon will be lost. The one jyothi that will never beextinguished is the Atma Jyothi. They believed Krishna to bethe Atma Jyothi and through such complete faith, they prayedto Krishna.As a result of our attachment to the body and its organs,we go on praising the beauty in the world. There was one dis-82 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978ciple of Ramanuja. His wife had very beautiful eyes. He wasconstantly protecting her beautiful eyes and even when shewas going to fetch water from the river, he was accompanyingher with an umbrella in order to protect her eyes. This strangebehaviour of the disciple was noticed by Ramanuja and heasked the disciple why he was behaving in that way. This manreplied very quietly and shyly, that because his wife’s eyeswere very beautiful, he was protecting those eyes from the raysof the sun. Then Ramanuja asked if he were to see eyes whichwere more beautiful than his wife’s eyes, whether he wouldprotect those eyes with the same care. The disciple assured thathe would. After Ramanuja completed his meditation, he andhis disciples went to the temple of Sri Ranga. When Ramanujastarted describing the eyes of the Lord, the eyes of the Lordshone beautifully and appeared exquisite and bright. The disci-ple saw those beautiful eyes and from that day he was enjoyingtheir beauty. In the same manner, the gopikas after experienc-ing all the beauty in different names and forms, started experi-encing the divine beauty of Krishna. Ever since then, they didnot seek anything else. As things were going on like this in theyear 3102 B.C. between the dates 17-18 February; at midnightKrishna gave up his mortal body. Before that, in the year 3138B.C., Krishna crowned Dharmaraja. Between these two periodsand for a total duration of 36 years Krishna enabled the gopi-kas to experience the divinity in Krishna. This was the goodfortune of many other people in Dwaraka also. In our sacredtexts, it has been described that the gopikas were very sorryand worried after the nirvana of Krishna, but this is not cor-rect. It is true that the Pandavas felt Krishna’s loss, but thegopikas considered Krishna to be eternal and immortal andnever felt his absence.Before the battle of Mahabharatha, there were severalbad omens. One year before the departure of the Pandavas toSummer Showers in Brindavan 197883the forest, Abhimanyu was born. Together with this one year,the twelve years in the forest and the additional year duringwhich they lived incognito, makes up fourteen years. Thus, atthe time of the Mahabharatha war, Abhimanyu was fifteenyears old and was playing like a child in front of Dharmaraja.When Dharmaraja was challenged to the battle, he felt some-what hesitant because Arjuna was not with him. Then, Abhi-manyu asked Dharmaraja what the problem was. Dharmarajaexplained to him that a great person like Bhishma challengedhim to battle. When Dharmaraja was thus worried, Abhimanyuimmediately said that it is not right for them to withdraw fromthe battle and insisted that he will go into the fight. I am nar-rating this incident to you to show you how really great andcourageous were those who were born in the Pandava family.Dharma-raja said that as Arjuna was not there, Abhimanyashould get his mother’s approval before going to battle. Evenhere, Dharmaraja was showing that it is very necessary to askfor and accept the instructions of the parents. Abhimanyu wentto his mother and asked for permission to go to battle. Hismother addressing him said, “May blessings of the great Lordbe showered on you, and may He enable you to maintain thenoble family traditions. May you, by the grace of the Lord,bring victory and glory to the family.” In some texts on thesubject, a view has been expressed that Abhimanyu’s motherfelt that he was too young and was not too happy about hisgoing to battle. This is not correct. Indeed, she was overjoyedto find the courageous son wanting to go to battle.When Abhimanya was sixteen, Parikshith was born asa son. He was born after Abhimanyu’s death. He was alsoabout to die in the womb of the mother but was saved byKrishna. Thus, he earned the grace of Krishna even when hewas in the womb of his mother. Thus Parikshith became themost important character in Bhagavatha. Hence, the curse of84 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978the elders was treated as a blessing. This was because Parik-shith was always thinking of Krishna whose image was im-printed in his mind. Pandavas were also great devotees whosacrificed everything they had in the thought of Krishna. Pan-davas recognised not only the great strength of Krishna butalso the divine aspect of Krishna. Gopikas were a differentkind. They had complete faith in the divine aspect of Krishnaand they had unwavering faith in Krishna. Theirs was a sacred,pure and selfless devotion. The gopis and gopalas are ideal ex-amples for those living in the Kali Yuga. We think that therasa krida—or the play of Krishna and gopikas—was somekind of a game involving human enjoyment, but this is not so.Indeed this is symbolic of the sacred confluence between thejivatma (represented by the gopikas) and the Paramatma (rep-resented by Krishna). They had converted their hearts intoBrindavan and their thoughts into sacred streams. They wereformless in the aspect of divinity. One gets attached to his sen-sory organs if one has attachment to his body. There was noillusion in them relating to their body. The reason for this isthat in their previous births in Kritha Yuga, they were actuallyrishis. In the Kritha Yuga, when they were Rishis, they wereable to get only the darshan of the Lord. In the Thretha Yuga,they became monkeys of Rama Avatar. In the Kritha Yuga,they thus had the darshan only of the Lord, and in the ThrethaYuga they had a chance to have Sambhashana or conversationwith him. Thereafter they prayed to God to let them have achance to get Sparsana, or the touch of the Lord, as well. Inorder that this may be achieved, the same rishis of Kritha Yugabecame monkeys in the Thretha Yuga and gopikas in the Dwa-para Yuga.They are also the three forms of gunas—rajas, thamasand Sathwa. Those who have the thamo guna will only getDarshan while those with rajasik qualities will get sambha-Summer Showers in Brindavan 197885shana or conversation. Those who have sathwik qualities willalso have sparsana or touch. I will give you one small exampleto show the divine aspect which one can get by sparsana orcontact with the Lord. Charcoal is dark and signifies ignorancein the form of darkness. Fire throws light or brightness andsignifies knowledge. So long as the fire and the charcoal areseparated from each other, the charcoal can only look at thefire but cannot get any of its brightness. However, when thecharcoal is put into the fire and brought into contact, it willalso become bright and will become a part of fire. Therefore,when one comes into contact with the divine form, the igno-rance in his body will be removed. If we also do a little fan-ning, the charcoal will become fire faster and sadhana consti-tutes such a fanning. By sadhana, even an ignorant person canbecome a wise person. Realising this truth, the gopikas werenear to Krishna and they were also dear to him. All the actionsof the gopikas were intended to attain immortality but were notperformed with any selfish motive. All the events that we readin the Bhagavatha must be regarded as actions performed bythe gopikas with a pure and sacred heart. They regarded them-selves as part of the Lord. They experienced the unity in allcreation. We should not take these actions in a superficialmanner. Their desires were completely burnt out in the thoughtof the divine.If we want to experience that state of bliss, we have toreach that high state of devotion. It is said that all that is visibleto our eyes does not exist in truth and will disappear in duecourse. That which is bound to disappear cannot give us hap-piness. When we acquire the worldly things, we get momen-tary happiness and when we are separated from them, we alsoget sorrow. When money and wealth come to us, we feelhappy, but when they go from us, we feel unhappy. All thesethings are such that they bring us happiness when they come86 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978but bring us sorrow when they go. By association, we get hap-piness and by dissociation we get sorrow. We should attemptto seek only the divine aspect of love because it has neither as-sociation nor dissociation. This kind of divine love has no rea-son. This is the natural form of divinity in man. This is, indeed,man’s real wealth. One is very fortunate to get a human birth;but because we are filling such a human life with various mate-rial desires, we are filling our life with sorrow. If we have nodesires, we cannot get sorrow at all; and there can be no onemore happy than one who has no desires. All this sorrow is ourown creation. Worry has no form at all. It is simply your owncreation. The form of worry is nothing. Our own desires areresponsible for our sorrow. You should keep illusory troublesat a distance and lead a happy life.13. Pain And Pleasure AlwaysGo TogetherThe tree that is born out of dust will ultimatelyturn into dust. The creation that is born out of Brahmanwill ultimately turn into Brahman. They only appear tobe different, but they are not. This word of Sai tells youthe path of truth.Pavitratma Swarupas:The seed that we put into dust will grow into a big treeand the big tree puts out several branches, flowers, fruits, etc.We should recognise that these branches, flowers and fruits areall coming out of dust only. However, the form of the tree andthe parts of the tree will all disappear in due course, sometimeor other, but the dust from which these parts have all come willremain permanently. That is the basis. In the same manner,what has come from Brahman, in the form of Prajnana, ex-hibits itself in so many ways. In every organ of the human be-ing, the aspect of Brahman is present. However, in due course,the body will get aged, will die and disappear. This type ofcreation tells us that everywhere we can see and recognise thePrajnana aspect of Brahman. The gopikas understood that allthis was indeed mithya or unreal. Gopikas were not like ordi-nary women. They had practised several types of sadhana, andthey had this aspect of Brahman showing in them with efful-gence. They were born as if they had come only to understandthis aspect. The gopikas were ideal individuals who had beenrishis in their previous births. They knew that if they fully un-derstood Brahman, they would become identical with Brah-man. They were establishing their unity with divinity. This hasalso been described by them as madhyama. What we cannot88 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978see in the beginning, what we cannot see in the end, but whatwe can see only in the interval may be described as madhyama.All that we see in creation now did not exist before Godbrought it into existence. We would not see this world, afterthe catastrophe comes in. It is only in the intermediate timethat we see the world as if it consists of passing clouds.Every human being will understand this truth if hetakes such a path of reasoning. We should ask if we existedbefore the body was born and if we would exist after the bodydies. It is only in the interval between birth and death, that thehuman body exists. What we have said applies to all that wesee in creation, including the hills, trees, animals and so on.These will all get merged with eternity in due course of time.The entire creation which is the result of our own imaginationwill merge with time. All matter that we see around us is sub-ject to decadence with time. For us to recognise the divinity inhuman beings, each individual should recognise his nature andtrue form. Before you are born, who are your parents, friends,relatives and enemies? To whom does this wealth, gardens,homes and fields belong? Wherefrom have we come andwhere are we going? Where will we go after the body dies?Wherefrom has this body come? We do not know the addressfrom which we have come and the address to which we go. Wewill be thrown into a wastepaper basket. We should realise thatwe have come from Brahman and that we will ultimately go toBrahman. Truly, we should make an attempt to understand theextent of ignorance in human beings. Today, it is as if we aregiving up trees and flowers that give sweetness and are runningafter bushy shrubs in a forest. We are giving up the originalobject, and are running after imitations. Without enjoying thesweetness that is contained in the grapes on a grapevine, weare going after the thorns like a camel in a bush. We are be-coming animals, because of such behaviour. We should makeSummer Showers in Brindavan 197889an attempt to recognise the divinity that is contained in all hu-man beings and reconcile this aspect with our past and future.The gopikas established that the divinity of God is om-nipresent. Since they were having a human form, they werewanting to enjoy and go near a divine personality in humanform. When Krishna went to Madhura, the condition of thegopikas was such that it could not be described in ordinarywords. Although they were aware of the truth that Krishna wasomnipresent, because of the illusion and maya, they were stillfeeling sad that Krishna was not present in human form. Onone occasion when the gopikas were talking amongst them-selves about Krishna, a big dark-complexioned bee cameamidst them and as their thoughts were only about Krishna,they felt that Krishna had come amidst them. Another gopikastarted comparing the complexion of the bee with that ofKrishna. Yet another gopika started comparing the qualities ofKrishna with the qualities of that bee. Another gopika decidedthat as Krishna was dark in complexion, the bee was in factKrishna himself. One characteristic of the bee is that it goes toa flower and sucks away the sweet honey that is contained inthe flower, without paying any attention to the flower itself.They felt that Krishna was also like that in the sense that heentered their hearts and sucked out the sweetness therein, andleft them without any consideration for them. They came to theconclusion that Krishna has now come in the form of the bee inorder to test them. Another gopika said that the bee was not anatural one because the bee had unusually coloured feelers onits mouth. They felt that if the bee was young, it should have ablack colour for its feelers, while if it was old, they should begrey in colour, but this had a red colour. Another gopika com-mented that in Madhura, when Krishna was playing with agopika who was wearing red kum kum, the kum kum then pos-sibly fell on Krishna which got stuck to the bee when it90 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978touched Krishna. Thus, they concluded that the bee has, in-deed, come from Krishna. With this, all possible doubts intheir minds were cleared; and they came to the definite conclu-sion that the bee was indeed from Krishna. The gopikas whowere separated from Krishna felt jealous when they saw thisbee. However, very quickly they thought that it was wrong tofeel jealous of one who was close to the Lord, and theychanged their views. They felt that the only way they couldwin the Lord’s grace was to show love and prema. One gopikathen cried out “Oh! Bee, why don’t you go back and tellKrishna that he should kindly look at us at least once.” Anothergopika said, “Can you not tell Krishna to put his brightnessinside my dark heart for a little while?” Another gopika saidthat her life was like a dried tree and requested the bee to con-vey to Krishna her prayer that be should bring back some lifeinto it. Radha came and said, “Tell Krishna to come and seemy shattered life and repair it and then wear it as a garland.”The gopikas were giving such messages to the bee to be takenback to Krishna. The inner meaning of this is that whatever thegopikas saw was only in connection with Krishna. They feltthat their hearts were not pure, their lives were not sacred, andthey were praying to Krishna that he should make their heartspure and take them to their destination, which is their right. Itis only natural that we should want to get back to where wecame from. In this created illusory universe, pain and pleasure,loss and gain, always go together. While our husbands are an-gry and while our mothers-in-law punish us in many ways, yetour thoughts are always with Krishna. We feel sorry for noth-ing other than separation from Krishna. They were demon-strating the truth that this world is a combination of pain andpleasure. Although the mother-in-law was giving them a lot oftrouble, the thought and the darshan of Krishna would makethem forget everything.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197891On one occasion, Bhagiratha tried to bring Ganges tothe earth. Addressing Bhagiratha, she asked if he was trying totake the Ganges and get it polluted by contact with people whocommitted a lot of sin. Ganges felt that if many sinners, whodo not know what kindness is and who suffer from ego andselfishness, come into contact with her, she will also becomeunsacred. Then Bhagiratha said, “Oh! Ganges, there are asmany sacred and devoted people as there are sinners; and byyour contact with them, their sin will be removed.” We shouldnote here that several tributaries—some of them pure and sa-cred, and others not so pure and sacred—flow into the Ganges,but the purity of the Ganges is not altered. These aspects ofgood and bad generate from our own ideas and do not comefrom somewhere outside. This truth was demonstrated by thegopikas. They came to the conclusion that the separation thatthey suffer from and the sorrow they were having were onlytheirs and not of Krishna. When the young babies begin to cry,they take their own toe and suck it and feel happy that they aregetting some juice. They do not realise that what they are en-joying is coming from within themselves. In the same manner,a dog bites a hard and dry bone and gets its gums injured. Asthe gums get injured, blood comes out, but the dog feels veryhappy sucking its own blood. The truth is that the blood hascome from the dog itself and not from outside. In the samemanner, the good and the bad in us come from within us andnot from anywhere outside or from someone else. Because thegopikas had such equal-mindedness, their behaviour was ex-emplary. They had experienced Brahman. However when weread the Bhagavatha or the stories of the gopikas, we wronglyfeel that they are ordinary women. They were devotees whohad equal-mindedness. They had a sacred heart. They had noattachments at all. They had no ego in them. They were prac-tising dharma in daily life, and their life was an ideal for oth-ers. Today, we are trying to live like the gopikas and gopalas.92 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978Such things can only be experienced but not described. Ourlife is full of desires. On the day when the desires disappear,we will have a sacred heart. Jealousy and ego occupy a veryimportant position. So long as we are filled with jealousy andego, we cannot understand the sacred aspects of Krishna.Today, you must develop such single-minded devotionthat you think of God as the only one reality. We should notmake an attempt to get the grace of God for purely selfish rea-sons. We must make an attempt to recognise divinity in all andGod’s omnipresence. Our life must be dedicated to recognisedivinity in everyone and to earn the grace of the Lord.Prema Swarupas:Everything that is present in this world must disappearsome day or the other. It is not right for us to make so mucheffort for the sake of this body, which is going to perish someday or the other. If we continue in this manner, it will be ablemish on human nature. Were there not several kings whoruled kingdoms on this earth and who were proud of their pos-sessions? Where are they today? Did not Savitri, who couldsave her husband and get victory over Yama, live in this glori-ous land of Bharath? Did not Chandramati, who could extin-guish a forest fire by her inner strength, live in this sacred landof Bharath? Did not Sita, daughter of the earth who could enterfire without any fear, live in this motherland of yours? IndeedBharath has given birth to such great Pavitratmas and sacredpeople, but do they exist today? Harischandra was a great Kingwho adhered to truth under all conditions. Does he exist today?King Nala ruled all the world at one time. Does he exist today?Sri Rama built a bridge over the ocean itself. Does he exist to-day? Thus, every human body will disappear with the passageof time. While the body lasts and lives, we must make an at-tempt to live a sacred life and earn the grace of the Lord. TheSummer Showers in Brindavan 197893ideas, thoughts and actions of the gopikas were all dedicated toKrishna. On the other hand, the devotees of today say that theywould surrender to Krishna, but what they do is to simply fulfiltheir desires. Such ideas will never give us the correct resultsthat we want. You young people should set an example of idealdevotion and faith to other citizens of your country. It is verynecessary to lead a pure and selfless life. You should have noego. You will be able to acquire the grace of the Lord, only ifyou have sacred thoughts.Dharmic principles form the basis of man’s conduct.We are born as human beings. We are living like human be-ings, and yet we are behaving like animals. Our conduct andactions are worse than the conduct of animals. The place wherestudents assemble should be a place of peace and security, buttoday the place where students gather becomes a fearful andinsecure place. You should make an attempt to get rid of thisblemish. For all these things, control of one’s sensory organs isimportant. To enable one to control one’s sensory organs, theBhagavatha has taught several methods. For the past thirteendays, you have been listening to the story of Bhagavatha.Every item in this sacred text has been intended as an ideal ex-ample for humanity. This story has been completely filled withLove. What comes out of the totality of Love is also full oflove. That which comes out of fullness and completeness mustalso be full and complete. From an infinite and full source, ifyou remove a full thing, the remainder would still be a fullthing. This is what is meant by saying, “That is a full thing,this is a full thing; and if you remove a full thing from a fullthing, what remains is a full thing.” All of us have come fromthe immortal source and we are immortal. What is not immor-tal is the destructible body. The aspect of love, which is theembodiment of God, has been described by saying, “RasoVaisaha.” It has come from Rasa and what comes from Rasa94 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978must always be strong. Simply because, we promote selfish-ness and weakness, it sometimes appears as weak. We aretaking our sacred lives and putting them along unsacred paths.No one else is responsible for this. Each one is responsible forhimself. If each one wants to correct himself, he must enter asacred path. I am hoping that by listening to such sacredthings, the students will remove the impurities that are con-tained in them and become strong and healthy.14. Man Always Becomes Good Or BadBy The Company He KeepsWestern education had a tremendous influenceon our conduct and culture. Our people have becomedecadent. All our traditions have dried up completely.People have changed their dress and other habits. Theyare not happy to speak to their own mothers and wives.They think that it is wrong to respect the code of con-duct of their elders. This has become a fearful situation.What shall I say about the condition of Bharath? Hercitizens, like the elephant which does not know its ownstrength, do not know the strength of their culture.Man’s life is a bed full of bugs. It is a hot bed of alldiseases that flourish in the world. To feel happy and to seehappiness in one’s life, one has to travel a long way. Students,Boys and Girls, our sacred country Bharath, is a beautifulcountry full of so many languages, traditions and excellentculture. The number and variety of languages and religions thatflourish in Bharath is not to be found in any other country. Inorder to introduce changes and reform this great country, an-cient saints and rishis have given us the sacred Vedas, Ithi-hasas and Puranas. The true background of this country andits culture are reflected in the stories of Bhagavatha and Maha-bharatha. We have been listening to the story of Bhagavathafor the last fourteen days. In fact, we must realise that this isthe story of our great culture. Vemana said that salt and cam-phor look alike but they taste so differently. Brass and Goldlook alike when we look at them; but when we let them falldown, the sound they produce is very different. In the samemanner, when the aspect of divinity takes a human form, we96 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978find the actions of such a form and ordinary human beings aresuperficially the same. Yasoda, the mother, put Krishna tosleep, and while singing a lullaby, she was immersed in thatecstasy. She tried to put Krishna to sleep for a long time; but inspite of all her attempts, he would not sleep. She was wonder-ing why Krishna was unable to sleep, and she was even pray-ing to the Goddess of sleep to come to her help. All actionswhich are selfless and sacred can be regarded as leelas of theLord. After some time, she found that Krishna was sleeping;but in fact, he was pretending to be asleep. She told the ser-vants to remain quiet. She addressed Krishna and said, “Youhave the entire world encompassed in you and how can anyonebuild a mansion for you? You shine with the effulgence of amillion suns and how can anyone show any light to you? Howis it possible for us to know you when you yourself contain allthe creation within you? However, Yasoda was the mother,and even if Krishna was Paramatma, the mother’s affectionwill still show up. No one can understand the effects of maya.Foolish human beings are born in maya, they grow up in maya,and they cannot understand the aspect of maya. All the livesare simply the result of maya, the birth and death are a result ofmaya. All attachments are results of maya and life is full ofmaya. One can wake up, in a moment, a person who is asleep;and one who is awake need not be woken up; but how can anyone wake up one who is pretending to be asleep. In a similarmanner, Yasoda was addressing Krishna and saying, “How cananyone wake you up, if you are pretending to be asleep. Youmust stop your pretence.” The Devas and Devatas were look-ing at this conversation and were telling themselves that Ya-soda was the most fortunate person because she was able toplay with the Lord.On another occasion, when Krishna was just getting inthe middle of his sleep, she came and sang a lullaby: “I haveSummer Showers in Brindavan 197897made the four Vedas as the four corners of your cradle, and Ihave made the nine precious stones decorate your cradle. TheKing of cobras is guarding you, in your cradle. This is the cra-dle of Omkara, and in it I have made a bed for you in the formof Thath thwam asi. You symbolise all the seven worlds andthey are united in you. In such a cradle, you should sleepsoundly.” The mother knew very well that Krishna was Godalmighty, and yet she was often steeped in such maya. Gradu-ally, Krishna was growing up in the house of Nanda, and hehad learnt to move about the house and play. The mother was,at all times, attached to him and was looking after him. On oneoccasion, when some gopikas came to his mother to enquireabout his welfare, Krishna went to a mirror and was pretendingto feed butter to his own image in the mirror, as if he was veryinnocent. The mother was greatly surprised to see how inno-cent Krishna was. All actions of Krishna appeared as if theywere being performed by a very young innocent person, butyet they caused a great deal of surprise. Krishna used to comeand ask his mother why his hair was not growing as nicely ashis brother’s hair. In order to satisfy him, his mother alwaysused to tell him that his hair would also grow nicely, if hedrank a lot of milk and ate plenty of butter. After some days,he came to his mother again and asked why his hair was notgrowing, although he was drinking plenty of milk and eatingbutter. The mother gave a somewhat harsh reply to this andsaid, “Your brother is drinking well-boiled milk and eatingbutter only if he is given, but he does not steal them. You arealways impatient and you snatch away the milk as soon as Imilk the cows, and even before the butter is ready, you cry forbutter. Your brother is very patient and quiet while you arenot!” She thus admonished Krishna. From that day, Krishnadetermined not to ask his mother for milk, and he used to go tothe neighbouring houses and ask for milk. Because he didmany unusual things like killing Rakshasi Puthana, he en-98 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978deared himself to all the people in the village, and they all usedto love him. He used to be freely welcomed in any house thathe went to, and from that day, the thefts also increased. Thegopikas used to complain to Yasoda. On one day, Yasodacaught Krishna and admonished him by saying, “You do noteat what is given to you but you go to the houses of the othergopikas and steal butter and milk. You are a small boy and yetyour entire mouth is smelling of butter and the whole villagehas been complaining about you.” In this manner, the gopikaswere always complaining about Krishna. We must understandthe inner meaning of the actions of Krishna. The word NavaNeeta means a pure heart. Pure butter here is compared to apure heart. Ksheera Sagara means ocean of milk, and the Sam-sara is sometimes described as an ocean. Here we should in-terpret Krishna’s actions by saying that he steals the pure andclean hearts of people who are steeped in the ocean of Sam-sara. In this manner, Krishna’s actions have a deep innermeaning. On one occasion, he came crying to his mother likean ordinary child. When the mother asked why he was crying,he replied that he was unhappy because his brother Balaramawas always quarrelling, and not playing properly with him.There was some kind of disagreement between Krishna andBalarama. While playing, Balarama would always ask him ifhe was truly the son of Yasoda, and he used to humiliate himin the presence of other children by saying that he was actuallypurchased by Yasoda from some other mother and that he wasnot truly the son of Yasoda. This used to hurt Krishna and hewould always assert that he was the son of Nanda and Yasoda.Balarama would then retort and ask why Krishna was dark ifhe was truly the son of Nanda and Yasoda, who were of faircomplexion. He used to argue that if Krishna was really theson of Nanda and Yasoda, he should also be fair. Krishna usedto bring such arguments before Mother Yasoda and start cry-ing. At this, Yasoda was deeply moved and she told KrishnaSummer Showers in Brindavan 197899that Balarama was always jealous and hence keeps on cookingup such stories. She asserted that she was, indeed, the motherand he was the son. Here, we must notice that she did not sayKrishna was her son or that she was his mother. Here,Balarama was in doubt. Friends were taking the informationfrom here and Yasoda was accepting the authority of affection.We should see that the essential evidence based on truth com-ing from dharma or the Vedas has not been used. Each one hasbeen using his own Pramana as the case may be. However, themain authority should be based on Pratyaksha Pramana in-volving the experience of all the senses. Krishna demonstratedto the world that only Pratyaksha Pramana was reliable andimportant.Man always becomes good or bad by the company hekeeps. If, therefore, we get into sacred company, we will alsoacquire sacred qualities. There is a small example for this. Ifwe look at a snake at any place, we regard it as harmful and wetry to kill it. But if the same snake is in the company of Eas-wara, we begin to worship it and respect it because of thecompany it keeps. The Upanishads have taught us that bothgood and bad qualities really come out of the company that wekeep. If we find a rat in some corner, we immediately try totrap it and kill it. But if the same rat is seen as the Vahana ofVinayaka (Ganesha), we make obeisance to it. We do so be-cause of the company it keeps. Bad qualities are also like this.If we take a big pot full of milk and add even a few drops ofliquor to it, the milk itself will become bad. In similar manner,fire, which is regarded as a sacred entity, gets hammered whenit is in contact with a lump of iron. Thus, by bad company weget several troubles and sorrows, and by good company we getgood results. If we take a piece of iron and throw it in the dust,it will get rusted and will lose all its value. However, if thesame iron is put in fire, it loses its impurities and acquires a100 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978bright shining colour. In this way, man changes because of thecompany that he keeps. If dust comes in contact with wind, itwill go high up although it has no wings to fly. The same dustgoes down to the lowest depths when it comes into contactwith water. It has no legs to go down or wings to go up. Thusthe company we keep determines whether we go up or down.As we know, good company results in a calm and peaceful life.That is why elders tell us that we should keep good company.Although Balarama and Krishna have both aspects of divinityin them, one follows the path of Jnana while the other followsthe path of Bhakthi or devotion. Between Balarama andKrishna both paths are demonstrated to the world. That is whythere is sometimes so much contradiction in their actions. TheJnana Marga relates to one’s wisdom while the BhakthiMarga is related to one’s heart.On one occasion, Krishna wanted to give Subhadra inmarriage to Arjuna but Balarama did not agree to this. The ac-tions of Krishna are such that he shows the harmony betweenone’s thought, word and deed. It has been said that the properstudy of mankind is man, and Krishna always establishes sucha harmony. He has always been addressing Arjuna as hisbrother-in-law, and he felt that he should not go on callingArjuna his brother-in-law without actually making him hisbrother-in-law by a marriage alliance. In that context, if yousimply come on a platform and address everyone as brothersand sisters, it will be a very shallow statement and will not re-flect the truth. Only when you really regard one and all asbrothers and sisters should you address them as such. Thefeeling of anxiety that you will have when your own brothersand sisters are in trouble must be reflected when anyone getsinto trouble. If an unrelated person looks at your sister withsome bad intentions, it will cause you a great deal of pain andunhappiness. You should feel hurt in the same manner, whenSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978101these other brothers and sisters are humiliated or insulted.Therefore, the words we utter with our mouth must also be putinto practice and we should experience the same in ourthoughts. The students today should strive to promote suchharmony between their thought, word and deed. The leelas ofKrishna were such that he was putting his thoughts into prac-tice. Krishna never had any impure ideas in him. He never hadany worldly thoughts in him. He had no blemish in him at all.He always had pure thoughts. Krishna is an ideal example andwe should end up by becoming one with him.15. God’s Grace Can Burn AwayMountains Of SinsAs the ointment on the eyelid does not touch theeyeball: As the grease in the food does not touch thetongue: As the Lotus does not touch the mud out ofwhich it comes: Atma, does not touch anything thatsurrounds it.Prema Swarupas!Atma is not made out of another material as the pot ismade out of mud. As curd is a transformed produce of milk,Atma is not a transformation of anything else. Atma is aboveall organs. It does not have its origin in any of the organs. It isonly with the help of Buddhi, which is free from rajasic andthamasic gunas that we can realise the Atma. The bliss of Atmacan be experienced only through Buddhi. For one who hasstarted on a journey to reach a particular village, the journeywill come to an end only when the destination is reached. Inthe same manner, for an individual who is searching for Atma,the search will come to an end the moment he experiencesAtma. For Atma, there is no connection with any kind of work.Sometimes, between the moon and us, clouds come and causesome obstruction. In order that these obstructing clouds may beblown away, it is necessary to have some breeze. In the samemanner, between buddhi and Atma, which can be compared tothe moon, some clouds come in the form of bad ideas or gunasand in order that we may blow them away, some karma or ac-tion is required. By following these actions, we can realise theaspect of the Atma with the help of buddhi.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978103There are two kinds of samskara or reform. One isbased on the gunas and the other is based on dosha. The gunasare like giving water to a fruit-bearing tree. The second is likeremoving the bad qualities and is comparable to removing dustfrom the surface of a mirror. Looking at ourselves only aftercleaning the mirror, is the special feature in the second type ofreform. When there is dust on the mirror, we cannot see our-selves clearly in the mirror. Removing of the impurity is thework that is required. Giving water and manure to a fruit treein order to get the fruit may be referred to as the UpasanaKhanda. To regard the daily work that we do as being relatedto God is the aspect of Karma Khanda. The act of giving sa-cred love and prema to God and thereby seek him has beenreferred to as the Upasana Khanda. The process of removingthe impurities from our mind and thereby seeing Atma with thehelp of Upasana Khanda and Karma Khanda is a very essen-tial process. This creates a form for the Atma and gives us blissof realisation. Such a form appears with a distinctive beautyand character. This divine beauty has no particular form andyet can attract everyone.The gopikas experienced this beauty of the form andsuffered when they were separated from it. In its company,they were thus in a state of great bliss. The gopikas demon-strated how ordinary people can take this path and enjoy thebliss related to the experience of the Atma. Pothana, the Telugupoet, has described this aspect of the Avatar. He describedKrishna’s face as being comparable to the moon and his eyesas being comparable to fish. His shoulders were compared tothe snakes. His waist was compared to that of a lion and hisfeet were described as being similar to the lotus. When Krishnawas thus being described, the snake, the fish, the moon, thelion and the lotus felt somewhat embarrassed. The moon won-dered if there could be any comparison between him and the104 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978effulgent face of Krishna and was ashamed by the comparison.He ran away and hid himself in the sky. The fish told them-selves that there could be no comparison between them and thestar-like eyes of Krishna, and with this feeling they went andhid themselves deep under water. Krishna’s shoulders weresoft and broad and the snakes wondered how such shoulderscould be compared to them. Blushing, they went into hiding inthe ant hills. The lion too thought that there could be no com-parison between its waist and the beautiful waist of Krishna;and being thus embarrassed, the lion went away to live, inhiding in a forest. The lotus flowers also felt that there couldbe no comparison between them and the nice, soft feet of theLord, and with such a feeling, they went under water. Thesame thing was described by Vyasa in a slightly different way.He said, “Two lotus flowers and two elephants were standingand playing. Between these two elephants, there was a big lionsitting. On this lion, was a big tank and in the midst of thistank, there was a big mountain. On this mountain, there was amoon; and in the moon, two fish were playing with each other.Round the moon were dark bees constantly humming around.”This description of Krishna by Vyasa is similar to the onegiven earlier; and in this, the two feet have been described astwo lotus flowers and the two hips have been described as twoelephants. On these two elephants stands the lion-like waist,and on the waist there is a stomach, which can be compared tothe tank, and on the tank is the mountain in the form of thechest. The moon, which is the face, is above the chest; and thebright shining eyes are the two fish playing with each other inthis face. The dark curly hair is compared to the bees humminground the face. The poet looks at the hair as if the dark-complexioned bees were coming to take the honey that is con-tained in the smile on the Godly face. The gopikas looked atthis beautiful form and realised that this cannot be ordinarybeauty. They came to the conclusion that it can only be beautySummer Showers in Brindavan 1978105associated with divine bliss. However much you may search,you will not find in their actions or thoughts anything relatedto the aspect of gunas or attachments. In Krishna, who isParamatma, such qualities are not to be found at all.Paramatma who is above the gunas, sometimes comes downto the level of the people with gunas so that he may teach themcertain things.I will give another example for this in a manner whichis easily understood by all the young students. One may be ahighly educated person. Yet, at the time of initiating his soninto education, he will write the alphabets with his own handfor the sake of his son. At that time, we need not wonder whysuch a highly educated person is writing down the alphabets.In order to teach a young boy who does not know them, he hasto come down to that level and do so. In a similar manner, theall-knowing and all-powerful Paramatma sometimes takes ahuman form in order to teach various aspects to the ignoranthuman beings. But it is not an easy thing to reach the divineLord. For a human being, there is a deep and significantmeaning here. Even for cultivating the love of an ordinary hu-man being, you will find that you will come across several dif-ficulties and troubles. Thus, there is no surprise, if to acquirethe love of God, you meet with many difficulties and obstruc-tions. Because of this, the gopikas said that they were finding alot of trouble in the process of acquiring the love of God. Thesame thing has been described by Vyasa by saying that if youwant the love of God; you must give up love for other things.When you give up your love for other things, it is easy to ac-quire the love of God and you will not find any trouble at all.When you are bound down by several other forms of love, youwill meet with a lot of difficulties if you want to acquire thelove of God. This process has been described as surrender.When some insects look at a bright light, they are attracted by106 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978the brightness and even loose their lives. The deer, which areattracted by music, come close and get trapped. The bees, at-tracted by the honey inside a lotus, get trapped. In a similarmanner, when you want the love of the Lord, you should befully prepared to completely surrender yourself to the Lord.You should have no attachment to your body or pay any atten-tion to your own honour or respect. You should completelydetach yourselves from all these. Only then, can you get closeto the Lord. Your mind should fully concentrate on the Lord.Until we rise to this high level of surrender, we should partici-pate in divine and sacred activities like bhajan or dhyana anddevelop the aspect of prema. When you are in a state of bliss,and when your love of God fructifies and bears fruit, then hisgrace will be on you. The gopikas, underwent several troubles,passed through several births, in order to get close to the Lordand earn his grace.We should understand to some extent the amount ofagitation which the gopikas went through when Akrura cameto take away Krishna. Akrura made Balarama and Krishna siton a chariot and was taking them away to Kamsa. The gopikasfelt that the name Akrura was not appropriate to him and thathe was, contrary to what his name indicates, really cruel. Theywere wondering how he could take away their Lord causingthem so much trouble.Because of the sorrow of this separation, the gopikaswent and caught hold of the horses and tried to prevent thewheels of the chariot from moving. Looking at the sorrowinggopikas, Krishna somehow wanted to please them, and hepretended to tell the charioteer that the chariot be taken back.At this, the gopikas were very happy and all the gopikas camebehind the chariot. Taking advantage of this situation, Krishnasoftly signaled to Akrura to quickly go forward. The gopikasSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978107were struggling hard and uttering loud cries, saying, “Oh!Krishna, please stay back. You are described as the protectorof devotees and as the protector of the weak. You are leavingus and going away. Is this the result of all your good qualitiesand virtues? In spite of what others have said about us andwhat troubles we went through, we never stopped praying toyou. Are you not merciful to us? We have surrendered to you.”With such feelings, the gopikas were crying and would not re-turn to Gokulam. They were remaining without food and sleep;and in this condition, a saint came up to them and said, “Youare not able to understand the real strength of love or prema.This is always accompanied by many troubles and sorrows. Ifwe want to enjoy the sweetness of the juice that is contained ina fruit, we will have to remove the cover, which is bitter, andremove the seeds which are inside and which are not edible.Only then can we enjoy the real juice.” This implies that it isonly when we can give up the bodily relationships that we canearn the grace of the Lord. The moral of this lesson is thatthose who want the love of the Lord should have to completelygive up all other types of love. If we really want to get the loveof the Lord, the bad thoughts that are present in us must bepushed away. You are reading a number of books and listeningto a number of discourses, but you are not paying attention tothe change that should be brought about in your own heart andbehaviour. We are not aiming at bringing about the change thatshould come in either the elders who are teaching us or in thestudents who are listening to the discourses. One can preach amillion ideals, but what is the use if any of them are not putinto practice. You are listening to the stories of Krishna and thedevotion of the gopikas but you should examine what changethis has brought about in you. the Bhagavatha is a text whichenables us to realise the connection between the individual as-pect of divinity in human beings. It is only when we make anattempt to put into practice some small fraction of what we108 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978listen to, will we be able to claim that our sadhana has beenpurposeful.It is not as if there were no gopikas who had bodily at-tachments. Even such gopikas put the path of divinity at a highlevel and always adopted a sacred path. It was the normalpractice that Krishna visited all the homes in Gokulam. Hecould assume any number of forms. There was, however, noscope for any misinterpretation because, at that time, Krishnawas about seven years old. On the other hand, the gopikaswere about thirty years old. The gopikas had no attachment toKrishna even as a brother or as a son. They regarded him as adivine incarnation. Because of this, and because Krishna hadno bad thoughts at all, he used to freely enter the houses of thegopikas. On one occasion, Krishna went to the house of onegopika rather late and by that time the husband had alreadygone to sleep. However, as Krishna had no hesitation at all, hebanged hard on the door. Only those who want to do things ina stealthy manner do things with fear, but Krishna had no suchfear and so he knocked loudly on the door. The gopikas used tohave small peep holes on the doors and their husbands ormothers-in-law would not know of these peep holes. There isan inner meaning to this, which I will give later. When Krishnawas knocking at the door in that manner, that particular gopikahad some amount of attachment to worldly matters and she re-plied, “Oh Krishna! Please wait for a little while. My husbandhas not yet slept, and I will open the door shortly.” The gopi-kas knew very well that their surrender to the Lord should bedone in a very quick manner and without any fuss. The devo-tees of today will go to the extent of even challenging God andwill pass a vote of no confidence if their difficulties are notremoved.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978109In some of the cinemas that we see, and the books thatwe read, Krishna is projected as having always uttered untruthto the gopikas and deceiving them, thereby making them sub-servient to his desires. In many ways, they picture Krishna asan ordinary thief without any morals. In the Bhagavatha, theconnection between the gopikas and Krishna was pictured as asacred connection between their hearts. There was no furtherscope for misinterpretation. They had fully merged in eachother, and there was no feeling whatsoever relating to theirbody; and in such a case how can there be any distortion? It isthe easiest way to reach God by developing the aspect of Love.In order to get rid of bad thoughts from our minds, we mustmake a special effort by spending some time every day in thethought of God. Out of the twenty-four hours of each day, weare wasting almost twenty-three hours and fifty-nine minutes.You should try and spend at least a few minutes everyday inthe thought of God. Cotton, bales as big as a mountain, will becompletely burnt out if you put a small lighted match on tothem. We may have committed sins as big as mountains; but ifeven one small ray of the grace of the Lord falls on you, allyour sins will be burnt away. Spend your life in the thought ofthe Lord and in the service of the Lord.16. Radha Is An Inseparable Part OfKrishna Even As White Colour Is AnInseparable Part Of MilkIf one knows the aspects of Atma, one can enjoybliss. If one does not know the same, he will suffer:knowledge of Brahman leads one to merge into Brah-man. This word of Sai is a statement of truth.Pavitratma Swarupas:Brahman alone is the truth. This is an aspect of Atma.Man thinks that he is an entity different from Brahman andgets involved in all sorts of troubles relating to his family. Thelife force that we see manifested in all the jivas is no other thanBrahman. Brahman is permanent. Brahman is indescribable.Brahman is infinite. Brahman has the same attitude to allthings around us. That it is permanent may be further expandedby stating that it has neither a beginning nor an end. Whateveris born will die, but whatever is never born has no death either.This is the first characteristic feature of Brahman. The secondcharacteristic relates to the fact that it is indescribable. It is notpossible for any human being to determine what it is and de-scribe it. The third feature relates to its being infinite. All kindsof strength are present in Brahman to an infinite extent. Hu-man nature, which is incapable of describing even one kind ofstrength, obviously cannot describe an innumerable number oftypes of strength. How can man, who cannot climb to therooftop of his own house, climb to reach the heavens? Howcan man, who is unable to understand himself, a very limitedaspect of God’s creation, understand the boundless qualities ofBrahman?Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978111In spite of this situation, we do find occasionally thatsome persons feel proud of the little knowledge they have or ofthe trivial worldly successes they may have attained, pro-claiming that God’s qualities are such and such, and that Godis like so and so. All the education which these persons havereceived deals only with the material aspects of the world. Ex-cept their ego, what other attainment of theirs gives them theright to speak about spiritual matters which do not come underthe purview of their meagre knowledge? In fact, they have notthe competence to speak about their own speciality. How canan individual, who has not the proficiency to expound matterswhich come within the sphere of what he is supposed to havelearnt, speak about divinity and its sacred aspects, which relateto higher knowledge? In fact, no human being on this earth hasthe ability to determine and describe the nature of divinity. Infact, all the learning which a human being can acquire will belimited to any one chosen aspect of God’s creation. In thecontext of his inability to master the same, how can he under-stand the innumerable aspects and manifestations of God?One of the most striking features of Brahman is theability by which, without having to take a form and withouthaving to use a base for its manifestation, it can, even in aformless state, manifest the variety of its powers and capaci-ties. One other feature that we should note relates to the factthat in Brahman’s manifestations, there is nothing which wecan describe as a blemish. Whatever is said, whatever is seenor done, whatever is thought of or propagated, it is all for theprosperity and the good of the people in the world. No word oraction is intended for God’s own good. Anything that even re-motely smacks of selfishness cannot be noticed in God’sthought, word or action. Whatever is uttered in the aspect ofBrahman is truth. Whatever is done in the aspect of Brahmanis Dharma. Where people accept narrow ideas and where peo-112 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978ple conduct themselves unjustly or incorrectly, God remainsonly a witness to all that and has no part to play in such situa-tions.It is the quality of a bright lamp to shed light. In thelight thus shed, many persons may be reading texts which theywish to understand. They may also perform several gooddeeds. They may also perform thefts in the light shed by thelamp. They may use the light as a help to themselves in doingmany bad things. But, there is no great reputation which thelamp itself gains by the many scholars who benefit by readingbooks in the light shed by the lamp, nor is there any disrespectwhich the lamp acquires because of the false accounts writtenby people using the light or because of the thefts committed bythe people under the light shed by the lamp. Whatever bad orgood is done, it is not done by the lamp. In the same manner,God does not gather any praise or blemish by the good or baddone by the individuals in this world. He is only a witness toall that goes on.The last of Brahman’s qualities, which we should enu-merate here, consists of the fact that in the entire creation,there can be found nothing which is either of the same status orparallel to Brahman. Brahman is unequalled and unique. ToBrahman, Brahman is the only parallel. There is no other par-allel in the entire world. Such a sacred aspect of Brahman, inorder to do good to humanity, occasionally by its ownsankalpa, takes a particular form and manifests itself in thatform.One of such sankalpas of Brahman is “Ekoham Ba-husyam.” “The one and only one I am, shall be seen as if it isin many forms.” Only when we add a little curd to milk thatmilk gets converted into curd. The curd that we had added hasalso earlier come from the milk itself. We should recogniseSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978113here that the connection between milk and curd is an inextrica-ble one. In the same manner, the capacities that are present inBrahman merely manifest themselves as different forms in thecreation. In fact, these manifested forms are inextricably re-lated to the unmanifested form of Brahman. This means thatwhat is projected as manifested creation is only an image ofBrahman. Creation thus manifests itself as work or Karma. Forthis, Brahman is the subject, object and the substance. It is theconfluence of the subject, object and the act of creation thatconstitutes the path for man’s attainment of divinity. So thatcreation, which originated from Paramatma, may go back tomerge into the very source, we should accept action in theworld as our duty. Action on the part of all human beingsshould be such that it will enable them to reach the object ofcreation and ultimately merge into it, “Thath Thwam Asi”:Thath is Paramatma, thwam is Prakruthi and asi is devotion.The object of devotion is to bring together Prakruthi andParamatma. However, unfortunately we do not find the as-pects of Brahman in the created human beings around us whoare the results of the sankalpa on the part of Brahman. Thus,all this creation which is a projection of Brahman, should befilled with the aspects of Brahman.Creation, or the projection of Brahman, has been calledDhara. This Dhara, in order that it may ultimately merge intothe creator, adopts several paths; the path of work, the path ofwisdom and the path of surrender. Since all the burden ofcreation is being borne by Paramatma, the former has beencalled “Bharya” and the latter has been called “Bharta.” TheLord who bears all the burden is called “Bharta” or one whobears the weight. It is the confluence of Paramatma, the Pu-rusha; and the creation or the “Bharya” has been called devo-tion or the path of surrender. Prakruthi has not the strength bywhich to bear its own burden. In this context, the features of114 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978Prakruthi have been given the name “Abala” or “one withoutstrength.” In common parlance, this word connotes a woman.An individual who is weak and who has no strength is called“Abala” or a woman. Every jiva or every individual who ispart of the created world, is in this sense a weakling or awoman. Hunger, anger, jealousy and ego are all common tomen and women. Sorrow as well as pleasure are experienced inthe same manner by men and women. The difference is only inname and form, but all other qualities are the same in men andwomen. If, therefore, we look at people from the point of viewof qualities, and ignore names and forms, all are women on theearth.On a stage, in a particular drama, several actors mayput on several parts, but these parts played by the actors are notreal. They are intended only for the purpose of the stage andthe drama. In a girls’ college, on a stage in a drama, severalparts such as a boy, an old man, a king and a queen are all puton, but in truth, all the actors are only girls. In the story, thepart of a husband and the part of a wife are both played bygirls. Thus, in fact, the man and the woman so appear only forthe purposes of the stage; but both are women. In the samemanner, the whole world is one stage and all the people areactors. They are all putting on one part or another and are act-ing on the stage. The only Purusha is God. Everyone else is aweakling or Abala, or a woman. This is the reason why indi-viduals in this world are always suffering and are afflicted byone kind of sorrow or another.In order to demonstrate to the people, the aspects whichhave just been described and to bring human beings into con-fluence with God, their creator; Krishna, who is Paramatma,himself, came in a human form. Dhara, the Prakruthi took theform of Radha, a position symbolising all creation. Thus, weSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978115should regard Radha as the messenger of Prakruthi symbolis-ing all that is typical in creation. She has been demonstratingmany types of ideals as examples for people for the purpose ofreaching the divine Lord in the form of Krishna. In all this, weshould make an effort to recognise the close relationship thatexists between the efforts of Radha and the responses ofKrishna.Very close to Gokulam, there used to be a place byname Vrishabhapura. Radha was living in Vrishabhapura andknew from the very beginning her being an embodiment ofPrakruthi and her connection with Paramatma. Since the en-tire creation was only a projection of Paramatma, in the con-text of Radha signifying creation and Krishna signifyingParamatma, the Creator; the relationship between Radha andKrishna was one like the relationship between an object and itsimage. Radha, in the bodily aspect, was nine years older thanKrishna. She was also a cousin sister of Nanda and thus wasclosely connected with Nanda. Ever since Krishna reached thehome of Nanda and Yasoda, Radha’s ideas began to take shapein the direction of wanting to move closer and closer toKrishna. At all times, Radha was thinking of Krishna and ut-tering the name of Krishna. Her daily routine was filled withwork connected with Krishna. Krishna was a seven-year-oldboy at that time. Every day, as soon as he got up from bed,Krishna used to take milk from his mother, walk to Vrishab-hapura, and come back. The mother did not know anythingabout this. If the mother asked him where he went, he used totell her that he went in search of the cows. Here, if we get adoubt whether Krishna had spoken untruth, we should remem-ber that Krishna never spoke untruth in all his life.To some persons amongst us, as a result of the impuri-ties in our own minds, of the ill-conceived thoughts in us, it116 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978may appear to be untruth but whatever Krishna spoke was al-ways truth. When he said that he had gone in search of thecow, it was the truth. We regard the earth, according to ourVedas, as the cow since it yields all that man needs for hissustenance. We address them as mother earth, mother cow,mother Veda, and so on. In this respect, all human beings arethe dear children of these three mothers. Therefore, to regardRadha, who symbolises creation, as a cow, is no untruth. Inthis manner, ever since Krishna was born, the thought ofRadha was imprinted on his mind.While things were going on like this, one day Radhaintended to enter Brindavan to pick up some dried pieces ofcow dung. She was making some attempts to enter the city andKrishna recognised that Radha was making such attempts.Since Nanda was the head of the place, a watchman wasguarding the entrances at the behest of Nanda. Krishna in-structed the watchman to state that only men are permitted toenter Brindavan and women are strictly prohibited from com-ing in. Thus, when Radha was trying to enter Brindavan on oneday with her basket for collecting dried pieces of cow dung,the watchman said that no woman can enter Brindavan. Radhawas utterly confused on hearing this. Smilingly, Radha asked,“Can you stay in Brindavan? If you can enter Brindavan, I canalso enter.” The watchman replied, “I am a man, you are awoman.” Radha replied, “You are making a big mistake. Inthis world, Krishna is the only Purusha. All others are women.If you can enter, I can also enter.”In this manner, she argued with great strength andquestioned the watchman by asking, “How can you call your-self a man, simply because you are wearing robes and dressappropriate to a man?” She forced her entry into Brindavan.Krishna, who was coming behind, noticed this and said thatSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978117since Radha forced her entry contrary to the orders of Krishna,and since she was a woman, she will have to pay a tax by wayof penalty for disobeying his orders. Radha replied, “Oh Lord!The heart you have given me is my only property. I can returnit to you by way of tax. I have neither wealth nor possessionsto pay tax in any other manner. I shall gladly surrender myonly belonging, namely my heart, to you.” Krishna replied“Golden Radha, Brindavan has come into existence to immor-talise the kind of divine relationship that exists between me asParamatma and you as Prakruthi. Posterity will know thatKrishna was always enshrined in the heart of Radha. Thiscommitment made by me will always convey the meaning ofthe relationship that existed between Radha and Krishna.Where there is Prakruthi, there will be Paramatma. Wherethere is Paramatma, there will be creation. Paramatma andPrakruthi are like the object and the image. Wherever we maygo, the combination and the confluence of the two aspects ofRadha and Krishna will be what people can see in this world.”Students:To regard Radha of the Bhagavatha as an ordinarywoman, to regard Krishna as an ordinary human being, a man,and to regard the relationship between them as no more thanbetween a man and a woman, as people generally understand,is very wrong and quite contrary to what the author of the sa-cred text of the Bhagavatha intended to convey. This relation-ship is the sacred relationship that exists between God and Hiscreation. It is as inseparable as the white colour of milk is in-separable from the milk itself. The colour of the milk is white.It is not possible for us to remove the white colour from milk.If we turn milk into curds, the curd is also white. If we churnthe curd and get buttermilk out of it, the buttermilk is alsowhite. If from that buttermilk, we separate the butter, it is alsowhite. Thus, do what you may, it is not possible to separate the118 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978white colour of milk from the milk itself. Radha is part andparcel of Krishna even as much as white colour is part and par-cel of milk. The kind of association between Radha andKrishna has no parallel in the world and cannot occur in anyother instance. Today, only when we understand this and putinto practice, at least to some extent, the lessons we can drawfrom the relationship between Radha and Krishna, will we bein a position to promote the aspects of Krishna, in their divineform, throughout the world. On the contrary, we should notregard Radha as one individual and Krishna as another indi-vidual and promote this thought based on a difference betweenthem. This oneness of Radha and Krishna has been referred toin the bible as “Kingdom of God.” This aspect of oneness ofPrakruthi and Paramatma has been referred to, in several re-ligions, by using different words. However, to enable commonpeople to understand the significance of Radha, our ancientshave created a form and a name. But whoever, continually andat all times thinks of Krishna, is a Radha. This is an aspect andnot a name. For this sacred and divine aspect of Radha, wehave been ascribing several distorted meanings. Radha is noother than a faithful image of Krishna, the object. We shouldundertake such action as will lead us to Krishna. The Creator isKrishna. The creation is the Prakruthi. Action is needed to beable to cultivate divine love. As a result of the love of Krishna,we should be able to reach Him. Today, we have understoodthe meaning and significance of the love of Radha for Krishna.We should now be prepared to interpret all her actions againstthe background of such divine love.17. At The Time Of One’s Death, It IsThe Body That Is DiscardedFoolish people always have their thoughts inattachment to things around them. A narrow mind cannever understand what liberation or detachmentmeans.A person with a broad mind will never under-take to do anything bad. A human being with an animalmind will always think only of bad acts.Pavitratma Swarupas:If one wants to understand the aspect of divinity or toteach this aspect to others, he must have a clean mind. Anyperson who has not cleansed his mind will not be able to teachthe aspect of divinity to others nor will he be able to under-stand it. You may ask if all the people who are preaching haveclean minds. The reason for human beings having degraded tosuch depths is that people who do not have clean minds preachto others. In a dark and unclean room, scorpions, snakes andother insects can come in. If the room is clean and well lighted,there is no chance for such bad insects to come. In the samemanner, in an individual who has a good and clean mind, thereis no chance for qualities like lust, ego, jealousy and anger toenter or flourish. When we can compare ourselves with a stan-dard that we may set, and accept it as a measure, we will real-ise how many bad qualities we have. If ignorance has to go,man must get the knowledge of Atma. Even if milk and soapare used to clean charcoal, it is not going to turn white. On theother hand, the milk and soap might turn black. We may ask aquestion, is there any chance of the charcoal becoming whiteand bright? It is not as if there is no chance at all of turning the120 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978charcoal bright and white. The charcoal, when in contact withfire, will appear bright. Here we can notice the blemish thatcomes out of bad company, even to good people. In the samemanner, if good people with good qualities like peace of mindand equanimity come into contact with bad people with badideas, not only can they not change the bad people, but theymay also become bad and acquire bad qualities. Once yourmind is not sacred enough, whatever effort you put in, it maybecome very difficult for you to take a good path. Truly, ifman, from moment to moment, continuously goes on recog-nising the sacredness which is present in human nature, it willbe possible for him to recognise the divinity that is present inhim. As a result of good work the gopikas had done in theirearlier lives, and as a result of the love and grace of God theyhad earned, they could develop such a sacred attitude. Theplace where they were born was a small village called Goku-lam. At that time there were no comforts at all. In those days,things were such that life was very difficult. There was neithera college nor even an elementary school, and the gopikas weretotally illiterate. Although they were not literate, they had verygood knowledge about the aspects of Atma. Today’s educationis such that it all relates to the external world. It only enablesyou to eke out your livelihood but it does not teach you the sa-cred aspects of Atma. Fortunately, such learning and educationas we have today did not exist in those days. If we examinewhether the learning of today is at least enabling us to havegood conduct, we will easily see the answer is no. Their lifewas totally along the path of truth. They pursued divinitythrough the path of love. Purity was the aim of their life. Tounderstand Atma was the destination of their life. Such werethe qualities of the gopikas.For a student of today, is there any chance of acquiringat least one of these sacred qualities? The main feature of to-Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978121day’s education seems to be to acquire degrees which merelybecome a head load. Having acquired these degrees, you sim-ply become a burden to the society. Does one have to undergothis education just to eke out a living? Are not the birds andanimals finding ways and means to feed themselves? If wehave education, it should enable us to get rid of the cycle ofbirth and death and enable us to understand our destination.After having acquired all types of education, a foolish persondoes not know who he is, and has also not given up the meanqualities that he has in him. By acquiring all this education, weonly become argumentative, but not wise. By getting educa-tion, we should learn such things by which we will escapedeath and repeated births. The gopikas had that kind of goodeducation that relieved them of this cycle of death and birth. Itmight appear from their conduct that they had some worldlydesire, but this is not true. They were only interested in thespiritual aspects; and whatever actions they had actually in-dulged in, were only leelas. The coming together of gopikasand Krishna became exemplary to the world and representedthe coming together of Prakruthi and Purusha. Whatever hasbeen said or done by them appears as of a low level because ofour own low thoughts, but actually, whatever they had done orsaid was of great significance. Students: If we stand by the sideof the ocean, it will appear as if it is very big and unending,and we cannot see its boundaries. If we can go high up in aplace or a suitable contrivance and look at the ocean, it willappear as if it is one big lake. In the same manner, if we ele-vate ourselves and see things in the proper perspective, thenwe will understand the true meaning of these events. However,our life is taking a peculiar turn. A life that is full of bad ideasand bad actions appears to be a false drama. In fact, all our lifeappears to be a false and pretentious drama. The life of thegopikas was indeed exemplary. In none of their actions, canone detect untruth, unjustness or unfairness. They led perfect122 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978lives. The coming together of Krishna and the gopikas is re-garded as one of bodily attachment because of the cinemas anddramas that we see today. The confluence of the gopikas andKrishna is truly divine. All actions of Krishna are truly to betreated as ideal examples. Whatever he did was intended to de-stroy and remove the little attachment they had to their bodyand life. The aspect of love in Krishna got imprinted in theirminds and they got immersed in that ecstasy.There is a small example to show this when Krishnawent to visit a gopika. Recognising that the gopika was not athome, he broke the pot of milk that was hanging from the roofand spilt the milk all over the place. He also put his feet in themilk and went out of the house leaving footprints on theground. The gopika came back and found the footprints ofKrishna. She followed the footprints of Krishna and foundwhere he was. Then Krishna said “If you desire to reach me,you must follow my footprints and this is the only way inwhich you can reach me.” Thus Krishna was showing themethod or path by which the devotees can reach him. Krishnawas one who showed the path of truth. On another occasion,the gopikas tried to go close to Krishna and they tried to findsome excuse to do so. They joined together and came toMother Yasoda with a long list of complaints. When Yasodaasked them for the cause of their visit, they all said, “Krishnacame up to the terrace at midnight and tied up the hair of onegopika with that of another.” The inner meaning of this has tobe carefully understood. The gopikas said that Krishna came atmidnight. Here midnight means neither day nor night. Thegopikas are in a state of half-knowledge. That is, they are nei-ther divine nor human. To such gopikas, Krishna came and tiedup their ignorance. On another occasion, the gopikas tried tomake Krishna speak untruth. They complained that when thecowherd women were carrying pots of milk and curd, KrishnaSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978123came and pierced holes in those pots. They accosted motherYasoda by saying, “Ask your son if he had not done this.”Here, also, we must understand the significance when Krishnaexplained by saying, “Perhaps God came and pierced thepots—I do not know.” He is indirectly saying that the one whohad pierced the pots was indeed himself. Another complaintthey made was, “When we were all bathing in the river, hegathered all our saris and went and sat on the top of a tree andwould not come down even if we called him.” To this Krishnasaid, “When they were bathing, there was a big whirlwindwhich gathered all these saris and put them on the tree.” Here,the whirlwind has to be identified as a form of God. The basicelements of creation are earth, fire, water, air and sky; and airis one form of the divine. In truth, the gopikas had a very sa-cred heart and were always immersed in the thoughts ofKrishna. Even while they were carrying pots of curd, milk orbutter, they totally forgot themselves in their ecstasy, and theyused to say, “Govinda, Madhava and Damodara.” On one oc-casion, Krishna stole butter. He was not available to his motherthat day. Yasoda knew very well that if Krishna saw the bigstick, he would not come and so she held the stick with onehand behind her back and held butter in the other hand andtried to attract Krishna by showing him the butter. Here, wemust notice that Yasoda realised that Krishna will come only ifhe sees a pure Chitta or mind as exemplified by butter in thisanalogy. God is one who is attracted only by pure minds. Themeaning of saying that he took away all the clothes is that hetook away all your bodily attachments. The clothes are a coverto the body and, in reality, the body is an attachment or a coverfor the Atma that is residing inside the same. The body is,therefore, only a dress for this life. When we say that one isdead, we mean that the body is dead and discarded. This act ofKrishna’s is thus to be interpreted as saying that so long as youhave attachment to your body, you cannot find the real aspect124 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978of Atma. We should not be under an illusion about the impor-tance of the body.In the aspect of Purusha, there are two kinds—the in-dividual Purusha and the group Purusha. If there is one indi-vidual, he is called Purusha but when there is a group of indi-viduals, it should be described as Prajnanam Brahma. As anexample to illustrate this, if there is one tree, we call it a tree;but if there are a large number of trees, we call the combina-tion a forest. If there is only one tree, we do not call it a forest.In the same manner, if God is present in one human form, he iscalled divinity or an Avatar; and if he is present in the totality,he is referred to as Creation. The individual is born because ofGod’s wanting to be so born. On the other hand, the nameless,formless aspect of God is referred to as Purushottama. Weshould see here that if the formless aspect of Purushottamatakes a human form, we call him Purusha. Having taken theform of a human being, the Purushottama sets an example toother living things and establishes the oneness of all creation.We should also recognise the truth that the aspect of the Atmacan be realised only if you have a clean mind.On another occasion, the gopikas went to Yasoda andtold her that the kind of mischief that Krishna was doing wasindescribable, and so they asked her to call him in their pres-ence and take steps to see that he never entered their housesagain. They complained by saying, “Krishna is creating troublebetween husbands and wives. He comes in the night and bangsthe doors; and if we open the doors, our husbands get angry;and if we do not open the doors, Krishna gets angry; and weare put to constant trouble because of such situations. It is notpossible to describe all our troubles to you. A situation hasarisen where we have to either forget Krishna or abandon ourhusbands.” Faced with these allegations, Krishna replied,Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978125“Mother, you are a very innocent lady and so you are believingall these stories. I will give you a simple answer and you judgefor yourself the truth of these stories. I have been sleeping si-lently in your bed, how can I go out in the nights without dis-turbing you? Now you can yourself see the truth.” Yasoda feltthat all the complaints were false and she sent away all thegopikas. The meaning of this is that in order to set right thehusbands of the gopikas, he had played all this drama. There isone small fact that we have to notice here. Krishna was actu-ally a seven-year-old boy at that time while the gopikas wereall much older. Under these conditions, there cannot be anychance for misunderstanding by the husbands. Such misunder-standings are simply because of the bad qualities and bad ideaswhich men have. Even if a wife is playing and spending toomuch time with their own small son, the selfish husband doesnot like it and attempts to stop it. This can be recognised as un-sacred behaviour of men. If he gets selfish ideas and doubts,even if a mother played with her own son, will he not getdoubts when she plays with other children? It is the bad qualityof men to doubt everything that comes in the way of their ownselfish interests. Krishna said that he was undertaking all thesetasks only to purify the husbands and create a pure mind inthem. The gopikas had very sacred minds and to doubt them isa great sin; and Krishna was a seven-year-old-boy and to haveany misunderstandings about his actions with regard to thegopikas is an even greater sin. There is no room whatsoever forany bad interpretation here. Because the husbands didn’t fullyrecognise the aspect of divinity, they were having all kinds ofdoubts. The gopikas who were subjected to this kind of unnec-essary blame and blemish were being protected by Krishna. Inthis way, Krishna propagated the aspects of an Avathar. Weshould not try to understand and interpret all actions of divinityat a human level. It is our primary duty to do such things thatwill make it possible for us to receive his grace. If only we can126 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978earn his grace, everything will be sweet, in life. The Lord isfull of sweetness—his vision is sweet, his speech is sweet, hisactions are sweet and he himself is only an embodiment ofsweetness. In a vessel filled with sweet sugar cane juice, if weput a large number of holes, we will get sweet juice onlythrough all the holes, and it is not possible to get anything souror bitter. In that context, Paramatma is full of sacred bliss andin his creation it is not possible to get anything different. Wewill make an effort to learn more about the devotion of thegopikas and the sacred aspects of Krishna in the days to fol-low.18. Concentration During MeditationCan Lead YouTo The Lord’s VisionBelief and faith are like two eyes. If one has notgot them, he will be counted as blind. Does God notexist, simply because you cannot see him? God may notexist so far as that person is concerned. But, does henot exist for us who can see him?Pavitratma Swarupas:Amongst the most important things which man has toacquire and experience, the first one is the grace of God. Bysuch grace, he can acquire valuable wisdom. By acquiring suchwisdom, he is also able to lead his life in a very peaceful man-ner. Every living individual must make an effort to recognisethe performance of the divinity that he experiences. There isalso a need for him to recognise the correct aspects of God. Inthe initial stages, it is impossible for man to pray and know theunmanifested form of God. Therefore, it is very necessary forman to begin with a form as the basis and worship. With thehelp of such prayers, he should go on to acquire divine strengthand with such strength, he should move on to the next stage.We should make an attempt to recognise the existence of God,not only in a name, but also in the context of sabda or sound.We keep saying Bhagavan, Bhagavan repeatedly. It is neces-sary for us to understand the meaning of this word Bhagavan.We have been taught by our scriptures that the main signifi-cance of the word Bhagavan comes from the aspect ofParamatma. What is contained in Brahman and Paramatma iscontained in this word Bhagavan. One meaning of the word128 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978Bhagavan is that he is filled with all kinds of prosperity. Fur-ther, it also describes one who can and should be worshipped.There are two other meanings for this letter “bha”. Thetwo meanings are sambharta and bharta. The word “samb-harta” means that through it, we should try and understand theorigin of creation. The word “bharta” means that he is bearingthe burden of creation and so, is called bharta. The letter “ga”refers to the fact that he is responsible for the beginning,maintenance and dissolution of creation. Hence, the letter “ga”comes in. There is a third meaning for the letter “bha.” It signi-fies brilliance or illumination. The letter “ga” in the contextmeans the spread of this brightness or illumination. The word“vanta,” means that he has the capacity and ability to do such athing. Thus the full meaning of “Bhagavanta” is that it refersto an aspect by which God has the capacity to spread hisbrightness or illumination. The sacred word Bhagavan has a lotof inner and significant meaning, but unfortunately we are for-getting this and using the word only as an honour or title. Forus to understand this sacred meaning and the sacred aspect ofdivinity, an amount of introspection on our part is necessary.Then only, can we understand the nature of our mind. Mindhas the characteristic feature of thinking continuously and re-peatedly, over and over again.Our mind is such that it is always thinking about thingscoming together and separating from each other. This is a natu-ral quality of the mind. Without bringing thoughts together andthe dissolution of such thoughts, the mind cannot exist at all.When these thoughts come in quick succession, the mindsometimes takes the wrong path. In such situations, the mindbecomes very confused and unsteady. If man wants to over-come this confusion, some amount of mental rest is necessaryfor the mind. If man wants peace of mind, he must give rest toSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978129his mind. Such occasional rest is necessary, not only for humanbeings, but also for animals, birds and even lifeless machines.If one does not get such rest, it becomes very difficult for lifeto exist and for man to live. If man can get this kind of rest, itwill give some peace and happiness.Mind has the quality by which it can run faster than thewind. If we want to stop a fast moving train or a car, we use agadget called a brake. In the same manner, if we want to stop amind that is moving freely and in an uncontrolled manner, wemust use a brake in the form of concentration or dhyana. Ifman has no control over his mind, he will become a demon. Ifhe has no control over his mind, he will become an animal. Inthis context, control over man’s mind and sense organs arevery necessary. To obtain such controls, there are three statesthat may work as obstacles. The first one is a state of nothing-ness. The second one is a state of diverse thinking. The thirdone, which can help, is the state of concentration. By its verynature, the mind has these three different aspects.If we want to read a sacred text, then sleep may over-take us. On the other hand, if we want to go and participate in asacred gathering, the mind will not permit it and even if thebody goes, the Goddess of sleep, will bother you there also.This may be described as a state of nothingness. If we are rec-onciled to this and want to go to sleep and take rest, all kindsof disturbing ideas and thoughts keep agitating your mind andthese will pull your mind into the street. This has been de-scribed as a state of diverse thinking. The more important stateis the state of concentration. Only when man takes to this stateand concentrates on things and forgets the other two aspects,can he be happy. It is enough, if man can learn how to live likea man. He need not become a Madhava and rise to the level ofdivinity. The aspect of concentration is particularly importantfor students.130 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978Lack of ability to concentrate is responsible for somany diseases in the world. Such a disease is very rampantamong the students. In the Bombay University, when a doctorexamined the students, he found 89% of the students sufferingfrom one disease or the other. In the state of Bengal, 98% ofthe students are sick. If we look at the students, they look niceand appear as if they are swans, but their health is rapidly dete-riorating. For external appearances, the students look quitehealthy but, in fact, they are not at all healthy. In many ways,they let their minds go astray and day after day, they are ruin-ing their health. This is the reason why the quality of thamoguna and thinking of diverse things at one time is becomingmore and more common amongst them. Today, concentrationon one chosen aspect is very necessary for the students. In or-der to show the value of concentration to the world, the gopi-kas may be cited as excellent examples. Whatever work theydid, and wherever they went, their mind was fully concentratedon Krishna. They were never allowing their minds to run indifferent directions. They always had full control over theirminds. Today, our mind is not under our control, our organsare not under our control, our likes and dislikes are not underour control, our hunger is not under our control. As is often thecase, your body is in the presence of the Lord in the temple,but your mind is thinking of the shoes that have been left out-side. Thus, we concentrate on things that are of no value to all.Today, people sit in meditation, but after they sit for a veryshort while, the mosquitoes start bothering them and their mindturns on the mosquitoes. Alternatively, it may be an ant thatmoves on the back that attracts your mind. Our actions arechanging accordingly. The room in which we wish to meditateis located next to the kitchen. If in the kitchen, the wife iscooking some vegetables, your mind concentrates on thevegetables and you ask yourself whether the vegetables areSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978131frying well. We are sitting in meditation only for external ap-pearances, but our thoughts go in various directions and areattracted by trivial things. If we do not understand the mannerof acquiring Vidya or avidya, we cannot do anything well. Justas avidya will give lack of peace, sometimes even Vidya, if notunderstood properly, will give lack of peace. There is an ex-ample for this. If there is a knife, it can be used for cuttingvegetables or doing good things and also for harming and trou-bling others. Although the knife is one and the same, ourthoughts determine whether it is used for good or bad. In thesame manner, when we use our education along the right path,it becomes a friend and it gives good results. The same educa-tion will become our enemy when we put it to improper use. Inthat context, the students should realise how they can use theireducation in the right path. As it has been said: “Slow andsteady wins the race.” The students should make an attempt toundertake their work in a slow and steady manner.Thus, there are many things that we can learn from thegopikas. The different paths they had adopted, the words theyhad used, and the work they did should all be learnt by us. Weshould learn the quality of forbearance that they had. Weshould also recognise the kind of sisterly relationship that ex-isted between them. Truly, when so many gopikas were tryingto reach Krishna, there are bound to be differences and quar-rels amongst them. There was no place for jealousy in theirminds. Absence of jealousy was their characteristic feature.Today, there is a lot of jealousy even with regard to a verysmall matter. If a student gets a first class or a first rank, theother students feel jealous. They do not work hard and get arank but they feel jealous when others get it. This is why in theeighth chapter of Bhagavad Gita, Krishna cautioned Arjunasaying, “Do not become a jealous person.” If one always wantsto find blemish in others, one starts with the quality of jeal-132 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978ousy. The disease gradually spreads and you will try to findfault with your own Guru and even with God. The quality ofjealousy, once it begins, will neither have a limit nor a direc-tion. It will flow in all directions in an uncontrolled manner. Inthe gopikas, there was no feeling of jealousy at all. If onegopika was suffering from separation from Krishna, all theother gopikas would go and console her. They used to tell herthat they were all sharing her concern and separation and theythus consoled her. Even while thus consoling, they were utter-ing the name of Govinda, Damodara, Madhava and so on. Inthis manner, they were always thinking of Lord Krishna. Howcan any ordinary human being acquire such qualities of equal-mindedness, forbearance and absence of jealousy? The gopikaswere such that they had done a great deal of good in their ear-lier lives. If we look at their capacity for concentration, it wasindeed exemplary. They would never think of anything else.Even if they had seen very fearful things, they maintained per-fect equanimity. It was difficult to find people, in the Goku-lam, who did not blame the gopikas. Generally, men talk verylightly about women. There are very few men who recognisethe sacredness contained in women.On one day, a new daughter-in-law had come to Go-kulam. Her name was Suguna. As soon as they saw her, all thegopikas were telling her how lucky she was to have come toGokulam as a daughter-in-law as that gave her an opportunityto be close to the Lord and sing his glory. They used to tell herabout Krishna whenever they met at the water tank or in themarket place. In Gokulam, there was an ancient practice. Sucha practice continues even now in some villages. In the verandaof a wealthy person, a lamp would be lighted every eveningand all the villagers would come and light their lamps fromthat lamp. Nanda was not only a wealthy person, but also GodHimself was born in his house in the form of Krishna. TheSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978133people of the village believed that if they lighted the lamp inthat house, they will all get a share of Nanda’s good fortune.Suguna, the new daughter-in-law took the wick from her houseand went to Nanda’s house to light the lamp. From the after-noon, she was anxiously waiting for the time to come when shecould go and see the place where Krishna lived. In her mind,there were only sacred thoughts. In Suguna, such divinethoughts were unwavering. She reached Nanda’s house withsuch thoughts. She went into the veranda and tried to light herlamp. She was looking at the interior of the house in the hopethat she would see Krishna. In fact all her thoughts were fo-cused on Krishna. When she was immersed in such thoughts,the flame spread to her hand but she knew nothing of it. Sheinstantly saw Krishna’s form in the lamp. She forgot all aboutherself when she was looking at Krishna’s form. She becameecstatic and lost himself. Yasoda, the mother, saw this frominside and quickly dragged Suguna’s hand from the flames andscolded her by saying that she should not forget herself in thatmanner. Although she was being scolded, Suguna’s attentionwas directed only towards the lamp and Krishna’s form. Al-though Yasoda was dragging Suguna away, she was going to-wards the lamp. Yasoda realised this situation and understoodthat Krishna was granting his divine vision to Suguna. Shequickly came to the market place and asked several gopikas tocome and see Suguna having Krishna’s darshan. All the gopi-kas came running and saw this scene. For a moment, they for-got their own selves and sang ecstatically, “To our Suguna,Krishna has given his darshan and she lost herself in watchinghis form. She even burnt her own hand.” Suguna’s concentra-tion was the cause for this darshan of the Lord. Whatever weconcentrate on, it should get imprinted on our mind. The gopi-kas were experiencing such situations because of their concen-tration. The gopikas used to sleep outside the houses lookingafter their children; but whenever they heard the divine flute,134 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978they used to forget everything and run in the direction of thesound. They were confident of their actions, they had the cour-age that whatever they did was sacred and so they did not carefor what others might say. Because they had tremendous self-confidence, they were able to concentrate and think of God.We are always afraid of what the world would say and alsoafraid of the diversity of our own thoughts. When we do goodthings, there is no reason why we should be afraid of theworld. Your thoughts are yours and your happiness should beyours. Many people go to a temple and put on vibhuthi, butthey rub it off as soon as they come out, thinking that theirfriends will laugh at them. Why should they go to the templewhen they have no courage to do it? Why is it that you areafraid to say that you have gone to a temple and that you haveyour own faith? Why can you not say that you have your faithand that you are not a slave to someone else’s ideas? There is agreat deal for us to learn from the actions of the gopikas. Theircourage and self-confidence are indeed exemplary. It is alsonecessary for us to have a certain amount of self-confidence.For sorrow or for pleasure, for defeat or for victory, we shoulddevelop the courage to meet them with equanimity.If an individual acquires some level of prosperity, solong as he lives, he keeps on feeling that the land belongs tohim. After he dies, his son inherits the same land. The son feelsthat the land is his. If the son gets into economic difficultiesand sells it away, the person who purchases it says that theland belongs to him. Here, the father claimed the land as hisown; the son also claimed the land as his own, and the pur-chaser also claims the land as his. To whom does this landreally belong? The land, looking at all this, feels that it doesnot belong to anyone. Individuals come and go and no one canacquire the land. The gopikas always felt that their thoughtswere their own and that they would not follow the dictates ofSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978135others’ thoughts. When we talk of women, we have the feelingthat they are weak people, but this is not so. They are the em-bodiments of Sakthi. In Bhagavad Gita it is said that God re-sides in women with seven different types of strength while ina man he resides only with three such aspects. Thus, in women,divinity exists to a great extent. There is a small example forthis—you should not misunderstand or misinterpret this ex-ample. For the entire country of Bharath there is a commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and under his control, there willbe millions of soldiers. When the General walks in, all the sol-diers will literally shiver. This General, who can be the causeof fear to so many people, when he comes home, he himselfshivers in the presence of his wife. There is so much strengthin a woman and the world is able to go on, because of thisstrength. A woman is like a field, while man is just like a seed.If we do not have a field, the seed cannot sprout. For all life onearth, woman is responsible. Great people, great saints andeven great Avatars have come into this world because of thehelp given by a woman functioning as a mother. Thus, thestrength of a woman is really very sacred. The gopikas weresuch that they provided lustre to the very womanhood.Whether in the matter of patience or forbearance or friendship,they showed exemplary conduct. It is wrong to regard this sa-cred path adopted by the gopikas as something trivial. This sa-cred devotion shown by the gopikas and by Radha should re-main ideal examples for all time. The Yugas may have goneand the life styles may have changed, but the ideals of thegopikas and the leelas of Krishna have stood the test of timeand they are always fresh. All these actions of gopikas wererepresentative of the actions of the jiva with respect to Brah-man. The inner significance of this is to say that our mind isthe Brindavan and our ideas are the gopikas. The Jiva is Radhaand Atma is Krishna. Thus, in the Brindavan of our heart, thejiva in the form of Radha, along with the ideas in the form of136 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978gopikas are performing leelas with Atma. Do not be under theimpression that Brindavan was somewhere and the leelas ofKrishna were performed there. Regard your heart as Brindavanand yourself as Radha and surrender yourself to Krishna, theLord. Your thoughts must be like the thoughts of the gopikas.Unsacred and impure ideas should not enter your minds. If thestudents shape themselves in this manner, they will be able torevive the ancient glory of this great country.19. Education Should Promote Humil-ity In The Educated PersonIf you can eliminate one’s mean desires, that willbecome true yoga: Giving up one’s property, wife andchildren and going to the forest cannot become yoga.This word of Sai indicates the right path.Prema Swarupas:While we are steeped in illusion and darkness, man’sduty is to try and come out of it and have the vision of the di-vine. Man is entitled to acquire sath, chith and ananda. Such ahuman being who has a right to enjoy sath, chith and anandathinks that he is an ordinary person who has no right for suchbliss. Man is not simply material. Matter should be subservientto man, but man cannot be subservient to matter. Man shouldnot become part of the work around him as if he is a prisoner.By giving up mean desires and leading a sacred path, man canunderstand divinity. This is the proper thing for him to do. Forall that goes on around us, there must be one who is the sub-ject. All the elemental substances in the world are doing theirwork by the sankalpa of this basic cause. We have no taskother than to love Paramatma, the very basis of all that we seearound us. He is the only one whom we should truly love. Thegopalas and gopikas have been teaching us this lesson.The culture of Bharath has taught the entire humanitythat it is their duty to travel from untruth to truth and not fromtruth to untruth. It is in this context that the Upanishads havetaught us that we should search for truth. Because man is livingin the illusion of creation, he should not just think that this isall untruth, and avoid life. Just as the water bubble comes out138 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978of the water itself, survives on the water, and ultimately getsmerged in water, which is its source, so also the human naturewhich comes out of Atma, survives because of Atma andshould ultimately merge in Atma. The illusions, that man suf-fers from, are created by man himself. They are not natural toman. Man thinks that he lives in illusion. When I hold a fra-grant flower in my hand, it gives fragrance not only to myselfbut also to those who are in the neighbourhood. In the samemanner, if I hold something in my hand which has a bad smell,that bad smell is given not only to me who holds it, but to allthose who are around me. Here, we should notice that whetherit is good or bad, it is only a reflection of our own mind. Thisis why it has been said that, “man’s mind alone is responsiblefor his bondage as well as for his freedom.” If we drop a stoneon the surface of water, the stone will sink to the bottom as ifthe water has opened up for the stone. Further, as a result ofthe stone falling on the surface of water, there will be severalwaves generated. These waves will gradually spread and travelto the very shores of the lake. In the same manner, if we drop athought in our mind, the good or bad ideas generated willspread all over our body. The thought that generates thesewaves in the tank of our mind may reach our hand and make itdo some bad work. They may reach our eyes and make the eyesee bad things. They may reach our legs and take the legs to abad place. Depending on the nature of the thoughts, we willundertake either good or bad actions. Thus, our thoughts willlead us either to do good things or bad things. Therefore, youshould attempt to accumulate good ideas and good thoughts.The individual who can make his mind free from bad thoughtswill always be a liberated person. Whatever work such a per-son does and wherever he may go, divinity will always be withhim and will see to it that he is successful. He is not interestedin the fruits of the work that he undertakes. Such a person willhave no thought whatsoever on the fruits of his work. He willSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978139always think that it is his duty to do only good work. Histhoughts will always be such that he will only undertake goodand sacred work.The gopalas and gopikas showed how one can intro-duce the aspect of divinity in all their daily activities. Thegopalas have been seeing Krishna ever since their childhoodand they could realise that he always performed things far be-yond the capacity of ordinary human beings. They were wor-shipping him in that context. Although in their minds, they hada clear notion that Krishna was divine, but because of theirbodily relationship they were sometimes thinking that Krishnawas their friend and one among them. In this way, Krishna wasplaying with gopalas and gopikas and giving them pleasure.On one occasion, he asked Yasoda for permission to go withthe other gopalas and with the cows when they go for grazing.The mother said that he was still a young child and that he wasbrought up very tenderly and she tried to dissuade him fromgoing. He then became very stubborn and said that he wouldnot eat his food. Recognising Krishna’s adamant nature, sheagreed to accept Krishna’s request. However, she said that be-cause the forest was full of snakes, thorns and scorpions, shewould have special shoes prepared for Krishna in two days andthat Krishna could then go.To this, Krishna did not agree; and he said that after all,the cows and the young calves were going to the same forestwithout any protection on their legs and so he said that hewould also go without shoes. Yasoda replied that they werecattle while Krishna was a young boy and insisted that Krishnashould wear shoes. Here, Krishna had a nice opportunity toteach a good lesson. He said that it was not right to think thatwhatever moves on two legs is human and what moves on fourlegs is an animal. He started explaining the origin of the word140 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978Pasu and that whoever has external vision only should betreated as an animal while whoever has his vision directed in-ward is a true human being. Whether it is an animal or humanbeing, in form, if he has only external vision, then it is as goodas being an animal. Many people are like crows. They onlywant to understand what is seen externally. They do not wantto know what internal vision is. They are always wanting toenjoy worldly comforts, but very few are making an effort toget inner peace and consequently lead a blissful life. Krishnadiffered from his mother and said that these cows are betterthan most human beings who were behaving like animals. Theanimals are full of love. They have no selfishness in them andthey always lead a life full of sacrifice. The milk that wasreally intended for the young calves is being given to the hu-man beings for providing them with energy and nourishment.Human beings use grass and hay to feed the cattle and in returnthe cattle are giving sacred milk for their use. The cattle areaccepting something that is useless and returning valuablemilk. In contrast, human beings accept and consume goodthings and, in return, do bad things. We should examine care-fully who really is the animal here.If you give a small amount of food, once in a while tothe animal, it will always be very attached and grateful to you.Man does not show this gratitude even if he receives some-thing very valuable. Arguing like this, Krishna said that hemust go with the cows. Realising that Krishna cannot be madeto change his mind, Yasoda agreed to his going; and early nextmorning, she packed some rice and curds along with somepickles and gave it to Krishna as food. Krishna and the cow-herd boys went into the grazing grounds and were playing andsinging happily. The cows were also happily following thegopikas and the gopalas. The calves went with the cows like achild who wants to follow its mother. In this happy mood, theySummer Showers in Brindavan 1978141did not realise where they were going. They lost their way andwandered deep into the forest. In order to feed themselves,they all stopped at the bank of a river and opened their foodpackets. In order to demonstrate the oneness of all the gopalas,Krishna got all the packets opened and mixed up all the foodthat was contained in the packets. He made the food into asmany parts as there were people. Equal portions were handedover to each of the gopalas. They all ate the food that was ap-portioned with the divine hand, with great relish. We say thatby the vision of the Lord, you will get rid of your sin; by talk-ing to the Lord, you will achieve liberation and salvation. Herethe gopalas were not only able to get the vision of the Lord,but also talk to him and touch him. After eating their food, theybegan to play hide and seek. In this game, all the gopalas weregetting caught but Krishna was not caught at all. It is quiteeasy to get at each individual thief but very difficult to get atthe chief of the group. Many times, you would have heard thedescription of the Lord as one who is a big thief of the heartsof his devotees. Such a big thief can be caught only by onewho has pure and sacred love. As the gopalas were thus play-ing with Krishna, even the Gods themselves were watching thegame. Who can get such a fortunate experience of being ableto play with the Lord. They played and played until they gottired. The gopalas thought that Yasoda might get upset ifKrishna was also tired. One of the gopalas spread a towel andKrishna rested his head on the lap of that gopala. The othergopalas were all becoming jealous. They went near Krishnaand requested that each day thereafter, he should rest on the lapof each of the other cowherds. Another gopala came and saidthat equal-mindedness should not just consist of distributingfood equally. He asked that even this pleasure must be givenequally to all of them. In this manner, the normal time bywhich they used to return home had passed. The gopalas haddigested all the food they had taken. They were feeling very142 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978hungry, and they all gathered round Krishna and told him thatthey were hungry. For one moment, Krishna closed his eyesand said that at a short distance away, the Brahmins were per-forming a Yagna and asked one of the older gopalas to gothere and fetch some food. The gopala, accompanied by oth-ers, went running to that place, and asked for food. The rith-wiks were very annoyed and asked these people to go away.They refused to give them food under the pretext that they hadnot yet completed their offering to the Lord. They chased awaythe gopalas saying that they cannot give them any food untilthe ceremonial offering to the Lord was made. They came run-ning back to Krishna and told him everything and asked forguidance as to what they should do. Krishna laughed loudlyand sent them again to that place. He said that thewomen—who knew better about the pangs of hunger—werecooking in the kitchen and they would certainly help if ap-proached directly. The gopalas were habituated to implicitlyaccept and obey the orders of Krishna. They always enjoyeddoing so. The gopalas quickly ran into the kitchen and ap-proached the women directly.The women in the kitchen were told by the gopalas thatKrishna had sent them to seek food. The mention of Krishna’sname melted their hearts and they wanted to know more aboutwhere Krishna was and what leelas he was indulging in. Onbeing told that Krishna was in a nearby place, they quicklygathered some food and went to meet Krishna. The rithwiksfinished the rituals and as it was time to make the ceremonialoffering of prasad to the Lord, they went into the kitchen tobring the food, but they could not find any food. They couldnot find even the women folk in the kitchen. When they wentin search of the women, they found Krishna sitting under a treeand enjoying the food that was being given to him by thewomen. It is said that while women are devoted, men are onlySummer Showers in Brindavan 1978143wise. There is an inner meaning for this statement. This is whywomen get the right to enter the mansion where Paramatmalives. The men who parade their wisdom can enter and reachonly up to the feet of the Lord when he is sitting on his throne.They cannot go further. Here, we should note that in order thatthe strength of simple and unsophisticated devotion as againstthe strength of wisdom may be shown to the world, Krishnahad created this situation. Whenever we want to enter any sa-cred gathering or a temple, a woman always takes the lead. Ifwe look at any instance in the Bhagavatha or Mahabharatha,we see that it is the woman who puts the man on the path ofspirituality. The hearts of our women are traditionally verytender. That is why, in the Bhagavad Gita it has been said thatwe should not let a woman shed tears of sorrow. In a house,where the woman is made so sad that she sheds tears of sor-row, there will never be prosperity. This has been stated in theVedas and the Vedas have placed the aspect of motherhood ona very high pedestal. When one gets hurt, one cries out“Amma” and not “Appa.” Even our country is referred to asmotherland. We say “Mathru Devo Bhava,” “Pithru DevoBhava” and not the other way. The mother comes first. We saySita Rama and not Rama Sita. Similarly we say Parvathi Pa-rameswara and not Parameswara Parvathi. In this manner, allthe sacred texts like Bhagavad Gita and the Vedas have alwaysgiven a high place to a woman. That is why, in a woman,Paramatma is found with seven types of strength and withsixteen different kalas. Because of this divine content in awoman, she can take the path of spirituality with ease. In orderto show to the world this exemplary behaviour of women, thegopikas were given a prominent place. Truly, for a human be-ing, there is no property more valuable than devotion and faith.Whatever education you may have and whatever materialwealth you may have, all that will be a waste, if you do nothave the Lord’s grace.144 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978Foolish people pursue impermanent and transientthings of the world and forget the divine aspects. All educationthat you get today seems to be useful only for feeding your-selves and for eking out a livelihood. Man is only making anattempt to fill his stomach. People are living like animals with-out paying attention to the need for any moral conduct. For thesake of material wealth, they are prepared to sell their honourand reputation.Students!Money comes and goes, morality comes and grows.What is the use of acquiring wealth and money. This will nothelp you at all. Students! you should not live like animals, likedogs and foxes. You should live a sacred life. The quality ofgood and correct education should be to respect elders and tobe respected by your friends. Education should promote hu-mility. Out of humility you will get deservedness and from de-servedness, you will get wealth that you should use for propa-gating dharma. Out of your education, you should acquiregood qualities. If education does not make you lead a good anddharmic life, such an educated person is worse than an animal.If you have wealth and if you use it well by helping others,then you will be a good person. Even if they are physicallyvery strong people, they will not become complete human be-ings unless they are good people. They may be all the timereading Vedas and doing japa, but that will not take them tothe level of true devotees. It is the sacred feeling of onenessalone that can bring people together. A human being who hasno faith or belief is worse than an animal. What do we live for?What have we come here for and what do we seek? Are not theanimals also eating and sleeping? Why do we acquire univer-sity degrees? Is it just for the sake of eating and sleeping? Donot be under the proud feeling that education is only for ac-Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978145quiring degrees. Do not acquire degrees just for the sake of be-coming a slave. True education is meant for giving peace to thecountry. Through your education, you should serve the com-munity and make the people around you happy. If we want todo good to the society and to the people around you, it is mostimportant that we have a sacred and devoted mind.Pavitratma Swarupas,Boys and girls, for the past twenty days you have beenlistening to the sacred text of Bhagavatha. I am hoping thatyou will be able to put into practice at least some of the thingsthat you have learnt here and bring glory to your country20. Non-believers Have No Direct Ex-perience Of Divinity Nor Have TheyRead About It In BooksThe words uttered by elders are like curd andrice. You should accept them in that spirit. If one doesnot do so, great harm will come to him. This word ofSai is a statement of truth.Pavitratma Swarupas:Creation is infinite. Creation has no origin. In this infi-nite and boundless universe, divinity is all pervading and istherefore extraordinarily interesting. In order to know whatPurushottama is and what his manifestations are, man has beenmaking several attempts. Since ancient times, such investiga-tions have been going on; and a ceaseless quest is being pur-sued. Some amongst them have gone through several types ofsadhana and as a result, have succeeded in securing a vision ofthe Paramatma. Some people had to stop this quest midway,but they came to the conclusion that there was a superiorpower, and they suspected the existence of the divine. Al-though such people did not secure a direct vision of the Lord,they strengthened their belief in the existence of the Lord.There is another group of people who keep on saying, withoutany search or experience, that God does not exist. They habitu-ally deny the existence of God. These three categories havebeen entering into arguments from time immemorial and thiscontinues even today. Even now, we come across people whohave had direct divine experience, people who had only indi-rect divine experience and people who have not had any expe-rience at all. Those who have had such an experience are beingdescribed as believers, those who have had indirect experienceSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978147as asthikas and those who have had no experience at all asnasthikas, or disbelievers. However, by the pressure of Kali,there has come into existence a fourth category of people also.This category of people think of the Lord when they havetroubles and problems and are in sorrow; but once their trou-bles and sorrows are overcome, they forget the Lord and evendeny his existence. This category should be described as be-lieving non-believers. One can tolerate even a non-believer butnot the believing non-believer.Those who have had direct experience of God rely ontheir own direct evidence of the existence of God. People whoaccept authority of the evidence coming from Vedas, Ithihasasand Puranas are described as people who accept the SabdaPramana. Those who do no sadhana and who have no experi-ence are the nasthikas. They rely for their authority on mereguess work.The first category of people describe God as being pre-sent in the smallest thing in the world as well as in the biggestthing. It is their concept that God is present everywhere and isall-powerful. The second category believe that God comes inhuman form whenever there is difficulty, injustice and man’sbad deeds have become too many. They believe that God re-sponds to the needs of the people. However, then as well asnow, there can be no direct proof of God’s existence and noone can prove his existence or the absence of God either. If webase ourselves on the experience of the first category of peo-ple, we can have some basis on which to accept the existenceof God. It is their concept that God is present as the tiniest ofthe tiny things and as the biggest of the big things. One mayask how we can see the tiniest of tiny particles and the biggestof big things. Air which constantly moves around us is presentat all times but are we able to see the particles of air? In that148 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978context, how can we see the tiniest among the tiny? We are notable to see even the small particles that we call atoms. Howthen can we see the particles smaller than that? Now let us askif we can see God as the largest amongst the large things. Thesun is much bigger than the earth and is many millions of milesaway. Even if we travel at 500 miles per hour, we will still takemore than 200 years to reach the sun. Also, there are millionsof such suns. Everything that is at such a great distance appearsas small as a tiny star. These stars are like our sun and, in somecases, even larger. They appear as if they are close to eachother. The distance between one star and another star is againvery large. If we take as much time as 200 years to one sun,how much time will we take to reach all the stars. Thus, we areunable to see either the tiny aspect or the large aspect of thecreation itself. How then can we see God?In this world, there are three distinct types. These cor-respond to thamo guna, rajo guna and sathwa guna. It hasbeen said in the Vedas that if you want to recognise and under-stand the aspect of Paramatma, you have to cross the darkboundaries. Although the reality is only one, many people whohave had direct experience thereof, have described it in severaldifferent ways. The Vedas say that the truth is one but peopledescribe it differently. In our own home, the same individual isbeing described as father by the son, husband by the wife, sonby the mother, father-in-law by the daughter-in-law and grand-father by the grandson. Because of different bodily relation-ships, the same individual is described by different names. Inthe same manner, wise people, yogis and persons who had ex-perience have described God in different ways. God has noparticular name or form. The Vedas have described God as onewith a thousand heads, a thousand hands and a thousand legs.If we want to get an idea of such a God, each individual willdescribe him in conformity with his concept and his ideas. SoSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978149far as men are concerned, they wish to recognise God in hu-man form. Unfortunately, with the development of science,people have come to say that we cannot consider any livingperson as God, and that God can exist only as a non-living en-tity. A body with life in it is Shivam and a body without life init is Savam. Is it not foolish to regard a corpse or a dead bodyas Shivam? The situation today is in such a wrong mess. God-hood takes a human form with the specific task of instillingfaith into and showing the path of truth to humanity.The Vedas have taught us that in all this confusion,there is some peace and in that peace there is a divine light andthat is God. The same thing can be expressed by saying that inthamo guna, there is rajo guna and in rajo guna, there is thesathwa guna and in the sathwa guna, we see God. In this man-ner of looking at things, true sathwa guna generates fromthamo guna itself. There is one example for this. On a goodmango tree, there are a number of unripe mangoes. The qualityof the mango is no doubt good; but if you try to eat it when it isunripe, it will be sour. After some time, even an insect will ap-pear within the fruit. When the mango comes to ripe stage,there will be in the fruit a certain sweetness and sourness to-gether. When it is completely ripe, it will fully develop sweet-ness. Thus, although it is a good quality mango, it will tastesour in its early stages, and, in that stage, you should not dis-card it saying that it is sour. We should protect the same thinguntil it fructifies into good fruit. In the same manner, the thamoguna can be compared to an unripe youthful stage. In duecourse, it will grow and become ripe. This stage is of the rajoguna. It is because of this that in the stage of youth, one willfind a lot of wavering. Out of such wavering, you will developsuperior knowledge and wisdom. In adolescence, waveringnature and wisdom coexist. When one ripens into old age, thesame qualities will ripen into sathwik gunas. It is not enough if150 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978you simply attain advancing age. Along with age, good ideas,good thoughts and good feelings must also arrive. Only then,will life develop sweetness. Therefore, we should make certainefforts to promote the sathwik qualities even in the stage ofthamo guna. This sathwik state has been referred to as Sathya.The first step is “Sathyam vada,” or speak truth. In order toreach this stage, you must undertake to perform dharma or“dharmam chara.” But today, this process has been reversed.We are only speaking of dharma instead of practising it, andwe are preaching truth instead of speaking truth. In all the plat-form speeches, we utter words like prema, dharma, sathya,etc., like parrots; but in practice, it is sathya that is discardedfirst.People are afraid of telling the truth. One is afraid evento know the truth about himself. If someone else points out anuntruth, we make an attempt to cover up the untruth. In thesecircumstances, how do you speak the truth? Since we are notable to do this, we say, “Sathyam vadha,” i.e., kill the truth ordestroy the truth. Students: truth is the most basic aspect. It iseven more fundamental than the atom. The word “truth” is thebasis of even the atom. We cannot see the atom, which is verysmall. We cannot see the universe, which is very big. But wecan certainly see the truth. Truth is the foundation for every-thing. It is said, “Sathyam Nasthi Paro Dharmaha.” There isno dharma other than the truth. Direct your life’s journey onthe sacred path towards Parameswara. In this journey, truthmust be your vehicle. Then, you will be able to see that truthitself is God. When we talk of non-believers or believing non-believers, they follow their path only because of their igno-rance. Their path is highly individualistic and has no authority.One’s own experience is the best authority in aspects relatingto God. For one who has tasted a sweet, you can explain how asweet tastes; but for one who asks you to describe the form ofSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978151sweetness, how can you do so? Your experience should arisefrom direct knowledge and that is the best authority. Under nocircumstances can evidence from guess work or hearsay be-come more important than direct experience. Students mustrecognise this clearly.In the word Nastika, there are two parts, Na and astika.Here the negative “Na” comes first and negates the aspect of“asti” or existence of the divine. In this word itself, we can seethe existence of God. There is one more example. We can saythat a particular form is not here, only if the form exists some-where. If we say that this flower is not a rose, obviously aflower called a rose with a certain fragrance and form mustexist somewhere. It is only because of the existence some-where of a rose, that we can say that this flower is not a rose.Similarly, if we say this is not God, it means that there is a Godsomewhere and you are saying that this is not God. This isonly a jugglery of words. The non-believers will say, “There isno God.” The believers will say, “God is now here.” Accord-ing to the non-believer, “God is no where.” If you put “W”close to here it becomes “God is no where” and if you take“W” further away and put it close to “no,” it becomes “God isnow here.”We should never depend upon an authority which istotally based upon an individual fancy. For the citizens ofBharath, the Vedas have been the authority. For Christians, theBible has been their authority while the Muslims accept theKoran as their authority. Thus, each religious group has a sa-cred text which is their authority. Among the citizens ofBharath, there are two groups called Saivites and Lingayats.The Lingapurana describes Shiva as one who has a Bull forHis vehicle. The Vishnupurana says that Garuda is the vehiclefor Ranga. While these groups quarrel like this, the Christians152 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978say that God is like a bright shining star. Thus, each one takesthe authority available to him, but amidst all this, we shouldsee that God is indeed nothing other than basic truth. Whereverwe may go, the one and only one truth takes different forms.The gopikas and gopalas developed such faith in theomnipresence of God, and they believed that God existed eve-rywhere and in all places. When they went to drink water froma pond, they found Krishna there. When people, out of jeal-ousy, gave them poisoned milk, they found Krishna even thereand they thought of him. If Krishna is not present in our heart,we cannot see him at all even though he is really present wherewe look for him. But if he is installed in our heart, then we cansee him everywhere. If we wear coloured glasses, the entireworld will appear coloured. If you keep blocks of salt in yourmouth and eat some sugar, can you get the sweet taste? If youthen say that sugar is salty, where does the fault lie? It lies inyou and in the salt that is in your mouth but not in the sugar. Ifyou are suffering from high fever and eat some sweet, you willnaturally find that it is bitter. The bitterness comes from thefever that you have within you and does not belong to thesweet.The situation today is such that people who are sittingon the bank of a river are preaching to you about the depth ofthe river. They have not experienced the river. In another ex-ample, it is like people giving you a lecture about good food,without actually tasting the food. Basing ourselves on thewords of the blind and lame people, are we justified in at-tempting to cross the river? The blind man has not seen theriver; the lame man has not crossed the river. The non-believers are like the lame and the blind. They have no directexperience of divinity nor have they read about it in books.They start with lack of belief as a faith and they come togetherSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978153to promote this aspect. Students should recognise this truth andconduct themselves in a manner which is right. Put your faithalong the path of dharma, accept the injunctions of the eldersand give happiness and joy to the elders and to yourselves. Ifyou accept such conduct, your life can become an example toothers.21. By Talking Too Much, We MakeThe Tongue Commit Four SinsThe first thing a human being has to do is togive up his bad qualities. By giving up his animalqualities, he comes closer to Pasupati. This word of Saishows you the path of truth.Yoga is equal-mindedness. It is the best among differ-ent kinds of work. Pavitratma Swarupas: In this world, mancannot experience sacredness without an equal-minded ap-proach. It is this equal-mindedness that is the proper sadhanawhich can give man complete happiness. So long as man doesnot try to put into practice his equal-mindedness, his life willbe in a confused state. In equal-mindedness, there are fivetypes. The first one can be referred to as equal-mindedness re-lating to the world. The second is equal-mindedness of a com-mon type. The third is equal-mindedness toward work. Thefourth is equal-mindedness toward devotion and the fifth isequal-mindedness related to wisdom. Our ability, by which wecan control our sensory organs, is the basis for equal-mindedness. In the daily world, just as we have hot and cold,we will also have pain and pleasure. If man can accept painand pleasure with the same attitude, he will be able to lead ahappy life. Under certain conditions, cold will give happinessand in certain other circumstances, heat will give pleasure. Wesee here that both heat and cold can give us happiness. Herewe should note that, although the time is different and the pathis different, the aspect of pleasure is common. In cold winter,warmth gives us happiness. In a hot season, cold will give uscomfort. It appears that hot and cold are opposites of eachother. It is not so. Each one has only an opposite character ofthe other. If there is no cold, we will not give such value toSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978155heat. If we do not know what heat is, we will not give so muchvalue to cold. In the same manner, unless there is pain, we donot enjoy pleasure. Here, sorrow takes the form of a step tohappiness. It is necessary for us to recognise the truth that hap-piness is contained in sorrow and sorrow is contained in happi-ness. It will be possible for us to have an equal attitude to bothwhen we recognise this truth. Pleasure is an interval betweentwo pains. It is only when pain is interspersed with pleasurethat we give any value to the pleasure. It is therefore necessaryfor us to receive pain and pleasure with an equal mind. Suchequal-mindedness is referred to as equal-mindedness relatingto the world. When we can develop such equal-mindedness inworldly matters, we will be able to withstand the troubles thatcome to us.Then comes the equal-mindedness relating to society.Praise and blame, loss and gain, victory and defeat are not tobe regarded as opposites of each other. They follow each other.We will take praise and blame. We should go into this matterand examine the same in some detail. Both blame and praiseestablish man’s steadiness. They appear as if they are contra-dictory to each other, but, in fact, they are not. That whichtakes you to a respectable position will also bring you down.As you are being praised, blame will also grow alongside.When we go on digging a well, a heap of mud will also growalongside. The deeper we go into the well, the higher will theaccumulated mound be. The well will be described as a deephole while the mound will be described as a heap of mud. Wethink that the hole, which corresponds to deep well, is blamewhile the heap corresponds to praise. But when we put theheap of mud into the well, it gets closed. In this context, themud from the well and the mud in the heap are the same. Oncewe realise that this is, in fact, so, we will not be afraid of criti-cism or blame. We will develop an equal-minded attitude for156 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978praise and blame. If there is no mound, we cannot close thewell. We should recognise the important connection which es-tablished that, as the mound grows higher and higher, the wellgoes deeper and deeper. Some people will look at the depth ofthe well while others look at the height of the mound. The cor-rect attitude will be to look at both with the same mind. Onlywhen man can look at both these with the same attitude, willhe be able to progress along the sacred path.We will now take losses and gains. If on the one hand,we feel happy at having secured gains, we will also have totake the trouble of protecting these gains. The same amount ofsorrow that we will have before securing the gains will bethere after securing the gains as well. When we feel happy thatwe have made a profit, we will also feel sorry that the incometax people will take away a good deal of the profit. If we candevelop the attitude that earning Rs. 25 only is the same asearning Rs. 100 and paying a tax of Rs. 75, we can lead ahappy life. If we can develop the attitude that we neither wantthe gain nor the loss, we will then be able to lead a peacefullife. In the same manner, certain attitudes connected with thesociety, like pain and pleasure, victory and defeat, etc., willalways come together. Our first task should be to recognise ourduty. We should not keep thinking whether it will lead to vic-tory or failure. It is man’s duty to make an attempt; the successor failure of the attempt should be left to God. If we developthis attitude, we will not be troubled by success or failures.You are all students; you want to succeed in your examina-tions. You should recognise that the sadhana or the effort ismore important than the success. More than developing thethought that you should succeed, it is important to put in youreffort. You are developing the desire to secure a pass, but youare not putting in the effort that is required to pass. If you putin the right effort, you need not worry about the result. If youSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978157put in the required effort, there can be no doubt about yoursuccess. If by some bad luck, you do not secure the pass, youneed not feel sorry for it, because you have put in the effort.You must develop this stability and equal-mindedness bywhich you neither feel elated nor depressed. If you can havethis equal attitude towards matters relating to society, either thegood or the bad will not unduly worry you.Next is the aspect of equal-mindedness relating towork. In this world, consequences like success and failure forthe work you do are natural. This creation consists of comingtogether and separating of things. Whatever is born is destinedalso to die. But, today human beings want to find a reason fordeath; but they are not wanting to know the reason for birth.We always ask why and how one has died, but we do not askwhy one is born. As we do not know the cause of one’s death,we also do not know the cause of one’s birth. For superficialpurposes, we think that one has died because of an accident orof sickness. This is not so. For death, birth alone is responsible.If we recognise that birth is the reason for death, we will notfeel sorry for death. We should, therefore, not worry about theresults of the work that we undertake. We should recognisework as natural for a human being.The next one is the equal-mindedness relating to devo-tion. For one who recognises that God is the basis of success orfailure, gains or losses, there will be no difference betweenthese aspects at all. In this, we should recognise the equal atti-tude of God himself. Once we recognise the truth that God isomnipresent and is present in everyone, then there will be nodifference between one and the other. By developing suchideas, we will be able to develop equal-mindedness throughdevotion.158 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978There is the equal-mindedness relating to wisdom. Weshould recognise that God is present everywhere and that therecognition of the oneness of God is the basis of all religion.When what really exists is only One, there is no room for anydifference in attitudes. The same life force that is present in anelephant is also present in a dog or in a cow. Since this lifeforce present in all jivas is one and the same, we observe thateverything is an aspect of the divine. So long as you have thefeeling of ownership or so long as you keep saying, “Mine,Mine, Mine,” you will not have a chance to observe thingsother than yours. So long as you have this attitude you will benever able to understand what is not yours. On the day whenyou give up the idea of some things being yours, you willreally understand this aspect of equanimity. You must reduceyour attachment to things. Because through the body, someattachments come up, we talk of relationship. The bad qualitiesthat are present in us are responsible for this. So long as jeal-ousy and ego are uppermost in your mind, God will be at adistance from you. When you are able to get rid of these quali-ties, God will come close to you. To think that one has notgone closer to God, is only a symptom of his own ignorance.The same item can give you happiness at one time and sorrowat other times. For such changes, hatred, ego and jealousy areresponsible.On one occasion, the gopikas looked at the Murali thatwas in Krishna’s hand and they developed some jealousy.They thought that not one of them got an opportunity to be-come as close to Krishna as the Murali, although they wereplaying and living with Krishna right from their childhood.Such an opportunity did not come to the gopikas, althoughthey were very devoted and were all the while thinking ofKrishna. They were whispering among themselves why a merestick of a murali should have such a golden opportunity. ToSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978159this, one gopika said that this piece of stick was such that it hadcaptured Krishna’s heart and was thereby having control overKrishna. Another gopika said that the stick was having itselfpressed by the divine hands. Another gopika said that the Mu-rali has the greatest fortune because the divine Lord was put-ting his mouth on the Murali and they both take a commonbreath. Another gopika said that the Murali has become veryproud because it has an opportunity to sleep on the same bedon which Krishna sleeps. In this manner, while the gopikaswere exhibiting their jealousy while talking about the Murali,Radha overheard the conversation and said that they should notpromote such jealousy. She said that the Murali was givinghappiness and bliss to many people. This great good fortunehas come the way of Murali, because it has done so much goodto others. The music that emanates from the Murali has glad-dened so many hearts. Not only this, she asked them to lookcarefully at the Murali, you will see that, like us, it does nothave too many desires. It is completely hollow and has no pulpin it at all. This is the reason why Krishna has accepted theMurali and plays with it. If we want to get so close to Krishna,we also must become hollow like the Murali, and we shouldnot have any desires or thoughts. When the gopikas realisedthis, they felt sorry that they undertook to criticise the Muraliwhich gave them so much happiness. They understood thatthey were not able to get close to the Lord because of their badqualities. So long as such evil qualities like jealousy and egoexist in us, we cannot get close to the Lord. The gopikasprayed to the Lord by saying, “Oh Krishna, sing a song, speakwith your beautiful voice to the hearts’ content of your devo-tees. Extract the quintessence of the Nada Brahma, and put itinto your murali, mix it and transform it into a song. Sing asong! Oh, Krishna and please your devotees. Oh, Murali, whata fortunate being you are, being so close to the Lord.” Thegopikas who heard Radha, felt very repentant and addressed160 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978the Murali in a very apologetic manner. They were, thereafter,training their minds to go close to the heights of surrender towhich the Murali had already reached.They were telling themselves, “Oh, mind, go to theplace where the Ganga and Yamuna come into confluence.” Inour concept, Ganga and Yamuna meet at Prayag; but accordingto the gopikas, this represents the confluence of Ganga andYamuna which are only symbolic names for the nerves ida andpingala. The place of their confluence is the central forehead.The centre of the forehead where Ganga and Yamuna (Ida andPingala) mix is sacred, pure and calm. The gopikas have de-cided that this place of confluence is also the place of Su-shumna Nadi where one can get peace. The gopikas sent alltheir thoughts to this place, and they were concentrating onKrishna. So long as this idea of difference or duality existed,the gopikas suffered. From the day they experienced an atti-tude of equal-mindedness, the gopikas were happy and lived asacred life. We should also promote such equal-mindednessand not give place to mean thoughts. Such thoughts come toyoung students, particularly in the context of Swami not talk-ing to them. There is nothing wrong in developing prema andlove and desire that Swami should come to you and see you,but it is not right to develop jealousy when Swami showersgrace on others. You should make an attempt to enjoy the blisseven when it has come to others. You must enjoy a state ofmind by which you do not hate others. We must try not tocause hurt or blame to others. This way, you can develop a sa-cred mind. When you develop such a sacred mind, God’s gracewill be showered on you. At that time, there will be no differ-ence between different people at all. In your young age, takingthe gopikas as ideal examples, you must promote the attitudeof equal-mindedness.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978161Talking too much hurts one’s mind and destroys one’smemory. The first thing that you have to do is to reduce toomuch talk. Tell yourselves, “Oh, Tongue! you know good tasteand you are a sacred organ of the human body. You should al-ways utter good words like Govinda, Damodara and Mad-hava.” The eye commits only one sin, that is bad vision. Theear commits only one sin, that is listening to bad things. How-ever, the tongue commits four sins. It speaks untruth, blamesothers, carries tales about others and talks too much. Thetongue thus commits four sins. In order to guard ourselvesfrom the tongue committing these sins, we must make a deter-mination to talk less. This is most important for the students.The energy that is present in you will diminish if you talk toomuch. It will also bring you disrepute. By talking too much,our friends will call us a bore when we approach them. Talkingtoo much will weaken your nerves also. When your nerves be-come weak, you become a nervous wreck; and your tonguewill also not be under control. It is because of this that our an-cestors gave so much importance to silence. They observedsilence over long periods of time. If the same tongue is used totalk about the Lord, it will also remain steady. However, that isthe right thing to do; and if you use your tongue to talk aboutthe Lord, it will also become sacred. To illustrate this, I willgive an example. If you have a radio receiver and use it con-stantly, you consume 10 or 20 units of power. In that context,if the radio in us keeps on talking ever since we are born,imagine how much power is spent. We see, that to the extentwe minimise our talking, we promote the intelligence that ispresent in us. I am hoping that by following such a path, youwill be able to take your life along the sacred path.22. The Noblest Quality Of Woman-hood Is CompassionNowadays, the desires in us are on the exces-sive side. Anger increases such desires further. Peoplewho harbour desires and anger will only come to grief.What greater truth can I convey to you, good people,who are gathered here.The place was the banks of river Yamuna. The atmos-phere was peaceful and beautiful. One could hear the singingof the murali in the cool air. Radha entered the sand duneswith a pot in her hand. Having placed the pot on the ground,she began listening to the enchanting soft music of the muraliand she stood stiff as a stick shedding tears of sorrow. Aftersome time, she heard someone calling, “Radha, Radha.” In-stantly she opened her eyes and looked all around. It was aplace where there were no other human beings. She then satdown and told herself that there may be places where there areno human beings, but there can be no place where Krishna wasnot present. She decided that the call was from Krishna. Sheproclaimed, “What I could play; I have played, what I couldsing; I have sung. From time immemorial, I undertook to playdifferent parts, I had participated in different acts and now it isenough. I wore clothes that may be described as anger and de-sire. I also wore jewels that may be described as attachmentsand moha. I wore anklets that may be described as greed. Iheard about the blame and blemish that came because of this.My mind also supported my actions and provided the back-ground music to my drama. What may be described as com-pany of some bad people sometimes, provided the rhythm andthe beat. Attachment and ego have been keeping time. With soSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978163many ancillaries, my drama has come to an end. For some timeI was performing my drama on water and at other times, I per-formed the same on the earth. These attachments and humanfoibles have been responsible for my inability to put my wholelife at the lotus feet of my Lord. Like a parrot which runs to acotton fruit thinking it to be a mango fruit and gets disap-pointed, I looked at these worldly desires and attractions, mis-taking them for something good and wasted my life in disap-pointment. Krishna! It is enough, this drama of mine shouldnow come to an end. I am requesting you to take my life andmerge me in you. In earlier times, I used to take the nameDhara. Now, I am called Radha.” This creation has three at-tributes. One is its feminine nature. In the word Stree, there arethree letters Sa, Ta and Ra. Sa signifies sathwik guna and Tasignifies thamasik guna. The third letter Ra is the symbol ofrajasik guna. For a stree, the letter Sa is the first letter and thesathwik guna is thus the most essential. Forbearance, humility,and obedience are the three essential qualities that go with thisguna. The next important one is the thamo guna. Fear, hum-bleness and shyness are qualities which are associated with thisguna. Contrary to this, we see that where the sathwik and tha-masik gunas should be present, features like courage, inde-pendence and the desire to take decisions freely are appearing.These features are to be found in some women and are be-coming more pronounced in the Kali Yuga. In fact the KaliYuga was just beginning at that time. She said that when thequalities of courage, freedom and independence of action arebeginning to be seen in women, she would not like to continueliving. Whereas for men, there is only one home, a woman hastwo homes. It is the duty of women to bring reputation to thehouse in which they are born and to hold high the honour ofthe homes into which they go. But the reputations of both thehouses are being brought down to some extent because of in-dependence of action among women. Krishna: it is unusual to164 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978refer to a woman as ‘abala’ or a weak person. This should notbe interpreted by saying that she is always subservient to aman. It should not mean that she is supreme only in thekitchen. The reputation of the entire home and even a wholenation depends on the women. However, in the background ofthe culture of Bharath, women have a specified place in certainrituals and in the giving away of some ceremonial gifts and itis in this background that they are referred to as being ‘abala.’When Harischandara was giving away the kingdom, Chan-dramati had a role to play. While giving away gifts, the wifealso should be a party to it. Otherwise, it will not be a goodgift. She is therefore given a prominent place and described asArdhangi. We will take another instance. When Ramachandrawanted to perform the Aswamedha Yaga, he could not do so,because Sita was not with him. They had to create a goldenidol of Sita to satisfy the requirement of her presence. In thatmanner, whenever a Yagna is performed, according to tradi-tion, the wife must also be sitting along with the husband andthen only the ritual will be completed. In that context, the hus-band and wife are referred to as Somadeva and Somadevi re-spectively. Because of a situation, where such rituals cannot beundertaken by a woman alone, she has been referred to as an“abala”. One cannot interpret this word by saying that awoman is weak in regard to mental or physical stamina.Here, in the aspect of womanhood, one must observeand draw attention to a great quality which may be describedas compassion. The next quality that we must note is theirability to sacrifice. The makeup of a woman is such that shewill give protection in spite of many faults. She can also becompared to an educational institution where she will teachpatiently like a good teacher, even if the recipient is not willingto learn. She may also be described as a happy home where sheis arranging everything without thinking of any discomfort forSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978165herself. We can also think of a woman as a person of sufficientspiritual strength by which she can make Aja, Hara, Hari orGod himself play like a child before her. She can also be de-scribed as one full of sacrifice and compassion. The home ofthe wife is the school where the husbands can learn everything.Radha said that this sacred form of womanhood was taking avery distorted route these days. She further said: “Krishna! tobe near you is my greatest ambition.” In this prayerful manner,holding the pot in her hand, she was rolling in ecstasy in thesand dunes.As Radha was like this, Krishna himself was in Brin-davan waiting anxiously for Radha’s return. While thinkingabout and recollecting Radha’s actions, he was recapitulatingall that he had learnt from Radha. Whatever form one’s ideasand thoughts take, God will respond accordingly. Since Radhahad Krishna in her thoughts at all times, Krishna was alsothinking of her. Just as by having continuous knowledge of theBrahman, one can hope to become identical with Brahman, soalso by constantly thinking of Krishna, Radha wanted to mergein Krishna. If you keep on repeating the word Radha continu-ously, it becomes Dhara and similarly if you keep on sayingRadha Krishna continuously it becomes Krishna-Radha.Therefore, Radha may be transformed into Krishna andKrishna may be transformed into Radha. The nature of God issuch that the thoughts with which we think of him and theideas that we ascribe to him will determine the kind of re-sponse that he would give. God is like a clean, clear mirror.The actions that you perform will be reflected in that mirror.Radha said “Krishna! will anyone want to see the image, if theoriginal itself is available to him? Will the beauty of an objectbe fully reflected in its image? Out of milk which has beenbroken, can we get curds?” While Radha was thinking of166 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978Krishna in this manner, Krishna’s divinity also came out in abright and effulgent form. When this took a separate form, itleft Krishna and began moving forward. In order to get backHis brightness, Krishna was physically following the efful-gence. Gradually, this effulgence came and merged in Radha.In the context of this Jyothi coming and merging in Radha, shewas also described as Ahladini—a name that signifies Ananda.Since this bliss came out of Krishna and merged in Radha,Krishna had to come to Radha for receiving back his efful-gence. God’s bliss can be understood only by the devotees.God is simply a witness. His bliss and His happiness aremerely for the devotees. He gives the gift or the fruit of yourwork, but he does not make you undertake the work. This ex-perience of happiness is that of the devotee and not of God. Ifone wants to experience divine bliss, one has to clean one’sown mind and like Radha, one has to print God’s image in hismind. For man to recognise the glory of divinity and to realisethe divinity contained in all living things, he has also got topurify his own mind and clean it. The love that is contained inman and in God are closely linked with each other in an inex-tricable manner. When the aspect of love in you is made to joindivine love, it will become the sweetest kind of devotion toGod.While talking of devotion and faith, we should knowthat there are six different kinds described as Santha Bhakthi,Sakhya Bhakthi, Dasya Bhakthi, Vatsalya Bhakthi, AnuragaBhakthi and Madhura Bhakthi. Of all these, the best is theMadhura Bhakthi or Bhakthi contained with sweetness. In allthese six steps, Madhura Bhakthi can be regarded as the high-est and the final step.It is not possible to find a higher or better form. Onecan only experience the sweetness of this Bhakthi. It cannot beSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978167described easily. Just as the ghee is the end product of trans-formation of milk, so also Madhura Bhakthi is the ultimateform of Bhakthi. This may be explained by the following ex-ample. By using a little curd as additive, you can convert milkinto curd or buttermilk. If this is churned, you can get butter.This butter can be heated to form ghee. This ghee cannot betransformed into anything better. In the same manner, we canchange Santha Bhakthi into Dasya Bhakthi and gradually moveon to Madhura Bhakthi but this cannot be transformed anyfurther. An individual who undertakes to reach a village willcomplete his journey as soon as he reaches the village. In thesame manner, a devotee or a sadhaka will complete his jour-ney as soon as, and only when, he reaches his destination. Thisis the form of Poorna Prema or the totality of love. Anythingthat comes out of this is also a total thing, and all that remainsis also a total thing. That is full and complete. Out of that, willcome something that is also full and complete. What will re-main will still be full and complete. This fruit of fullness ispresent in the life of every individual. On the tree of every life,there is the fruit of Madhura Bhakthi. If you want to enjoy thatfruit, you should remove the cover. The cover is in the form ofattachment. Moreover, there will be several seeds in the fruit.These seeds, which are our thoughts and desires, must also beremoved. Only then, can you get the sweet pulp. This sweetpulp has been referred to as vairagya. Vairagya does not meangiving up your wife and children and running away to a forest.The removal of the bad qualities in you is the true meaning ofvairagya. If you really want to get rid of the bad qualities inyou, you must make an effort. Radha’s dress was her anger anddesire. The word dress here refers to bodily illusions. She saidthat she had given up these illusions. She was wearing ankletsof attachment. The sound that comes from the anklets is like ablemish. This implies that from attachment, we only get blameand blemish. She also said that she was wearing a garland168 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978made of sensory organs. This signifies that she had given upthe desires coming from sensory organs. She said that becauseof this, she had transformed herself into Radha and made her-self like a ready-made juice. That is, the seed and pulp, thecover and such useless things have all separated out of theirown accord. The reason for this is God’s sacred love. Havingobtained the sacred love of God, she is not concerned with thelove to other persons. She prayed that her movements shouldmerge in Krishna. You will listen to the aspect of her merger inthe following days.23. The Creator And His Act Of Crea-tion Go On ForeverThe tongue moves with great agility between thesharp teeth without being hurt. Man also should con-duct himself with the same agility in this world. Thisword of Sai is a statement of truth.What is seen by your eyes, what moves your mind,what awakens your body and what shapes your entire life is thecreation around you. Gopala is well versed in tending the cowsand looking after the cows. He can give amply. He can playand make you sing. He can move and move others. He canprotect you and make you happy. This is the aspect of gopala.The word “Govu” is a Telugu word meaning the cow, and itmeans several other things as well. It means earth, sensory or-gans, heaven, speech, etc. For one aspect of cow, the aspect ofmother earth is comparable. Our traditions and the Puranas tellus that earth has taken the form of the cow. Gopala recognisedthe position of Radha, who was determined to end her life onthe sand dunes, and came to see her. For both Paramatma andHis creation, there is neither a beginning nor an end. The act ofcreation and the creator are permanent and they go on forever.Conditions may change, times may change but divinity willnever change—creator and act of creation are permanent. Oneaspect of the Paramatma is to look after the cows, protect themand ultimately have them merge in him. However, we shouldsee the significant inner meaning of the “cows” here. Refer-ence to mother earth is the same as a reference to the cow.Reference to the “cows” is the same as reference to sensoryorgans.170 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978“Oh, Krishna! These cows are mischievous andnaughty. I am waiting to hand them over to you. Today, if youagree to let my cows go and merge with you, I will be veryhappy.” Radha prayed to Krishna that he take her cows underhis protection and give her relief. The cow has the bad habit ofdestroying even the best harvest of the field, in the form of Ve-das. “In my offering this cow to you, there may be a doubt asto how you will feed this cow. I will give the feed for the cowalso. I am hoping that by association with you, the bad quali-ties in the cow will be removed.”We should examine and understand the inner meaningof what Radha meant when making this request. When shetalks of her cows, she means her senses which have been trou-bling her in many ways. There is neither a chosen place nor achosen time for such trouble. These sensory organs do notsubmit themselves to the effects of changing times or ofchanging environment. She was troubled greatly by her sen-sory organs. She prays “Krishna, you are Gopala and you havecreated these sensory organs. You alone have the mastery overthese organs. That is why in Bhagavad Gita you have beengiven the name Gudakesa. The word Gudakesa means one whostands in the position of the head of the organs. The letter “Go”also means indriyas or organs. By requesting Krishna to lookafter the organs, she was surrendering to Krishna her ability touse the organs independently. She said that her ego and at-tachment will form good food for the cows, by which shemeans her sensory organs. This food will be eaten with greatrelish by the cows, as if it were green grass. It has always beenknown that the organs survive and are fed by ego and attach-ment. If we find that man is letting his sensory organs functionwithout any control, his ego and attachment are responsible forthis. Here we see that Radha who is in the form of Dhara is inthe state of giving up her ego and attachment completely. InSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978171this drama which was being played, Krishna was using Radhaas an instrument to tell the people of the entire earth about thisaspect of the organs. The entire creation is merely an image ofRadha. Although we may notice some defects in the image be-cause of distortions, the object itself will never have distor-tions, and it will try to attain perfection. In order to teach wis-dom to the people at large, Krishna took Arjuna as an instru-ment. Just as Arjuna was an instrument in that case, Radha wasa suitable instrument in this case. Through Radha, he wasteaching people about the sacred aspects of devotion. It is verywrong for us to think that Radha is an ordinary woman and thatKrishna is an ordinary man and whatever has been demon-strated to us to be the ordinary human connection between manand woman. Krishna used to address Arjuna as Partha. Theword Partha means son of mother earth, and anyone who is ason of mother earth can be addressed by this name. BhagavadGita is not a gift that was given only to Partha or Arjuna. Thecontents of Bhagavad Gita are intended for all living beings.This will create a connection between all human beings. In thesame manner, Krishna took Radha as an instrument to teachpeople about various aspects of devotion. In that context, whenyou can surrender your actions and thoughts to Krishna, youwill have reached the stage of Radha. The word Radha doesnot, therefore, refer only to a woman. We should understandthat anyone who surrenders himself to Krishna will becomeRadha. Krishna taught us in the Gita that he will protect allpeople, who belong to all religions, if they seek him. Radhateaches us that not only should you fill your head with knowl-edge and wisdom, but you should fill your heart also with in-tense love. She teaches us that it is better to fill your heart alsowith love rather than your head with knowledge. Radha istelling us that we should find diversity in divinity, which isreally universal. Radha is telling us that we should surrenderour sensory organs to Krishna. Otherwise, they will take you172 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978along the wrong path. Radha is telling us that we should notbelieve in the transient and impermanent world. We should fixour attention on the permanent aspect of the Lord. She hasbeen telling us that we should not believe in the world, shouldnot fear death and should not forget God. Radha is one whohas given these three main injunctions. Radha is telling us thatwe should, at all times, and in all the gunas, enjoy the bliss ofthe Lord. Radha is telling us that we should get rid of jealousy,particularly when we see others prosper. Radha was one whocleared the suspicions of the other gopikas and made them giveup jealousy.Divya Atma Swarupas:You should make an attempt to promote the divinitythat is present in you and bring it up and enjoy that bliss. Youshould make an attempt to elevate yourself and should not al-low yourself to slip down. One can also prove that one’s ownexperience with regard to the Atma is the most important. Youhave been told that the most important thing is God, and thematerial aspects come only next. But in reality, this is not quiteso. God is the most important and next comes the aspect of “I,”and then comes the third and last stage, namely the world. Buttoday this has become topsy-turvy. The most important thing isthe material aspect, and God is treated as the least important.The divinity in us will get exalted only in certain conditions. Itis important to realise how this divine aspect in Radha wastrying to reach out to others and proclaim Krishna to them.You have been listening to these sacred things day after day,and I hope that you will be able to turn over in your mind,what you have listened to, and attempt to put, at least, some ofthem into daily practice.24. Krishna Was An Infinite Ocean:Gopikas Were Small TributariesMerging In The OceanHappiness is generated where there is totallove. Truth, sacrifice and peace will be associated withsuch a place. There is no safety for anyone withoutlove. This word of Sai shows you the path of love.Gopala left gopis and the Gokula and reached Mad-hura. The whole of Gokula was suffering from the pangs ofseparation. The gopikas who had experienced the taste of di-vine company did not want to have any other experience. Thegopikas were anxiously waiting for the return of Gopala. Everyday, the gopikas were looking at the path along which Gopalamight return. They were waiting to have his vision. Madhava,who knew the minds of the gopikas, sent his friend Uddhava toconsole them. Nobody knew when Uddhava reached Gokula.As the day was dawning, they found a huge chariot in front ofNanda’s palace. The gopikas were overjoyed because theythought that their Lord knew of their sorrow and came to con-sole them. In a moment, the news of the arrival of the chariotspread throughout Gokula. Unable to control their happiness,the gopikas came in groups to Nanda’s house. As soon as theycame there, they realised that Krishna had not come, but sent amessenger to console them. Sinking in disappointment, theyfell on the ground. At that time, Uddhava came out and wantedto give them news of Krishna. Since the gopikas had totallysurrendered themselves to Krishna, they were not in the habitof looking at or talking to a stranger. Their minds did not agreeto a direct conversation with Uddhava. They took a bee as anintermediary and they talked to Uddhava through the bee. Theword Bhramara is a Sanskrit word for bee and this episode isknown as Bhramara Gita. Uddhava tried to explain to the174 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978gopikas that Krishna is God himself and that he has no quali-ties and that he is omnipresent. He advised them that sinceKrishna was omnipresent, there was no need for them to feelsorry that he was away. He told them that they should acceptKrishna’s presence everywhere. In fact, from the very begin-ning, the gopikas were used to worshiping the pure, cleansathwik form of Krishna. Having been used to worshiping aform, they could not readily agree to think of Krishna as aformless divine aspect. Addressing Uddhava through the bee,they said “Oh, Bhramara! He may be a great Yogeswara to theYogis, but to us, he is Nanda Kisora and we want him in theform in which we know him. We do not want him in the formof a Yogeswara. Will it be possible to get rid of all the dark-ness in the world by simply bringing a message about somebrilliant light? Will the poverty of a poor man disappearmerely by his listening to the might of wealth? Will a hungryman’s hunger be relieved only by hearing a description of thefood? Will the disease of a sick man be cured if you describethe greatness of various medicines to him?” They would nottalk directly to Uddhava. They were only addressing the bee.Continuing they said, “Oh, bee, by simply bringing in mes-sages, is our sorrow going to be diminished? By looking at youand hearing your message, can we get the sweet form ofKrishna? By listening to your message, our sorrow is not goingto be reduced. In order that we may have the vision of theLord, we have been spending each moment as a Yuga. By thepangs of separation, our hearts have become heavy and wehave become weak. Under these circumstances, your messagewill not satisfy us.” From their childhood, the gopikas hadplayed with Krishna and had experienced his divinity. Theywill never be satisfied with a message, and they can never ac-cept the suggestion to think of Krishna as a formless entity. So,they said, “Oh, Bee, keep your message to yourself. We needGopala, but not the message. Do what you may, bring GopalaSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978175to us and show him to us. We heard that you are a friend ofGopala. We also heard that Krishna will readily accept afriend’s advice. Please go back to Madhura and make efforts tobring Krishna to Gokula. Reduce our suffering and help us.”Another gopika took up the conversation and said, “We haveonly one mind, and even that mind has gone with Gopala. Wedo not have another mind to listen to you and appreciate thataspect of formless divinity that you are preaching. If we hadmore minds than one, we would have gladly listened to you,but now it is not possible for us to listen at all. Since we haveno other mind, there is no chance of our listening to yourpreaching. So, please return to Madhura.” To this, Uddhavasaid, “Gopikas, do not be in a hurry. At least, listen to the mes-sage that God has sent, read the note that I have brought andsend a reply.” The gopikas then said, “Gokulam is a small vil-lage, there are no big schools here. We are illiterate and cannotread the note. We do not have the ability of reading Krishna’smessage. We are not the type who will be satisfied with a mes-sage or a letter. For one who is used to enjoying what is im-mortal, a letter does not mean anything.” Clearly and categori-cally, they said that the letter is of no use to them. Anothergopika said, “By the suffering of separation, our bodies havebecome hot and unbearable and it is possible that because ofthis heat, the letter may get burnt. Alternatively, the letter mayget drenched by the tears of sorrow from our eyes. In eithercase, it will not be possible for us to read the letter sent byKrishna.” When he heard these sacred thoughts of the gopikas,several ideas were sprouting in the mind of Uddhava. He was agreat scholar, but he did not realise the intensity of the suffer-ing of the gopikas. Within himself, he tried to understand eachand every word uttered by the gopikas and gave it a sacred Ve-dic meaning.176 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978The gopikas said that they had only one mind in thisstatement; Uddhava recognised that there is a high level ofconcentration on the object. He recognised that gopikas had alltheir minds fixed on one object. In understanding that the onlymind of the gopikas was fixed on Krishna, he realised in it, theaspect of total surrender and became very happy. The mind ofhuman beings has three states—state of nothingness, state ofthinking of diverse things and state of concentration. It is verydifficult to attain the state of concentration. It will come onlyafter a lot of effort. Amongst the people who could reach thestate of concentration, the gopikas were at the highest level.All the ideas of gopikas had no relation whatsoever with thingsconcerning the world. Their attention was directed towardsAtma only. Since the gopikas were habituated to worship aform, they had secured this easily. Uddhava recognised theideas that were in the gopikas’ minds and could understandtheir suffering. They said, “Oh, Bee! Our mind is able to pic-ture all the mischievous things that Krishna did. Although inthe superficial form, Krishna and we are different, yet, we areidentical so far as our ideas are concerned. You may teach usmany kinds of worship involving the formless aspect. It willnot appeal to us. It is easy to preach—anyone can do so—but itis difficult to put it into practice. We have been waiting forKrishna’s return.” Such talk melted Uddhava’s heart. He foundthat the physical strength of the gopikas was gradually sinkingbecause they were not eating food or paying attention to theirbodies. While the gopikas were sending messages throughUddhava, Radha was preparing to merge her life with Krishna.Radha reached the Kunjana Vana. At a lonely place, with asacred idea of imprinting Krishna’s picture in her mind, shesaid, “All these days, I had the form of Krishna in the lake ofmy mind. I have been protecting it with tears of love. In courseof time, this lake began to get drier and drier. Then, I kept theform in my eyes and nurtured it with my tears. Even these tearsSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978177are now becoming scarce. In what other manner can I protectthe lotus of Krishna? The time is fleeting away, and I mayhave to leave this body soon. A situation has come when theJyothi of my life has to merge in the divine.” When she wasthus thinking of Krishna with great intensity of feeling,Krishna came. She had only one last wish. She expressed thiswish by saying that she wanted to hear the Lord sing on hisMurali. While listening to the Murali, she gave up her life.Later, Krishna explained the inner significance of this to thePandavas. From that day, Krishna gave up his Murali whichwas with him always, during his younger days. Krishnastopped playing on the Murali from the day when Radha endedher life. It is necessary for us to recognise the close connectionthat exists between Radha and the Murali. The human body inits bodily aspect has nine holes. The Murali also has nineholes. Radha was like a Murali and she had no place in her forany worldly ideas. Radha was above all worldly ideas. Such aRadha came out of the Murali, and she again went and mergedin the Murali. Here Murali means the body. The breathing inand breathing out represents God’s Sankalpa. This is alsotermed “Soham” in the form of Hamsa Gayatri. It also gives usthe ideal “I am that, I am that.” The same idea has also beendescribed in “Thath Thwam Asi” or “That Art Thou.” Whileeveryone is identical with the divine, Radha is establishing thisgreat truth in her form. The following is a small example forthis.In a hillock, there is a rock. A sculptor goes to the rockand attempts to chisel out a figure. When he chisels a figureout of the rock, small bits of the rock fall out. It is only the sa-cred figure that has been carved out that will be put in the tem-ple. Other pieces of rock will remain near the hillock. Theother pieces of rock may keep saying, “We are a part of thebeautiful figure that has been carved out.” This is the meaning178 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978of “Thath Thwam Asi.” This means that the small pieces ofrock and the beautiful idol have come from the same source.Only the sculptor gave a beautiful form to the idol and it isworshipped as being divine. The only difference between thesmall pieces of rock and the idol is in the form and the name.In the same manner, although all the Jivas are identicalwith the divine, the aspect of Radha is like the beautiful chis-elled form, whereas, the gopikas are like the small pieces ofrock. Here we should recognise the great truth that the Eas-wara present in all the Jivas is one and the same. Just as manyjyothis come out of one paramjyothi, many jivas come fromthe divine aspect. We can get a good example for this from thetradition that we follow during Deepavali. We take one singlecandle and with that we light a number of jyothis. If we do nothave the candle, we cannot light so many jyothis. Severaljyothis come from the same jyothi. In the same manner, sinceall jivas have originated from one Brahma jyothi, our Sadhanashould aim at taking back the jivas to the Brahma Jyothi.However, we are forgetting the original Brahma Jyothi andgiving importance to the secondary jivana jyothi. The gopikasrecognised their origin. After having surrendered themselves toone aspect, they would not worship any other aspect. In thismanner, they developed the highest form of concentration. To-day, people have several minds, several offerings, severalpaths, several ideas and thoughts. We are living in diversityand have become distant from oneness. We remember Godwhen we are in difficulty and once our troubles are over, wethink only of the world. Shaping our lives in that manner, yetwe call ourselves devotees of God. Truly, if we compare our-selves with the gopikas and gopalas, we will not find a singleinstance of comparison. Till the very end of their lives, theyrelied on the name and form of Krishna. Everyday, we are alsooffering ourselves, but to what? to children, to wealth and toenjoyment. In that context, we should describe our devotion asSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978179part-time devotion. From such devotion it will not be possibleto get any kind of bliss. Students, you have two ears and youcan listen to two things. You have two eyes and you can usethem to see two things, but you have only one tongue and youshould utter only one word and use it to describe only oneform. This is the real symbol of the path of truth.If we follow this path, we can make our life an idealexample for others. Whatever be the difficulties through whichthey had to pass, the gopikas exhibited only one mind and onlyone objective. They took a vow that even if they live for a mil-lion years, they will not touch anyone else’s feet. They said,they would wait for Krishna till eternity with their eyes lookingto him. We will surrender all we have if necessary, but we willnever accept any other path. By showing such determination,the gopikas were showing an ideal path for humanity to follow.Truly, if we look at Bhagavatha and interpret what is con-tained therein superficially, we will misunderstand it greatly.The gopikas were very blessed people. They led exemplarylives and were so born because of great spiritual attainments.To take such sacred individuals and compare them to ordinaryhuman beings will be very wrong. This is the reason why evensage Suka, who had sacrificed everything, and who would notbe subservient to anything, praised the devotion of the gopikasvery much. Parikshith asked Suka if there was a possibility ofthe gopikas attaining salvation if they go along the path whichthey were following. He asked how the gopikas, who attachedimportance to body consciousness and worshipped a form, getsalvation. To this, Suka replied, “If you completely and unwa-veringly believe that Krishna is God, you will then accept aform. He is of infinite number of forms and is like an infiniteocean. You may compare gopikas to small tributaries or ca-nals. They may have some aspects of attachment. But, oncethis small tributary gets into the ocean, will the ocean be pol-180 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978luted or will the tributary be purified? In this context, weshould cite two good examples. If in ten litres of milk, we mixten drops of water, the result will be milk and not water. If inten litres of water, we mix ten drops of milk, the result will bewater and even the few drops of milk will lose their value.Whatever is in a large quantity will convert the smaller quan-tity into having its characteristics. In the same manner, God islike the infinite ocean. He is the Ksheera Sagara. In this way,if we take our lives with all the impurities in it and merge themin the sacred ocean, the drop will get the quality of the ocean.If the individual goes and merges himself into the infinite di-vine, he will also become divine. This is why it has been said,“Brahma vid Brahmaiva bhavati.” So, do not pay attention tothe ideas and thoughts of man, but pay attention to his desire ofgoing and merging with the divine. Those of you who make aneffort to spend at least a part of your time with the thought ofthe divine, will surely take the sacred path. If you spend allyour life in earning money and thinking of your family andyour relations, what kind of help will you get from suchthoughts after your death? You must make an attempt to get apeaceful death. You cannot escape death. So long as you live,if you spend your time in the pursuit of material objects, whenwill you think of God? That is why Suka advised Parikshith tospend the last days of his life in listening to Bhagavatha. Thewhole of Bhagavatha consists of methods of making man’s lifesacred. For the past twenty-five days, you have been listeningto the sacred Bhagavatha. All this will be useful if you practiceat least one or two of these aspects. Students, boys and girls,you must promote the aspect of divine love. You should notpromote narrow worldly type of love. You should make an ef-fort to promote the divine total love that emanates from thedepths of your heart. You should not promote love which isindividual. You should get rid of narrow ideas and promoteGod’s love. Do not let this sacred opportunity that has comeSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978181your way slip out of your hands. You must make every effortto make good use of this opportunity.25. Service To Man Must Be RegardedAs Service To GodTo set right those who have taken the wrongpath and to protect the good people, Sai will be bornagain and again. He will be born without any pangs ofbirth. What other truth can I convey to you, the goodpeople who have assembled here.Pavitratma Swarupas:The sacred story of Prahlada is very illuminating. Thegopalas have a pure, sathwik and clean mind. The gopikashave been used to worship a form, that is Krishna. On the otherhand, Prahlada was an equally sacred person, but he was wor-shipping the formless aspect of God. Bhagavatha is a conflu-ence of both these features—an aspect of God that has no formand no qualities, and another aspect of God which has a formand some qualities. The worship of the formless aspect of Godand of God with a form constitute the essence of Bhagavathaand may be compared with the two eyes of a person. It is nec-essary for us to recognise these two aspects of God. If we askwhich of the two feet is more important for us to walk, we willsee that both feet are equally important. It is only when wehave both feet that we can walk comfortably. Walking is meantfor reaching the destination.This is a pillow. The outer cover of this pillow is clothand what is inside is cotton. One who worships the visibleform will argue that the cotton is more important. The basis forthis is that without cotton, we cannot have cloth. When we ex-amine the inseparable connection between those two aspects,we will come to the conclusion that the cloth has a certain us-age and the cotton has another type of usage. Cotton is some-Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978183thing that is used to produce the cloth but cannot replace thecloth. So, for everyone who is in a human form, it is essentialto have a form as an aspect of God, at least as a first step. It isnot right for us to begin the search for God by thinking of thecontents of the container, forgetting the container. This is a sil-ver tumbler. We do not see, in this, the silver being differentfrom the tumbler. Someone has given me the silver, and I havegot a tumbler made out of the silver. If the individual asks forhis silver back, it is not possible for me to say that he couldtake the silver and let me retain the tumbler. It is not possible,at all, to separate the silver from the tumbler. In this manner, asthe silver and the tumbler are inextricably connected with eachother, God with a form and God without a form are connectedwith each other. If we just bring a piece of silver and want topour water into it, we cannot do so. If we take the silver andgive it the shape of a tumbler, then only can we use it to con-tain water. Here, the form of the container can be compared tothe form of God. Taking this form as the basis, we can gradu-ally proceed to realise the nature of the contents of that con-tainer. But remember that if we want to sell the tumbler, wewill not get any value for the tumbler. The value is really thatof the silver that is used in making the tumbler. Therefore,when the experience of the Atma flows in a mortal form, onlywhen the aspect of Para Brahman is mixed with this, will itget a value. The purpose of sadhana is to enable us to worshipthe divinity that is omnipresent and help us to see the divinitythat is in us. What we should learn today is the path that willenable us to see the divinity that is present in every one. Prah-lada was one who loves Hari and Hiranya Kashyapa was onewho hated Hari. At all times, there was a difference of opinionbetween the father and the son. As Prahlada grew older, thefather tried his best to teach his son what he considered as thecorrect type of education. For an individual filled with ego,jealousy and arrogance, the world around him is the most im-184 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978portant thing. Since Hiranya Kashyapa was of this type, heused to preach that there was no God, and that he himself wasGod and that there was nothing worthwhile beyond his king-dom. Prahlada was very much against such teachings. He wasfeeling sorry that the people in the world were worshippingSiri (wealth) instead of Hari. He felt that without the presenceof Hari, all the wealth was indeed useless. He began to preachthat Hari was the base and the wealth that one gets is only in-cidental. Prahlada used to think that if only man can learn howto reconcile Hari with Siri, he can then become very blessedindeed. As he was immersed in such thought and actions, hisfather did not like the spiritual path on which his son was go-ing. Therefore, he got hold of two spiritually strong teachers byname Chanda and Amarka and instructed them to see thatPrahlada was put on a different path. Hiranya Kashyapa wasalways worshipping wealth; and Prahlada was always wor-shipping Hari; and between these two extremes, the motherLilavati was suffering very much. Here, we should carefullyunderstand the difference between human beings, demons anddivine persons. When we talk of God, we should not think ofhim as residing at some distant place; in fact he resides in eachone of you. When you think of sin, you should realise that it isnot external to you and it depends on the actions that you un-dertake. Therefore, when we talk of demons, human beings orDevas, it is not as if they are resident at some far off place. Ashas been told in the Gita, this division is really based on theGunas or actions and the classification of the person is deter-mined by his qualities. In keeping with this, Hiranya Kashyaparepresents the demons, Lilavati represents the humans andPrahlada represents the divine ones. Thus, in one family, thefather, mother and son represent demonic, human and divinequalities. In this manner, Prahlada’s actions, which originatefrom divinity, were being promoted day after day. Since Prah-lada had the fortune of being close to Narada, the coming to-Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978185gether of these two divine personalities brought a great deal ofananda to Prahlada. The two teachers, Chanda and Amarkatried to teach Prahlada that Hiranya Kashyapa was God andthat his kingdom was heaven. They were also telling him thatthere was no one greater than his father. However, Prahladanever agreed with this kind of preaching. On the other hand, hewould defy the teachers and tell them that this was not the kindof teaching that they should be imparting to young and pureminds such as his. After some time, Hiranya Kashyapa broughtPrahlada and made him sit on his lap and asked him what helearnt from his Gurus. To this, Prahlada replied that the Gurushad taught him all that there was to learn about the importantaspects of life. He went on to say that “Om Namo Narayana”represents the essence of all learning. As soon as he heard this,Hiranya Kashyapa felt that he was being stung by millions ofscorpions. He could not bear this situation at all and called thegurus and instructed them to use whatever methods of punish-ment they would like, but to see that Prahlada’s attention wasdiverted from the path chosen by him to a different one. Hetried many methods to change Prahlada. He tried to beg him,punish him, cajole him and threaten him, but all these were ofno avail at all. Prahlada would not lend himself to any of thesemethods. He had only one ambition and all these methods didnot deter him from his chosen sacred path. To a person who isin divine samadhi, the worldly punishments will not meananything. On Prahlada who was immersed in the aspects ofNarayana, the punishments had no effect at all. The teachers,Chanda and Amarka came to Hiranya Kashyapa and told himthat all the demons were punishing Prahlada, but this had noeffect on him at all and that he was always in bliss uttering thename of Narayana. He would not suffer or cry in spite of allthe punishments. They got snakes to bite him, elephants totrample on him and beat him mercilessly; but all these were ofno avail. Prahlada was not moved at all. These were not things186 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978which a father should mete out to a son. Hiranya Kashyapa putthe son to indescribable pain and torture, just because the boywas always thinking of the Lord. In return for all this, Prahladawas teaching the father various aspects of truth and God. Hesaid, “A human being who is attracted by transient pleasureswill be mistaking charcoal for a precious stone.”In the same manner in the Upanishads, in order to testNachiketa, King Yama asks him a number of questions. Heasks, “Dear Son! You are in the prime of youth and withoutexperiencing the pleasures of youth, why do you want to enterthe spiritual world?” To this, Nachiketa replies, “These pleas-ures are very transient. They are like passing clouds and arelike visions which one gets in a dream.” He was saying that hewas interested only in the permanent aspects of life. Prahlada,Nachiketa and several other young devotees have demon-strated that youth is no obstruction to experiencing the sacredaspects of divinity. Prahlada has taught the world about thekind of persons that should be regarded as good teachers. Hesaid, “The prayers that are offered to Kamalaksha are the onlytrue prayers. The eyes are valuable only if they are used to seedivinity. The head that bows to Seshasayee is the only headthat counts. All other heads are as good as not being present.That education which teaches us about the Lord is the only trueeducation. The teacher who teaches us about the secrets of di-vinity is the only true teacher. A father who encourages the sonto go and reach Hari is the only real father.” Nowadays, thereare many fathers like Hiranya Kashyapa. If the children wantto attend divine discourses or sacred bhajans, the father dis-courages them and says that they should take to such a pathonly when they grow old and retire from active service. Somefathers even advise their children that they should do suchthings only as a last resort. Because such fathers have becomevery large in number, the children are taking to a wrong path.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978187In this context, Prahlada has also said, “How can you think ofGod when the messengers of the God of death are draggingyou, and your own relatives are pushing your body nearlydead, out of the house and crying over the impending death? Isit possible to utter the name of Hari, at that time, if you do notdo so when you are in good health?” He continues, “Oh! Fool-ish person, when the phlegm chokes your throat and when yourrelatives are surrounding you and crying over your impendingdeath, is it possible to think of God?” It is in this context that itis said that such prayers and thoughts should start at an earlystage of your life. You should start early, drive slowly andreach safely. If you start early on such a path, there is a possi-bility of your blossoming into a good person. If a plant is goodwhen it is tiny, it will develop into a good and straight tree; butif the plant becomes crooked even when it is tiny, the entiretree will be crooked. In the early age, you must see that yourlife takes a straight path. This age of yours is, therefore, themost important one. So saying, you should not give up yourfamily, job and life and go and live in a forest. This is not theright kind of sacrifice. You should have “hands in the societyand heads in the forest.” But today it is exactly the opposite.Many people have their hands in the forest and their heads inthe society. By following such a path, we are losing even thelittle divinity that is present in us. Whatever service we do, weshould regard it as being done in the thought of God. A fewminutes ago, one of the speakers told you that service to manmust be regarded as service to God. Abu Ben Adam earned thelove of God. He was dedicated to the service of man. We maysay that we have a great deal of love towards God, but who isthe one who can measure your love towards God. In fact, Godmust be pleased with your love and say that you have a greatdeal of love for Him. In such a case, God will have love to-wards you.188 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978What is the point of your talking about your love like afrog in the well? Your love must be such that God will bepleased with it and say that in return, you deserve his grace.You should get back an acknowledgement from God that hehas received your love, sent in the form of a registered letter.Whether your love is of a superior type or not, the answer mustcome from the Lord. Prahlada was one who had received thereply from the Lord in many ways. He used to feel that Godwas present everywhere. He felt that his sadhana was alwaysdirected towards the Lord. For him, work was transformed intoworship. On one occasion, after becoming very angry thatPrahlada was not changing his ways, Hiranya Kashyapa sentfor his son and asked where the God to whom he was prayingwas residing. To this Prahlada replied that God was presenteverywhere, wherever he is looked for. Then HiranyaKashyapa asked if God was indeed residing in the pillar infront of them. Prahlada said that God was resident at all placesincluding the pillar. He also said that the aspect of God was sowidespread that there was no place even to put a needle. Thefather then asked if he would see God if the pillar was broken,and he went and broke the pillar. We should here understandwhy the Lord had given his vision to Hiranya Kashyapa whowas always arguing that God does not exist. We should alsounderstand the difference between Prahlada and HiranyaKashyapa. If one has to be born as man, there must be somekarma behind it. Even if a tree has to be born, there must be aseed planted. Similarly for the birth of a human being, theremust be some cause, karma in the form of a seed.In a similar manner, we may ask if God is to come inhuman form, should there be some karma behind it. In the caseof man, he is born as a result of his karma. Man is not born asa result of others’ karma. He is born as a result of his ownkarma. The tree that comes is dependent on the seed. You can-Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978189not get a mango tree, if you plant a lemon seed. However, forthe birth of God in human form, there are two causes. The baddeeds of bad people and the good deeds of good people arejointly responsible for the birth of the Lord. Here, as a result ofthe bad that Hiranya Kashyapa had done and the good thatPrahlada had done, the Nara Simha Avathar had come. Prah-lada proclaimed the truth that God is present everywhere; andin order to establish that truth, God came in human form. In theearlier times, Hiranya Kashyapa believed that God does notexist. and with this belief, he searched for God and he did notfind God. On the other hand, Prahlada found him even in apillar. If you say that God exists, he exists. For one who saysthat God does not exist, He does not exist. For one who saysthat God exists and does not exist, He exists and does not exist.These are only your feelings. No and Yes are not for Sai forwhom it is always Yes, Yes, Yes. To reconcile these two, acertain amount of sadhana is necessary.We now take the incident of a group of people whosaid that God does not exist. One sanyasi comes and says thatGod exists. The moment they saw the yellow robe, the othersbecame angry and surrounded him and asked him if God reallyexists. He asked, “What is it that exists, if God does not exist?If you can show proof that God does not exist, I will showproof that God exists.” The sanyasi, thinking that he mustteach them a good lesson, said that he would show them God ifthey can bring him a glass of milk. Thinking that he can, in-deed, show them God, they rushed and brought him a glass ofmilk. As soon as they heard of this news, the entire villagegathered together. In the centre of the group, the sanyasi wasstirring the milk and carefully looking inside. He explainedthat he was looking for butter. They asked how he could seebutter in a glass of milk. The sanyasi then said that just as onecannot see butter in milk, directly, one cannot see God directly.190 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978To see butter in milk, you have to heat the milk, make it intocurd and then churn the curd. You will then get butter. Thepeople gathered there agreed that, although butter cannot beseen, it was present in the milk and will come out after someeffort. The sanyasi then said that in a similar manner, God waspresent in all creation but would become visible only aftersome effort. Like butter is present in milk, God is present eve-rywhere. As we have to adopt a particular path to get butter outof milk, we shall have to adopt a path called Sadhana to get toexperience divinity and have a vision of the Lord. Prahladafollowed such a path and made the people around him followsuch a path to secure the vision of the Lord.Here we may get a doubt why the Lord had to take thisspecial form to get rid of Hiranya Kashyapa. In fact, HiranyaKashyapa was a great man who did a lot of sadhana to attainthe grace of God; but in course of time, he had also developeda lot of ego and forgot the all-powerful God. When he was per-forming thapas, he asked a boon from God according to whichhe would not die of old age, or in the forest, or in a house; thathe should not be killed by man or animal; that he would not diein a home or outside a home. As God was pleased with histhapas, he agreed to this boon; but in due course, he had to killHiranya Kashyapa because of the very bad qualities that he haddeveloped. In order to keep up the promise that he gave andyet kill him, he had to take such an unusual form that was nei-ther human nor animal. He took Hiranya Kashyapa on histhighs so that he was neither on the ground nor in the sky. Hedestroyed Hiranya Kashyapa by his nails, which neither hadlife nor were without life. God can give boons; but when sinexceeds all limits, he will undertake to punish. Thinking thatwe have the grace of God, we should not exceed limits of sin.The belief or non-belief regarding the existence of God is onlya creation of your mind, and it has nothing to do with God.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978191Today, when people are forgetting the sacred aspect of divinityand when in its place they are promoting sin and the belief inthe non-existence of God, it is necessary for students tostrengthen their faith in God. In the text of Bhagavatha, thestory of Prahlada and the description of the devotion of thegopikas are indeed inspiring and sacred. These stories are suchthat they will easily enter your mind. Prahlada has been show-ing what should be the food that you should eat for this sacredtype of sadhana. One of the main reasons why demoniacqualities are being shown by human beings today is the type offood that people are eating. I have told you several times thatthe type of food that you take will determine the type ofthoughts that you get in your head, and this will determine thetype of sadhana that you do. Whether in the field of science orin the field of spirituality, you cannot but agree that the foodthat you eat determines the type of behaviour that you have.The gross type of food that we eat is excreted out. The subtlecontent of the food is converted into blood. Even more subtlecontent of food changes into our mind. To a large extent, ourideas are determined by the kind of food that we eat and thisshapes our conduct. Food and conduct have become the mainreasons for our good and bad actions. If we really want tocome to this stage of divine comprehension, we should accus-tom ourselves to the appropriate sadhana.Amongst all things that are born, to be born as a humanbeing is the most sacred and most difficult thing and we mustmake an effort to achieve the divine objective. Prahlada wasalways immersed in the divine Namasmarana and, in this age,this is the only thing that will enable us to attain divine bliss.26. Good Health Is OurGreatest WealthTill you cross the river, a boat is necessary. Soalso, till you reach the divine destination, you need thehuman body as your vehicle. Be healthy, do not eat im-pure or unclean food and impair your health.Students,Even after having attained the sacred human birth, it isvery unfortunate if you are not able to put your life on the rightpath. The gopikas were pure and sacred-minded and were usedto worshipping God with a name and form. Prahlada was alsopure and sacred-minded, and he was used to worshipping theformless God. Both were ideal examples for these two paths.People who want to develop themselves along the path of theAtma must have good health and, for this purpose, the controlof food is essential. By eating clean food, we can get a cleanmind and through a clean mind, we can get a clear idea of thegoal. Through such a clean concept of the Atma, we will beable to get rid of the illusion of maya. Through this method,the knot that is present in our heart will open up, and this is thebasis for getting a divine vision. We should not think that theimportance that is being given to the aspect of food is unneces-sary. For all types of Yoga—Pranayama, Niyama, Pratyahara,Samadhi, etc.—correct type of food is the most important ba-sis. You may have some doubt as to why we should give somuch importance to a minor matter like the intake of foodwhen there are so many other important things. Without havingpurity of mind, we cannot achieve even a small thing. By theunclean food that we take in, we expose our body to unneces-sary ills. In creation, there are 84 lakhs of different kinds ofSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978193jivas. Amongst those 84 lakhs of living things, man alonecooks his food and eats it. All the other types of living beingstake their food in the natural uncooked form. By taking tonatural food, these jivas promote their longevity. Because mancooks his food before he eats, the life force that is contained inthe food is partly destroyed. There is an example for this.When we take some seeds and put them in the ground alongwith manure, we get good trees. But if the same seeds areboiled or cooked and then planted in the earth, we will not getany plants at all. This means that by frying or cooking, thesathwik life force that is present in the seeds is destroyed. Byeating such food, man makes himself liable to several types ofdiseases. Because man eats such cooked food, he also becomesdistant from sadhana. It is because of this that in ancient times,rishis and devotees of God were eating only uncooked food inits natural form. This is the reason why Bhagavad Gita in its17th and 18th chapters has described sathwik food as thatwhich has been offered to God. We use the word sathwik foodto convey different meanings in different parts of the world.We generally think that fruits, milk, vegetables, etc., withouttoo much salt or pepper constitute sathwik food. To think so isnatural, but with this feeling, we should not eat too much ofthis kind of food. We should eat only a limited quantity ofeven sathwik food. Alcoholic drinks and meat eating promoterajo guna. Bhagavad Gita has been teaching us that we shouldeat only sathwik food and that too, in a limited measure. Thereis a vast amount of air around us and just because there is air,are we consuming too much of this air? We take it to the extentto which it is necessary for us. Simply because sacred Gangesis available to us in plenty, we do not go and consume toomuch of its water. We take water only in a limited quantitywhen we need it. In that manner, human beings have been con-suming what is required for them; but when it comes to thequestion of food, why is it that we eat too much and in exces-194 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978sive quantities? If we eat more than what we need, we willhave trouble digesting our food. In order that we may digesttoo much food, we will have to spend two or three hours in awasteful manner. Further, it would also imply that we are de-priving someone else of the food that he might need more thanus. In this manner, we will be committing two wrongs. Be thatas it may, such eating will promote ill health. Limited con-sumption of food will promote a clean and pure mind.We now come to food that has already been offered toGod. Neither matter nor food is created by man. The entirecreation is the property of the Lord, and to eat this food, with-out offering it to the Lord would amount to ingratitude. In the15th chapter of Gita this has been expressed by saying thatfood must be offered to the Lord before one eats it. It is saidthat God in the form of Vysvanara is present in you and is con-suming the food. If the food that you are eating is offered toGod in the first instance, it becomes prasad and all the blemishthat may be contained in the food will be removed. So, we saythat limited food and sathwik food which is already offered toGod will enable us to have a clean mind. For our bondage andfor our liberation, our mind alone is responsible; and if wepromote a clean mind, we will have no problems. Every smalltask that we may undertake depends on our mind. If we have toreach a destination, we have to reach through our mind.When we take our food, we are taking it through ourtongue; but we have five different sense organs. In spite ofthis, we think that we are consuming food only through thepalate. Many people wonder why they are getting badthoughts, although they are consuming only pure and sathwikfood. There is something here to which you have to give agreat deal of thought. Sabda, sparsa, rupa, rasa and gandhaare the five senses in us. Whatever we take in can enter ourSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978195body by way of any of the sensory organs, namely, ear, skin,eye, tongue or nose. In a superficial manner, we think we aretaking the food only through the palate, and we are not givingany thought to the kind of food that we are taking through theother organs. When we say that we should accept only sathwikfood, it refers to food that we accept through all the organs.Our eyes must accept only vision that is sacred and sathwik.We should use our eyes to see only the sacred creation of theLord. Just because we have eyes, we should not use them tosee everything without any control. Sometimes when we lookat certain things, the organs within us may become uncontrol-lable. This is why, the sadhakas have laid down that men andwomen should not look at each other too much, as it will pro-mote rajo guna. We should use our eyes only to look at sacredthings. It is because of this that the gopikas were not willing todiscuss too much with Uddhava. They used a bee as an inter-mediary while speaking with Uddhava. They were worried thattheir mind might get distorted if they looked and talked withUddhava. So, they adopted this procedure.The next is the process of listening or the food that wetake through our ears. We should not indulge in blaming oth-ers, criticising others and listening to unnecessary things. Allthis constitutes unsacred food. We should also not listen tothings intended to ridicule others. We should be prepared tolisten only to sacred thoughts of the Lord. We should not beprepared to listen to the blame heaped on others.Then comes the process of smell, the food we take inthrough the nose. You should take only sacred smell which isassociated with divine aspects. Good smell does not meanscent or perfume. Good smell connotes sacred smell associatedwith the divine. Thus, through all the organs, we should try totake in only sacred and pure things. Next one is the sense of196 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978touch. Our ancients have prescribed that contact should be onlywith divine aspects. When we sit down for dhyana, we use asmall plank and sit on that so that there is no contact with theearth. It is not possible for us to realise what happens by con-tact that exists between us and the earth. Those who do notrecognise this truth, ridicule these habits.There is an example for this. This is a flower, and itdrops down, if I let it go. What is responsible for its falling? Itcomes down because the earth has the power to attract. We cansee the flower that has been left in the air. We can see theearth, but we are not able to see the attraction that pulls downthe flower. Just because we are not able to see this power, it isfolly for us to argue that the earth has no power to attract. Inthe same manner, there are several types of attractive powersin the aspect of the divine. The creation that we see around ushas the strength of sound, strength of movement, strength ofbeing permanent and prosperous, the strength of maya andmany other different types of strength. This is why it is saidthat, when you are in dhyana, your body should not be in con-tact with anyone else. There are also other meanings for this.Wherever there is dirt and unclean atmosphere, there would bebad and filthy bacteria, while in a clean place where the at-mosphere is good and clean, there will be clean bacteria. Whenwe touch an unclean body, there is a possibility of the diseasecausing germs flowing into us. Further, that unclean and unsa-cred body may communicate a part of the uncleanness to us.One body and another are like magnets in this case. This is thereason why individuals who take the path of sadhana, shouldkeep away from unclean surroundings and objects. It is in thiscontext that our ancients have advised that we should go andtouch the feet of sacred and elderly people so that the sacred-ness that is contained in their body is transmitted to us. Simi-Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978197larly, if you touch an unsacred body, the impurity or unsacred-ness can also enter into you.It is only when you restrict the intake through all yourorgans to sacred things that you will really be taking onlysathwik food. If you take sathwik food through your mouth inthe form of fruits and milk and use your eyes to see all badthings, there is no use of such a partial restriction. It is becauseof this that the gopikas of those days were promoting the as-pect of sathsanga. Everyday, they used to gather in a sath-sanga, or a congregation of good people, and spend time talk-ing about Krishna. This is why it has been said that out of sath-sanga, you will have good qualities, and out of that, you willget detachment and out of detachment, you will get a steadyand unwavering mind. This kind of sathwic food through allthe organs will be helpful to a large extent.While Chanda and Amarka were causing a lot of hard-ship to Prahlada and uttering harsh words, he was determinedto keep away from the harsh words. Prahlada always utteredthe sacred, “Om Namo Narayana” so loudly that he would nothear anything else. When he was alone, Prahlada used to lookat the exquisite beauty that is contained in God’s creation, butwhen his father or Gurus came, he used to close his eyes. Evenwhen his father spoke to him, he used to close his eyes becausehe was worried that if he looked at his father, bad ideas wouldget into him. The meaning of a sacred saying like, “Yadbhaavan thad bhavathi” is that the thoughts will determine theaction—and of “Brahma vid Brahmaiva bhavati” is that if youhave divine ideas, you will merge with Brahman. These are,therefore, very important. After Hiranya Kashyapa was killed,Lord Nara Simha was preparing to leave and Prahlada startedshivering. Lord Nara Simha asked if Prahlada was tremblingbecause of the fearful and strange appearance of God. To this198 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978question, Prahlada said that he was certainly not afraid oflooking at the beautiful face of God and listening to the beauti-ful voice of God. He said that there was no chance whatsoeverof his being afraid because of God’s presence. Prahlada saidthat he was worried that the Lord would leave after giving hima sacred vision and that he would be left back alone on earth.Prahlada said that he cannot live in the world—even for a mo-ment—without the Lord and that this was causing him a greatdeal of worry.Recognising the great sacredness that is contained inGod’s vision, His touch and His speech, we should decide toaccept through all the five organs, only sacred food. Here,many people may have a doubt as to what is sacred and sath-wik food. I will explain this aspect. Some people think that it isgood to eat a banana or a coconut. Neither coconut nor bananaare bad in any way. Our ancients considered the coconut as asacred food. Gradually, when we look at the coconut, it re-minds us of our head. It also has two eyes and one mouth. Italso has a patch of hair. Some people think that it is a form ofShiva because it has three eyes. In fact, in certain festivals, acoconut is decorated and people perform puja to it. What is thereason for our giving so much importance to a coconut? It isuseful to examine this, even in a worldly sense. Doctors haveexamined this fruit and come to the conclusion that it has veryvaluable constituents. It is believed that this fruit has nearly57% of fat, 15% of powdery material, another 15% of waterysubstance, seven or eight percent of solid matter. The remain-ing eight percent is pulp. The rishis believed this to be a verysacred fruit. An unripe coconut is also a sacred fruit. Whateverwe may eat, provided it does not contain too much salt, chili oracid; and if we eat in the right proportions, it may be describedas sathwic. The ideal proportion is two parts of solid food, onepart of liquid and one part of air. This kind of food will help usSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978199a great deal in our sadhana and we will have good health. It isin this context that it has been said that health is our truewealth. A healthy body will have a healthy mind. However,today man is not accepting any of these good principles and heis subjecting himself to a lot of disease and harm.An individual who wants to attain self-realisation andsecure the vision of the Lord, should first give up bad listening,bad vision and bad food. From that day, he will have movedcloser to his objectives. So, you must strive to remove theblemish in you. A sinner may change but a sin will neverchange. These bad qualities are causing you a lot of harm. Youmust strive to bring a change in the society around you. Youthlike you have the capacity and energy to achieve many greatthings. You must perform sadhana to promote your spiritualand mental wealth. You must also try and control the bad ac-tions that are emanating in the society. You must first rectifyyourself and then try to rectify the society around you. Manyof our scriptures have taught us that good type of food is es-sential. Just to relieve your hunger or fill the basket of yourstomach, you should not eat whatever you see and whereveryour feet drag you. Even if it is some trouble, you must searchfor good and clean food. But young people of today do nothave such patience. We need not go so far. If the coffee towhich you are habituated is delayed even by a few minutes,you get very irritated and excited. You should make an attemptto get rid of such weakness. If you cannot control your actionswhen you are young, you cannot do so when you grow old.While one is young and strong, he must try to control the or-gans. This is the right path which you must adopt. Your actionsmust be undertaken in the thought of God. I hope that you willbe able to take such a sacred path and lead a good life.27. Religious Scriptures HaveNot Been Written ForMaking MoneyGod is your friend, closer than even your ownmother and father. He exists in you in the form of Atma.What I am conveying to you is the simple truth. Whatgreater truth can I convey?In the spiritual field, this country has acquired a greatreputation. Although several changes are coming about in themoral and political areas in the country, the spiritual field hasalways been moving forward. It is not possible for anyone tostop this progress. To the extent to which we are makingspiritual progress, some people think that to that extent, we arebecoming more and more blind in what they regard as themodern aspects. Truly in this modern age, people are living insuch a manner that they do not understand what human natureis. They are under the illusion that this body, which is full ofdirt, impurity and filth, is the real human being. They believethat, if they have some little education by which they can earna livelihood, get a roof to live under and some clothes to wear,they have all that is required. If man is identified only with thehuman body, then, perhaps, the food, clothes, and a housewould be sufficient; but man is not just that. He has a divineaspect that is living within him. America has acquired thereputation of being the wealthiest country in the world, andthere is no lack of prosperity or money for the people in thatcountry. There is no limit for man’s bodily pleasures in thatcountry. On an average, there is one motor car for every fivecitizens in that country. If we pile up the number of availablecars, we may even reach the moon itself. On the AmericanSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978201roads, even if you stand for a whole day, you may not see evenone person walking on the road. Even in such a materiallyprosperous country, one in every five commits suicide. What isthe reason for this state of affairs, in spite of such wealth? Ob-viously, there is every opportunity to enjoy worldly comfort,but there is no chance of enjoying divine bliss.Truly, man is not just the body, he is the one who liveswithin the body. There is a close connection between the onewho lives within the human body and the human being. Youcan get true bliss from the sacred aspect that resides within thebody, but you cannot get any bliss from the material body. Solong as the baby plays with the toys, it gets some happiness fora short period; but the moment the child sees the mother, it willthrow away all toys and rush to the mother because it will thenget permanent happiness. Wealth and possession of materialassets may give transient happiness, but long-standing blisswill come only from the divine. It is because of this that manypeople from affluent countries come and participate in move-ments like Hare Ram and Hare Krishna, for the sake of gettingsome peace. Peace and bliss come from within you and notfrom outside. Man does not live only by food. He lives by theexperience of Atma. Modernised people, who cannot recognisethis truth, are under the illusion that the material world is im-portant. The body is made up of the five material elements, andit is inevitable that the body will fall one day or the other. Theone who lives within the body is eternal. The divinity in thebody has neither birth nor death. What resides in the body inthe form of Atma is God. The life force that is present in you ispresent in all living things. The Upanishads have establishedthe truth that this living force is the same as God. The wholeworld is one and is made up of Brahman and there is no sec-ond parallel to Brahman. This world is impermanent and itcauses trouble. In this world, which is untrue, impermanent202 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978and transient, how can we get bliss? A bird, perched on abranch that keeps on moving, will also keep on moving. Anindividual catching hold of a piece of wood in an ocean willkeep moving, although he holds on to the wood, because thewaves keep the wood moving. In this world, which is intrinsi-cally changing all the time, how can we remain unchangingwhen we form a part of this world?There is no use of our getting attached to this transientbody, which is like dust. You should get attached to God. Godis like our own life breath. We have been given life, only toreach such an omnipresent God. Prahlada has shown that anyson who does not attempt to get the grace of God is not a wor-thy son at all. If with all the fullness which your hands are ca-pable of, you do not worship Shiva; if with the fullness of yourmouth, you do not praise Hari; if there is no compassion andlove of truth in you, what is the purpose of being born, exceptto cause birth pangs to one’s mother? One must give a shape toone’s life in such a way that one earns the grace of God. Weshould follow a sacred path. Having been born, we should doall that is necessary to see that we are not born again. When wemeet our death, we should so meet it that we do not meet it asecond time. This is, indeed, the secret of man’s life. But to-day, in man’s life, to the extent to which the knowledge of sci-ence has grown, to that extent, the strength of man has becomeless. As science has progressed, the sense that is present inhuman beings has become less and less. What you call Sciencecan give you material pleasure but it cannot give you any blissof Atma. Spirituality leads you to the aspect of completeness.Every human being must realise this completeness or the totalknowledge contained in spirituality. The word man or Manavahas three letters, Ma, Na and Va in it. Here Ma signifies igno-rance or lack of knowledge, Na means getting rid of suchdarkness or ignorance and Va implies your conduct. Thus, theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978203word Manava means that you should conduct yourself in amanner by which you will eliminate total darkness and igno-rance. But today, there is no justification for the use of thisword because people are not conducting themselves in thatmanner. This is why even our appearance is completelychanged. Man is wasting his life as if it is a cinema life. We areconducting ourelves in a manner by which we do not even rec-ognise the very basis of human nature. Sacred texts: Bible,Quoran, Bhagavatha, etc., have been showing us the way tofollow a sacred path. All religions teach only good. One shouldconduct oneself, knowing what is good. If one’s mind and at-titude are good, what is it that is bad in any religion? Youngpeople should not promote difference relating to religion or tocommunity. In order that young people may recognise the one-ness of all religions, Prahlada was teaching his companionsabout many sacred things.We are the embodiments of truth and truth is our na-ture. Peace is the basis of all forms in this world. Shivam, orprosperity, is also that which is most sought after by all formsin this world. Thus Sathyam, Shivam and Sundaram form thefoundation for the world, and these three are inseparably con-nected with each other. Just as one and the same item can begiven different names, the divine Atma has been taking differ-ent names and forms. Names may be different but contentscannot be different. The water present here may be describedas “Neeru” by the Telugu-speaking people, “Tanni” by theTamil-speaking people. “Vari” by the Sanskrit-speaking peo-ple and “Pani” by the Hindi-speaking people. All these words:water, neeru, tanni, vari and pani are different names for wa-ter, but the water that is contained is one and the same. In thesame manner, there is only one divine God. The truth, which isonly One, has been described by different people using differ-ent words.204 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978I will give an example so that you can understand iteasily. Different sweets exist with different names likeMysorepak, Gulabjam, Palakova, Laddu, etc. However, in allthese things, the essential constituent is sugar; and if there is nosugar, the sweet will have no name or form. In the same man-ner, divinity is present in everyone; and this has been demon-strated by the gopikas.There used to be one king who was well versed in allaspects of administration including moral, political and aca-demic. He was always able to speak the truth and also makehis people speak the truth. He believed that truth is the basisfor all types of dharma. He established the fact that all dharmais based on truth. On one occasion, there was a test for him andfor his firm determination. When he was sitting on his throneand conducting the business of the state, a very well-dressedand beautiful woman came in and said that her name was Dha-nalakshmi. The king asked why she had come there. She saidthat she wanted to go away and came seeking permission ofthe king. She was permitted to go, and the king did not showany sorrow or unhappiness. After some time, another beautifulwoman came and stood there and said that her name wasRighteousness. She said that there was no use of Righteousnessremaining in the mansion after wealth had left and so she alsowanted to go away. She was also allowed to go. After sometime, a beautiful young man came and described himself asGood Conduct. He said that without wealth and righteousness,there was no place for good conduct and so he wanted to seekpermission to leave the palace. The king agreed to his leavingthe palace as well. After some time another person came andsaid that his name was Keerti or Reputation. He said thatwhere there was no money, Righteousness, Good Conduct,there cannot be room for reputation and so he also sought per-mission to leave. The king agreed to this also. After some time,Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978205another beautiful person came and stood there and said that hisname was Truth. He also asked for permission to leave, butthen the king caught hold of his feet and begged him not toleave. He said that he could live without wealth, righteousness,good conduct or even reputation but not without truth. He,therefore, begged that truth should stay on. He said that truthwas the very essence of his life. In this way, when the king re-quested truth to stay on, he agreed to stay on. When truth thusdecided to stay on in the king’s mansion, Wealth, Good Con-duct, Righteousness and Reputation also decided that they hadno value without truth, and they all came back to the palace.Students:We should try and acquire a life, which is full of loveand truth. We should promote in ourselves, love that is selfless.Life is a very transient one. In the short time that we have, wemust earn good reputation. Calling yourselves students, youshould not behave in a manner that is not worthy of the stu-dents. Young students are such that they have to make a longjourney. Students who have to take such a long journey, shoulddevelop characteristics like love, forbearance and sacredness.Students; in this body of ours which is the tree of life, there areseveral branches. leaves and fruits, etc. To our tree of life, ourown relations are like branches and leaves, and our own ideasare like the flowers. Our belief and faith constitute the roots forthis tree and our bliss is the fruit in this tree. The character thatyou have is like the juice in this fruit. If the fruits do not existon the tree, it will become similar to firewood. Therefore, forthe tree of our life, there should be the fruit in the form of goodcharacter, and there should be roots in the form of our faith andbelief. The thoughts and attitudes of the gopikas were such thatthey were always using them to think of the sacred and divineform of Krishna. On the other hand, Prahlada established theformless aspect of God. Texts and scriptures of all religions206 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978preach only such sacred things. The religious texts have notbeen written for the sake of making money. They are not likecheap useless books that we can get in the market today. In or-der to communicate to the people their personal experienceabout divinity, the great rishis had written these texts. Whathas been taught in the Vedic, Christian, Muslim, Zoroastrian orany other religion, simply refers to the royal road to reach God.However, students are not inclined to read such books. Theysay that they do not have any time to do so. They have the timeto read useless time-wasting books like cheap novels, whichdestroy human character. It is the first and primary duty of allstudents to spend as much time as possible listening to sacredaspects. When the students can acquire and promote such sa-cred qualities, there will be no doubt whatsoever that we willbe able to establish the brotherhood of man and fatherhood ofGod. To establish these truths, many kings and rulers sacri-ficed their lives. If one has no peace of mind, the whole lifewill become a living death, even if you have all the wealth.One may have millions of rupees, but if his health is not good,what is the use of all his wealth? When an individual in a highposition is afflicted with cancer, will his position save himfrom the dreadful disease? It is only when you can earn thegrace and love of God, that you will be happy. Thyagarajasang and said that if he had the grace of Lord Rama, he wouldhave all the strength in the world. We should, therefore, dosuch good work to enable us to acquire the love of God. If mancan spend at least a part of his life in this sacred task, there willbe no doubt whatsoever that he can demonstrate to others, thisroyal path to happiness.28. Good Health Is Man’sGreatest WealthThis body has been given to you so that you maybe a humble devotee and serve God. Do not get ill andbecome dependent on a doctor. This is the word of Saiwhich shows you the correct path.Students!From time immemorial, many rishis have spent all theirtime in this country thinking of God. Questions like: Does Godexist? How can we see God? Can we reach God? are not new.They have been with us right from the beginning of creation.Answers to these questions were sought to be found by manypeople making different attempts. They had sought answers tothese questions with all the strength of thapas built up with un-relenting efforts. They had also tried to find answers to thesequestions by seeking the grace of God. The few people whofound partial answers tried to spread the answers to the othersin the world. They addressed the people through the Vedas andsaid that they had been able to get a glimpse of the strength ofthe great Paramapurusha who is beyond the darkness of igno-rance. They described him as the effulgent shining entity. Godcannot be perceived or understood by looking for him only inthe external world. Although God is omnipresent, he revealshimself in the form of prajnana or knowledge within a person.The Veda has been proclaiming that the eternal God is presentinside the material body which is made of matter and which isdestructible. Diamonds do not drop from heaven, nor can theybe got as a fruit from a tree. Such precious stones will be foundonly in the earth. In the same manner, the precious jewel ofdivinity will manifest itself in the human body, which is made208 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978up of matter. Man’s ultimate objective is to search for this ba-sic divine aspect that is present in all living beings. Today,being unable to recognise the sacred divinity that is residing inus, we are wasting our lives like a person who uses sandal-wood as firewood not knowing its worth. Truly, this divine as-pect, which is present in the human body, will project itselfonly occasionally. Sun’s brilliance is present at all places butby using this brilliance falling on a wall, we will not be able tosee ourselves as in a mirror. So also, sun’s rays falling on treesor mud will not enable us to see ourselves. Sun’s rays fall eve-rywhere; yet we cannot use them to look at ourselves. How-ever, when the sun’s brilliance falls on a mirror, we can use itto see our own face. In the same manner, while God is omni-present and can be found everywhere, we can see him clearlyonly when we look at him with a clean mind. A pure and cleanheart is the weapon with which you can remove ego. The sa-cred aspect of God is such that with its help, we can also re-move jealousy. Using these sacred thoughts of God, the gopi-kas could remove their jealousy and ego. Whatever the gopikasdid in their lives, they did it by surrendering their mind,thoughts and senses to Krishna and, thereby, they led a verysacred life. Whatever they did with their bodies, they thoughtthat it was work done for, and on behalf of, Krishna. Whateverwords they uttered with their tongue, they regarded them asbeing the leela of Krishna. Whatever work they did with theirhands, they regarded that as service to Krishna. Their wordswere always about Krishna. Their smile was always a smileabout eternity. In this manner, at all times, they enjoyed blissand surrendered themselves to the thought of the Lord. Theirbirths may have changed, times may have changed, yet theyregarded themselves as being close to Krishna, their ultimateobjective. They felt that Krishna was present in all forms, hu-man as well as animal and living as well as non-living. Theyused to say, “What is it that we can surrender to you? There isSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978209nothing that we can offer you. Everything is in you and you arein everything. When the entire universe is contained in you,can we serve you any sweets? When you are present in all thewaters of the world, how can we give you a bath with water?You have the brightness of a million suns and how can we usea candle to show you. When the great saints like Ajahara couldnot comprehend you, how can we reach you? We are able tounderstand the nature of the earth only, in your name—Gopala.How can anyone describe your leelas?” In this manner, theydescribed the glory of Krishna and they spent all their lives insuch thoughts. Not only this, they addressed Krishna and said,“Oh! Krishna! If you become a flower, we will become a beeand go round you; if you become a tree, we will becomecreepers and wind round you; if you become a mountain, wewill become mountain streams and go round you. If you be-come the big blue sky, we will be small shining stars in thatsky. If you become the ocean, we will become small rivuletsand flow into you. We cannot bear separation from you at anytime. We pray that we may be given the fortune to be with youat all times. Whatever form you take, we will also take the ap-propriate forms so that we may be with you.” This implies thatbetween the gopikas and Krishna, there is an inseparable con-nection. Krishna is not distinct from his devotees. Krishna’sform depends on the ideas and thoughts of the devotees. TheLord will take a form that is determined by the ideas andthoughts of the devotees. In order that we may experience thesacredness of this divine aspect, a clean mind and a pure formare necessary. Our life should be put on the path of truth sothat we may reach divinity, which is truth itself.Today the situation in the world is such that it is takingthe wrong path in many ways. It is not giving the appropriateenvironment for the young people. In that context, in order toprovide a good atmosphere, the culture and traditions of210 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978Bharath have to be taught to them. Students, in the world it isnot as if there are no individuals who are well versed in sacredtexts like Bhagavatha, Ramayana, etc. But whatever they mayhave learnt and whatever their scholarship be, if they cannotput into practice at least a fraction of what they have learnt,they will simply be wasting their time. All the scholarship willbe useless if it is not accompanied by practice. This can be de-scribed in another manner. “If a donkey carries a fragrant ma-terial on its back, will it become an elephant? We may have thestrength to teach others because we have learnt many books.However, whatever you learn will become utterly useless if itcannot be put into practice. This has been explained by sayingthat if the thought, word, and action are the same, that individ-ual will be described as a Mahatma. This is also described bysaying that a proper study of mankind is man. We have noright to call ourselves human beings if there is no human na-ture in us. The divine aspect does not exist in a foreign land orin any outside space. It exists within us and in us. Studentsmust realise that for people who have unrelenting ambition toseek something which they cannot get, the spiritual path offersa beacon light. By following such a sacred path of truth,Harischandra has carved for himself a name among the sacreddevoted people. His story tells us how, for the sake of adheringto truth, he even sold away his wife and child and finally evenhimself. It is very rare to see such a family in the present ageof Kali. When the husband has all kinds of difficulties and sev-eral troubles, his wife was not only helping him to face thesituation, but was also encouraging him. The husband and wifeshould conduct themselves as an object and an image. Undersome conditions and at some time or other, every man is boundto face some difficulties. Every individual will always havesome problems. But, in the context of such a situation, eachone should help the other. Such patience and forbearance arevery important for men. On one occasion, the wifeSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978211Chandramati touches the feet of Harischandra and asks himwhy he was so troubled. Then Harischandra said that he wastroubled because he could not repay the debt that he owed toViswamithra and that he had no money with him. At one time,Harischandra was a great King and possessed a great deal ofwealth. At that time, the wife, in order to help the husband,said, “As a result of bad times, all the wealth that we had, hasbeen lost; whatever wealth is left is only in the form of mysupport to you and your support to me. So, please sell me tosomeone who can pay for me and redeem your debt.” We willnot see such wives today. They will say that they are not re-sponsible for the debts incurred by their husbands and willimmediately threaten to go back to their mothers’ home. Sur-rendering your mind to the husband and leading a sacred life,you should attempt to establish divinity in your heart. Thegopikas have shown such exemplary conduct in their life. Un-fortunately, in the Bhagavatha that we read and the Bha-gavatha that is depicted to us in the pictures, the gopikas areknown as unsacred people with unacceptable behaviour. Thegopikas showed that their conduct was exemplary even to theDevas. Simply because the gopikas were born in the familiesof cowherds, we are thinking poorly about them. They arereally great Maharishis reborn as gopikas. Their life is dedi-cated to God and you should also realise that they have beenborn with a purpose.It has become common, these days, to think thatwomen’s ideas are catastrophic and harmful. The gopikas haveno semblance to the women of these days. Their conduct wassuch that while fulfilling their daily duties, they always thoughtof God and surrendered themselves to God. They were lookingat their husbands and children as if they, also, were in the formof Krishna. While giving food to their husbands, they used toimagine that they were offering food to the Lord. While giving212 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978bath to their children, they used to think that they were per-forming Abhisheka to Krishna. This was the elevating feelingthey had in them. While cutting vegetables for cooking, theyused to think that they were cutting their bad thoughts out oftheir minds, and that ego, jealousy and anger were being re-moved with a knife. While boiling their vegetables, they usedto think that Krishna’s love was being used as water for boilingthe vegetables. Whatever small task they undertook, they did itwith a feeling that the work was dedicated to Krishna. As Ihave told you once, “If all the women go and seek employ-ment, who will do the work at home? If the husband and wifeboth go to an office, where are the mothers to look after thechildren? If the women go to school to teach other children,who will teach their own children? If the women go about withbooks in their hand, who is going to look after the work in thekitchen? While you may meet the financial troubles to someextent, several new troubles will come up. The happiness thatmay come by getting a job will be nothing compared to the un-happiness that will accompany this.”Today, everyone wants employment. If you are able toget “Yoga” you can easily get a job. The word “Udyoga”comes from Yoga. What is Yoga? This is to fulfil your task inthe correct manner. Since people, who do not have the rightkind of ability are holding jobs, the situation of the country isso deplorable. We do not see people who recognise their duty.We only see the exhibitionism that goes with their positionsand authority. In the very first instance, we should promote ourability and strength. We should first acquire the strength to getright our homes, our villages, and the community around us. Itis, therefore, necessary for the students to read the sacred textsand follow, as examples, the lives of great and exemplary men.The strength of those days was the strength of dharma andrighteousness. Today strength is the strength of wealth, moneySummer Showers in Brindavan 1978213and position. Wealth and money are like passing clouds andcan disappear at any moment. The position or authority that wehave today may drop at any moment. On the other hand, thestrength arising from dharma and the strength arising fromGod are permanently fixed. We should therefore develop com-plete faith and know what is permanent. In the earlier days, allthe Vanaras made an attempt to cross the ocean in order tosearch for Sita. In their attempt to cross a big ocean, they didnot lose their courage and ability. Because they attempted toundertake the task with divine strength and with the constantchanting of the name of the Lord, they could successfullymake a bridge across even the ocean in a very short time. Inwhich engineering colleges did these monkeys get their de-grees? The only degree they had was the grace of Rama. If, ina short while, they could complete a bridge over a deep ocean,can we compare our education to the knowledge they had? Allthe engineers of today come and prepare a five-year plan or aten-year plan and the bridge collapses even before it is for-mally opened. Without spending a single paisa, with faith inGod and with divine strength, those monkeys could undertakesuch a task. Because we depend on material assistance, our en-tire life has become very artificial. Our life today is such thatwe cannot move an inch without money. In the earlier days, itwas dharma which had the upper hand while now, money hasthe upper hand. Students, I am hoping that you will take thiscountry, by working in a purposeful and fruitful manner, to itsancient pristine glory.29. God Is Like A Kalpa Tharu WhichCan Fill All Your WantsOne may have learnt the quintessence of all Ve-das; he may have learnt the Vedanta and Vedangas. Hemay be living in kingly mansions; he may have wongreat victories in the battle-field and may also haveconquered the Goddess of wealth. All this will be use-less if he has no devotion to God. He will be a muchbetter person if he has devotion to God, than even theking of the land. What other truth can I convey to you?Like the Kalpa Tharu, the tree that fulfils allyour desires, there is a God who can fulfil all your de-sires. It is much better to reach the lotus feet of thisGod, than commit sin and go to hell which is unbear-able.Pavitratma Swarupas:Devotion to God is the only path for salvation. For thesorrows of birth and of death which accompany you in thisworld, God’s name is the only solution. We can describe de-votion as the promotion of a sacred mind, in a selfless manner,in the thought of God. The path of devotion will take you,along with your mind, body and action, towards God. As theriver flows into the ocean, the river of your life should flowinto the ocean of God. Human nature should have this as thesacred objective. Truly, having attained human birth, if we areunable to take ourselves towards God, it is useless attainingthis birth. Although there are several paths of devotion, the Ve-das have told us that there are three main ones amongst them.The first one is described as the path of Pushti Bhakthi. TheSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978215second one is described as the path of Maryada Bhakthi. Thethird one is the path of Pravaha Bhakthi.Pushti Bhakthi can be explained by saying that it en-ables you to directly attain the grace of God without the help ofthe normal Purusharthas. By accumulating the good that youhave done in all your lives, you have been able to acquire de-votion of God. Such a path is the path of Pushti Bhakthi. Onecan also describe it as one of total surrender to God. Such aperson will always regard all that he does, as being done forGod and by his grace. Prahlada and Radha are the best exam-ples of this category of devotion. They have shown whatPushti Bhakthi should be. They had such devotion from theirvery birth, and they did not require the help of elders nor didthey have to do any sadhana. They earned the grace of theLord and enjoyed great bliss. Amongst women, Radha, andamongst the men, Prahlada, are shining examples; and theirlives have the specific purpose of being noble examples to allother human beings. Prahlada never left the name ofGod—whether in a state of difficulties and sorrow or in a stateof comfort and pleasure, he was always thinking of God. Thisdevotion of Prahlada and Radha may also be described as thepath generally taken by a cat. The mother cat will take the kit-ten to a place of safety. The kittens will always look for themother cat to come and take them to another safe place. Bythemselves, they will not move from their place at all. Theywill not make any attempt to do anything on their own. Themother cat will take care of all their wants and requirements.All the comforts for the kitten will be provided by the mothercat. In the same manner, Prahlada felt that God will take careof all his safety, and he totally surrendered himself to God.Radha was also like this. She was always looking for the graceof Krishna. So long as you have attachments, you will neverunderstand what really belongs to you. Only when all attach-216 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978ments are given up, you will realise this truth. Prahlada andRadha were devotees who have learnt this great truth and hadexterminated the ego in them. Bliss was their true form.Devya Atma Swarupas:In the totality of this cosmic power, an individual is avery small part. When man wants to love himself, he cannotavoid loving others. Only when he can love others is he enti-tled to love himself. In that context, even if you forget what isgood for others, you will have to recognise the nature of divin-ity. Love of divinity will gradually take a form in which youwill love yourself. This kind of devotion, which is pure love ofGod, must be practised by every individual. Such individualshave been described as individuals with Pushti Bhakthi.The second category has been named Maryada Bhak-thi. Individuals who are well versed in Vedas and who go tothe elders and by getting their grace, achieve the path of devo-tion, may be described as people who have Maryada Bhakthi.They practice the Purusharthas, namely dharma, artha, kamaand moksha and thereby understand the aspect of love of di-vinity. The four Purusharthas are divided into two parts fordaily practice. They put dharma and artha together and kamaand moksha together. They believe that artha or wealth mustbe acquired in a dharmic manner. They also recognised thatwealth is necessary for dharma. They realised that one shouldseek moksha or liberation. This category of devotees believedthat all creation is like a dream and is unreal. Such people havebeen earning the grace of the Lord by their own effort and havebeen described as individuals with Maryada Bhakthi.The third category is Pravaha Bhakthi. In a stream,when water moves away from one place, more water comes tothat place. There is always a state of motion. These people doSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978217not have any devotion or faith. They are devoid of devotionand will always seek the pleasures of the world. This aspecthas also been aptly described by Sankara in the followingwords. “To be born again and die again and take repeatedbirths for the purpose of repeatedly dying, even animals havethis kind of life cycle.” We must first recognise that it is use-less to be continually taking birth in this endless cycle of birthsand deaths. There used to be a very notorious thief. This thiefhad served his sentence in the jail and was informed that hewould be released the next day. He was asked to pack up hisbelongings and be ready. To this the thief said that it is betterhe leave his belongings in the jail itself as he was anyway go-ing to come back very shortly.Although he had spent so much time in the jail, he didnot realise that he should not come back into the prison. Hewas always committing wrong and coming back to the sameplace. This is the characteristic feature of Pravaha Bhakthi.Truly, your life would be a waste, if there is no devotion in it.This category of Pravaha Bhakthi is like the thief. It is likecommitting theft again and again and repeatedly going back tothe prison. Man takes birth, wastes his life in useless thingsand takes birth again and repeats the same cycle. Truly, inBharath because of different religions, our attitudes are alsobecoming very confusing. All the religions have been teachingonly good things. No religion teaches us to speak untruth, or beunkind, or to disrespect our parents. The religions may be dif-ferent with regard to the particular aspects of God about whichwe really do not know, but in regard to what we know or howwe should conduct ourselves, all religions have been teachingthe same thing. All religions have been telling the same thing,in relation to worldly conduct. All religions have agreed that itis good to be able to sing the glory of God. This kind of sacredbliss is the quality of the Atma. All the noble qualities like218 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978speaking truth, loving others, etc., are generated from the Atmaas the source. It has become the fashion in this age of Kali togive up what comes from the sacred Atma. We accept and dothings that are forbidden by Atma. What has been forbidden bythe Sastras is being accepted. In fact, this has become normalwith people. Some others, in this modern age have been argu-ing, that there is nothing like religion. If man has no religion,he will become one without a mind. Students should recognisethat everyone with a mind should have a religion. All the lead-ers who want to propagate that there is no religion end up cre-ating a new religion. They do not recognise the truth that evento say that there is no religion is creating a new religion in it-self. What we may call religion is something that comes fromwithin. Religion is not a bundle of rituals by which we forbidpeople from doing this or that. Only when we can recognisethis basic truth, it will be possible for us to lead good lives.There are many people who are following the wrong path. It iswrong to follow and imitate someone who is an ordinary hu-man being. Today students must realise this. This aspect ofimitation is a sign of weakness. There is a small example forthis.There is a seed and it is blossoming out. You water iteveryday and protect it. Gradually it becomes a tiny plant. Theseed takes the form of a plant with the help of water and ma-nure. However, when the seed becomes a plant, it does notimitate the water or the soil or the manure. It will not changeits natural form; it will grow into a tree. So also, while we mayjoin several people and work with them, we should not changeour natural behaviour. You can make an attempt to absorb thegood qualities. The sacred path is that in which you will notchange your own nature, but you will accept all the good thatis found in others. When we face a problem, we should care-fully examine and see how we can solve the problem.Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978219Happiness or bliss is our nature. Because we give upthis path, we run into all kinds of difficulties. There is an ex-ample for this. If the child in a cradle plays happily, the motherwill not be surprised. In the thought that the child is playinghappily, the mother will go and attend to other things. If thechild, however, is unhappy or crying, the mother will rush tothe child to see if there is an ant or an insect in the cradle. Thisshows that being happy is the natural feature and being sorryor unhappy is unnatural. It is natural for everything that is bornto die. For such a natural thing as death, we are feeling sorry.For unnatural conduct on our part, we feel happy. There is asmall example for this. If there is a small puncture in a cycletyre or car tyre, all the air that is present will go out. This isnatural. But, in a man’s body, there are at least ten big punc-tures and air is constantly going out and coming in. How natu-ral is this situation. Our body is all the time being reborn.Taking such a transient life, we are building castles in the airand thinking that they are permanent. In this process, we areforgetting the permanent and sacred aspect of the Atma.Wealth and fame are necessary but these are all ancillaries;they do not constitute the base. When divinity is present inyou, these will be useful ancillaries. The confluence of allthese makes up man’s nature. For these ancillaries, the aspectof the Atma is like the central heart. It is often said that therecannot be a village without a temple and a human body with-out a heart. Our body, along with all the accessories, should beregarded as a village; and a heart filled with spirituality is to beregarded as the temple in that village. We should recognise thetruth that these two are inextricably connected with each other.So also, we should have health and material possessions, andhaving had them, we should know how to make good use ofthem. We should accept some discipline and limitation. Toomuch of anything and unlimited conduct is not good. We need220 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978food, but we should take it in limits. We need water, but weshould take it in limits. If we transgress these disciplinarylimitations, it will cause a disease. In our body also, there is a98.4° temperature. If what should be 98.4° becomes 99°, wesay that fever has started. Even if there is a little more heatthan required, it means that a disease has started. In the samemanner, wealth, anger, temper and all qualities should bewithin limits. We must put these qualities along a useful path.Today, you call yourselves students. What is the use if we can-not be of service to others. We must make an attempt to ac-quire the obedience and humility that go with education andput them into practice. Having acquired knowledge and wis-dom, if we take a wrong path, what is the use of our education.Today, people are not having Pushti Bhakthi, or MaryadaBhakthi or Pravaha Bhakthi. They are showing LakshmiBhakthi or devotion to wealth. There is a small story.On one occasion, Lakshmi and Narayana were con-versing with each other. Usually women have too many doubtsand hesitations. This is their weakness. When this weaknessenters them, some amount of ego and anger also comes tothem. Because of this ego and anger, an amount of jealousywill start. Lakshmi was in this situation. Here, you should notthink that Lakshmi also has these weaknesses. In order to teachthe people and set an example, such stories are created. Lak-shmi, in fact, has shown an ideal example of womanhood. Po-tana, the Telugu poet described an occasion when Lakshmi andNarayana were playing the game of chess in which there arepawns, horses and elephants. By the use of her horses, Lak-shmi trapped an elephant. At the same time, King elephantGajendra was seeking Narayana’s help. Immediately, Nara-yana shouted that he would come and rescue Gajendra. To this,Lakshmi said that he cannot do so. She was thinking of thegame of chess and the trapped elephant. As this was going on,Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978221Narayana got up and left the place. Here, the poet beautifullydescribed the conduct and humility of Lakshmi. Lakshmi wasin great confusion. She wanted to ask her husband where bewas going. She took a step forward and a step backward inhesitation. She did not want to disturb her husband. In thatconfusion, her hair got dishevelled. Truly, the women of thosedays had great devotion and respect for their husbands and be-haved with great humility.Here, talking about the situation in the world, Lakshmitold Narayana that there were more people in the world whowere devotees of Lakshmi. Narayana said that this was not trueand that the devotees who showed more faith in Lakshmi wereonly behaving superficially. Actually, people who sought truebliss were indeed devoted to Narayana. Lakshmi did not agreewith this and said that she would take a bet on this issue. Bothof them started on a tour to find the truth. Narayana took therole of a great pundit. He had a very convincing way ofpreaching and left an indelible impression on the minds of thepeople. He went into the world, teaching Vedas and Sastras.Lakshmi also took the form of a Yogini and went to the sameplaces to which Narayana went. She adopted a novel proce-dure. If anyone invited the Yogini to his house, she used to in-sist on some procedures. She said that she would not eat fromplates belonging to others. She insisted on carrying her ownplates made of gold and she made it a practice to leave thesegolden plates in the household after eating her meal. In thismanner, because she was leaving these golden plates, the peo-ple who invited her became very large in number. In fact, shedid not have any leisure or respite because of the growingnumber of invitations. She wanted to make good use of herpopularity. She also insisted that she would go to a particularvillage, only if the villagers turned away the scholar who wasvisiting their village. As the propaganda intensified in this222 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978manner, Narayana was not welcomed in any village. In fact,there was no one who would even give him a meal. In thisway, Lakshmi’s popularity increased day after day. After thisdrama went on for some time, Lakshmi and Narayana met andLakshmi asked Narayana if he would accept that her devoteeswere indeed more in number. This is indeed the situation inthis Kali Yuga. The devotees of Lakshmi are becoming manyin number. Devotees going after Siri are becoming many butdevotees going after Hari are reducing.People show their devotion only for exhibitionism, butin fact, they have no devotion at all. When Swami is here, eve-ryone is quiet and disciplined. When Swami goes out, there isneither silence nor discipline. Our discipline should be con-nected with our whole life and not with one place and onetime. Whatever place you may go to and whatever the situationmay be, you must maintain discipline. This kind of faith is truefaith. Just as our breath always keeps going in and out, so alsoour discipline should become our breath and be with us wher-ever we go and whatever we do. Many people come and talkabout God as if it is for exhibition. In reality, so long as yourheart is not clean, God will have no place in your heart. Devo-tees should not feel jealous when they look at others who arebetter off or hate others because they are better off. You cannotcall yourself a devotee if you simply do puja or japa. Weshould prepare our heart in such a manner that we can earn thegrace of Lord. We should know that love is not a one-way traf-fic. You must learn that your entire life must be surrendered toGod. What exists is only One. Truth is One. If there are twothings, it cannot be truth. Young students must learn to pray toGod at least twice a day while doing the duty that is entrustedto them. If we desire to drink sweet water and if we put saltinstead of sugar, how can the water taste sweet? Thinking thatsalt and sugar have the same colour, if we put salt, we will notSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978223get the sweetness. We should learn to control the bad qualities.In every human being, divinity is present to some extent. Weshould learn to bring out this devotion.In this tumbler, there is water and at the bottom of thewater there is sugar. If we drink the water from the surface, itwill be tasteless. If we stir it nicely and then drink it, the waterwill taste sweet. There was sugar even earlier, but when westirred the sugar, it spread everywhere and gave us the sweet-ness. So also in the tumbler of our heart, there is the sweetsugar in the form of divinity. Because we do not recognise thisdivinity, we experience only the superficial worldly pleasures.But if we use our ‘Buddhi’ as a spoon and stir the sugar, withthe help of sadhana, then there will be sweetness everywhere.Therefore, if you perform sadhana, materially and spiritually,you will taste sweetness. But we do not do this. When we talkof God, we talk nicely and say nice things; but we go on de-ceiving people in actual life. Even if others do not know yourdeceit, does not God know your true nature? Thus externalshow is not important. Whatever you want to do, you must doit from the depths of your heart. From ancient times, such ex-ternal devotion in the form of ritual was promoted; and we areunable to show the real strength of inner devotion. Bhakthidoes not consist of having a photo for worship and giving itArati everyday or shouting Baba, Baba. True Bhakthi meansthat there must be a transformation in your behaviour. God iswithin you, around you and in you. He is omnipresent. Recog-nising this truth, you must arrive at the result that you and Godare one. This is the truth that you must realise. Performingsuch Sadhana, and recognising this truth, students should un-dertake to spread the spiritual glory of our country. Only if youachieve this objective and bring about a transformation inyourself, will your stay here, for the last one month, be usefuland purposeful. You should enjoy bliss and also be able to224 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978transfer such bliss to others with whom you come into contact.You should try and develop into people with Pushti Bhakthi orMaryada Bhakthi. You should not have Pravaha Bhakthi.It is not as if you do not know the situation in the worldas of now. Wherever you go, qualities like untruth, unkindness,hatred and jealousy are becoming prominent. At such a time,students like you, armed with weapons of kindness, forbear-ance, love and patience, must enter society and bring about asocial transformation. You should give happiness to your par-ents. In the traditions of our country, it is said that you shouldgive happiness to your father and your mother. Only when youare able to do this, will you have achieved something. It is onlywhen you can put such ideals into practice, will you havelearnt something. Students, boys and girls, you should do allyour work with the thought of God in your mind. I bless youthat you get this strength.30. History And Culture Of One’sMotherland Are Like One’sFather And MotherIf you cannot see God because of your igno-rance, as you cannot see the stars in the daytime be-cause of light, do not say that God does not exist. Whatother truth can I convey to you. Good people alwayssee only good. They do not find a fault at all. They keepon praising all that they see. There is another categoryof people who describe a fault as a fault and good asgood. The third category of people always find onlyfaults and they never see good anywhere. A fourthcategory of people see even good acts as bad acts andthey blame all the people around them. The first threecategories can be tolerated. The fourth category are sobad that even demons are better than them.Students, boys and girls,It is not easy for man to live his life satisfactorily in thisworld. When a student is in a school, there will be a new les-son each day, and a new class each year. It will not happen thathe will sit in the same class in all the years and learn the samelesson at all the times. In the same manner, every sadhaka onthe spiritual path should introspect and find out if his sadhanais correct and improving day after day. If not, he shouldchange his ideas and attitudes and improve himself. A sadhakashould not always remain on a dual path. As the first step, weshould move on from a dual path to one that we call qualifiednon-dualism. This is the duty of every sadhaka. To worshipGod with flowers and to offer incense to him is only the firststep in sadhana. A sadhaka who has good qualities and sacredmind, will always grow in his spiritual stature as he moves226 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978along the spiritual path. It is the duty of every sadhaka to keepon improving from his first step. A sadhaka should not spendall his life in doing worldly puja to God and remain a beginner.He should strive to improve his mental attitude. That iswhy in Bhagavad Gita, Ahimsa has been described as the firstflower. The control of sensory organs has been described asthe second flower of offering. The third flower is described ascompassion. Forbearance is described as the next offering to bemade. Peace, thapas, dhyana and truth are the other flowerswhich follow. The Gita has taught us that one should worshipGod through the eight flowers and one should merge in Godthrough such a blissful experience. In order to worship God,man spends a lot of time in gathering flowers which will onlyfade away in a short while. After a time, these transient ordi-nary flowers will become useless and stale. How are we goingto get true bliss by using such transient flowers to worshipGod? Not only this, these ordinary flowers are available inGod’s creation. They have not been created by man for thebenefit of man. They have been created by God and what is thespeciality, if you take and offer such flowers of God. The treethat has given you the flower will get the benefit by such of-fering. What is the gain that will come to you by such offer-ing? On the other hand, you should offer the fruits of yoursadhana, the fruits that will come from your own sadhana, thefruits which will come from your own life, to God. These fruitsare good conduct, truth, good habits, love, etc. These fruitsmust be grown by the effort of your sadhana. You should offersuch fruits to God. If such fruits, grown by you by your sad-hana, are offered to God, the benefit will come to you. In thepreliminary stages such pujas with flowers plucked from a treeare necessary. To adopt this procedure for all our life is not theright type of sadhana. It will be like sitting in the same class ina school for all your life. As our life span is becoming shorterSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978227and shorter, day after day, we should, through our sadhana,reach a higher step on our spiritual ladder. The essence of goodqualities, good ideas and love should be offered to God asfruits grown by your own sadhana. The world itself will bebenefited by an individual who has good conduct. If fire startson one tree in a forest, that fire will not stop after burning thatparticular tree. It will spread and burn out the entire forest. Inthe same manner, if there is one individual who has bad quali-ties, he will spoil the entire community in addition to ruininghimself. On the other hand, if there is a tree that is full of goodflowers, it will fill the entire area with good flavour and willspread its fragrance. In the same manner, if there is an individ-ual with a high code of conduct, he will not only improve him-self but will also improve the entire society around himthrough his good conduct. In this context, for our attaining ahigh and respectable position or a low and despicable position,our qualities alone are responsible. Our good and our bad arecontained in our qualities. For all these things, the factor that isresponsible is one’s selfishness. So long as this selfishness ispresent, man cannot experience any kind of happiness. Thequality of selfishness is of a demoniac nature. It does not takeinto consideration the happiness or the well-being of others.Students, boys and girls, you must get rid of this selfishness.You should attempt to promote in yourself an attitude of self-lessness and divine love. If you want to get rid of selfishness,you should promote qualities like, sath, chith and ananda.These qualities of sath, chith and ananda are not to be acquiredfrom outside. They are naturally present in us. The quality oftruth is present in us. But, on some occasions, as a result of badqualities, we cover this truth. If truth is not present in us, howdoes it come out on certain occasions. Truth is present withinourselves in a latent and effulgent form. Chith representsawareness. We use this awareness on several occasions to dis-tinguish good from bad. If this awareness is not present, we228 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978will not be able to enquire into anything at all. Thus, this qual-ity of chith is also present in us in a latent form. Ananda orbliss is also present in us. This is evident from the fact that wesometimes feel happy. The sun and the moon are brightlyshining at all times but when there is a thick layer of clouds,we will not be able to see the sun or the moon. In the samemanner, in the sky of our heart, divine qualities like sath, chithand ananda are always present, but when bad qualities likeselfishness and ego are present, they act like the clouds andhide the good qualities. We should promote divine qualitieslike sath, chith and ananda. The human body is not an ordi-nary thing. It is like the temple of God. This body is also like achariot for God. This chariot cannot be empty. In the chariot,the one who has the form of the Atma is the God. It is in thiscontext that we say that God, who is ancient, because he iseternal, is living in this new human body. In this sacred anddivine temple, the human body, the effulgent Atma is living.Like every river flows to join the sea, the human life must alsoflow to join its ultimate destination, the ocean of divinity.There is an example for this. The sun’s rays fall on anocean and convert the water into vapour. If we directly takeocean water, it will taste salty. But, when the ocean water isconverted into vapour, because of sun’s rays, and if this vapourturns into clouds and rain, this rain water will taste very sweet.Here we should ask how and wherefrom does the rain waterget its sweet taste while the water from the ocean tastes salt-ish? The water of the oceans can be compared to knowledgeobtained from books while the water from rains can be com-pared to knowledge obtained from experience. When the sun’srays fall on ocean water, it gets converted into the cloudswhich may be compared with truth. From these clouds, whichwe have called truth, will come the rain drops in the form oflove. The drops of love gather together and form a river ofSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978229bliss. The river of bliss, which is made up of drops of love, willgo and merge in the ocean again There is no other alternativefor this water. That is why it is said that all rivers must mergein the ocean. The water that has fallen on the earth has ulti-mately to merge with the ocean. But, today man has forgottenhis final destination. He is running after illusions. Today, hu-man beings are not able to recognise where they have comefrom and where they are going to. If we take an envelope, wemust write the “from address” or the “to address.” If both arenot written, the envelope will simply go to the wastepaper bas-ket. In this context, we should understand wherefrom the en-velope of our life has come or where it is going to. Life, whichis not aware of either the “from” address or the “to” address, ismerely a waste of time. Out of the time which man spends inthe thought of his relations, friends and others, out of the timewhich man spends in the thought of acquiring wealth andfame, if he spends even a fraction in the thought of God, hewill not have to face the hell. The doors of heaven will openfor such a person. It is not right for us to spend all our time inevil thoughts about others. It is always better to think of Godrather than about others. Thus, the three divine qualities ofSath, Chith, and Ananda must be promoted. We should exam-ine the manner in which we can promote these qualities. Wemust become people with good qualities. Through good con-duct, such sacred ideas will begin to sprout in us. So long aswe keep our attachment to the created world around us, wecannot get such good qualities. The eyes see bad things, theears hear wrong things, the words are such that they criticiseothers. So long as we have such faulty vision and faulty talk,we can never develop good conduct. On the other hand, if oursensory organs are surrendered to God, we may get good con-duct through the grace of God. While it is not an easy thing toacquire, yet by effort, man can achieve these qualities.Whether we receive praise or blame, gain or loss, sorrow or230 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978pleasure, we will have to struggle to get the grace of God byour good conduct.In this manner, the gopikas surrendered all their life toKrishna. On one occasion, Radha said that there was nothingelse for her in her life. She said, “Although I have not even ashelter in the world, I am bearing this life for your sake. I can-not live, if I am separated from you even for one moment. Youare like the eyeballs in my eyes. You are always like a baby inmy thoughts. I cannot have any life without you.” When thegopikas thus regard Krishna as a child, is there any chance oftheir devotion taking an unsacred form. Truly, if we want tounderstand the sacred contents of Bhagavatha, we will be ableto do so only through devotion. If we take our distorted visionand use it to understand Bhagavatha, it will also appear dis-torted. As your thoughts are, so is the result. The result will bebased on the thoughts which an individual has. Radha de-scribed Krishna as the eyeball in her eye. Here also, there is ameaning which you should recognise. When you are standingin front of me and I am standing in front of you, it is naturalthat I see my image in your eye and you see your image in myeye. On the other hand, if we are not looking at each other,then you cannot see your image in my eye and I cannot see myimage in your eye. This statement of Radha, therefore, meansthat the gopikas and Krishna are inseparably situated close toeach other. Krishna is present in their heart as if he has beenprinted on the paper of their heart. Their thoughts are exter-nally fixed on the name and form of Krishna. All their work isdedicated to Krishna. His worship and devotion to him havebecome firm in their minds. That is why the gopikas were ca-pable of such sacrifice and self-surrender. They were experi-encing Krishna with all their mind. On the other hand, our de-votion today is distorted and our view of Radha’s devotion isalso distorted. We may dress like Radha and talk like Radha,Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978231but you cannot get a heart like that of Radha. Even if we do notput on any of these external forms to imitate Radha, if you canhave the heart of Radha, then Krishna will reside in your heart.Our entire life, unfortunately, depends on exhibitionism; andwe seem to derive pleasure from such conduct. Students, it isgreat ignorance to give up the bird in your hand and go afterthe bird in the bush. God does not exist in some separate placeoutside you. When you make an attempt to turn your visionand thoughts inward, you will see divinity within yourself.Although we may accept external actions as the first step, weshould make progress to a higher step. On the other hand, if wealways remain on the first step, when are we going to risehigher. It is only when we recognise the need to go higher, canour life become purposeful. The ideas that are contained in usare moving away like the cold wind or the clouds. Like aflower which blossoms in the morning and fades away in theevening, our life will fade away due to old age. We are forget-ting our duty. Having got such a sacred opportunity, it is un-fortunate that we are frittering away our life in the pursuit ofuseless things. We have been learning for the past one monthabout the sacredness of Bhagavatha. We must learn to surren-der all our actions to God, and only then can we say that wehave learnt something. Gradually, the attachment to externalbody connections should become less and less. We shouldreach a stage when we can accept the Krishna aspect as beingpresent in every one. I have said many times that you are reallynot one person but three persons: the one you think you are,the one others think you are and the one you really are. If youspend all your time in the aspect of what you think you are,namely your body, how will you ever think of God? We shouldgradually turn the external manifestation of devotion to trueinner devotion. Here, ahimsa has been mentioned as the firstflower in this worship. We generally think that ahimsa means232 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978not causing harm to some living being. Ahimsa is not just this.Even bad vision, or bad hearing or bad talk is also ahimsa.Ahimsa really means that you should not cause harm toanyone through your vision, hearing or talking. Buddha alsosaid “Ahimsa Paramo dharma.” On the basis of what Buddhasaid, Gandhi adopted this path. He interpreted ahimsa as thatwhich does not cause any harm to any living object. Aftersome time, he realised that himsa is done even if any harm isdone either by vision, or by hearing, or even by talking. Onone occasion, the cow which he was looking after had a seriousdisease. Several doctors looked at the cow and decided that thecow would not live much longer. When Gandhi realised this,he suggested that an injection be given to end the life of thecow. This was because he thought that even looking at the suf-fering of the cow is himsa for those who look at the suffering.We should interpret ahimsa as not causing any harm or himsato any individual by any means. In this manner, young stu-dents, both boys and girls should be prepared to enter into so-ciety and do the right kind of service. In the very first instance,you must try and understand the sacred nature of your country.As soon as one is born, one recognises his father and mother.So also, we should regard the dharma or righteousness and sa-credness of our country. We should regard the history andculture of our country as our father and mother. Students oftoday do not know about the history of our country, and theyknow much less about her culture. This means that the studentsof today are in the unfortunate position of not being able torecognise their own parents. Truly, one’s motherland is moreimportant than ever the parents who gave birth to you. Stu-dents should recognise that the body is only a reflection of thecountry. The society is in a very degraded state. The sacred-ness of our culture is becoming tarnished. Students shouldcome forward to revitalise the sacredness of the country.Summer Showers in Brindavan 197823331. Brahman Is Ananda:Anando BrahmanThis motherland of ours has given birth to anumber of great people who have spread her name andfame all over the continents and the world. We haveestablished our independence after driving away theoutside rulers and earned a great reputation for herlearning and scholarship. This country of ours has alsobeen known for its fine arts, scriptures, culture andtraditions. Since you have been born in this greatcountry, the responsibility for maintaining her glorioustraditions is on your shoulders, boys and girls.I will give you the quintessence of all Vedantain one sentence. ‘The Atma that is present in all livingbeings is one—and the only one—and that is no otherthan you.’That was the early morning time. The environment wassuch that the mind was put at ease, because of the cool breeze.The rising sun gave the entire sky a golden colour. In this verypeaceful atmosphere, a thought was generated in the mind ofBhrigu. In this sacred atmosphere, the mind of Bhrigu was in-deed constantly generating sacred thoughts. Who is Brahma?Who discovered this aspect of Brahma? What constitutesBrahma? Who is responsible for all this creation? In this man-ner, from moment to moment, Bhrigu was troubled with ideasand filled with the desire to learn the answers to such ques-tions. Bhrigu made the firm determination to get at the an-swers. Unable to contain himself any longer, he went to hisfather to seek an answer. His father Varuna was an all-knowing person. He prayed to his father to give him theSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978235knowledge that he was seeking. Varuna did not have any ob-jection to give answers to such questions, but in those days, theenvironment was such that the answers to such questions wereto be sought by the students themselves. If a guru clears thedoubts of the disciple as soon as they arise, then the disciplewill lose all capacity to seek and search for answers. Every in-dividual must be given some independence to seek answers tosuch questions and satisfy his curiosity. In this manner, Varunawanted to give such an opportunity to Bhrigu. He gave himonly a brief outline and said, “Brahma is one in whom allcreation started and in whom all creation will merge. He is alsothe one who sustains all Creation.” Having received these indi-cations, Bhrigu went back to the forest and after a great deal ofthought came to the conclusion “Annam Brahma.” He thoughtthat man is born out of food, man lives on food and food sus-tains man. Ultimately, man dies because of what be eats, andso he came to the conclusion that ‘food is a form of Brahma’and returned home. He came home and asked his father if whathe has learnt was the truth or whether it was merely a reflec-tion of his ignorance. The father said that he had not yet recog-nised the true significance of Brahman and suggested that hego back to the forest to seek further answers. He went back tothe forest and contemplated for some time. He began to won-der if man can live by food alone. If there is no life in man, canthe body enjoy the food that is kept before him. He thereforeconcluded that life is more important and concluded that“Pranam Brahman.” He made several attempts to reach thisconclusion and came again to his father. Again his father saidthat the answer was not correct and suggested that he shouldmake further enquiry. Here we may wonder if it is right for thefather to keep on sending his son back to the forest withoutgiving him the correct answer. A true seeker of truth should beprepared to undergo any amount of trouble to get at the truth.The teachers of those days believed that each person—be he236 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978their son or some one else—should undergo all the troublenecessary to learn the truth. The gurus of those days were suchthat they recognised this aspect. Bhrigu went back to the forestand in many ways was making attempts to learn the truth ofBrahman. He asked himself if food and life were available,would man be happy and contented. Would it be right to con-clude that man is born only for food and sleep. He came to theconclusion that in order to understand life, one’s mind is mostimportant. If mind was not present, we can never understandhuman nature. If there is no mind, one cannot understand theconnection that should exists between man and man. Mind,alone, is responsible for bondage and liberation of a humanbeing. He thus came to the conclusion that mind is the form ofBrahman. He returned to his father and reported to him hisconclusion. Again the father said that he should go back to theforest and seek the truth. Bhrigu did so and thought that if manhas not got the ability to distinguish right from wrong, his lifewill become useless even if he has food, wealth and mind. Oneshould be able to distinguish the permanent from the imperma-nent. Sometimes we also accept this and say, in common par-lance, that if a man has no Buddhi, he is useless. In this con-text, Bhrigu came to the conclusion that Buddhi is Brahman.This was referred to by him as “Vignanam Brahma.” When hecame back to his father and reported this conclusion, the fatherwas still not happy and suggested further enquiry. Bhrigu wentback to the forest again. A true jijnasu will have such intensedesire to seek an answer to his questions. Without such con-centration, one cannot achieve true satisfaction. Today, ourconcentration is on transient and impermanent things. The Ma-harishis and students of the earlier days had immense concen-tration on their objective. This is the true destination of man.This is the secret of man and should be the final destination ofman. After having acquired human birth, he should make anattempt to understand divinity. Bhrigu continued his enquirySummer Showers in Brindavan 1978237and came to the conclusion that however learned a man maybe, unless he has bliss and happiness, his life is useless. Thepurpose of life is ananda and life comes from ananda. As awater bubble is born in water, grows in water and merges inwater, man has to be born in ananda and sustain himself byananda and finally merge in ananda. Bhrigu came to the con-clusion that this ananda was Brahma. He was filled with suchananda and this began to grow. He did not come back to thefather. After a few days, the father himself came to see him.Bhrigu was fully immersed in bliss and, for such a person,there is no father, or mother or relatives. The father recognisedthis state of bliss and blessed his son.Fathers and sons of those days were such that they wereafter truth. Nowadays, if the children ask any questions aboutthe aspect of Brahma, the parents will curb such curiosity bysaying that they should not waste their time. They are told tothink of such things only after getting old. Today, many peoplewho are preaching the aspect of Brahman will go nowhere be-cause they are subservient to the worldly desires. There a smallstory here. Nanak was propagating sacred ideas of God andeven the Muslims were attracted by his teachings. It appearedas if the teachings of Nanak were acceptable to all religions.He was one who was clearly indicating the path that oneshould adopt. After some time, some religious leaders startedworrying that all the Muslims may take to Nanak’s religion.They carried complaints to King Akbar and created tales aboutNanak which would influence the King against Nanak. Theywanted Akbar to punish Nanak. Akbar however had a verysteady mind and a great respect for all religions. Even thoughthe religious leaders complained about Nanak, he did not be-lieve them. Akbar decided that he should talk to Nanak directlyand assess the situation. He sent for Nanak, but Nanak wouldnot come to meet kings who rule over the material world. He238 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978said that he would go only to devotees. He said that he is a freeperson moving in God’s Kingdom and would not come to meetAkbar. Such a reply further excited the religious leaders. Theywere planning and inquiring further to trouble Nanak. How-ever, Akbar sent word to Nanak, again telling him that the nextday there would be prayers in honour of God at the mosqueand requested that Nanak attend the prayers. He also sent apalanquin to carry Nanak. However, Nanak thought it very ar-rogant to go to God’s abode in a palanquin and walked to themosque. Much before others came there, he unobtrusively satin a corner. The religious leaders began to recite prayers; andas soon as this started, Nanak laughed very loudly. All thoseassembled there felt very angry. Nanak was laughing so loudlythat people were not even able to hear the prayers. After sometime, Akbar began to pray and Nanak laughed even moreloudly. All others who were assembled there felt angry that hewas humiliating even Akbar. After that, Akbar went and askedNanak softly why he had laughed, when the prayers were be-ing recited. Nanak said, “Although the priest was recitingprayers, his thoughts were in his home where the child washaving fever. The priest’s mind was directed towards hishome. If the mind says one thing and he does something else,he cannot be a religious leader. This is not helpful at all.” Ak-bar went and asked the priest if, in truth, his mind was thinkingof his son when he was saying the prayers. The priest con-firmed that as the child was suffering from high fever, he wasthinking of his son even while reciting the prayers. Akbar thenasked Nanak why his laughter continued even when he startedto pray. Nanak then said, “Surely you know why I laughed.Before you came here, several horses were sent to you by theking of Panchala, and you have a great liking towards horses.Although you were praying here, your thoughts were on thehorses. Is this not true?” After Nanak gave this answer abouthis laughter, Akbar helped Nanak spread his religion and gaveSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978239him all support. In the prayers, that we undertake, we go onstriking at the mosquitoes soon after we start the prayer. Be-cause religious leaders like Nanak of earlier days had thepower to concentrate, they were called Mahatmas. Theirthought, word and deed were totally united. Today, it has be-come difficult for man to even live as man. Because of the ad-vances in science, man is learning to fly like a bird in the sky,swim like a fish under water, but, unfortunately, he has notlearnt to live like a man on earth. If we cannot live like a manon earth, what is it that we achieve by living like a bird in theair? That is why we say, “How many are born as human be-ings? How many become human beings after being born? Howmany of them, having been born as human beings, have givenup the right conduct? If a human being gets to be described assuch, just because of his birth, then who is the monkey?” Onedoes not become a human being by birth. One should showthat he is a human being by his conduct and behaviour.The body may be that of a human being; but in him,there is no right conduct at all. We should, therefore, shapeourselves as human beings. There is an example for this. Thereis a microphone here. If there is no current in this microphone,it is useless. In the same manner, in the body of a human being,only when there is a current in the form of divinity, will it haveany distinctive feature. The body is like a negative aspect. Thedivinity in the body is the positive. It is only when the negativeand the positive come together, there will be some good. To-day, the negative is in good shape, but the positive is totallymissing. In such a body, how can we expect to promote therighteous conduct. It is easy to understand why righteousnesshas disappeared. If there is a head with bad thoughts, if thereare ears which are willing to listen to bad things, if you want topry into others’ activities, how can justice and truth even re-main with you. If we want to live like human beings, we240 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978should, if necessary, with the help of elders, take at least one ortwo good aspects of life and put them into daily practice. Stu-dents, in the sacred history of our motherland, there have beenmany sacred texts like Ramayana and Mahabharatha. Ninetypercent of the students have no idea of these sacred books. Ifyou are children of Bharath and if you do not know the sacred-ness of Bharath, how can you call yourselves citizens ofBharath? Truly, you should recognise the glory and sacrednessof your motherland. If you do not do so, your life is as good asliving death. I hope that at least from today, you will recognisethis sacred truth and that you will be prepared to serve the so-ciety through the Sai organisations. You should recognise thatthe Sai organisations represent the essence of all religions.There is no use having stayed here for one month if you do notput what you have learnt here into practice.32. Control Of Senses Is Most Impor-tant For Young StudentsThe form of pure love is Brahman: Brahman isfull of divine love. If love is joined with love, it becomesdiscipline. If one is full of love, one is entitled to be-come unique in his own way.This great motherland of ours has earnedreputation going far beyond our boundaries. This greatcountry has defeated western rulers and acquired free-dom. This country has been known for its art and cul-ture. It is known for her traditions and Sastras. Peoplewho are born in this land have the responsibility ofmaintaining the traditions and dharmic reputation.Young students, this responsibility is on you.Without Sathya, Dharma, Prema and Shanthiwhatever education you may have, the value of thateducation is zero. Without Sathya, Dharma, Prema andShanthi whatever gifts you may give, their value iszero. Without Sathya, Dharma, Prema and Shanthiwhatever positions of authority you may occupy, the re-sult is zero, For the mansion of Sanatana Dharma,Sathya, Dharma, Prema and Shanthi constitute the fourpillars of foundation. What other truth can I convey toyou good people, who have assembled here.Dear Students, boys and girls, teachers, people in positionsof authority in the field of education: Today, many problems are confronting us, and thereare very few amongst our leaders who can help us clear theconfusion. Every aspect and every sphere of life is full ofproblems. Even education is not able to help in the solution of242 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978these problems. The ideal which education is demonstratinghas taken a crooked form.The creative ability that should exist in the field of edu-cation has broken to pieces. Man is performing his journeyalong a path where he is not able to recognise the true aspect ofhuman nature. Today, the entire field of education appears tobe covered with a rough blanket. While eating our food out ofsuch a rough blanket, it is foolish of us to think that our foodshould not contain any bits and pieces of cotton or fibre. If wethink so, it will be an illusory belief on our part. The humannature of today is such that we are not able to see any spirit ofsacrifice or adherence to truth in it. In these circumstances, thestudents should enter into the spheres of worldly matters, ethi-cal and spiritual, and set themselves as ideal examples. In fact,these summer classes are arranged with that objective andhope. Truly, the essence of the right type of education is that itshould give you the ability to stand on your own legs. Goodeducation is to enable you to get rid of servitude in all aspects.The very object of correct education should be to enable you tohave a vision of your divine self. When man loses his ability tosacrifice and his ability to conduct himself in a selfless man-ner, the education he receives will become utterly useless. Solong as we depend only on economic prosperity, this will beour fate. What cannot be achieved through work, what cannotbe achieved through wealth, can be achieved through sacrifice.The immortality that you wish, and the divinity that you wishto reach, can be achieved through sacrifice.In Bharath, hard work is the main Yagna. We need alarge number of people who are willing to do hard work. Thedetermination to shed laziness and take to hard work and ac-cept divinity should sprout in all of you. The culture of Bharathand the traditions of our country should evoke a spirit of faithSummer Showers in Brindavan 1978243and belief in us; and, thereby, we should recognise the sacred-ness of our own self. The field of politics, or material prosper-ity or even education cannot offer a short cut for us. Man’sbroad mind, sacred views and hard work are very necessaryand constitute the only path to take us to our destination. Wemust push away ego. We must accept sacredness. We mustrecognise the brotherhood of man and the fatherhood of God.Only when we can take such a path, this sacred country ofBharath will prosper and march into glory. Students have tomake a long journey in their life. Students should take courage,should take the divine path and become broadminded withgood and helpful ideas. They should become heroes and re-move injustice, unkindness, and untruth from the society. Stu-dents should not become cowards. They should push awaytheir weaknesses and take a leap forward with faith in God andhelp society. If we can light one bright lamp in one house, theentire street will be lighted. In a similar manner, if each studenthas in his heart a bright light, there will then be no doubt what-soever that the whole community will be led from darkness tolight. Today, either for the weaknesses or for the faulty ideas inthe minds of students, they are not responsible. Because in thetender minds and soft hearts of these students, outsiders makepolitics enter and the students get so excited. Students shoulddecide for themselves what path they would like to take andwhat destination they would like to reach. They should guidetheir own conduct in consonance with that decision. Theyshould regard service to community as their main objective.Discipline and adherence to sacred work must be promoted bystudents. Discipline is the most important path for the students.They should respect their parents and their motherland. Forone month, in this peaceful place, you have listened to sacredideas given to you by learned and pure-minded elders. Whatyou have learnt here and what you have experienced here andthe bliss that you have enjoyed here should be recapitulated by244 Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978you in all your life. Truly, if you have any problems, youshould make an attempt to solve them peacefully. You shouldnot convert every problem into a violent situation. By havingindividual ideas and selfish interests, you should not bringblemish to the whole country. The peace of the world shouldbe in your mind. There may be some problems in the case ofindividuals. This is natural for students. Control of their sensesis most important. In fact, this is the basic difference between aman and an animal. Only if man can control his senses, can hebe better than an animal. One should not let his mind go un-controlled. One should control and train the mind in such away that it will be subservient to him. For the process, anamount of Yoga is necessary. Students like you should promotea healthy and sacred mind. Only if you are able to do this, willour country be able to move along a prosperous path. If you goalong the wrong path, the motherland will suffer a thousandtimes more than what your parents suffer, if you do not pro-gress in your education. Every student should shape himself asan ideal example. I have told you many times that a damagedcar which comes for repair and replacement of various partslike nuts, bolts, screws, etc., should, after repair, be in a goodcondition when it is sent back home. In a similar manner, youhave all come here with the need for repair. You have comehere a month ago as a damaged car. You have been repaired inthis workshop and your old and mean ideas have been re-placed. When you go back to your homes, you should try tomove the car of your life with clean ideas and good conduct.You should no longer have evil vision, faulty words or badthoughts. You should do good work and set yourself as an ex-ample to others. If after going home, you still conduct yourselfwith the same old bad habits, what is the benefit of coming tothe summer classes? You will also be setting a bad example toyour friends. You will have lost all goodwill. Your time, effortand physical strength will have been wasted and become unsa-Summer Showers in Brindavan 1978245cred. Students, what you have learnt, acquired and seen hereduring the past one month should be put into practice for therest of your life. Many things which you should know andwhich you should accept in practice for your daily life havebeen taught to you in the last month. You should not think thatthe summer classes have come to an end. The education thatyou have to get is a continuous and life long one. Do not havethe thought that from tomorrow we are bidding you farewell.This place always welcomes sacred ideas and sacred thoughts.If you have imprinted in your heart, the experiences that youhave had here, the good that you have acquired here will al-ways be with you. Spiritual aspects are well above worldly af-fairs. Wherever you go, the experience that you have had herewill come to you in good stead and help you whenever youneed them. Many elders have told you about ideals, and youshould attempt to put them into practice. I am hoping that youwill do so, and I bless you that you may be able to do so.