SUMMER SHOWERS 1990INDIAN  CULTURE  AND  SPIRITUALITYDiscourses byBHAGAVAN  SRI  SATHYA  SAIBABADelivered during the Summer CourseMAY-JUNE 1990© Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications TrustAll Rights ReservedFirst published in IndiaLarge Print Edition 1993Book also available in BraillePrinting rights granted by arrangements with theSri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust,Prasanthi Nilayam, IndiaTo: Sathya Sai Baba Society andSathya Sai Book Center of America305 West First Street,Tustin, California, 92780-3108Published and distributed by theSathya Sai Book Center of AmericaCONTENTS1. The glory of Indian culture  ..................................................................................... 12. Sanctify the body.......................................................................................................63. The moving temple..................................................................................................124. Mastery of the senses...............................................................................................205. Road to Divinity.......................................................................................................286. Hold the reins...........................................................................................................357. Vagaries of the mind................................................................................................408. Buddhi the charioteer...............................................................................................459. Egoism and attachment............................................................................................5010. The three gunas......................................................................................................5411. Know thyself..........................................................................................................5912. Self-knowledge......................................................................................................6313. What is freedom?...................................................................................................6614. Practice and precept...............................................................................................7415. Ascent of man........................................................................................................7916. Vedic wisdom.........................................................................................................831.The Glory of Indian CultureThe entire Cosmos has emerged from TruthAnd it will merge back in TruthWhere is the place beyond the sway of Truth?Behold, brothers, That which is the Pure Sathwa!Embodiments of Divine Love, dear students, teachers and patrons of education!To every man born on earth, Truth is verily the visible God. The entire universe con-sisting of movable and immovable objects has emerged from Truth. Sathyam-Jnanam-Anantam-Brahma. Truth is indeed Brahman. Truth is endless. According to Vedantins,Truth is synonymous with the eternal Brahman. Hence, truth alone has to be revered byeveryone. Bharathiyas (Indians) are wedded to truth and righteousness. Justice is theirmainstay. Every man is the inheritor of truth and righteousness. Young boys and girlswho want to promote peace and harmony should strive to seek and pursue truth. Bhara-thiyas cherish the welfare of the world. Our youth should therefore dedicate themselvesto universal well-being. This is our creed or religion, so to speak. It is because we haveforgotten such sacred truth as well as our culture and the sanctity thereof, that we are un-able to achieve communal unity and national integrity.Truth and righteousness will never submit to anything. All kinds of power, whetherphysical, intellectual, monetary, military, or political, have to bend before truth and right-eousness; but the latter will yield to none. Truth and righteousness will always triumph.The chief requisite of man’s life is to be human. Whatever our scholarship or positionof authority, we should not ignore the human values. Indian culture is unparalleled andmost wonderful. Having forgotten the grandeur and glory of their heritage, the students oftoday enticed by so-called modernity, have become oblivious to their own innate divinity.The whirlwind of the rapidly progressing science and technology, coupled with industri-alization, is bringing about undesirable changes in our society by way of uprooting themoral or ethical values so essential for human well-being. Science and technology have,no doubt, contributed substantially to material progress; but they have altogether under-mined spiritual values such as selflessness, divinity, and dignity inherent in man. In away, they have devalued humanity itself so much so that the present generation of youngmen and women are unable to recognise their divine nature. They are considering self-centredness as the goal of life. Demonic qualities like ostentation, egoism, and excessiveand empty talk are playing their devil dance in society. This very country, which has beenthe spiritual teacher of entire mankind, is becoming the playing field of evil forces likeinjustice, indiscipline, licentiousness, and defiance of truth. Having become slaves tomodernity, people are utterly disregarding truth and righteousness and ignoring the hoaryIndian culture and traditions, with the false notion that material self advancement is thesummum bonum of life. What the students have to protect today is not the nation. Theyhave to safeguard truth and righteousness only. These two, in turn, will protect the nation.Giving up truth and righteousness, educated persons nowadays are causing damage to thenation, ostensibly in the name of protecting it.People do not become wise by mere education. They are considering education as ameans of livelihood rather than the art of living. The supreme goal of life should ever be2Summer Showers 1990kept in view. A small piece of fertile land is more valuable than a large tract of barrenland; so also character is much more valuable and essential than scholarship. Today eve-rybody is striving to acquire wealth, power, and pelf, which are like passing clouds, whilenobody bothers himself to acquire virtues that lead to the Truth Eternal. You must try tobecome exemplars of virtues, but not of wealth and power. It is a pity that even the elderswho profess themselves to be well-wishers of society are giving up their own ancientculture, lured by modernity. When the mother cow is grazing off the crop in the field,will its calf stand quiet on the field bund? It is impossible. It is no wonder the youngergeneration is following the bad example of their elders, leaders, parents, and teacherswho are not setting the right example for the youth to emulate. What is the reason for ourancients earning name and fame as upholders of morality in society? Because of their ex-emplary practice of virtues in daily life. They pursued the four purusharthas (goals oflife) scrupulously and shared with others benefits and joys derived therefrom. But thepresent day youngsters are groping in the dark, aimlessly indulging in all sorts of indis-criminate activities.Dharma (right conduct), artha (wealth), kama (desire), and moksha (liberation) arethe four purusharthas (goals of human life.) Dispensing with dharma, which is like thefeet, and moksha, which may be compared to the head, people are hankering only afterartha and kama, resulting in disorder and insecurity in the society and nation in general.The root cause for loss of peace and security is the neglect of truth and righteousness,which are highly indispensable for man.Students! Do not forget our ancient culture, which is the very life-breath of Bharathi-yas. Bharath (India) had offered the gems of its great culture to the world at large in thepast. The nation has suffered a serious setback due to the ever-growing malady of apingother countries. Imitation is human. Creation is divine. The right education for the stu-dents is the manifestation of their innate divinity.About fifty years back, the youth of our country, imbued with patriotism and love forour culture, used to follow the footsteps of the elders. The national leaders, teachers, andscholars of those days were setting up exemplary ideals. There was harmony in theirthoughts, words, and deeds. That is why the younger generation was following their ex-ample. They used to decorate their rooms with pictures of divine incarnations and na-tional leaders whom they used to adore and emulate. However it is a matter for regret thatnowadays, ideal teachers and ideal leaders are conspicuous by their absence. Leaders andteachers say something and actually do something else, with the result that they have for-feited the confidence of the young. Today the pictures of their favourite film stars adornthe walls of the students’ rooms. What is the reason for this degeneration of their minds?The only reason is the dearth of ideal leaders who believe, practise, and propagate the In-dian culture. Nevertheless, Bharathiya culture might be seen by the discerning eye to bepervading not only the manner of dressing and speaking, working, and playing but alsoevery activity undertaken from dawn to dusk.In present day India there are many persons who do not understand what samskrithi(culture) is. There can be no human life without samskrithi. It is a way of life. Ignoringthis way and taking to wrong paths, men are losing peace and security. Everyone wantscomfort. But no attempt is being made to recognise what real comfort is. Eating fourtimes a day, sleeping, viewing television and films three or four times, forgetful of theoutside world—these are considered to contribute to comfort or happiness. Among allliving creatures, to be born as a human being is declared by the scriptures as a rare privi-Summer Showers 19903lege. But if man too is content merely with eating, drinking, mating and sleeping likebirds and beasts, without trying to understand what samskrithi is, his life is a sheer waste.The word samskrithi, originating from samskritham, refers to the process of refine-ment of every object before it is made fit for human use. For example, consider howmany transformations are undergone by paddy before it becomes fit for human consump-tion—threshing the paddy grains from the sheaves, winnowing and separating grainsfrom chaff, pounding or milling to remove the husk from the grain, cleaning the rice byremoving extraneous matter like small stones and weed seeds, etc., soaking the raw ricein water, and finally cooking over fire to get cooked rice. Such samskrithi (refinement)also enhances the value of things. For instance, the value of paddy is, say, one hundredrupees per bag. But, when it is dehusked and cleaned in the milling process, the value ofone bag of rice will be six hundred rupees—a sixfold increase due to refinement. Let usconsider a second example. If a wrist watch made of stainless steel is crushed and throwninto fire, the resulting mass of stainless steel will not be worth even a quarter of a rupee.But the worth of the same mass of steel when fabricated into a wrist watch by the manu-facturing process is enhanced to one thousand rupees. To give another illustration, cottonharvested from the cotton plant has to be dried, the unwanted calyx removed, and thenput in a ginning machine to separate the seeds from the lint; the lint has to be spun intoyarn in a spinning machine, and the yarn has to be woven into cloth in a weaving mill.Thus, when cotton is transformed into cloth, its value and utility are enhanced. Likewise,man should not remain in the state in which he was born. He should manifest his inherentdivinity. Students should therefore try to acquire, in addition to academic knowledge,qualities like humility and discrimination, which will help them to become full-fledgedhuman personalities. As a seed finds fulfillment in a fruit-bearing tree, man should findfulfillment in a purposeful life leading to perfection through samskarana (transforma-tion), and yielding the fruits of peace, security and love.Love is a divine quality in man. But it should be shown not only toward other humanbeings, but also towards birds, beasts, and other living creatures. True samskrithi lies insuch an expansion of love, giving up narrowness and developing broad-mindedness,which results in real joy for oneself and for the society as well. Thus will human naturebe sublimated into divinity.The Vedas, which are the repositories of Indian culture, have declared that one shouldnot entertain hatred or ill will toward any living being. Therefore, along with their normalstudies, the students should acquaint themselves with the Indian culture and put it intopractice.You are all aware how in the present day world man is losing foresight in everythought, sacrificing truth in every word, and forsaking righteousness in every action.Love is on the decline on all fronts and progressive ideas are given the go-by. Spiritualityis being ridiculed. Hatred based on caste and religion is ever on the increase. Parochial-ism and selfishness are running riot and playing havoc. If today revolutions are rampant,what is the reason for it? It is because people have forsaken fear of sin, love for God, andmorality in society. There is no benefit to the world from people who have the humanform sans discrimination and discipline, which are the characteristics of a true man. Stu-dents! Along with your usual education you must imbibe the qualities of faith in the na-tion to which you belong and cherish the welfare of the world in which you live. Sinceancient times, it has been the Hindu tradition to pray for the happiness of all. Bharath has4Summer Showers 1990been contributing to the stability, peace, and security of all nations through its uniquespiritual genius.The Vedas which are the basis for Indian culture, have taught: speak truth—practicerighteousness. Unfortunately, today, people do not speak truth. They talk about right-eousness but do not practise it. If we protect dharma, practising it, dharma in turn willprotect us. Dharma does not mean the mere observance of certain traditions and formali-ties. It is the harmony of thought, word, and deed, which results in the purification ofthese faculties. Today, dharma has declined because of the lack of such harmony and pu-rity of the trikaranas (three instruments of action). The Upanishads exhort man not toabandon sathya (truth) and dharma (righteousness) under any circumstances even at therisk of his life; King Harishchandra stands out as the supreme exemplar in this respect.Truth alone triumphs. One who wants to achieve victory should follow dharma.Dhritarashtra asked Sanjaya, “in your opinion, who will win the Kurukshetrawar—Pandavas or Kauravas?” Sanjaya, who was the master of his senses, replied, “OKing! Where there is the Almighty Lord together with the virtuous Arjuna devoted totruth and righteousness, there certainly will victory be.” There is no dharma or religionhigher than sathya (truth). Dharma depends on sathya. Bhagavatha declares that there isno greater sin than going back on one’s own plighted word. Hence sathya is supreme.Sathya and dharma are interdependent and inseparable.Boys and girls—children of Bharath! The path of truth is supremely important. Weshould firmly believe that it is the divine Principle and pay obeisance to it accordingly.People study and learn about various things, but, with all their education, they do notknow their own Reality. The more one has book learning, the more argumentative onebecomes. Howsoever educated a wicked fellow might be, his evil nature will not change.What is the use of straining oneself to acquire such worthless education? That alone istrue education which confers immortality on man. That is indeed the education in truthand righteousness. Sathya and dharma are inseparable from the virtuous and noble per-sons. That is why truth, which is eternal, is also called Atma, which is the core of all be-ings. While all other objects and beings are subject to change, like the passing clouds;Atma alone remains changeless. That does not mean that you should give up secularlearning. Along with it, you should try to acquire the knowledge of that which is real andeverlasting. How many have not acquired high educational qualifications, name andfame? But how transient and fleeting are such things! The body itself is impermanent.However, even when the body perishes, our samskaras (accumulated mental impressions)will remain with us permanently. We should remember that we should live not for thesake of annam (food), but for the sake of adarsham (ideal). Ideals are always supremeand everlasting. If one person becomes an ideal, he can influence the lives of many othersfor the better. It is better to live like the swan for one year than to live like the crow forhundred years. It is enough if you live even for ten years as ideal students. To lead anideal life, it is essential to have love of the nation and love of the Spirit (Atma), as well aslove and respect for parents.Students! Try to recognise how sacred, how pure, how exemplary, how loving, howsublime, and how vast your motherland is. Many young men of India are nowadays goingabroad, belittling their own motherland as worthless. In fact, no other country in theworld has really all the worthwhile things that Bharath has. Born in this land of karma,yoga, and thyaga (sacrifice), students should understand and cherish its cultural heritage.Their present ignorance of this sacred culture is due to the absence of teachers and par-Summer Showers 19905ents who could convey the elements of this culture to the students. During the fifteendays of this Summer Course, you, students, should learn how to harmonise our ancientculture and tradition with the needs of the modern world and to lead lives governed bytruth and righteousness. Position or power is not important. They are transient like thepassing clouds. One should not be proud of one’s wealth, progeny, or youthful vigour.They may all disappear in a moment. Adolescence is a very precious period in one’s life.It should be rightly used. Once you waste this precious period, you cannot get it backlater on, strive as you may, with all your effort. Try to develop faith in the sacred Bhara-thiya culture, which transcends the limitations of time, space, and circumstances. Duringthese fifteen days, endeavour to understand fully the glory and unique greatness of ourculture.In his welcome address, the Vice-Chancellor, Sri Saraf, prayed that I should explainto you the functions and significance of the body, senses, mind, intellect, and Atma. It isessential for students to know about these matters. Of what avail is it for one to know allabout the external world without knowing about one’s own reality! It is important for youto understand the nature of Brahman (the supreme Oversoul), and Atma (the individualsoul). This is the royal path to the fulfillment of human life. Students—both boys andgirls— should sanctify this precious period of time by imbibing sacred ideas and idealsand then strive to spread the same throughout the length and breadth of this vast countryof ours. Do not forget that in all these matters, devotion is the most important requisite.Without divine grace, we cannot achieve anything. For anyone to think that he canachieve things by himself is only to betray his egoistic arrogance. Therefore, try to de-velop faith in Atma (Self); then you can achieve anything.2SANCTIFY THE BODYYou are not the body, a bundle of flesh, blood and bones!Neither are you the unmanifested desires, nor the manifested mind;You are also not the infatuating delusion that thwarts your liberation;But you are the Eternal Paramatma,If only you recognise your innate power.Students! Embodiments of Divine Love!The body, the senses, the mind, and the intellect are only vestures put on by man.Only when we understand the nature and significance of these adjuncts can we makeproper use of them. You wear trousers, banian, shirt, and coat. Only when you know howto use each of these things correctly can you use them in the proper way and get the bene-fit therefrom. Otherwise you may make bizarre use of them, like putting on the banianover the shirt or wearing the pant in the reverse direction. Hence you generally ensurethat you wear your daily attire correctly so as to give a decent and attractive appearance.Likewise the body is our garment. It is only when we know how to wear it and use it ap-propriately that we can make good use of it and get the best out of it.Dahyati iti dehah—That which is burnt is called the body. This is the derivativemeaning of the word deha (body). It is a matter of common knowledge that the body isburnt after death. But even when it is alive, the body experiences burning due to worries.The body is inert. It is a storehouse of filth and subject to all kinds of diseases. It is abundle of bones and flesh and cannot help you to cross the ocean of births and deaths. So,Oh Mind! Instead of relying on such a flimsy body, better cling to the Lotus Feet of LordHari. This was the prayer of the sages. The body, which is made up of the five elements,is impermanent. But you who have put on this body are verily the supreme God who iseternal and unchanging. It is therefore, up to you to use your power of discrimination inusing the body wisely and thereby to derive joy from it.Sarira is another name for the body. Siryathe iti sariraha. That which is liable to de-cay is called sarira. At the time of birth, the body is a lump of flesh and blood. As itgrows, it attains beauty and enters the stage of adolescence and adulthood, when it be-comes puffed up with the pride of beauty and vigour, etc. In due course, it is overtaken bythe ravages of old age, resulting in loss of vitality and susceptibility to diseases. Thus thebody is subject to many a change.Yet another name for the body is mandir (shrine or temple), because it enshrines thejiva (individual soul), which in fact is no other than the eternal God (Supreme soul). Be-ing the sacred and holy abode of God, the body should, therefore, be not misused bututilised for entertaining good thoughts, for speaking good words, and for performinggood actions. Hence, to facilitate such right use of the body, it should be kept in goodtrim.Any instrument should be maintained in a fit condition if it is to give satisfactory per-formance. For instance, you can write comfortably with a fountain pen only if it is filledwith the required ink and when the nib also is in good condition. So also, a knife can beused for cutting provided it has the required sharpness and suitable handle etc. Likewise,the body, which is an instrument to perform righteous actions, should be kept in a suit-Summer Showers 19907able condition for that purpose. You can use a knife for cutting vegetables, fruits etc., butnot for cutting a piece of iron. So also we should use the body with discrimination toachieve the purpose for which it is meant. Every time before you do anything, you shouldask yourself, I am the Brahman dwelling in this body as the individual Atman. As such, isit proper for me to do this action or not? Only then will you be using the body in the rightmanner. Just because you have this body, you should not use it according to your whimsand fancies, forgetting the fact that it is the temple of God, which should, therefore, beused for sacred purposes.The body has also been called kshetra. The one who cognises this kshetra is thekshetrajna (the knower of the kshetra). You are the knower of the kshetra and the body isthe kshetra, which is known by you. Hence, you are the witness of this body. Kshetrameans a sacred place associated with the Divine and filled with holy vibrations, as forinstance the places of pilgrimage like Kasi, Varanasi, Tirupati, Badri, etc. These kshetrasare meant to be used for the performance of worship, redeeming religious vows, givingcharity, and such other sacred activities. Similarly, in the kshetra of the body, goodthoughts and good actions alone should prevail. This is the inner meaning of the appella-tion kshetra used for the body.Another meaning of the term kshetra is field. In this field of the body, the fruits wereap are dependent on the seeds we sow. If we sow good thoughts, we can harvest goodfruits. Bad thoughts will only yield bad results. The body is thus a field in which theseeds of punya (merit) and papa (sin), are sown. We should, however, remember that thebody as a field has certain advantages when compared to the agricultural field. In culti-vating a field for raising crops, we have to wait for the right season and the optimumconditions to sow a particular variety of crop. The suitability of a land for growing a par-ticular crop has to be taken into consideration. Sowing cannot be done indiscriminately.However in the case of the field of our body, there are no such constraints. It can be cul-tivated in all conditions and at all times including night and day. When you sow seeds onan arable land, you may get a good crop or poor crop. You may not realise your expecta-tions. But in the case of the human body, you are bound to reap the fruits of the good orbad thoughts and actions, which you sow as seeds. You are sure to have cent percent re-turn. As you sow, so you reap. This is an immutable law. You must therefore ensure thatonly seeds in the form of good thoughts and deeds are sown. You should not misuse thebody as you like. You should discriminate between the transient and the permanent andutilise your body for achieving the ultimate good.Those who wish to use the body properly and ensure that they entertain goodthoughts, perform good acts, and reap good results should scrupulously follow twothings, viz., regulation of diet and regulation of other living habits. You should not con-sume any and every type of food merely to appease hunger or the palate. You must eatonly sathwic (pure) food. Our thoughts are determined by the kind of food we consume.For instance, as in the firewood so is the fire as well as the smoke; if you use sandalwood, you will get the fragrant smoke; if you make use of a foul-smelling kind of fuel,you will get a foul-smelling smoke. Thus, the kind of smoke depends on the kind of fire;again as is the smoke, so is the cloud; as is the cloud, so is the water, as is the water, so isthe rain; as is the rain, so is the crop; as is the crop, so is the food; as is the food, so is thehead—thoughts. Our thoughts, therefore, are the result of the type of food we eat. Thebody is cleansed by water, while the mind is purified by Truth. It is only when we takefood that is conducive to truth that we can pursue the path of truth. As the body is a sa-8Summer Showers 1990cred shrine, you should strictly avoid taking any intoxicating substances. Articles of foodthat promote rajasic qualities, which inflame passions, should be eschewed.What is the meaning of sathwic food? The prevalent notion is that fruits and milkconstitute sathwic food. But that is not all to it. What is consumed by the mouth is not theonly food that enters the body. The other sense organs, like the eyes, the ears, the nose,and the hands, also consume objects from the external world. Hence, just because a per-son takes fruits and milk through one of the five sense organs, he cannot claim to havetaken sathwic food, unless the food taken by him through all the five senses is sathwic innature. Through the eyes, you have to see only what is pure. To see all kinds of thingsindiscriminately will spell disaster. The power of sight should be used only for sacredpurposes. Unfortunately, however, the vision of youth today is getting increasingly per-verted like keechaka drishti (lustful vision). The result is that they will meet with thesame fate as Keechaka of the Maha-bharatha, who was destroyed by Bheema. Studentsshould be particularly careful in this regard. It is only when they use their eyes in a pureand sacred way will they be receiving sathwic impressions through the eyes.The ears also need pure food. This means we should listen only to sacred words andto accounts relating to the Divine. Let us always hear good and pleasant things about oth-ers. In this way, we must safeguard the ears from being polluted by hearing bad things.Only thus can we ensure consuming sathwic food through the ears.Only fragrant sweet-smelling scents should be absorbed through the nose. Inhalingbad odours will result in disease. If you inhale foul air, you will be breathing in disease-producing organisms. You must inhale pure air, in a clean open space.The hand also should be used to consume pure food. In other words, you must per-form only good acts with your hands, befitting the appellation of temple, used for thebody.When you get rid of the five evils associated with the pollution of speech, sight,hearing, thought and action, you will be able to realise your own Divinity and becomeParamatma (Supreme Soul). If the senses are fed with polluted food, you cannot becomepure merely by taking milk and fruit. You must partake of pure sathwic food through allthe five sense organs.Usually a temple will have many gates. These gateways are intended to let in onlydevotees who seek to worship the deity inside the temple, but not all and sundry. Simi-larly for this temple of the body there are five gates. What is the purpose of these door-ways? If we build a house and erect doors in it, they are intended to let in our kith and kinonly and not all stray animals like dogs, pigs and donkeys etc. If such unwanted animalstry to enter, the doors are shut against them. Likewise, the doors of the five senses in thissacred body should be kept open for sacred and divine entrants alone. Only then will itdeserve the name kshetra or mandir. On the other hand, if unholy objects and ideas areallowed to enter, it ceases to be a holy temple. Thus it may be seen that sathwic food isvery essential for putting the body to proper use.Next comes vihara—movement or association with places, persons, objects, etc. Youmust consider seriously what sort of places you may visit, what kind of environment inwhich you should live and what type of persons with whom you ought to associate your-selves. Tell me your company and I shall tell you what you are, goes the adage. Youshould eschew all bad company, because your thoughts are influenced by the companyyou keep. Young people today are readily cultivating evil company. They take easily tobad ways. This amounts to belittling and devaluating the human body, which the scrip-Summer Showers 19909tures have declared to be the most precious and rare possession among all created beings.Realising this fact, the sages of yore chose to live in solitude in order to engage them-selves in sacred thoughts and actions like devotional singing, meditation and penance.But even this may be considered a sign of weakness, in a way. For instance, if you wantto subdue anger, can you do it by retiring into a forest and doing austerities for any num-ber of years? As your anger arises in the midst of people, it has to be conquered only inthe same milieu and not in unpeopled forest. You may remain tranquil as long as you arein the forest, but when you come back to a crowd, you will be the same old irate person.If you want to control your senses, it is a delusion to imagine that you can do so by re-sorting to religious penance. It can be achieved easily if you understand the subtle work-ings of the body, but not by any other means. Suppose you buy a new car, you must knowhow to drive it properly. Just because you have purchased it with your own money andgot it duly registered, you cannot sit at the steering wheel and drive as you like, it wouldthen be dangerous to your car, to yourself and to the public as well. Although the car maybe yours, you must know how to use it properly. It should be noted that all the problemsand troubles of man are due to the fact that he does not know how to make proper use ofhis body. Hence, he becomes an easy prey to sorrow and disease. One thing should al-ways be remembered. No one can go against the divine Will. No one can alter the Lord’sLawc which is immutable.The body is inert. Many may argue as to how the body can be called inert, when it isseen to be capable of growth. The answer to this doubt is that when you clean your housedaily and go on dumping the sweepings in one place, it will grow into a big heap. Like-wise, when you go on dumping into your body various kinds of food so many times perday, your body, though insentient, will grow like the heap of garbage. It should howeverbe realised that the body is able to function by way of eating, talking, walking and grow-ing etc., because of the chaithanya (consciousness) within it. In this respect, the bodymay be compared to a car. Eyes are like the headlights, tongue like the horn and ears likethe loudspeakers. It is because of the battery inside the car that the above-mentioned partsof the car are also able to function. Similarly, the various organs of the inert body are ableto function only because of the Atmic Power inside the body. To cite another analogy, theinert iron filings are able to move hither and thither when attracted by the power of amagnet. So also, the operation of all the organs of the body, which are inert by them-selves is made possible by the presence of the Atma inside. It is a pity that we spend a lotof time, effort and money to beautify the transient and inert body, forgetting our realAtma, Self, which is permanent and sentient.Man is prone to three kinds of misconceptions in relation to his body. One is to mis-take himself to be something that is not his real Self. Another is to regard persons or ob-jects that do not belong to him as his own. The third is to believe the evanescent to be theeverlasting. Man considers the body as his real self. If that is the case, why should he say,this is my body. This statement clearly implies that he is different from the body, becausethe owner is different from what he owns. For instance, when a man says, this is my ker-chief, he is apart from the kerchief. Hence, how can one say that he is the body? This isthe first and basic blunder.Secondly, in worldly matters man is misled by the belief that he is the owner of vari-ous kinds of properties like houses, lands, vehicles etc. You build a house and call ityours. When you sell it, it is no longer yours. Likewise, you buy a car and call it yours.When it is sold, it ceases to be yours. So, things are yours only as long as you own and10Summer Showers 1990use them. Forgetting that all these possessions are temporary, like fleeting clouds, youdevelop undue attachments for them. In fact, nothing is yours. How can those that belongto the body be yours? All these misconceptions are caused by the veil of maya (delusion)and the resultant sense of possessiveness and the aberrations of the mind. Prior to mar-riage, no one can say who is the husband and who is the wife. Before birth, nobody cansay who is the mother and who is the child. Only after marriage do you say this is mywife. It is only after birth do you declare that he is my son. But these relationships aretransient and not permanent and are based on the wrong identification of oneself with thebody. Nobody brings with him even a tiny piece of cloth at the time of birth, and nobodyleaves his address even, at the time of death. If they are really yours, why won’t they giveyou their address at the time of final departure? Nothing belongs to you. Forgetting yourown reality and mistaking the unreal as the real in this illusory world, you are creatingproblems for yourself. You are always yourself only. You don’t belong to anybody, nordoes anyone belong to you. There is only one thing that exists. Despite the unequivocaldeclaration of the scriptures that Reality is One, but sages call it differently—we continueto believe wrongly that diversity is real.Let us consider the case of the head of a household or family. His wife callshim—My dear husband. His son calls him—My dear father. His mother calls him—Mydear son, while his daughter-in-law refers to him as—My dear father-in-law. Thus, oneand the same person is called in different ways according to various relationships with thebody. As the scriptures declare—the One has become many. Therefore, there is unity un-derlying the diversity. There is only One. That one is the Hero—God; all the rest—i.e.the entire world, is zero. When you put one zero by the side of that one, it becomes ten;with one more zero it becomes a hundred, and with a third zero, it becomes one thousand,and so on. Wherefrom do all these zeros get their value? It is only from the Hero. If youremove the Hero, there is no value for any number of zeroes. Therefore, God alone is theHero. The delusion of the body, mind, intellect, etc. are only zeroes. So, it is importantthat we should hold on to the Hero—God. That does not mean that you should give upthe world or abandon your worldly duties.You have to do your duty by your kith and kin. But while thus discharging your du-ties, you should never deviate from the spiritual path. Your secular life should be harmo-nised with your spiritual life. So long as you live in the world, you have to conform to therules and regulations governing the worldly affairs. But whatever you may do, you mustnot lose sight of the supreme spiritual goal of life. You should recognise the fact thatnothing belongs to you whether mother, father, brother, kinsmen, wealth, house, etc. Allthese ephemeral things are related to the changing body, which is the basis for all mentalaberrations.The body undergoes various changes due to food and other living habits. Whatever besuch changes in the body, the individuality remains unchanged. The changes of name andform such as childhood, boyhood, manhood, and old age pertain to the body and henceillusory. You should not therefore consider the body as real and permanent at all. Never-theless, it is your duty to ensure that the body is not subjected to disease and is main-tained as a fit instrument. As long as you sail in the river of life, you must see to it thatthe boat of your body does not develop holes or leaks thereby preventing water from en-tering into the boat. The boat may be in water, but there should be no water in the boat.Remain in the world and attend to your duties, but don’t allow worries to enter your mindSummer Showers 199011and make your body susceptible to all kinds of diseases. Consider the body as only aninstrument.To keep this instrument of the body in good trim, you have to regulate your food andother habits. Also, look upon the body as your vesture or clothing, and resort to washingit clean from time to time, just as soiled clothes are cleaned by the washerman. All thatthe washerman does is to remove the dirt from the cloth enabling it to regain its originalwhiteness. So too, purity is natural to the human body, but it becomes dirty due to im-proper use; and therefore you should get it cleaned with the help of God as washerman,by resorting to such practices as prayer, japa, meditation, and love of God. The washer-man alone can wash the clothes, but not a barber. So also, God alone, and none else, cancleanse your heart of its impurities. Never forget that this body is only a garment. It isdue to the ignorance that you look upon the body as your real Self. Only when you get ridof this ignorance, will you shine as the effulgent Sun of Wisdom.Students! Besides the body, you have to recognise the role and importance of theother related entities like the sense organs, mind, and intellect and keep them in goodshape. If you keep laddu (an Indian Sweet), or cloves in your shirt pocket and forgetfullygive the shirt to the washerman, you will find that the pocket has developed stains whenthe washerman brings the shirt back to you after washing. Likewise the mind is stainedwith bad impressions if you allow bad thoughts to enter it. It is only when the nature ofeach of these constituents of your personality, viz., body, senses, mind, and intellect isproperly understood will you be able to lead an integral and purposeful human life. Oth-erwise, you will become a victim of all sorts of difficulties and problems. You need notwaste your time in the routine spiritual practices like japa and dhyana (meditation). Torecognise the truth is the real sadhana (spiritual exercise). When food is cooked, therewill be no longer any need for firewood. Likewise, when truth has been realised, there isno need for sadhana.During this fortnight if you are able to grasp the nature and significance of the body,the senses, the mind, the intellect, and also the Atma (God), which is the supreme witnesspresiding over the rest of them, you will be in a position to master the mystery of theCosmos made up of the five basic elements (pancha bhuthas). Ultimately, as God is thebasis of everything, students have to develop faith in God.3THE MOVING TEMPLEThis body is a valueless iron safe;Like the precious jewels kept in an iron safe,There is the Divine inside the body.This Sai’s word is the path of Truth.What you call God is not in some far off place,That God is in your very body;What you call sin is not in a distant countryIt is there in the very actions that you perform.Embodiments of the Divine Atma!Although the human body is worthless in itself and is impermanent, it has to be care-fully looked after, because it enshrines the divine Atma. This is man’s primary duty.Without a healthy and strong body, man will fall an easy victim to numerous ailments.Body is verily the foundation for human life. That is why the ancient Romans, who wereaware of this truth and who were the pioneers of modern civilisation in the West, used tocarefully undertake various measures for the proper upkeep and development of the body.The body is a world in itself. It is not merely the outer form. It is the collective as-semblage of many organs and limbs. Each organ has its own beauty, which has to befostered. A weak and unhealthy body is incapable of any resolute action. Pure, noble, andsublime ideas can emanate only from a strong and healthy body. All religions are agreedon this point. Although the body is impermanent, special care should be taken to maintainit properly because it provides residence for the eternal Atma. The divine spirit illuminesthe body although the latter is composed of flesh, blood, faeces, urine, and other foul-smelling and impure things. Atma does not grow with the body, nor does it decay alongwith the body. The Atma principle is not subject to growth or decay. It is ever pure, pre-cious and immutable.Even if a big and brilliant diamond is found in a garbage heap, it does not lose itslustre or value. Just because a good variety of pumpkin is grown in a thorny fence, therewill be no change in its taste or cooking quality. Even though the peahen’s egg is hatchedunder the warmth of the ordinary hen or fowl, the young peacock that emerges will notlose its beautiful plumage. So also, the splendour and effulgence of the selfless, stainless,eternal Atmic Principle will in no way be diminished although it is associated with thehuman body which is full of impurities.What is the reason for people, professing different faiths, being agreed on the need tonourish the health and happiness of the body? It is because all of them regard the body asthe temple of the Lord within. Therefore it is man’s primary duty not to neglect this holytemple called the body, but to take utmost care for its proper maintenance and for using itfor the discharge of one’s duties and obligations in life. Persons who do not recognise thistruth subject the body to various ordeals in the name of worship, religious vows, fasting,and penance. Thereby they are missing the goal of recognising the eternal Atmic Princi-ple. By hitting the anthill, can you kill the snake inside it? By subjecting the body to tor-Summer Showers 199013ture, can you realise the Atma? By giving up good food and water, can you attain libera-tion? Self-realisation is possible only through knowing your own real nature.Therefore, the first step in the quest for Self-knowledge is to understand the nature ofman. Whatever the number of lives one might have had, the body one has now assumedis new. This shows that Divinity is inherent in man. The discovery of this Divinity, orreal Self of man, calls for appropriate enquiry leading to the perception of the Real. Whenone perceives his real Self through prolonged contemplation on the Self, he becomes adrashta (seer). The ultimate aim of bhakthi (devotion) is to become such a drashta and toexperience the world with this spiritual perspective or background. Without this attain-ment, man remains a human being in form only, with no realisation of his true Self. TheSanskrit word manava, used to designate man, means “not new”, because his reality isthe Atma, which is ancient and eternal. Another meaning of the word manava is “ma”(ajnana, ignorance), “na” (without); “va” (conducting oneself). In other words, he alonedeserves the name of manava (man) who conducts himself without ignorance. Can allgreen birds speak like a parrot? Can every insect found on a flower be called a bee? Can adonkey become a tiger by merely putting on the skin of a tiger? Just because a pig hasgrown huge like an elephant, can it be called an elephant? Likewise can every one thathas the human form be considered a real man? He alone can be rightly called a man, whohas harmonised his thoughts, words, and deeds.The body is like a water bubble, which emerges from water, stays on water for awhile, and merges back in water. So also the bubble called “nara” (man) has emergedfrom the water called “Narayana” (God) and merges back in Him. Only when we recog-nise this divine origin of the human being will we take care to maintain and use the hu-man body in an appropriate manner. Although the body is a mere instrument, its use hasto be regulated according to prescribed standards and limits. Every object in the world isgoverned by certain regulations. It has rightly been said that we cannot achieve any suc-cess or progress without observing such discipline. The body too is governed by certainregulations. We should develop purity in our thoughts, feelings, looks, and actions. If, onthe other hand, one uses one’s senses and limbs in impure ways, one’s nature would de-generate from human to demoniac.Our life can be compared to a business enterprise. The body’s normal temperature is98˚, if the temperature goes up to even 99˚, it is a symptom of disease. Our blood pres-sure too is 120/80mm, if it becomes more or less it is considered as disease. Even oureyeball can see light only within a particular range. Any deviation from the range willresult in damage to the retina. Similarly our ears can hear sound within a given range; be-yond that limit, the eardrums will be damaged. Thus our body may be called a limitedcompany. Hence we should observe these limits while making use of the body. Whetherin the food we eat, or water we drink, or the words we speak and hear, in fact in all ourliving habits, moderation should be observed as the keynote. Exceeding the limits willentail danger. Excessive eating or talking results in mental aberration, while moderateeating or talking is conducive to pleasantness in life. Therefore the body should alwaysbe used in such a manner only that confers happiness on man’s life.Man’s knowledge can be classified into five categories. The type of knowledge that ismost widely prevalent nowadays is book knowledge. We are wasting our entire lives foracquiring such book knowledge, which is merely superficial. On account of this, generalknowledge and common sense have become conspicuous by their absence. These two,namely, general knowledge and common sense, cannot be gained from books, but only14Summer Showers 1990from various experiences in actual day-to-day living, especially through service to soci-ety. The fourth one is discriminative knowledge. This type of knowledge is nowadaysbeing used perversely for selfish ends. This is not the right use of discrimination. What iswanted is the kind of discrimination which keeps in view not the selfish individual goodbut the collective good of the society at large. Young people should particularly avoidjustifying the wrong use of their discrimination for self-interest. They should developwhat may be called “fundamental discrimination”, which is equally applicable to all peo-ple, irrespective of the country to which they belong. Unlike in the case of ordinaryarithmetic, 3–1 = 1 according to the spiritual arithmetic. You may argue that this equationis incorrect, but I firmly assert that it is correct. Why? Because it is based not on selfishworldly calculation but on selfless Atmic calculation, which aims at universal welfare. Ofthe three entities God, maya, and the Universe, God is the object, maya is the mirror, andthe Universe is God’s reflection. If the mirror be removed, there will be no maya andUniverse. Then only God remains. Therefore, 3–1 = 1. People are not in a position to un-derstand such things because they lack the fifth type of knowledge viz. practical knowl-edge. This practical knowledge is highly essential for man; but it is woefully lacking to-day, because every individual thinks that it is enough to take care of oneself only. Heshould realise that he is a part of society and that he should be equally concerned aboutthe welfare of the society as a whole. There is no difference at all between the sun and hisrays, or between the sea and its waves. Likewise, there is no difference whatsoever be-tween God and Love, because God is the source of Love. Similar is the relationship be-tween the body and the Atma, which are interdependent and intimately associated witheach other.Although the body is transient, it should be properly cared for until Atma is realised.Not recognising this truth, many persons neglect the body and expose themselves to theonslaught of many diseases. Even for achieving the four purusharthas (goals of humanlife) viz. dharma, artha, kama, and moksha, bodily health is highly essential. Man todayis subject to more maladies caused by mental worries than by consuming bad food. Whatis the shape of worry? It is only a mentally created fear. There should be a limit tospeculation, anxiety and worries. Otherwise they will lead to mental troubles and de-rangement. A study of university students showed that 80 to 90 percent of the students inseveral universities were suffering from one or the other kind of mental disorders. Stu-dents should see that, in this most precious stage of their lives, they do not become a preyto physical or mental ill-health. They should keep their minds away from unnecessarythoughts and worries and also avoid excessive reading, playing, singing, and sleeping,etc., because excessive indulgence in any of such activities will have an adverse effect onthe body.Moreover, you have been told, off and on, about the programme of “Ceiling on De-sires”, which has four important components. The first one is: “Don’t waste food.” Why?Because food is God. Food is indispensable for human life, since the body cannot survivewithout food. The second one is: “Don’t waste money.” The misuse of money is an evil.Today’s youth especially are wasting money in a number of ways. This will lead to badhabits, loss of peace of mind, and the ruining of your life itself. Our country is today fac-ing grave economic problems, so indiscriminate spending of money for selfish purposesshould strictly be eschewed in the interest of the society at large. The spirit of cooperationhas to be promoted. National unity and integrity should be safeguarded.Summer Showers 199015A balance has to be maintained between individual interests and national interests.Everything in life depends on maintaining the proper balance, whether it be walking, sit-ting, cycling or driving a car. Today this balance has been lost because of excessiveknowledge and its misuse. If knowledge is to be put to right use, it should be transformedinto skill. However, instead of skill, young people in particular are killing knowledge.You are wasting knowledge and energy in seeing, hearing, talking, thinking etc., inwrong manner and in excessive measure. Therefore the third item in the “Ceiling on De-sires”, says: “Don’t waste energy.” A small illustration in this connection. You haveturned the radio to a particular station. Whether the volume is kept high or low, whetheryou listen or not, so many units of electrical energy will be wasted. Likewise your body isa radio. You are constantly engaged in thinking as well as talking in a loud or low tone,talking to others or to yourself, talking while awake and even while asleep. Due to suchcontinuous talking day and night, how much of energy is being wasted, thereby causingallergy in your lives. Every action involves the use of energy. If the energy in the body isproperly utilised, then balance will be maintained and the body will be in good shape.The fourth dictum of the “Ceiling on Desires” is: “Don’t waste time.” Students, onlywhen the body is strong, healthy, and happy can you enjoy the proper state of balance inlife. Man’s life is wasted in brooding over the past and worrying about the future. What isthe root cause of man’s sorrow and sickness? Not being content with what he has, andhankering after what he does not have, man forfeits peace of mind. There is no need tothink about what is past or about what is in store in the future. Of what avail is it to thinkof the past, which is irrevocable, or to worry about the future, which is uncertain? It is asheer waste of time. Past is past, future is future. You can do nothing about either. Whatis most important is the present. This is not ordinary present. It is Omnipresent. The resultof the past and the result of the future are both present in the present. You are reaping inthe present what you had sown in the past. And what you are sowing in the present youwill reap in the future. Thus, both the past and the future are contained in the presentonly. So, make the best use of the present. Give up all sorts of worry and lead ideal livesleading to immortality and fulfillment of the purpose of human life.Students! Don’t underestimate the value of the body. Everything in this world is im-permanent; on that account, are we neglecting such things? So, even though the body istransient, you should take good care of it so long as it lasts, because it is a moving templeof God. Develop self-confidence instead of confidence in the world. Self-confidence maybe compared to the foundation for the edifice of life, self-satisfaction is like the walls,self-sacrifice is the roof, and Self-realisation is the happiness of living in the mansion ofhuman body. Therefore, with self-confidence, you can accomplish anything and securejoy. You will be able to face and surmount any difficulties in life.What do you mean by Self? Self is of two kinds. One is the single lettered “I”. Theother is the three-lettered “eye”, which stands for the body. The single-lettered “I” refersto the Atma, which is present in all. There may be some people who may not have thethree-lettered “eye” or even if it is there, it may be covered by cataract or suffer fromother defects or diseases. But the single lettered “I” exists equally in all persons irrespec-tive of whether one is a bhogi (hedonist or pleasure-seeker), rogi (diseased person), yogi(realised person), viragi (the renunciate or monk), or byragi (mendicant).Whenever a number of people are called severally by their names, each of them willrespond saying “I”. Although their names and forms are different, the “I” in all of them isone and the same. That is why the Vedas have declared, “Ekam Sath vipra bahudha16Summer Showers 1990vadanti,” which means: “Truth or existence is one, but the sages call it by variousnames.” You should, therefore, try to experience the unity underlying the diversity in theuniverse. It is because you see the diversity, ignoring the unity, that there is so muchrestlessness and lack of peace in the world. For instance, nations are many but earth isone; stars are many but sky is one, beings are many but breath is one. Therefore, if manremembers this unity in diversity, there will be no room for differences, quarrels or warsin the world.Students, you are now in the most precious period of your life. You should never giveroom for any differences and discrimination in your thoughts, words, or deeds. Such un-healthy ideas arise from an unhealthy body. Each of you can judge for yourself whetheryou are strong and healthy or weak and unhealthy, based on the nature of ideas that arisein you. That is why it is said “Yat bhavam tat bhavati (As you think, so you become.)”Just as you take care of the iron safe for the sake of the valuable jewels inside, so too youshould take care of your body for the sake of the precious Atma in it. You should eat tolive but not live to eat. If you have self-confidence, the required food will come walkingto you, as it were. You need not go in search of food. That is why it is said in the Bha-gavatha that one who seeks the Atma is a gopi (devotee) while one who seeks food is apapi (sinner). It is a pity that having got the invaluable human birth, people are runningafter anna (food) instead of seeking the Atma. Vedanta has been exhorting man to findout who he really is. Instead of using the mirror of your intellect for looking at your Self,you are placing the mirror in front of others to see them. That is why you are not able tosee yourself.Develop self-confidence, which will lead you to bliss. Never give room for worriesand anxieties. Gain sufficient strength of the body and mind to face boldly the difficul-ties, losses, and sorrows that may confront you in life. This will be facilitated if youpractise the four F’s taught in our educational system viz., “Follow the Master (your con-science),” “Face the Devil,” “Fight till the end,” and “Finish the game.” What is the innermeaning of the first three letters of the alphabet, A, B, C in the English language? Theymean Always Be Careful. The same dictum is given by the Upanishad by exhorting aman to “arise, awake, and stop not till the goal is reached.”However long you may live, whatever scientific knowledge you may acquire, what-ever position you may occupy, some time or other you have to know the Truth aboutyourself. Start knowing it from now itself. You should be on the alert all the time, be-cause you can never know when the Lord’s Grace, His Love and Benediction will beshowered on you, at what time and at what place and in what circumstances. Unlike inthe case of worldly matters, you cannot understand what is happening in the spiritual do-main or what the Divine plans are. Therefore, if you go on discharging your duties andobligations in the proper manner with enthusiasm and joy, that itself will confer bliss onyou. Don’t worry about the future. Don’t brood over the past. All are passing clouds only.In this world, there is nothing permanent whether persons, objects or other things. Thevery name jagat (universe) means “coming and going.” Knowing this truth, why shouldyou worry at all? So give no scope whatsoever for any kind of worry. Only then can manbe entitled to become divine.It is only man that is endowed with the capacity to discover his Divinity. In this con-text, food habits play an important role. Out of 84,000,000 living beings on earth,83,999,999 species of creatures like insects, birds, animals, and beasts, etc., live on whatis provided by God in nature, and hence they do not generally suffer from any diseases.Summer Showers 199017Man is the sole exception in this regard. By becoming a slave to his palate, he relishesonly cooked and spicy foods of various kinds, without realising to what extent such foodsare curtailing his own longevity.Besides this, it is significant to note that those who live on vegetarian food are lessprone to diseases whereas non-vegetarians are subject to more diseases. Why? Becauseanimal food is incompatible with the needs of the human body. Doctors speak about pro-teins being present in non-vegetarian food, but the fact is that there are better qualityproteins in food articles like vegetables, pulses, milk, curd, etc. Non-vegetarian food notonly affects man’s body but also has deleterious effect on his mind.Food, Head, God—these three are interrelated. By consuming animal food, animaltendencies are aroused. As is your food, so are your thoughts. Men today are behaving ina manner worse than that of wild animals in the forest. They have become cruel, pitiless,and hard-hearted. There is no sympathy or understanding even between man and man.The main reason for this condition lies in the kind of food that is consumed. Students, becareful about the food you eat. See that it is conducive to your health and happiness. Ourancestors used to take food twice a day and our ancient sages used to eat only once a day.They declared that the man who eats only once is a yogi, the one who eats twice a day isa bhogi (enjoyer), and he who eats thrice a day is a rogi (sick man). Today, people go onconsuming food at all times, not to speak of drinks and snacks in between. How then canthey escape from indigestion and other diseases? Man needs food that supplies him en-ergy equivalent to about one calorie per minute. Young people should be satisfied with2,000 calories of food per day. For healthy life, man needs only 1,500 calories per day.But nowadays, the food intake has increased up to 5,000 calories. As a result, people suf-fer from indigestion and sleeplessness. Loss of sleep gives rise to many ailments. Don’tworry about sleep. If you go to bed without any worry, you will get sound sleep auto-matically.Observe moderation in your intake of food as well as in other living habits, to keepyour body in good shape and to perform your duties properly. However, do not developundue attachment to the body. The two feelings of “I” and “mine” are solely responsiblefor all the problems and evils prevailing in society. You should try to minimize, if noteliminate altogether, the feelings of “doership” and enjoyership”. Then only will you beable to lead ideal lives.We suffer from ill health due to psychological reasons also. If you examine yourpulse, blood pressure, temperature, etc., with feeling or fear that you are unwell, you willget abnormal readings. If you have the apprehension that you will not get good sleep, itwill happen accordingly. So, always try to have a positive outlook and self-confidencethat your health is all right. Our ancients wished to live long for the sake of a Godly lifeand therefore tried to preserve the health of their bodies as well as minds accordingly.Today, one is called an old man at the age of sixty or seventy. But in olden days, peoplewere considered young even at the age of 80, 90 or 100. Students, you might have read inthe Mahabharatha that at the time of the Kurukshetra war, Krishna and Arjuna were 86years and 84 years old respectively. But they were in youthful condition and participatedin the war with vigour, vitality, and valour. Who was the Commander-in-chief of theKaurava army? It was the 116 year old Bhishma. If it were to be today, a 116 year oldman would be confined to his cot, with his body shaking all over and needing others’help even for getting up from bed. But Bhishma fought fiercely for nine days. How doyou account for this? It was because of their mental strength, nourishing food, and above18Summer Showers 1990all Self-confidence (confidence in the real Self, Atma). Today such spiritual strength istotally lacking among the people. Self-confidence is constantly going up and down. Theirminds are unsteady and subject to jumps and bumps from moment to moment. If theirwishes are fulfilled, they will install ten pictures of God instead of one in their shrineroom. In case their desires are not complied with, they will remove even the one picturethat they used to worship previously. This is an indication of the waywardness of theirmind. This is not the right attitude.You may worship a picture as God, but not God as a picture. If your mind waversfrom moment to moment, how can there be steadiness or stability in life? Every one mustendeavour to develop the courage to face the vicissitudes of life, joys or sorrows, gains orlosses, with equanimity.Today, many who profess themselves to be believers in God. But because these so-called believers do not conduct themselves properly, many are becoming atheists. Talk-ing about bhakthi (devotion), they resort to bhukthi (hedonism). This is no genuine devo-tion. A devotee should be ready to gladly accept anything as God’s gift. Can you getsugar by merely requesting the sugar cane, instead of crushing it to extract the juice fromit? Even if it is the best kind of diamond, will it shine in all its effulgence unless it issubjected to cutting and polishing? Similarly, it is only when man undergoes trials andtribulations, hardships, losses and sorrows that his real worth will shine forth. Bhakthi(devotion) is the nectar obtained as a result of churning the essences of many Upanishadsand Scriptures. Real devotion is that which is buttressed by firm faith and is steadfast andunchanging under all circumstances. Only then does one deserve to get the fruits of realbhakthi (devotion).Embodiments of Divine Love!Although you may have body-consciousness, your lives should be guided by the At-mic awareness. The body, the senses, the mind, the intellect and the Atma are to be con-sidered as your five-breaths (pancha pranas). Once you have understood the mysteries orsubtleties of each of them you need no other spiritual discipline. Truth is everything.Without realising this, what is the use of troubling yourselves with all sorts of sadhanas(spiritual practices)? I am explaining to you, during this summer course, about the subtletruths relating to the five vital constituents of your personality, in compliance with therequest of your Vice-Chancellor. You speak about meditation. What do you do in medi-tation? You are merely sitting in a comfortable posture, with your eyes closed. But yourmind is wandering in the barber’s shop, or washerman’s laundry or in the bazaar (marketplace). Instead of engaging yourself in such futile exercises, you had better enter into thesociety and undertake selfless service. Without understanding what real meditation is,your attempts at meditation will result only in sound sleep. First of all, try to understandthe nature of the mind. Then only will you be able to control it. Once, an old womancame to me and complained that her mind was giving her endless trouble by its restlesswanderings. Then I asked her, “Where is that mind which is troubling you? Show it to meand I shall destroy it.” She replied “Swami, I don’t know where it is.” I told her, “If youdo not know where the mind is, how do you say it is troubling you? Is it the mind that istroubling you or are you troubling yourself.” So without understanding anything aboutthe mind, to blame it is meaningless and to sit in meditation is sheer idleness. You must,therefore, have a thorough understanding of the nature of the mind as well as the senses.Everything in the world has some useful secrets to reveal. God does not create anythingwithout a purpose. All things are purposeful, meaningful, blissful, and valuable. But weSummer Showers 199019are not making any effort to understand their mysteries. Hence I hope and bless that dur-ing this fortnight you will understand thoroughly the nature and the role of the body, thesenses, the mind, the intellect, and the Atma so that you may blossom forth as ideal stu-dents endowed with purity and equanimity.4MASTERY OF THE SENSESOne may acquire great scholarship and come out    victorious in assemblies of scholars;One may be a great hero and win battles galore;One may be born as a king of kings and rule a vast empire;One may generously give away in charity gold and cows;One may be able to count the countless stars that adorn the sky;One may be able to name the innumerable species of living beings;One may be well-versed in ashtanga vidya (the eightfold path of yoga);One may be successful in reaching the Moon;But no one can control their body and senses,Nor conquer their mind and keep itIn a state of constant introversion and unshakeable equanimity.It is true that the body wields some influence over the senses. But the senses haveeven greater influence on the body. There can be no body without the senses nor senseswithout the body. These two are inseparable and interdependent. Negative without posi-tive, or positive without negative (in the case of electric current) will serve no purpose.Likewise, a body without senses, or senses without a body cannot function. Hence it isimperative for every person to take proper care of the body.The role of the senses is remarkable. The wonders performed by the Divine defy de-scription. But the part played by the senses is even more marvelous and mysterious.Strange, unpredictable and indescribable indeed are the ways of the sense organs. Thesenses are subtler than the body. Although the faculties of speech, touch, sight, hearing,and taste as well as gas, bile, and phlegm exist in the body, the senses exercise extraordi-nary control over all of them equally. Joy and sorrow, heat and cold, etc., are experiencedonly when the sense organs come in contact with external objects. Without the sensoryobjects, the senses cannot function even for a moment. All the activities of the senses areoriented toward the objects in the environment. It is not possible for us to comprehend ordescribe the myriad facets of sense organs and their activities.The senses are also called by the name maatraah, which means “measuring instru-ments”. How is this measuring done by the sense organs? Take a fruit, for instance.Which of the senses has the capacity to determine whether it is sweet or sour? Whichsense organ measures or decides the taste of an object? It is the tongue. The tongue de-termines the taste of an eatable, decides whether it is good or bad, and makes it known toall concerned.Which organ is capable of declaring whether a picture is attractive or ugly? The eyealone is the measuring rod for this purpose. Similarly, the power to determine whether anobject is fragrant or foul-smelling is vested in the nose. Likewise it is the ear that can dis-criminate be-tween a melodious musical note and a discordant one. Thus, the sense or-gans are called maatraah in as much as they are endowed with the capacity to measureand determine the particular quality or characteristic of different sense objects.In the Kathopanishad, the senses are described as horses yoked to the chariot of thebody. What is the inner significance of naming the senses as horses (aswa in Sanskrit)?Summer Showers 199021Aswa means that which is always restless. It is common knowledge that a horse, whetherit is standing or running or even sleeping, moves some part of its body or the other all thetime, whether a tail, or the leg, or the back, or the nose, or the jaws. It is because of thisrestless nature of the horse that it is called aswam. Similarly, take the case of the peepultree (Ficus religiosa). Whether there is any breeze or not, its leaves are constantlyrustling. Hence it is called aswatha tree.In ancient times, the Indian rulers used to perform a sacrifice (yaga) by name Aswa-Medha Yaga. “Aswa” means fickle. “Medha” means “buddhi (intellect)”. Thus, “aswamedha” means “fickle-minded”. Hence, the horse that is used in the sacrifice symbolisesa fickle mind. Whosoever is capable of capturing and controlling that horse is describedas dheemantha (a man of heroic intelligence), worthy of combat. Here we see the esotericand exoteric meanings of the term aswa-medha. It is only when both meanings are takentogether that we get at the whole truth. Today, it is the duty of every person to control thehorse-like senses. Only then can he be called a hero in the true sense. Whatever yagas,yajnas, or other rituals one may perform, whatever Scriptures one might have mastered, ifone has no control over his senses, all these accomplishments are worthless.The term maatraah as applied to the senses has yet another meaning. It indicates thatthe limit to what can be experienced by each sense organ has been prescribed by the LordDivine. For instance, the eye can only see but cannot hear. The mouth can only speak butcannot see. Thus, each organ has been endowed by God with a specific talent only. Onlythose who use these organs according to the divinely prescribed functions will be actingup to the Will of the Divine. Those who violate the prescribed limits will be transgressingthe divine Will, thereby becoming liable for punishment.Everyone, therefore, should make use of the sense organs with due regard to thefunctions and limits prescribed for each of them. For example, the nose has been allotteda specific assignment of inhaling and exhaling air for preserving one’s health and of dis-tinguishing between good and bad smells, and take in only what is good and fragrant. Ig-noring this specific role ordained for the nose, today’s man unfortunately is misusing itfor taking snuff and inhaling foul odours. By such practices, he is violating the injunc-tions pertaining to the use of the nose. Thereby he commits a double offence; one, vio-lating a divine injunction, and the other, causing damage to his health. No wonder, there-fore, that man today has become a prey to all kinds of disease.In the same manner, the tongue has been given to man to consume wholesome foodthat promotes his health as well as to speak gently and sweetly, so as to give joy to others,and to communicate his innermost thoughts and feelings to others. The tongue, which hasbeen bestowed on us for such edifying purposes, is being grossly misused nowadays. It isbeing used for consuming drugs and narcotics, eating animal food, smoking, indulging inabuses of others, carrying tales, backbiting, speaking harsh words that hurt others, etc.Through such perverse use of the tongue, the divine injunctions are violated by setting atnaught the ordained limits. Consequently, man has to experience numerous troubles.It is only by properly using the God-given senses for the purposes for which they areintended that man can rise to divine heights. Just because you have the sense organs, youshould not use them as you please. They are like horses yoked to a chariot. You mustknow how to handle them properly so that the chariot can run smoothly and safely alongthe right road to the ultimate goal of life. The horses must be in front of the chariot. To-day, on the contrary, the horses are placed behind the chariot. This is leading to danger-ous consequences. If, on the plea that the senses should be respected and given a place of22Summer Showers 1990honour, you place the horses (senses) inside the chariot, how can the chariot move at all?While fostering the senses, no effort is being made to bring them under control internally.This amounts to feeding a horse excessively and unduly fattening it but not giving it ade-quate work. This is sure to have untoward results. Today, we are pampering the sensesbut not giving them any work. That is why they are running amuck, spelling disaster tothe master himself. The senses should be put to right use as ordained by God; otherwise,man will have to suffer from lack of peace.This situation may be compared to that of a man with many wives. King Uttanapaadahad two wives, and, because of the differences between them, the child Dhruva had to goto the forest to perform penance. King Dasaratha had three wives. To comply with thedemands of his youngest wife, he had to endure the exile of his dearest son, Rama, to theforest, eventually to lose his life due to the pangs of separation. If this is the plight ofthose having two or three wives, imagine the condition of one who has to manage tenwives! For, this V.I.P. (very important person), namely the mind, has to manage tenwives—the five sense organs and the five organs of action. Each organ insists on enjoy-ing objects of its own choice. For example, the nose is attracted by the smell of masaladosa (a South Indian delicacy) and wants to have it. The ear wants the radio to be tuned,so that it can enjoy melodious music. The eyes hanker after a new film. Thus when all ofthem are keen about their own particular desires, how can the master (the mind) satisfythem all at the same time? Unable to satisfy them, the mind gets frustrated. How then canthis mind wedded to ten wives enjoy peace? It is only when the senses are kept underproper control that man can be happy himself and share that happiness with those aroundhim.There is a method by which the demands of the senses can be reconciled and harmo-nised. This is by treating both good and bad with equal-mindedness. Tukaram is an illus-trious example in this regard. He was a great devotee, and very gentle by nature. His wifewas a shrew. Nevertheless, by his calmness and forbearance, Tukaram managed to get onwell with her. Only when one is in the habit of retaliating word for word, tit for tat, toothfor tooth, and nail for nail does one have to face discord and trouble. But Tukaram wasthe very embodiment of forbearance. He used to cultivate his small farm of half-an-acreto maintain his family. At the insistence of his neighbours, he once raised sugarcane cropin that small plot of land. When the crop was mature taking undue advantage of Tu-karam’s good nature, many passers-by used to pluck a couple of sugarcanes and chewthem. Finally, Tukaram harvested whatever crop was left behind, bundled the canes, andwas taking them home in his cart. On the way, the children of the village gathered roundhim and pleaded for a piece of sugarcane each. In his usual generosity, Tukaram allowedthe children to help themselves to the canes in the cart. At last when he reached home,there was only one cane left in the cart. Seeing this, his wife flew into a rage and stronglyscolded Tukaram, condemning him as unfit for family life; she took out the only cane onthe cart in a fit of anger and struck Tukaram with it. The cane broke into three pieces, outof which two fell on the ground, and the other was in her hand. Tukaram calmly re-marked, “I was wondering all along the way how to distribute the remaining cane to thethree members of the family. I am glad you have nicely solved the problem for me. Youcan eat one piece, which is in your hand, and give the other two, which have fallen on thefloor, to the two children.” Such forbearance and equanimity can rarely be found exceptin a few high-souled persons. These qualities can be acquired only through devotion andfaith. You need not feel disheartened with the fear that you will not be able to control theSummer Showers 199023senses. By developing one-pointed devotion and complete surrender to God, the sensescan definitely be brought under control.Kabir is an example of another godly man in a different situation. Unlike Tukaram’swife, Kabir’s wife was highly devoted and faithful, totally dedicated to serving the hus-band and obeying him implicitly. One day Kabir was plying his handloom, chanting, asusual, the name of “Ram” all the time. Suddenly he called his wife and saying that onethread has snapped, he asked her to bring a lamp. It was noon, and when she brought thelighted lamp, Kabir asked her to take it back as it was not necessary (because of day-light). Any other wife in her position would have retorted, saying, “Have you no eyes tosee the daylight? Why did you waste my time and effort by unnecessarily asking me tobring a lighted lamp and to take it back? Do you think I have no other work?” etc. ButKabir’s wife was made of a different stuff. She silently took back the lamp, without amurmur or uttering even a single word of resentment. Hence, with such a dutiful andobedient wife, Kabir was able to develop his devotion unhampered, and expressed hisgratitude to God for His Grace in giving him such a good partner in life.Here you have two examples of saintly men who, despite their contrasting familysituations, pursued their spiritual path equally well. Hence, it is not the environment thatmatters in the control of one’s senses and emotions. It is the purity of one’s impulses, sin-cerity of purpose, and determination in treading the divine path that count rather than theenvironment which is of little or no consequence in this regard.You must have heard about Einstein who was a great scientist as well as a man ofwisdom—a rare combination. He had a very stupid woman. She was not only uneducatedbut also rude in her behaviour. Einstein was always engaged in experiments, investiga-tions, and also contemplation. He was so much absorbed in his work that he never used togo in time for his food and refreshments, even though frequently reminded by his wife.His wife was upset and disgusted with the behaviour of her husband and used to lose hertemper quite often. One day, she was feeling very hungry. She served all the dishes onthe dinner table and repeatedly requested her husband to come and have his food. ButEinstein paid no heed to her words, as he was engrossed with his thoughts forgetful of theworld outside. His wife became enraged at this and rushed to him with a jugful of waterand emptied it on her husband’s head along with a shower of rebukes. Einstein was notupset, though fully drenched. He smiled at his wife and cooly remarked, “Everyday, itused to be only lightning and thunder. But today it is a heavy downpour on my head! Justimagine the forbearance, composure, and humour of Einstein in such a highly trying andprovoking situation! If it were to be any other husband, he would have smashed thewife’s head with the very same empty jug snatching it from her hand. But Einstein neverthought in terms of such retaliation or even retort for that matter. Such was the controlover his senses.The ancient sages regarded sense control as a form of penance. To discipline thesenses, one should understand how the senses function. Here is a small story to illustratehow a Christian priest learnt a lesson in sense control from the driver of a horse carriagein which he was traveling. The priest noticed that the driver was beating the horse se-verely as it was approaching a railway crossing. The priest, who was a strong believer inChrist’s message of love and compassion, took pity on the animal and asked the driverwhy he was beating the horse unnecessarily, although it was running all right. The driverexplained that at the level crossing there were some white painted stones, which created afright in the horse. He was beating the animal because it was more afraid of the whip than24Summer Showers 1990the white stones and would therefore proceed through the level crossing without haltingdue to the fear of the white stones. So the priest learnt the lesson that when the attentionof any sense organ is distracted by something, it should be diverted to another desirablething by means of a stronger incentive or disincentive. Then only will it give up its crazydigressions and take to the right path.Suppose there is an animal that has developed the bad habit of stealthily grazing thecrops in others’ fields. How to wean it away from the bad habit? If you feed that animalin your cattle-stall with green fodder, which is even more palatable than the field crops, itwill get used to stall-feeding and will thereby give up its bad habit of grazing field crops.Likewise, the senses should be weaned away from their bad habits and trained properly totake to good habits.The senses have been compared to pasu (animals). The word pasu means the onewhose vision is externally oriented. The one having an inner vision is called pasupati or“the Lord of animals” (Siva). Man should aspire and strive to become a “pasupati” ormaster of the senses, but not a pasu, a slave of the senses. It is a pity that today’s man hasbecome a slave of the senses. There are several ways of taming the senses and puttingthem on the proper path. In this connection, it is important to avoid pampering the senses.If you investigate carefully about the birthplace of the sense-pleasures, you will findthat they have their origin only in sorrow. That is why every sense pleasure carries with itthe sting of sorrow. The pleasure derived from the senses is momentary and ultimatelyends up in grief only. Desires arise this moment and subside the next moment. Supposethe desire to eat laddu (sweet) arises in you today. No sooner have you eaten two laddusthan you develop satiation or aversion for the sweet. Desire this moment and disgust nextmoment! Pleasure and pain in quick succession! By thus contemplating the momentaryand deceptive nature of the so-called sense-pleasures, we can develop discrimination anddetachment and keep the senses under check. Another important point you should note isthat, if the senses are kept busy in the right way, there will be no trouble from them. Oth-erwise, you will become their slave.Even though I may not be physically present, I know what is going on at a particularplace at a particular time as well as the inner feelings of the people concerned. For in-stance, this afternoon, Dr. Hemalatha, Principal of the Women’s College, Anantapur, en-tertained all of you with a very illuminating lecture on Prahlada, interspersed with melo-dious songs and poems in Telugu. One of the most important things she mentioned washow Hiranyakashipu, who hated and abused Hari (Lord Vishnu), was killed by the latterand was redeemed thereby. Similarly in the case of Lord Krishna, he was being alwaysabused strongly by people like Sisupala and Dantavakra. Once, in the great assembly hallof Dharmaja (Yudhistira), packed with a distinguished gathering of eminent people, thequestion arose as to who should be given the first offering (or primacy) of respect andhonour, i.e. “Agra Thamboolam” (literally, meaning the first offering of pan supari orbetel leaves and arecanut). Although there were several men of distinction like Bhishma,Drona, etc., the Pandavas decided to give this unique honour only to Sri Krishna, whowas their all in all, who stood by them through thick and thin, and who came to their res-cue during many a crisis. Dharmaja washed Krishna’s feet and gave him the first offeringof respect and honour.Wicked persons cannot understand the inner meaning and motives of other people.Guided merely by external formalities and selfish considerations, they criticise and abuseothers out of malice and envy. This was exactly what the narrow-minded Sisupala did onSummer Showers 199025that occasion. He could not tolerate Krishna being honoured thus in that great assemblyof eminent personages. Right in front of the great teachers, great sages and great men ofhonour and distinction, the wicked Sisupala began showering virulent abuses on SriKrishna, mentioning for instance that Krishna was a thief who stole butter from others’houses, and who robbed the innocent cowherd girls of their saris, outraging their modestyand indulging in fun and frolic with them, and that therefore it was a wanton affront tothe august assembly to give the primacy of honour to Krishna. When this type of vitu-perative abuse by Sisupala exceeded the limits, Krishna suddenly threw at Sisupala thevery plate in which Dharmaja made his offering to Krishna. Some say that Krishna threwHis Sudarshana Chakra at Sisupala. But that is not correct. It was only with the throwingof the plate that Krishna severed Sisupala’s head. Dharmaja was exceedingly happy thatthe wicked Sisupala was slain by Krishna. But the very next moment, his happinessturned into utter surprise and bewilderment, as if his mind was struck by a severe cy-clone, when he witnessed the blood from the severed neck of Sisupala falling onKrishna’s sacred feet, and what was more surprising when the life flame emerging fromSisupala’s body merged in Sri Krishna. Amazed at this strange phenomenon, Dharmajaquestioned Narada how such a traitor and vicious enemy of Krishna like Sisupala couldhave such a glorious end, by way of the merger of his spirit in Sri Krishna—a consum-mation that even devotees who have surrendered themselves to the Divine can hardly ex-pect. To this Narada replied, “Abuse or praise, vilification or veneration pertain to thebody only and not to the Atma, which is beyond all pairs of opposites. The one SupremeParamatma alone dwells in all beings. That being the case, who is the reviler and who thereviled? Who is a friend and who a foe? All are the same. The blood that is saturated withthe constant remembrance of God becomes an offering dedicated to God. Whether out ofhatred or love, lust or envy, ego or surrender, whatever be the feelings, it is enough if theLord’s name is remembered incessantly.” Sisupala remembered Sri Krishna’s name moreoften than many devotees. Devotees remember God only when they see the temples andtheir towers or pictures and idols installed therein. But Sisupala, out of his intense hatredfor Krishna, had Krishna in his mind in all places and at all times whether waking orsleeping. It was because of this ceaseless remembrance of Sri Krishna that Sisupala’s soulcould merge in Him.Worldly persons look only at the superficial and external aspects of things and ac-tions. But the Lord does not see things that way. He is free from hatred or envy, likes ordislikes. When these are attributed to the Lord, they are but a reflection of your ownfeelings. God is like a clean mirror. What you see therein is but a mere reflection of yourown actions and postures—grin for a grin, smile for a smile, salute for a salute, and so on.For God, there is no action or reaction. God neither punishes nor rewards anyone. Youare punished or rewarded by your own actions. Hence no one is entitled to question theactions of God, accusing God of favouritism to some and indifference to others. Who hasthe authority to dictate to God how He should conduct Himself? The Divinity present inevery one may find expression in various types of behaviour. But the actions of the Di-vine are always full of love and entirely free from selfishness and therefore totally taint-less. That is why God has several appellations like “attributeless, taintless, ancient, theabode for all, eternal, pure, enlightened (consciousness), free,” etc. God’s eye does notsee purity or impurity. It is all in your vision only. As you think, so you become. Youlook at the world through coloured glasses and wrongly attribute those colours to the26Summer Showers 1990world. It is your defective vision that makes you see defects which do not exist in crea-tion.The defects that you attribute to the senses are, in fact, the defects in your ownthought processes and feelings. If the senses are properly used, they will offer you theright impressions. For example, Tukaram had good feelings and so gave a favourable in-terpretation to even the rude and negative behaviour of his wife; his senses did not standin the way of his spiritual progress and equanimity, despite trying circumstances in hisfamily. Likewise, Kabir was always engaged in remembrance of God, so his wife’s be-haviour was harmonious and conducive to his spiritual advancement, Einstein, too, hadthe quality of equanimity in him and was therefore not at all upset by the boisterous be-haviours of his wife. From all these instances, it is evident that what you need to do is toharmonise your own thoughts and feelings through proper sadhana (spiritual discipline),rather than blame the environment or other persons for your shortcomings.However, some stubborn people given to vain argumentation, blame God for givingan outgoing orientation to man’s senses. They argue that God has given them eyes withdoors that open to the outside world; ears that can hear external sounds; and noses thatcan only inhale the air from outside. They contend, therefore, that the fault lies with thecreator only and not with them. They try to justify their sensuous behaviour, by sayingthat, “to err is human.” Such misleading rationalisation is a travesty of truth and is worthyof strong condemnation, especially when it is indulged in by the youth. If animals behavewrongly, it is quite understandable, because they are not endowed with the faculty of dis-crimination to control and guide their senses. But if man, who is blessed by God with thepower of discrimination, takes to the wrong path, yielding to his senses, it is highly un-pardonable. How paradoxical and ridiculous it is to be born as a man and to behave as ananimal; behave, therefore, as befits a human being.Some students who consider themselves to be very smart, try to argue thus, “Look atthe birds, cattle, and beasts. They are having full freedom to eat what they want, to mateas they like, and to fly or wander as they wish. Why should man be denied such freedomas is enjoyed by these lower animals?” A specious argument indeed! But let us ask thesewiseacres, “What kind of freedom do the animals enjoy?” The answer undoubtedly is,“animal freedom”. Animals enjoy animal freedom. There is nothing wrong in it. But be-ing a man, is it not wrong and unbecoming of you to want to enjoy animal freedom? Youtry to give several wrong meanings and misleading interpretations to the word “freedom”.What you should strive for is freedom from the senses and not freedom of the senses.True freedom is to control the senses and the lower self in an attempt to attain the higher(real) Self and experience the eternal bliss of the Atma (Atmananda).Along with knowledge, it is important to have character also. Then only you can en-joy a perfect balance in life. It is a pity that today’s education caters only to the develop-ment of intelligence and cleverness, ignoring character and human values altogether.What is the use of acquiring any amount of knowledge available in the world, if one doesnot have character? This is the reason for the loss of balance in the case of the modernmen in general and the educated men in particular. If you lose your balance while riding abicycle, you are liable to meet with accidents. Similarly, if there is a lack of balance be-tween knowledge and character in your life’s journey, you are surely exposing yourself toserious accidents. Therefore, you have to control the senses on the one hand and developvirtuous living on the other. It is highly essential for students to maintain the balancebetween the two. Students! It will not do if you merely exercise control over your senses.Summer Showers 199027You should also harmonise them. According to Patanjali, yoga is the control of the wan-derings of the mind. However, such control of the mind is most difficult, if not altogetherimpossible, to achieve. The appropriate and easy method, on the contrary, is to achievemental harmony or balance. Concentrate on what is good; then you will be automaticallykeeping yourself away from what is bad. It is the weakness of your mind that is responsi-ble for all your problems. There was a foreigner by name Carlyle. He was highly intelli-gent, but due to lack of control over his senses, he became very weak. He was sufferingfrom insomnia. One day, he called his neighbour and complained to him that he was un-able to sleep during night time, because of the crowing of the cock in that neighbour’shouse. The neighbour replied that no cock would crow throughout night, but only twiceor thrice and that in spite of having the cock in his house, he (neighbour) was able tosleep well. Carlyle’s reply to this was that he too knew that the cock crows only two orthree times, but he was unable to sleep because he was always thinking of the cock andits crowing at any time of the night. The lesson of the story is that Carlyle’s loss of sleepwas not due to the crowing of the cock as alleged by him but only due to his own imagi-nary fear. Likewise most people nowadays suffer not on account of their senses but onlydue to all sorts of wrong imaginations. So, man should completely give up such imagina-tions and baseless fears, which are detrimental to him. In the next few days, we shall con-sider some more aspects of the senses, their mastery and harmonisation.5ROAD TO DIVINITYIn the worthless mens’ hearts devoid of purity,Do abide the vices of anger and envy.Don’t bats abound in dens of darkness?Never should you forget this wise saying.He alone is a man who seeks the OneWho blest his ears with the power to hearAnd endowed his eyes with the glow of sight.Embodiments of Divine Love!Control of the senses must be the primary aim of students, but not the fleeting pleas-ures of the sense objects, which give but a little momentary joy followed by endless mis-ery. The sensory perceptions, namely, hearing, touching, seeing, tasting, and smelling,are more powerful than the sense organs. The most important among the sense organs isthe tongue. If the tongue is conquered, it virtually amounts to mastering all the senses.The tongue has two important functions: eating and talking. Whoever is able to conquerthese two faculties of the tongue can merge himself in the divine Self. When the tonguestops talking, the mind starts chatting. To control the mind’s prattling, the intellect has tobe awakened. Then one should gently persuade the intellect to turn gradually toward theAtma.True sadhana (spiritual practice) consists in the technique of merging the vaak (fac-ulty of speech) in the mind, the mind in the intellect, and finally the intellect in the Atma.Forgetting this sacred and royal road available to man, it is sad that he chooses to indulgein sensual pleasures, which ultimately drown him in deep sorrow. No one tries to find outwhat the ultimate source of animation for the insentient senses is, nor does one seek toknow who the real enjoyer is of all the pleasures derived through the senses. Studentsshould recognise that there is an intimate relationship between the external world and theinternal world within oneself. Is it the body or the senses or the Atma that experiences thepleasures of eating delicious food or seeing a beautiful sight, or smelling a fragrant ob-ject? It is not the body, much less the sense organs. The real experiencer in all these casesis the Atma, which is the causeless cause of all that exists and which fosters, sustains,presides, and rules over all the things in the universe. Atma is the basis for the manifestedworld and the original source of motivation for the internal world. Only when we recog-nise the cardinal role of the Atma as the root cause of everything will the deceptive andtransient sense organs cease to have dominance over us.Of all the sense organs, the tongue has an overriding importance and influence. Mas-tery over this one sense organ will enable one to master easily all the other sense organs.The Kathopanishad has compared the senses to horses. A horse can run fast; but once abridle is put in its mouth and held tight, its entire movement can be easily controlled.How can a small bridle control such a large, strong and fast-running animal? Because, themouth is the most important and vulnerable part of the horse from the standpoint ofkeeping it under control. Once the mouth is bridled, the entire animal comes under con-trol. Likewise in the case of man also, the mouth is the most important among the fiveSummer Showers 199029sense organs. With the help of a small rudder, we can save a big boat from a fierce cy-clone. With a small spark we can kindle a bonfire. The power of speech is like a spark offire. By controlling the tongue, one can virtually acquire control over the world itself.The power of speech can be used either for a noble and sublime purpose or misused in amean and mischievous manner. It can be utilised for blessing people or for blaming oth-ers. Bilwamangal, alias Jayadeva, sings thus addressing the tongue in words that combinecompliments with counseling: “Oh my dear tongue! You are sweet. You have the capac-ity to discriminate between good and bad taste. So I am telling you the supremely be-nevolent truth. Do not indulge in idle talk; instead of it make yourself busy by singing thesweet and glorious names of the Lord—Govinda! Damodara! Madhava! etc.” There is afamiliar saying “A slip of the foot may not cause much harm, but a slip of the tongue willland you in hell.” A reckless use of your tongue can grievously hurt others’ hearts. Andno doctor on earth can heal the wound caused by a harsh word.When the senses come in contact with sense objects, they can give rise to immensepleasure as well as endless pain. For instance, someone outside is abusing you; as long asthe abuse is beyond the range of your sense organs, you are not in any way affected by it.But once the abusive words reach your ears, you become enraged and excited beyondcontrol. What is the reason for your being upset like that? As long as there was no contactbetween the sound waves and your ears, you were unruffled. It was the subsequent con-tact between the two that provoked the strong reaction in you. To take a contrasting ex-ample: someone outside is praising you, extolling your admirable qualities. As long asyou have not heard his words of praise, you derive no joy nor do you entertain a feelingof endearment toward him. But once his words of praise have reached your ears, you re-joice in them and develop great love for the speaker. What is the reason for the hatred inthe first example and for the love in the second one? It is only the contact between thesenses and their objects. Thus it becomes clear that the senses can enjoy peace only whenthey do not come in contact with sense objects. In the alternative, one should be able tomaintain a feeling of equanimity without giving way either to elation or agitation in spiteof a contact between his senses and their objects and irrespective of whether the outcomeof such a contact is pleasant or otherwise.It should, however, be recognised that it is neither easy nor always possible to preventthe senses and their objects from coming into mutual contact. On the contrary, it is possi-ble, with some effort, to develop an attitude of equipoise, notwithstanding such contacts,which are more often unavoidable. To foster such an attitude, you should resort to thepath of enquiry and thereby develop the firm conviction, “I am neither the body nor thesense organs. I am the ever-blissful Atma.” Only when you are unshakeably establishedin this conviction will the sense organs cease to trouble you. It is only through the pursuitof the path of enquiry accompanied by the constant contemplation on the idea that youare nothing other than the Atma that you can transcend the human limitations and experi-ence your divine Self under all circumstances.You may have heard about the great philosopher, Philip Sydney. As a boy, while hewas staying away from his parents to attend school in another town, his father wrote hima letter giving some words of advice as follows. “My dear son! Every day offer yourheartfelt prayer to God. Always strive to turn your mind toward God. Conduct yourselfwith respect and humility toward your teachers and fellow students. Do not give room foranger, disappointment, or discontentment. Don’t get distressed when others criticise andabuse you or get elated when they praise you. Never criticise others.” The father con-30Summer Showers 1990cluded his letter with the following important caution to his son, “If ever you have tomake a promise, make it only to God and to none else. Speech is God’s gift. Hence youhave no right to give a pledge to any one else. The plighted word should be offered onlyto God. If you follow this rule, you will grow in wisdom and your glory will shine. Al-ways exercise control over your tongue and never allow it to run amuck. Thus you willstand forth as an ideal student in society.” Philip Sydney scrupulously followed his fa-ther’s advice and achieved great eminence as a philosopher.Students should note that too much talking is harmful to their mind. They should notconcern themselves with any matters other than their studies. They must remember thatthey are seekers of knowledge and not seekers of extraneous things. Only after finishingyour studies can you engage yourselves in other activities. Even then, you should beguided by the rule of moderation; never exceed the limits either of talking or in othermatters relating to your daily life. The tongue is prone to four types of lapses: (1) Utter-ing lies, (2) Carrying tales against others, (3) Criticising or scandalising others, and (4)Excessive talking. It is these four tendencies that deprive man of his peace of mind. Oneshould speak only the truth. Of course, in some rare cases, it may be dangerous to speakthe truth. Under such circumstances, you should be discreet enough to avoid speakingeither truth or untruth. Only thus can you be a success in society.The senses are extremely powerful. They are the root cause for all the joys and sor-rows of mankind. You should, therefore, try to understand thoroughly the nature and roleof the senses and harness them to your best advantage. An eminent poet sang thus aboutthe havoc that the senses are capable of: “If the head harbours wicked thoughts, if thetongue indulges in calumny, if the eyes are keen to observe others’ lapses, if the ears arealert to overhear others, if the mind and heart are bent upon deceiving others—at the verysight of these monstrosities, justice and fair play will not survive at all.”Man’s stronghold should be to adhere to the path of truth, rectitude, and justice. Butman’s tragedy is that he becomes a helpless victim of his five senses, which lead himastray and land him in endless problems. We have the classic examples of each kind ofanimal or insect being trapped and even losing its life on account of its weakness for onesense alone—the deer for the sense of sound, the elephant for the sense of touch, themoth for the sense of sight, the fish for the sense of taste, and the bee for the sense ofsmell. Hence, one can easily imagine the plight of man who is the unfortunate victim ofall the five senses. In this context, the students should follow the shining example of theyoung devotee Prahlada. Despite all the tempting allurements designed by his father, de-spite all the ingenuous tutoring by his teachers at the insistence of his father, and despiteall the intimidations and tortures as well as all the cruel attempts to kill him outright,Prahlada never succumbed to the sensual ways of worldly life but stuck tenaciously to thespiritual path, with the Lord’s name ever dancing on his tongue. He even used to lead hisfellow-students also on the spiritual path, inspiring them with his melodious devotionalsongs and stories. Here is a sample of an interesting story that he had learnt from the SageNarada and that he narrated to his young friends:There was a king who had many wives. He had no peace of mind because of them.One day he wanted to find out whether there was any man in his entire kingdom who wasfree from worries due to a nagging wife. So after giving wide publicity, he arranged twobig tents (pandals), the first one for those who were under their wives’ control and thesecond one for those who had control over their wives. By sunset, the first tent was filledto capacity, whereas there was not a single man in the second tent. At last, one man cameSummer Showers 199031suddenly and sat in the second tent. The king felt happy that there was at least one manwho had control over his wife. He met him inside the tent and asked him courteously tospeak the truth as to whether he had control over his wife. The man replied that he wouldnever speak a lie and that the truth was that he was squarely under his wife’s control. Theking then told him about the impropriety of his sitting in the wrong tent and ordered himto go and stand in the other tent. That henpecked husband replied in agony, “Your Maj-esty! I have strict orders from my wife to sit in this tent only at any cost. I dare not dis-obey her and go to the other tent, whatever punishment you may give me or even if youtake my life.” The lesson of this story is: the mind, which is supposed to be the husbandof his wives, namely the senses, is in the pitiable plight of being a helpless slave to them.In fact, the order of control based on the increasing order of subtlety ought to be as fol-lows: the body, the sense organs, the mind, the intellect, and the Atma, each of them con-trolling the preceding one. This means that the Atma, being the subtlest of all, should holdsway over the rest of them.Since the sense organs are highly potent, the first and foremost task for man is tobring them under his control for leading an ideal life. Because young people today havelost control over their senses, all their actions and behaviour are devious. They do notknow how to sit properly in the classroom, how to walk about, how to read, how to sleep,and how to behave towards their parents, teachers, elders, and friends. They betray lackof concentration even while talking to somebody, by casting their looks hither andthither. They make unnecessary gestures and odd movements of all their limbs as if theyare dancing while engaged in conversation or speech making. While walking on the road,students should have their eyes on their feet so as to avoid distractions and prevent acci-dents. While sleeping they should stretch their body straight and not curl themselves likea coil of wire, which is bundled. By constant practice of the right way of doing thingsthey will develop good habits and acquire mastery over all their senses.Students should avoid unnecessary curiosity in respect of matters that do not directlyconcern them. If they indulge in excessive talk with all and sundry or if they go on inter-fering in others’ affairs, they will make themselves unpopular and unwanted by others.Everybody will try to avoid such people and thus they will lose the respect of all. It is avery bad habit for students to be standing and talking in the bazaar. If at all talking isnecessary, they should do it in their hostel rooms but never in the market place. The ob-servance of discipline in all these matters is of paramount importance to the students.Today young people do not know how to sit properly while reading or writing, etc.They sit with their backs bent and drooping like 80-year old people. This causes variousailments and leads to premature old age. While walking or sitting, you must be straightlike a rod, keeping the spine erect. There is a physiological reason for this. A very im-portant nerve called the sushumna naadi, runs through the spinal column, from its base inthe mooladhara to the sahasraara at top of the head. If this gets bent, serious results willfollow. The importance of the sushumna naadi is known only to those engaged in thepractice of kundalini yoga.When the situation requires, we should not hesitate to carry our footwear. For in-stance, when we have to cross a rivulet on foot, or if it rains heavily when we are walk-ing, it is convenient to carry our shoes. Although the worth of the footwear is very little,we should give due respect to it, because it protects our feet when required. Here is astory about how and why Sri Krishna carried the shoes of a woman. On the ninth day ofthe Kurukshetra war, Bhishma, the Commander of the Kaurava Army, took a serious vow32Summer Showers 1990that he would kill all the Pandava brothers in the next day’s battle. Droupadi, the wife ofthe Pandavas, came to know about this. In her great anxiety and worry, she ran to SriKrishna, fell at His feet, and prayed to Him to save the lives of her five husbands. It was10 p.m. Sri Krishna hit upon a strategy. He asked Droupadi to hasten to the tent ofBhishma and prostrate before him making sure that there is jingling of her bangles in theprocess of prostration. Further he asked her to leave her footwear with him and go toBhishma with bare feet, because if she went with her footwear, Bhishma would be alertedby the sound of her footwear and might recognise her, in which case, His strategy of get-ting her blessed by Bhishma would not succeed.According to Krishna’s advice, Droupadi, with her head veil, went softly barefootedto Bhishma’s tent. At that time, Bhishma was restlessly walking to and fro in his tent. Hewas upset by a strong feeling of remorse about the vow he had taken on the battlefieldthat day to kill all the Pandavas in the next day’s battle. He could not eat or sleep thatnight because his conscience told him that the Pandavas were the very embodiment ofsathya and dharma (truth and righteousness) and that it was, therefore, a great sin on hispart to kill them mercilessly without any justification. Engrossed in these thoughts he waspacing up and down when Droupadi entered the tent and swiftly prostrated before him,making a jingling sound with her bangles, as suggested by Krishna. Since the sound ofbangles indicated that a woman was a “sumangali”, i.e. a woman whose husband wasalive, Bhishma in accordance with the Hindu tradition and custom blessed her, saying,“Deergha sumangali bhava,” which means “May you live long together with your hus-band(s),” not knowing the identity of the woman who was prostrating before him. NowDroupadi knew for certain that Bhishma’s blessing would never go in vain. So, no soonerdid she hear Bhishma’s blessings than she joyously sprang to her feet and removing herhead veil, thanked Bhishma profusely, and told him that it was for the sake of this veryblessing that she came to his tent at that odd hour. Bhishma was highly surprised when hediscovered that it was Droupadi whom he had blessed in a manner that ran counter to thevow he had taken. He began questioning her, “Who has designed this strategy for you?Who has shown you the way to my tent? Has anybody accompanied you?”As he was questioning her thus, Krishna made His dramatic appearance beforeBhishma and Droupadi. It did not take Bhishma long to guess that Sri Krishna, the Mas-ter Strategist of the whole universe, was behind the entire plot and the scene being en-acted in his tent. Beside himself with joyous excitement, Bhishma exclaimed, “O LordKrishna! It is quite evident now that this is all your divine plan and your impeccably per-fect game!” Bhishma now felt relieved of his sense of remorse, and, in fact, he even feltglad about the whole affair, because it served the dual purpose of saving the lives of Pan-davas on the one hand and saving himself on the other hand from the ignominy and sin ofslaying the virtuous Pandavas.Now that Bhishma was relieved of his tension and anxiety and became his normalself, he felt the pangs of hunger; because due to the worried state of his mind till a littlewhile ago, he did not feel hungry and hence he had not eaten anything that night after thatday’s fierce fighting in the battlefield. He then noticed some packet that Krishna was car-rying in his armpit. Thinking that it might be a packet of some eatables that could relievehis hunger, he eagerly asked Krishna about the contents of the packet. The playfulKrishna suddenly let go the packet from his armpit, and when it got ripped while fallingon the ground, what did Bhishma as well as Droupadi see to their utter amazement? Loand behold, a pair of shoes! With a mischievous smile Krishna pointed His finger towardSummer Showers 199033them saying, “They are Droupadi’s slippers.” Both Bhishma and Droupadi could notcontain themselves, because, leave alone Bhishma, even Droupadi never expected or sus-pected that Krishna would carry her slippers. Both of them began shedding profuse tearsof ecstasy at what the Lord did. Choked with emotion, Bhishma exclaimed, “O LordKrishna! Who can understand Your divine leelas? There is no limit to the troubles Youundergo in order to protect Your devotees who have surrendered themselves at Your Lo-tus Feet. In order to save Your devotees, You never hesitate to do even such things whichothers would consider as demeaning, degrading, or debasing. What a Merciful Lord Youare!”The lesson that students should learn from this story is that they should not consideranything as mean and beneath their dignity, as long as it serves the purpose of helping theneedy, without deviating however from the path of rectitude. Our ancient scriptures likethe Vedas, Sastras, Puranas —mythological books— and Ithihasas —Epics— provideplenty of shining examples of people who led such noble and ideal lives. But the studentsof today are so ignorant about our scriptures that they do not know what is meant bySastras or Ramayana or Parayana —recital of scriptures. Thus, they are forfeiting therich heritage of their glorious culture and tradition. Students of the Sai Educational sys-tem should, therefore, become pioneers in imbibing a judicious and harmonious combi-nation of both secular and sacred learning i.e. acquiring both scientific and spiritualknowledge.You hear people talking about “culture” and “spirituality” as if they are two differentthings. In My view, culture is only the essence derived from spirituality. Just as sugar iscommon to all the varieties of sweets, which are seemingly different from one another,spirituality is common to the seemingly different cultures of all lands and nations. Inshort, you should recognise that culture is a part of the all-inclusive spirituality. You mustcultivate and develop this all-inclusive unitary vision. The various organs and limbs ofthe body are not different from the body. Viswam (the universe) is not separate fromVishnu (God). Likewise, you have to recognise that what you call “secular” and “sacred”or “worldly” and “spiritual” are not two discrete and unrelated things but only two facetsof one indivisible Reality or Truth. You can easily grasp this fact if you consider the ex-ample of a bean seed, which consists of two cotyledons covered by a common seed-coat.When the bean seed is sown in the field and when it germinates, you can see the saplingconsisting of the two thick cotyledons with the plumule in between them. The seedlinggrows, deriving its nourishment from both the cotyledons. So also, the seedling calledhuman being requires for his growth and full development both the secular and sacredaspects of life. These two aspects of life neither exist nor can they thrive independently inisolation from each other. They are both intimately and inextricably related. The sum to-tal of these two aspects is what you call “culture”. People lacking in such broad-mindedunitary vision see the apparent and even imaginary differences between the culture of onenation and another. True wisdom lies in discerning and discovering the fundamental unitybehind the superficial differences in the world culture. The same thing applies to the con-cept of religions too. To say that Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, Islam, etc. are dif-ferent religions betrays not only narrow-mindedness but also the lack of understandingabout the meaning of “religion”. “Religion” means “Realisation”. Since realisation is oneand the same, irrespective of whatever religion is professed by different men, it logicallyfollows that basically all religions are one; or to be more accurate, there is only one re-ligion.34Summer Showers 1990In this connection, there is a small story. When Krishna went to Dhritharashtra as anambassador on behalf of the Pandavas, Dhritharashtra asked Him, “O Krishna, the Pan-davas and Kauravas are the sons of two brothers. Being divine, why are you partial to thePandavas? Why don’t you love the Kauravas, too? Krishna replied, “O King, I am sorryto say that you are blind not only physically but also spiritually. You should understandthat I cannot but support and help those who take refuge in Me and who surrender to Mewithout any reservation. The celestial Sage Narada once asked Narayana about His cor-rect address, since He had many “branch offices”. Narayana answered Narada saying thatHis “Head Office” or permanent address, where He stayed always, was the heart of thedevotee who constantly remembered Him with supreme love and devotion. Apart fromthis, let me tell you the nature of the relationship between the Pandavas and Myself.Dharmaja is My head, Arjuna My shoulder, Bheema My stomach, Nakula and SahadevaMy legs. I am the heart, so we are all inseparable parts of one and the same body.”The implication of the above reply of Krishna, in answer to Dhritharashtra, is that thebody, the senses, the mind, the intellect, and the Atma together constitute the integral hu-man personality, illustrating the truth of the Vedic declaration “Ekam Sath,” i.e. “Exis-tence is One.” Just as the body has several parts, the one Lord has also several names.Students! Till now, in the Summer Course, you have been told about the body and thesenses and their relationship. From tomorrow, we shall consider the interrelationshipbetween the mind and the senses, between the intellect and the senses, as well as the At-mic Principle that runs as the common undercurrent that integrates and animates the en-tire human system.6HOLD THE REINSMind alone is the causeFor man’s rise and fall in life;Mind alone is responsibleFor man’s bondage or liberation;This mind alone makes man forgetHis reality and land himself in hell!Dear Students!Man is a combination of body, mind, and Atma. These three together constitute thesteps for man’s ascent to the highest stage. The body is the instrument for actions. Themind is concerned with cognition. The changeless and permanent Reality is the Atma,which is the divine aspect of man. Thus, doing, knowing, and being are the triune mani-festations of the human personality. Although the body, mind, and Atma have differentnames and characteristics, their harmonisation and unification help man to raise himselffrom the human to the divine level. On the contrary, their alienation from one another de-grades him to the animal level.The word “antha karana (inner instrument)” is used in everyday worldly context aswell as in the spiritual parlance. What is its form, its nature, its role, its importance, andits destination? When we enquire along these lines, we will find that mind itself assumesthe subtle form of antha karana, consisting of four aspects, namely, manas (mind), bud-dhi (intellect), chitta (memory), and ahamkara (ego), the last three being the subtle as-pects of the mind. The particular name is given, based on the functions performed, just asone and the same Brahmin is called a priest (pujari) when he performs worship in a tem-ple, a cook when he works in the kitchen, a teacher when he teaches students, and a“panchaanga brahmin” when he interprets the almanac (panchaanga).In the same manner when the mind is engaged in wavering thought processes, it iscalled manas. When it is busy in the process of enquiry and discrimination between rightand wrong, it is named as buddhi (intellect). When it functions as a repository of memo-ries—it is known as chitta. When it identifies itself with the physical body, assuming thedoership for various activities, it goes by the name of ahamkara (ego). Thus, it may beseen that the mind, although basically one, displays these varied forms on account of thedifferent roles assumed by it. In fact, the mind alone is the cause of all things. “Mano-moolam idam Jagat” says the Scriptures. It means the whole cosmos is nothing but aprojection of the mind.Man derives his name from the possession of the mind. As a man thinks, so he be-comes. Man means mind, and mind means man. Mind is only a bundle of thoughts.Thoughts give rise to actions, and what we enjoy or suffer in this world are the conse-quences of these actions. It follows, therefore, that only when man’s thoughts are goodwill his life be good. Thoughts are highly potent. They survive the death of man. Hence itis essential to keep out bad thoughts from our minds. It is bad thoughts that separate manfrom man and make them forget their common divinity. When men realise that the Atmain every body is one and the same, there will be no room for differences. Man should tryto expand his relationship gradually from the individual level to the level of the family,36Summer Showers 1990the community, the nation and finally the whole world. The peace of the individual aswell as of the world depends on the mind, hence the need for proper disciplining of themind. Like a fish swimming against the current to save itself from dangers, man shouldcombat the evil thoughts within and protect himself from dangers.Man today is creating all sorts of trouble for himself, because of his wrong thoughts.None else should be blamed for his pleasures or pains, gains or losses. Mind is the root ofthe tree of samsara (cycle of births and deaths), and the manifested universe in general.To destroy this tree, lay the the axe at the root itself. In other words, the mind should bedestroyed by diverting the thoughts to the enquiry about the Atma, the real Self or the real“I”.Based on the differences in the nature of the mind, different colours are attributed toit. For instance, the mind filled with anger is red in colour. A selfish mind is wheat-brown. An egotistic mind is of the orange hue, while the mind dedicated to God is purewhite.Today the world is riddled with fear. Whether at home or out in the street, or whiletravelling in a train, bus, or plane, people are haunted by fear. The root cause for thisubiquitous fear is the absence of pure and sacred thoughts in the minds of men. Thewhole world appears like a maze filled with fear at every turn. The tragedy of Abhima-nyu, son of Arjuna and a hero of Kurukshetra war, was that he knew how to enter themaze called Padmavyuha but did not know how to get out of it. Likewise, you know howto enter the maze of worldly pleasures, but do not know how to get out of it. You willknow the way out only when you submit your thoughts to the scrutiny of the duddhi (in-tellect).In the Kathopanishad, the body is compared to a chariot, the senses to horses, themind to the reins, and the intellect to the charioteer. This means that the mind is in be-tween the senses and the intellect. If the mind follows the dictates of the intellect, it willbe safe. If, on the contrary, it follows the whims and fancies of the senses, it will becomea bondslave of the senses and a victim of endless sorrow and suffering. Allowing freerein to the senses is the pravritthi marga (the external path), while controlling the sensesis the nivritthi marga (the internal path). Most people are content to pursue the external.Few are concerned to explore the internal. Many people today employ their thoughts andefforts in harming others. They do not realise the fact that the harm they do to others willrecoil on themselves many fold. An outstanding example of this is the vicious Kauravasled by Duryodhana and Dussasana subjecting the virtuous Pandavas to innumerable hard-ships. What was the ultimate result of this? Although the Pandavas suffered temporarily,in the final reckoning the Kauravas were utterly destroyed forever. Students! Always re-member this and never think of hurting others. Don’t criticise or condemn others. If youdeceive your friends, they in turn will cheat you. If you disobey your parents, your chil-dren will pay you back in the same coin. If you hurt others, they will hurt you in retalia-tion. This kind of reaction, resound, and reflection are inherent in man’s mind. Hence youshould scrupulously follow the maxim, “Hurt never; help ever.” There are some sinfulpersons who cavil not only at other men, but even against God. This seems to be theirvery nature, although God never harms any one at any time.In this context, the lowest category of people are those who take sadistic pleasure inhurting other people without any provocation whatsoever. They may be compared to themoths whose nature is to damage all clothes indiscriminately—whether it is a valuablesari costing one thousand rupees or a worthless soiled rag in the kitchen. This highly des-Summer Showers 199037picable tendency on the part of some persons to harm others is traceable to their badthoughts. We try to dispel foul odours from our living rooms and toilets by using sub-stances like air-fresheners, incense sticks, and other deodorants. Similarly we should tryto counteract our bad thoughts with good ones. Good thoughts will eventually lead us tothe fulfillment of our lives, while bad thoughts will degrade us to the level of beasts. Nodoubt the replacement of bad thoughts by good ones, calls for sincere and determined ef-fort, because as Arjuna complained to Krishna the mind is fickle (chanchalam), turbulent(pramathi), strong (balavath), and stubborn (dridham).Everyone clamours for peace. But peace is not any-where outside; it is right therewithin us only. However, if you want to enjoy that peace, you have to resort to practice(abhyasa); what type of practice? First of all give up selfish thoughts. Then persistentlyengage yourself in the constant enquiry of what you really are. If you merely repeatthrice, saying “I am a man. I am a man. I am a man,” you will be half-a-man only. To re-alise your manhood in full, you should also repeat, “I am not an animal, I am not an ani-mal, I am not an animal.” For, people nowadays call themselves men but behave as ani-mals. In the light of this fact, the animal is better than the man, because the animal thinksof itself as an animal and behaves accordingly, whereas man claims himself to be a manbut behaves like an animal! You got the name “man” because you are endowed with ma-nas (mind). However to deserve that name, you should mould your mind in the propermanner which befits a man but not a beast.Mind is a priceless possession. It is God’s greatest gift to man. The Scriptures havedeclared that the mind alone is responsible either for man’s bondage or for his liberation.So, how can you condemn the mind as bad, when it is capable of leading you to the su-preme goal of liberation? A knife can be used to cut fruits and vegetables. But in a fit ofanger and frustration, if you make use of it for cutting your own throat or others’ throats,is it the fault of the knife? Likewise, you cannot blame the mind if you misuse it.Whether the mind contributes to your upliftment or downfall depends on how you use it.The mind is often compared to a cat. A cat gently catches hold of its young kittenswith its mouth and carries them from place to place to ensure their safety and nourish-ment. In utter contrast, the cat uses the same mouth for fiercely pouncing upon rats andtearing them to pieces. Similar is the case with the mind. It serves as the supreme bene-factor of those who engage themselves in the contemplation of God, in good thoughts,good words, and good actions. On the other hand, the same mind brings disaster to thosewho take to the wrong path of un-righteousness or outright wickedness.The way in which the mind functions may also be likened to mono-acting. Because,one and the same mind assumes different forms and plays different roles, depending onthe needs of varying situations.In the beginningless beginning God was one. The thought arose in Him, “I am one;let Me become many,” and thus the One became the many. However, despite the many,the unity still persists unaffected by the diversity. Thus, whether for the unity in diversity,or for the diversity in unity, only thoughts (samkalpas) are responsible. What is needed isto regulate our thoughts in the right manner. As soon as a thought arises, we should notrush into action, but should subject the thought to the scrutiny of the intellect for a correctdecision before implementing the thought. But nowadays most people have the tendencyto be in a hurry to put their thoughts into action without any such deliberation. That is thereason for the statement, “Haste makes waste, waste makes worry, so do not be in ahurry.” Therefore, action undertaken after deliberation alone results in peace.38Summer Showers 1990People talk of world peace. But how can you ensure peace in the world? Here is theformula for it. “If there is righteousness in the heart, there will be beauty in the character.If there is beauty in the character, there will be harmony in the home. If there is harmonyin the home, there will be order in the nation. If there is order in the nation, there will bepeace in the world.” It may thus be seen that the first link in the chain leading to worldpeace is righteousness or dharma. Dharma is only another name for right action. But theprerequisite for right action is right thought. In other words, peace should start with theindividual and gradually spread wider and wider right along the line—from the home orfamily to the village to the nation, etc., till finally, it encompasses the entire world.You chant, “Peace, Peace, Peace”—i.e., three times after meditation, bhajan, etc. Bymerely uttering thrice with your tongue, you cannot obtain or ensure peace. The signifi-cance of the three chants is that man is in need of three kinds of peace; (i) adhi bhoutik(peace unhampered by other beings), (ii) adhi Atmic (peace undisturbed by ones’ ownbody and mind), and (iii) adhi daivic (peace undisturbed by forces beyond human con-trol). Of these three, adhi daivic signifies the need for divine Grace, which can be earnedonly by absolute surrender to God. This concept of “surrender to God” is often misunder-stood. Surrender does not mean the abandonment of all activities, foolishly thinking that“God will do whatever is necessary for me, because you have surrendered everything toHim.” That would be sheer laziness. It is like sitting before a plate of chapatis with potatocurry and idly expecting your hunger to be satisfied without eating the stuff. On the otherhand, the correct meaning of surrender is to make use of your God-given faculties andenergy to perform your legitimate work, dedicating all your activities to the Lord, withoutthe false sense of doership and without undue concern for the results of your actions.Students! If you want to have good thoughts, you must resort to the spiritual path.The starting point for spiritual path is sathsanga (holy company).Thoughts are contagious. Hence the adage, “Tell me your company, and I will tellyou what you are.” You should therefore, scrupulously eschew bad company. SriShankara eulogised the value of holy company in glowing terms as follows: “The com-pany of the wise begets detachment, detachment leads to the destruction of delusion, fol-lowed by the acquisition of steady wisdom, and culminating finally in jivanmukti (libera-tion, while alive).” Therefore, the essential point you should remember is that only goodcompany will engender good thoughts in you.Students! Cultivate and develop only sacred thoughts and thus sanctify your lives.Become ideal men, so that others may also derive and benefit by following your example.Bad company, bad thoughts and sensuous ways of living may give you momentary pleas-ure but will eventually drown you in untold misery and utter ruin. Remember that youcannot but reap what you sow. When you are born from your mother’s womb, your neckis not bedecked with flower garlands or with necklaces of gold, pearls or diamonds butrest assured that your neck does carry on it an unseen heavy garland given by Brahma(the Creator) the garland of the fruits of good and bad actions done by you in previouslives.Let me conclude with a word about gratitude. For want of gratitude, man is degradinghimself to a lower level than even the animals. You say “thanks” to somebody who picksup and gives to you your own handkerchief that you happened to drop on the ground. Buthow very strange and surprising that you never think of thanking God for all the preciousthings He has so graciously bestowed on you. He has placed you in this vast and wonder-ful universe, providing for you pure air to breathe, clean water to drink, mother earth toSummer Showers 199039live on, etc. In short, but for the five great elements created by Him, you cannot live evenfor a moment. Therefore, is there a greater sin than forgetting to offer your thanks to suchan all-merciful God?You buy a plot of land with your own money and construct a house thereon with yourown money. But the Corporation wants you to pay the house tax, just for providing elec-tricity and water, of course levying separate additional taxes for these amenities. But tellme, what tax are you paying to God for providing you with facilities like the sun who il-lumines the whole world, the wind which refreshes all living beings with cool breeze, thetorrential rain that not only cools the earth but also sustains life, and so on and so forth?Not to give any thought to such things, indicates not only ingratitude on the part of manbut also the thamo guna (inertia) that is polluting his mind.7VAGARIES  OF  THE  MINDIt is the mind that matters, wherever one may be,Neither home nor forest can give you liberation;It makes no difference—whether you are in the temple or forest,As long as the mind is not up to the mark.Dear students!“The universe is like the reflection of a city in a mirror,” declared Dakshinamurthy.What man has to achieve primarily is the purification and final annihilation of the anthkarana (inner instrument) not so much the purusharthas, viz., dharma (righteousness),artha (wealth), kama (fulfillment of desires), and moksha (liberation). The whole worldalong with its joys and sorrows, vices and virtues, truth and untruth, justice and injusticeetc. is in the mind only.The mind is like a clean mirror. It has no intrinsic power of its own to directly experi-ence the sense objects except through the concerned sense organs. For instance, it can seeonly through the eyes and hear only through the ears but can neither see nor hear by itselfindependently. Consequently, the offences committed by the senses are reflected in themirror of mind. No blame attaches to the mind per se. It is the association with the way-ward senses that pollutes the mind. According to the Scriptures, the mind is subject tothree kinds of pullution: mala, vikshepa, and avarana.What is mala? Man commits many offences, knowingly or unknowingly, not only inthis life but also in previous lives. The imprint of these actions is carried by the chitta(memory), life after life, like dust accumulating on the surface of a mirror day after day.Thus, the mirror of man’s mind gets covered up by such dirt, which is technically namedas “mala”. On account of this mala, man is unable to see clearly the reflection of his realidentity in the mirror of his mind. Hence, it is necessary to cleanse the mirror of the im-purities covering it. This cleansing is done by regulating one’s food and other living hab-its, including recreation. Young students particularly should strictly avoid eating impurefood. Purity should be ensured with regard to the vessels used for cooking (patra suddhi),the food materials used for cooking (padaartha suddhi), and thirdly, the process ofcooking (paaka suddhi). In this connection, an important point which is generally over-looked is the fact that many of the ills from which people suffer today are due to con-suming things obtained through unfair means as well as polluted by the bad vibrationsfrom cooks of questionable character. It is extremely difficult, if not altogether impossi-ble, especially in the present day context, to ensure such purity in all these respects and atall times. To get over these practical difficulties, the way out suggested by the scripturesis to offer the food to God before eating it, duly regarding it as God’s gift. To the ques-tion, “Where is God?” the answer is given in verse 14 of Chapter 15 of the Gita—“AhamVaiswanaro bhutva” etc.—which declares that the Lord dwells in every one as vaiswa-nara (the digestive fire and digests the different kinds of food that is consumed).  If youeat food without first offering it to God, you will be affected by all the impurities and de-fects present in it. On the contrary, if you offer the food to the Lord before eating, as sug-gested in verse 24 of Chapter 4 of the Gita “Brahmaarpanam” etc., it becomes prasada(gift from God), and consequently all the impurities in the food are thereby eliminated.Summer Showers 199041This helps the process of gradually cleansing the mind of its impurity or dirt called Mala.It should, however, be borne in mind that the complete removal of mala cannot be donein a day or a month. This requires persistent and prolonged practice. If raw gold or ore isto be converted into pure gold, it has to be melted on fire repeatedly to remove the impu-rities. So also the impurity of man’s mind, called “mala”, can be eliminated only by con-stant practice over a period of time.The second distortion of the mind, called vikshepa, is due to the constant wavering ofthe mind, like the movements of the reflected image in a mirror that is kept moving orshaking frequently. To control this waywardness of the mind, one should undertake vari-ous spiritual practices like meditation, prayer and the nine modes of devotion mentionedin the scriptures, viz., (1) sravanam (listening to the Lord’s stories, leelas, and mahima),(2) kirtanam (singing His glories), (3) smaranam (remembrance), (4) Pada sevanam(service to the Lotus Feet),  (5) archanam (worship), (6) vandanam (salutation), (7)daasyam (master-servant relationship), (8) sakhyam (companionship), and (9) Atma nive-danam (offering oneself to the Lord i.e., Self-surrender).If the young students of today, who will be the leaders of Bharath tomorrow, cannotcontrol the fickleness of their minds and cleanse the impurities thereof, the future admini-stration and politics of the country cannot but be deplorably impure and corrupt. Studentsshould realise that education is for life but not for making out a livelihood. They shouldstrain their every nerve to acquire steadiness of mind, which is a prerequisite for concen-tration. For this, you should bend the body, mend the senses, and end the mind and this isthe process of attaining immortality. If you want to be masters and not slaves, you shouldkeep your body, senses and mind under your control.Why is the country today torn by strife, indiscipline, violence, and chaos? Becausepeople, both young and old, are preoccupied with external material things, totally ignor-ing the spirit within. The entire educational system is riddled with selfishness. Educatedpersons want to amass wealth quickly by any means, fair or foul, hook or crook. It is thesame motive that is impelling many students to go abroad and acquire money for selfishends, without any regard for their parents or their motherland. Such self-centred intellec-tuals, who suffer from the craze to go abroad, should remember the declaration of theScriptures that “one’s mother and motherland are much superior even to heaven.” Theyshould give up their obsession for acquiring wealth and realise that real wealth consists inleading virtuous lives coupled with love and service to the land of their birth. Your fore-most duty is to show gratitude to your parents to whom you owe everything includingyour food, blood, and head. You have to take care of them, especially in their old age. Ifyou discharge your duties properly and lead your lives on these lines which broaden andpurify your minds and hearts, your mind will automatically become free from the distor-tion of vikshepas and you will acquire steadiness and concentration of mind without theneed for any other spiritual disciplines.Now, we come to the third distortion of the mind: avarana. This may be likened to athick cloth covering the mirror of man’s mind, which does not at all permit of any reflec-tion whatsoever of the image of the Self. Thus, while mala does not enable us to have aclear and correct image of the Self, and while vikshepa results in seeing the Self as wa-vering, avarana altogether hides the Reality (Self) and makes one identify himselfwrongly with his body.Students! Recognise that what you are experiencing as the real world is only the “re-action”, “resound”, and “reflection” of your “Real Self.” Now, the question arises, “What42Summer Showers 1990exactly is the thick cloth that covers the mirror of one’s mind”? This cloth is made up ofthe arishad-varga—the gang of six internal enemies of man—viz. kama (desire), krodha(anger), lobha (greed), moha (attachment), mada (pride), and maatsarya (jealousy, envy).Out of the six, pride may be considered as the worst enemy. Pride is of eight kinds: prideof money, learning, caste, affluence, beauty, youth, position or authority, and tapas(spiritual pride). If you ponder over two facts you can overcome this enemy namelypride.Firstly, if you look around instead of being like a frog in the well, you will find that inrespect of each of these eight items that cause pride in you, there are many other peoplewho are superior to you. Secondly, all these items—money, authority, youth etc.—arehighly transient. Therefore, get rid of pride as well as the other five enemies included inthe arishadvarga, if you want to remove the avarana covering your mind’s mirror. Thebest means to remove this thick cloth of avarana is to develop love for all. Love is God.Live in Love.Love is the only bond that can unite all and make us realise the one Reality behind allthe seeming diversity. A simple illustration will make this point clear. You have a candlelight. You cover it with a vessel having several holes in it. Although there is one light,you see light through each and every hole, giving the impression of there being severallights. Now, you cover the vessel with a thick cloth. You see no light at all. Next you re-move the thick cloth. You see many lights again. Now break or remove the pot. You seethe one and only real candle light.Similarly, the Atma inside you is covered by the body having nine holes throughwhich you see the multiplicity and diversity in the world. You have covered this nine-holed body of yours with a thick cloth, which is woven with the warp for woof of “I” orahamkara and “mine” (mamakara). When you remove the cloth made up of “I” and“mine”, and when you get rid of the wrong identification with the body, the avarana ofthe mind disappears, and you see the light of your Real Self (the Atma Jyothi), the onlyLight (Eka Jyothi), dispelling the darkness of the illusory multiplicity.The mind, the intellect, the memory, and ego, which together constitute the anthakarana (the inner instrument), are formless, but the external instruments, the sense or-gans, which are the media through which the antha karana perceives the phenomenalworld, have forms. The antha karana is subject to four kinds of defects, viz., bhranthi(delusion), pramadam (hazard or danger), karanaapaatavam (weakness of the instru-ments), and vipralipsa (jealousy). These four defects result in the malfunctioning of theantha karana.Bhranthi refers to the deluded state of mind in which a person mistakes, for instance,a rope for a snake and vice versa. In other words, he regards the unreal as real and thereal as unreal; the temporary as permanent and the permanent as temporary.Such delusions invariably lead to accidents or dangerous situations (pramadam). Ifyou hold a snake thinking it is a rope, you are certainly in for trouble. Man today regardsthe body as real, not knowing that it is as unreal as a water bubble, which is sure to burstat any time, at any place.Students! You must carefully note one point. If it is the sense organs that enable aman to see, hear, talk, and so on, how is it that even when all the organs are there intact ina dead person, he is unable to see, hear, talk etc.? It is because the power that animatesthe organs is not there. The body may be compared to a torch light. The eyes are like thebulbs. The intellect is the switch. If with all these, you don’t get light, what could be theSummer Showers 199043reason? Obviously there are no battery cells inside. The blood cells in our body are likethose battery cells. They carry the divine energy in them. The blood cells may be there,but if the divine power has left them, they can no longer make the senses function. So it isclear that in the presence of the divine power the body can do many wonders; in its ab-sence, the body becomes not only inert, but also decomposed and rotten.Once a Vedantin came to Me and asked, “Swami! Sankaracharya has said that Brah-man alone is real and the world is illusory. But we are directly perceiving the world assubstantial and deriving so many experiences from it. How can we deny its existence?” Itold him, “My dear one! Leave to the world itself the question of its reality or unreality.First of all, find out whether you are real or unreal.” Like that Vedantin, the students oftoday also want to learn about everything else but not about their own reality. You seemto be more concerned with the “news” outside than the “nuisance” inside you. First getrid of this nuisance of your ignorance; realise your true nature. Reform yourself first, be-fore thinking of reforming others. Otherwise your bhrama (delusion) will land you inpramadam (danger).The third defect of the mind, karana apaatavam, means weakness or debility of theinstruments. This weakness affects both the inner instrument (antha karana) and the ex-ternal instruments (the sense organs.) Here is a small story to illustrate the weakness ofantha karana. There was a rich farmer in a village. He was the undisputed leader of thevillage. There was another middle-class farmer in the same village. One day, the cattlebelonging to both these farmers were grazing together. Unexpectedly there started afierce fighting between the two bullocks, one belonging to the rich farmer and the otherto the middle-class farmer. During the fight, the rich man’s bullock died due to the injuryto some vital and vulnerable part of its body. Now, the middle-class farmer who wasthere at that time became deeply worried. He ran to the village to inform the rich farmerabout the fatal accident to the latter’s bullock. But due to the highly nervous and confusedstate of his mind, he was trembling with fear, and he told the rich farmer that the latter’sbullock had killed the bullock of the farmer; i.e. the opposite of what actually happened.The rich farmer very calmly received the news. He consoled the small farmer, sayingthat, when human beings endowed with intelligence are killing each other, there is nowonder if the rich farmer’s bullock has killed the small farmer’s bullock, because after allthe animals are devoid of any intelligence; in the meanwhile, the small farmer realised hismistake in giving a wrong report and told the rich man, “Respected Sir, I have unwit-tingly committed a blunder by giving a wrong version of the accident. I am very sorry totell you that it is my bullock that has killed your bullock.” On hearing this, the rich manwas beside himself with anger. He rebuked and abused the small farmer in very strongterms and demanded from him a penalty of five hundred rupees. This story betrays thekarana-apaatavam in respect of the rich man’s antha karana, which obviously was weakbecause of its inconsistent behaviour based on the feeling of “I”  and “mine” as opposedto the “other” man.Now, let us consider some examples of karana-apaatvam relating to the external in-struments, the sense organs. When a person is suffering from malarial fever, even laddu(delicious sweet) will taste bitter. This is due to the diseased condition of the tongue butnot due to any defect in laddu. Similarly, a jaundiced eye will see everything as yellow,irrespective of whether the actual colour is white, red or black etc. It must, however, benoted that the ailments of the external instruments have an adverse effect on the internal44Summer Showers 1990instruments, because of their relatedness. Anyway, the net effect of karana-apaatvam asa whole is to undermine maanavatwa (human nature).The fourth deficiency of the antha karana is “vipralipsa”, which means jealousy orenvy. It is one of the worst qualities of man. He cannot endure or tolerate the prosperityor happiness of others. There is no cure for this disease. Feel happy when others arehappy. Do not give room for envy. Develop fraternal feelings towards your fellow stu-dents. Rejoice in their curricular and extra-curricular achievements, without any feelingof envy. The reason for envy is selfishness, which is rampant nowadays both among thestudents and non-students. For instance, able-bodied students rush in and occupy the frontseats in buses, even pushing aside the old people, women, and children who are standingin a long queue. Why don’t you give preference to such people? Even if you don’t get aseat in the bus, you can afford to walk a mile or two, thereby deriving the double benefitof saving the bus fare and giving much needed exercise to your body.Students! All that you have to do to achieve purity in thought, word, and deed is tofollow these five injunctionsThink no evil; think what is good.See no evil; see what is good.Hear no evil; hear what is good.Talk no evil; talk what is good.Do no evil; do what is good.When you adhere to these five injunctions as the very breath of your life, you will beable to overcome all four defects of the antha karana and achieve purity of mind and theother three components of the antha karana, and thereby experience ineffable bliss.Students! You are aware that water is stored in tanks during the rainy season and isused later on during summer to irrigate the agricultural lands. Similarly, from this mo-ment you should cultivate control of the body, the senses, and the antha karana, becausenow you have the vigour and vitality of youth. Acquire God’s Grace in abundance now,when the time is opportune. It will stand you in good stead in your future, which will thenbe bright, secure and prosperous. Also remember that God will never forget His devotees.It is the devotees who forget God. God never forsakes His devotees; only the devoteesforsake God.Students! The body, the mind, and the senses are like water taps, while the intellect islike the water tank. As the water in the tank, so is the water in the taps. So, in the daysahead, we shall be discussing about this important faculty of buddhi (intellect).8BUDDHI THE CHARIOTEERPurity of mind is the pathway to progress,Purity of mind means mighty power;A pure mind is like a precious pearl in the sea;Never forget these words of wisdom.See no evil, speak no evil;Hear no evil—anytime, anywhere, in the world;Remember always the picture of the three monkeys;What I say is truth, indeed!You have been told previously that, according to the Upanishads, the human body isa chariot, the sense organs being the horses, with the mind as the reins. However beauti-ful the chariot may be, however dependable the horses, however firm and secure thereins, all of these are of no use if there is no charioteer. So also, however efficient thebody, the senses and the mind may be, they serve no purpose in the absence of thecharioteer, namely, buddhi (intellect). In life’s journey, the intellect is of supreme impor-tance. It is called nischayatmika buddhi, which means that the buddhi has the decision-making capacity. In daily life, many difficulties, problems and disturbances arise fromtime to time. For overcoming all these obstacles, buddhi is our mainstay. Without the in-tervention of the buddhi, none of our problems can be solved. “Samsayaatma vinasyathi”,says the Gita, which means that a man filled with doubts will perish. Because the buddhidestroys doubts, the Gita affirms, “Buddhi grahayam athindriyam (buddhi can grasp thatwhich is beyond the grasp of the sense organs).”The Bhagavad Gita has laid down two banks to channalise its message. In the ab-sence of these banks, the river of life will be subject to many problems, difficulties, andhazards. The two banks are symbolised by two mantras. One is: Sraddhavaan labhatheJnanam (the man of faith acquires supreme wisdom). The other is: Samsayaatmavinasyathi (the one filled with doubts will perish). When the river of life flows in betweenthese two banks of mantras, it will be blessed with peace and happiness and ultimatelyreach the sea of Divine Grace which is its goal.“Antarvaani” (inner voice) is another name for the buddhi. Man is guided by this in-ner voice in the conduct of his life. Whenever problems arise, he awaits the directives ofthe inner voice. If satisfactory answers are not forthcoming from his inner voice, man willhave no satisfaction in life. In other words, his satisfaction with the external world is afunction of his satisfaction with his inner world, represented by the inner voice. Some-times you hear people saying, “My conscience is not satisfied; or my conscience does notapprove of this.” Here conscience refers to the inner voice. So when you are exhorted to“Follow the Master,” the Master stands for your conscience. Only when you follow thedictates of your conscience can you reach the right destination.The name vijnana is also sometimes attributed to the buddhi. But it is not correct, be-cause vijnana means the so-called scientific or mundane knowledge, which helps man todiscover facts relating to the objective or phenomenal world, whereas buddhi is con-46Summer Showers 1990cerned with the subtle realm of the inner world. Hence, the role of the buddhi should becorrectly understood.Off and on, the buddhi tends to be covered by ahamkara (the ego sense). In this con-text, one should remember that the senses are subtler than the body, the mind is evenmore subtle than the senses, and the buddhi is far more subtle than the mind. The Atma,of course, is subtlest of all. In the light of this fact, when we say that ahamkara is able toenvelop the buddhi, it means that ahamkara is subtler than the buddhi. Thus, ahamkarabeing extremely subtle, is all-pervasive and permeates all our actions. This is why man isunable to transcend ahamkara and experience the Atma (the Self).Once, a king summoned an assembly of great scholars to his court. He posed the fol-lowing question before them. “You are all distinguished scholars who have mastered thescriptures. Can you tell me how many among you are capable of attaining liberation?”Despite all their academic learning, none of the pundits had the courage to stand up andgive an affirmative answer. The whole assembly was stunned into silence. At that stage,an ordinary man from among the public got up and said boldly, (In Telugu), Nenu pothepovachchunu. His reply has two meanings: (i) “I may possibly go to moksha” and (ii) “Ifthe I goes, one can attain liberation.” The second meaning did not occur to any of thescholars. So, taking the first meaning only, all the pundits felt outraged by the audacity ofthat uneducated person, who appeared to be totally ignorant of the scriptures and haddone no spiritual sadhana. When the scholars began murmuring among themselves, theking asked that ordinary-looking person, “On what grounds did you make your claim? Itappears to be an affront to all the scholars present here.” The man politely replied, “YourExcellency! Please forgive me. The meaning of my statement is that if the ‘I’ goes, lib-eration can be attained. I am sure no one has any objection to this statement of mine.” So,the purpose of this story is that the ahamkara, which veils the buddhi and which leadsone to the wrong identification of the body with the Self, should be removed before onecan realise the Atma.The buddhi is very close to the Atma and therefore well located to receive 90% of theAtmic energy and illumination. The mind derives its power from the buddhi, the sensesfrom the mind, and the body from the senses. In this process of the flow of power fromthe Atma to the body in stages, there occurs a gradual quantitative and qualitative dimi-nution of the power. Here is a simple illustration for the quantitative decrease. Supposethere is a dark room, which cannot directly receive sunlight. If you want to illuminate thatroom, you can do it by holding a mirror in the open vicinity and by directing the sun’srays reflected on the mirror towards the interior of the room. However, when compared tothe direct rays of the sun, the reflected rays on the mirror are less powerful, and the re-flected light in the room is much less powerful. Regarding the gradual deterioration in thequality, let us consider the example of a river. At the source of the springs that give riseto the river, the water will be pure and crystal clear. But as several rivulets and tributariesjoin its course, and as it wends its way through the countryside, the river gets more andmore polluted as people begin making use of the water. Similarly, the purity of the Atmagets gradually contaminated as it passes through the buddhi, the mind, and the senses andfinally reaches the body. Nevertheless, it is possible, through effort, to minimise thisquantitative and qualitative deterioration, by sanctifying and purifying the Buddhi and byfacilitating the direct influence of the buddhi on the body.In the Taithiriya Upanishad, which is one of the important among the ten principalUpanishads, the buddhi is described as a bird. “Sraddha (faith)” is the head of the bird.Summer Showers 199047Its right wing is “ritam” (the cosmic rhythm), and its left wing is “sathyam” (truth.) Themain body of the bird is “Mahat Thathwa” (the Great Principle), its tail is called yoga.The buddhi, in its complete form, is thus composed of five constituents and is extraordi-narily powerful.Once, King Vikramaditya convened an assembly of great scholars and asked them fortheir opinion regarding which is the most important among the three, viz., sraddha,medha, and buddhi. The scholars came out with different answers. However, they finallyexpressed their consensus that medha (talent) was the most important. Disappointed withtheir conclusion, the king told the assembly, “Oh pundits! ‘Aastha’ means asakthi orsraddha (zeal and faith); ‘swaastha’ means sthiratva and firmness. Without asakthi andsthiratva, medha (talent) is useless. In other words, it would be futile on the part of manto depend only on his talents and cleverness for leading a purposeful life. He should de-velop faith and zeal together with steadiness and firm determination. Then only will he beable to accomplish great things in his life. Sraddha or faith is of paramount importance.Without sraddha, you can achieve nothing. If you have a small spark of fire, you can fanit and create a big blazing fire from out of it, provided you have sraddha. If you lacksraddha, you will allow even a blazing fire to die out. Similarly with faith, you can pro-duce a mighty banyan tree from a minute seed. Today’s man has sraddha no doubt, butonly in securing the fruit and not in the labour required for getting it. He does not havethe spirit of work in him. The advances in science and technology have made man a loverof comfort for ease with no interest in hard work. There is nothing wrong with science assuch. It is the improper use of science that is leading man astray. What is needed today isto pay attention to love and spiritual advancement along with scientific progress. The dif-ference between science and spirituality is brought out vividly, albeit succinctly, by thetwo simple equations:i.  Spirit of love = Spiritualityii. Split of love = ScienceWhen the pleasure-giving objects are transient, and when the body that enjoys thepleasures is also impermanent, how illogical it is to expect permanent happiness from theconveniences and comforts offered by science and technology! If you want permanenthappiness, you have to purify your antha karana and develop universal love by followingthe spiritual path.Today, we are witnessing rapid and radical changes in almost every field oflife—political, economic, social, scientific, etc. However, there is no mental ethical andspiritual transformation. This is because no effort is made to understand the nature androle of the human mind. The food consumed by man provides the source of origin, suste-nance and development of his mind. After digestion, the grossest part of the food isthrown out as excreta. The subtle part becomes blood and flesh, while the subtlest partassumes the form of the mind. So the nature of the mind depends on the quality andquantity of food consumed. While the gross body or the food sheath (annamaya kosa) ischiefly derived from food, the subtle part of the water we drink contributes to the lifesheath (pranamaya kosa). The grosser part of the water goes out as urine. The foodsheath and the life sheath provide the basis for the other three sheaths, namely, the ma-nomaya kosa (the mental sheath), the vijnanamaya kosa (the intellectual sheath), and the48Summer Showers 1990anandamaya kosa (the bliss sheath). This shows the paramount importance of food anddrink in moulding and developing the human personality.Reference has been made earlier to the supreme need for ridding the buddhi of theahamkara that often envelops it. You should understand the difference between aham-kara, the ego and the Atma (Self). ahamkara is the father of ahamkara, grandfather of themind or thought, the great grandfather of vaak (speech). Thus, the ahamkara, the aham-kara, the mind (manas), and vaak are all members of the same family. Ahamkara is theone that comes and goes, whereas there is no such coming and going for the Atma. Usu-ally, the Sanskrit word ahamkara is translated into English as “ego”. Both these wordsare employed in common usage to mean self-esteem or pride born of delusion aboutone’s wealth or scholarship etc. This is a wrong usage of the words. Their correct mean-ing is the mistaken identification of oneself with the body. All may not be proud of theirwealth or knowledge, but everyone is a victim of ahamkara in the sense of consideringoneself to be the body. It is this ahamkara that shrouds the buddhi and misleads it on thewrong path. Hence, if the buddhi is to develop sraddha, we should first eliminate aham-kara.As mentioned earlier, ritam, is the right wing of the bird of buddhi. In Vedantic par-lance ritam and sathyam have been used as synonyms. However, there is a differencebetween the two, sathyam means putting your words into action, and factually reportingin words what you have done. Ritam, on the other hand, has a wider connotation, namely,purity, harmony, and unity of the trikaranas (thought, word, and deed). We may also saythat sathyam is concerned more with the external world, while ritam relates more to theinternal world of mind and its modifications. Sathyam is said to transcend time—past,present, and future, while Atma transcends time and space.Yoga is the tail of the buddhi-bird. This tail of yoga is needed to maintain the requiredbalance between the two wings of sathyam and ritam, just as the tail of an aeroplaneserves the purpose of balancing the two wings of the aircraft. Yoga as envisaged hereshould not be confused with asanas, physical exercises of various kinds. Yoga heremeans the control of the mind and senses.Then there is the Mahat Thathwa, which is the body of the bird of buddhi. MahatThathwa signifies the realisation of the mahavakya “Thath-thwam-asi—the great Upani-shadic declaration That Thou Art.” In other words, it is experiencing one’s real Self asSath-chith-ananda. Buddhi should not therefore be confused with medha, which refers tothe possession of worldly talents, intelligence, and cleverness etc., without having Self-knowledge. Thus buddhi consisting of sraddha, sathyam, ritam, Mahat Thathwam, andyoga may be considered as the resound, reflection, and reaction of the Atma. On the otherhand, medha sakthi (the power of worldly knowledge) corresponds to maya sakthi (thedivine power of delusion).On Rama’s return to Ayodhya after finishing His 14 years of exile in the forests, Kai-keyi, who felt penitent about this grievous wrong she had done to Rama, approached Himwhen He was alone and prayed, “My dear Rama, even though I knew about your divinenature, I caused you a lot of unnecessary hardship, blinded by narrow feeling of ‘I’ and‘mine’. Kindly give me some upadesh (spiritual instruction), so that I may be absolved ofthe heinous sin I have committed against such a noble person like yourself.” In responseto her request, Rama did not give her the upadesh directly but gave her some hints indi-rectly. This is characteristic of all Avatars from time immemorial. Avatars seldom giveadvice directly. Whatever they wish to communicate they convey more often by way ofSummer Showers 199049indirect suggestions and only rarely by the direct method of instruction. The reason forthis is there is divinity inherent in every human being, which he can manifest spontane-ously, if favourable conditions are provided, just as a viable seed will germinate and growinto a tree because of its inherent nature, if only suitable facilities are provided for themanifestation of its potentiality. Man should be enabled to correct himself by his own ef-forts, by merely giving timely suggestions, rather than by stultifying his freedom anddignity through directives imposed from without. In short, the best maxim for helpingpeople either in worldly matters or in the spiritual field is “Help them to help themselves”or “Self-help is the best help.”Following the same strategy, therefore, Sri Rama, in the present instance told, Kai-keyi, “Mother! Please take bath in the holy Sarayu river and come back for My upadesh.But while bathing in the Sarayu please observe what is going along the riverside.” Kai-keyi went along with her retinue to the river and returned to Rama after bath. Rama askedher, “Mother! Now tell Me what you noticed on the banks of Sarayu.” Kaikeyi repliedthat she saw a number of sheep and goats grazing the green grass on the banks, bleating“mae, mae,” as usual, every now and then. Then Rama told her promptly that “mae, mae”was His upadesh for her. He disclosed to her that the bleating of the sheep and goatsmeant, “Who am I? Who am I?” He further remarked that when even sheep are con-cerned with the question of, “Who am I?” if a man does not concern himself with thisquestion, he is worse than sheep.Everyone should first seek to know the answer to the question, “Who am I?” Withoutknowing who you are, what is the use of trying to know everything about others? At birthyou cried out “Koham (Who am I)?” You should not die with the same question on yourlips. When you die, you should be able to assert cheerfully “Soham (I am That or He)”.Then alone can you justify your birth as a man and enjoy the satisfaction of having ful-filled the purpose of human life. There is only one path to get rid of ahamkara, namelypursuing the Godly way of life. Whenever you feel the sense of ego, sit silently in a cor-ner and observe what your breathing is telling you. It is declaring, “So…Ham”. “So”while inhaling and “Ham” while exhaling. The two syllables “So” and “Ham”, which to-gether constitute the word Soham convey the meaning: “I am Brahman.” If you con-stantly meditate upon this, your ego-sense characterised by the idea: “I am the body,” willcease to bother you. This “So-ham” mantra repeats itself in each of you 21,600 times perday. Thus “I am Brahman” is the message of your inner voice all the time. Ignoring this,however, everyone identifies himself with the temporary, artificial name given to thebody. Thinking yourself to be Ramaiah, Krishnaiah, or Seenaiah (the names given to yourbody) however long you may engage yourself in spiritual practices, you will not achieveany progress. You will continue to be what you have been according to the name given toyour body. “Soham” is the name with which you were born. That alone is your naturaland permanent name. That indeed is your Reality or Truth. Realise it and experienceSath-chith-ananda. Krishna is known as Partha Sarathi (the Charioteer of Partha). Parthadoes not mean Arjuna alone. It applies to all children of prithvi (the earth). So, makeKrishna your charioteer. As the buddhi is a reflection of the divine Atma, make use of itas the charioteer in your journey to realise the Atma. Also remember that for success inevery endeavour, prema (universal love) is essential. The Lord is the embodiment ofLove, the Sun of Truth. Therefore, through Love, seek to know your true Self with thehelp of the buddhi and purify your mind. This is what I expect of you.9EGOISM AND ATTACHMENTI am not merit, nor sin,Neither happiness nor sorrow,Neither mantra nor holy water,Neither Veda nor yajna,Neither food nor the enjoyer of food.I am Sathyam, Sivam, Sundaram—Truth, Goodness, BeautyThe embodiment of Sath-Chith-Ananda—Being-Awareness-Bliss.The above mantra is applicable to everybody. Man is a seeker of happiness and anaspirant for bliss. He strives ceaselessly day and night to achieve happiness and bliss. Inall spheres of his life, he aims at two things: attainment of happiness and removal of sor-row. What is the inner significance of this perennial quest of man for happiness? Man’svery nature is bliss. He is indeed the embodiment of happiness. He is, therefore, entitledto seek this birthright, happiness. If sugar were to lose its sweetness, it would cease to besugar. If a rose were to lose its fragrance, it would no longer be a rose. Likewise, if a manloses his natural condition of happiness and bliss, he has forfeited his human state. If, forinstance, one notices on the road a man with a sorrowful face, he enquires from him thecause for his sorrow. Such enquiry is made by every passer-by, because it is not naturalfor a human being to be sad. In the same bazaar, however, if somebody is going in ahappy mood, no special notice is taken of him and no one questions him why he is notunhappy. For, it causes no surprise if a man is happy, because it is his natural condition.Man has been endowed with the body, the senses, the mind and the intellect in orderto experience his natural state of bliss. But unfortunately, because these faculties or giftsof God are polluted and misused, man is drowned in misery. The body is tainted with thedirt of raga and dwesha (attachment and hatred). The senses are shrouded in the soiledcloth of desires and sensuous pleasures. The mind has been polluted by all of these impu-rities. As a result man is unable to recognise his true nature. He is labouring under themistaken notion that the worldly pleasures are both dependable and natural to him. Infact, these are all highly transient and ephemeral like the passing clouds.Recognising that man’s moral weaknesses are on the increase, because of the defectsin the food that he takes, our forefathers devised simple but sacred ways and means forpurifying the food before eating. They used to sprinkle some water on the food, chantingthe mantra: “Annam Brahma, Raso Vishnuh, Bhoktaa Maheswarah” (the solid food isBrahma, the drinking water and the liquid essence of the food is Vishnu, and the enjoyerof the meal is Maheswara). In performing this purificatory rite, the partaker of food praysto the Trinity to protect him with sathyam and ritam. The invocation to the deities is toendow him with trikarana suddhi (the triple purity of thought, word, and deed). By thisrite, the food was being sanctified as prasad. The so-called intellectuals of today, puffedup with pride of their talents and skills, are ignoring the efficacy and potency of sathyamand ritam.Summer Showers 199051Sankaracharya, during his victorious philosophical pilgrimage through the length andbreadth of India, had to engage himself in a debate with a scholarly intellectual by nameMandana Mishra on the subject of “medha sakthi” (intellectual prowess). Both of themagreed on Ubhaya Bharati to be the umpire to decide who was the winner in the debate.Ubhaya Bharati was not merely a distinguished scholar but also possessed divine quali-ties like a pure heart and buddhi enriched with sathyam, ritam, asakthi or sraddha, andstirathva (steadfastness, cosmic rhythm, zeal or faith, and firmness respectively.) UbhayaBharati was none other than wife of Mandana Mishra. The choice was unique in manyrespects. It was remarkable that Sankara was willing to have his opponent’s wife as thejudge. It was the greatest testimony to his faith in the utter impartiality of UbhayaBharati, because her buddhi, endowed with the power of discrimination and objectivity,was superior to the mere intellectual ability, which is termed medhas.Students must understand that buddhi is more powerful than medhas. Buddhi is notmere intellectualism, as commonly understood. It is a peaceful state of the intellect en-dowed with aastha or asakthi (zeal or faith) and swastha or stirathva (firmness or stead-fastness). This buddhi is the intellect, which is enriched by ritam and sathyam as well asby yoga and Mahat Thathwa. This buddhi has not only the power of deliberation and dis-crimination but also the power of deep insight, enquiry and impartial judgement. BecauseUbhaya Bharati had this kind of buddhi, she declared that Sankaracharya had won thedebate. Sankara was extremely pleased with Ubhaya Bharati’s unbiased verdict. UbhayaBharati then declared that in accordance with the understanding between the two contest-ants before the commencement of the debate, Mandana Mishra, as the vanquished, shouldtake to sanyasa (monkhood) and become a disciple of Sankara. At the same time, as thedevoted wife of Mandana Mishra, she decided to become a sanyasini (nun) herself, inconformity with the ideals of womanhood, according to which the wife should follow thehusband in weal and woe. Although she was under no obligation to adopt a monastic life,she did so in order to set an example to the world. After taking sanyasa, Ubhaya Bharatiestablished an ashram with the purpose of showing to the arrogant scholars, who reliedon mere intellectual acumen or medhas that it was inferior to buddhi, which is a synthesisof several divine qualities, as mentioned above. One day when she was going to the riverfor a bath along with her women disciples, she saw an ascetic, who was known for hisrenunciation of everything in life, sleeping on the wayside, resting his head on a hollowwater jug, made of a dried bottle-gourd, using it as a pillow and at the same time ensuringthat nobody could steal it from him. In order to convey a lesson to the monk, UbhayaBharati spoke within his hearing, the following words to her disciples; “Look at thatmonk who has ostensibly renounced all attachments. Is it not strange that he has notgiven up his attachment to his worthless water jug?” On hearing these remarks, the as-cetic got enraged. He thought, “After all she is a woman. Is she entitled to teach me how Ishould behave?” In a short while ,when he saw Ubhaya Bharati returning from the riverafter bath, he flung his water jug at her feet as a proof of his sense of renunciation. Ub-haya Bharati quickly reacted to this, by remarking about him, to her disciples in thesewords: “Alas! He is not only filled with abhimana (attachment), but also with ahamkara(egoism).” Immediately the monk ran up to her, fell at her feet regardless of her being awoman, and pleaded for forgiveness of his shortcomings.From the above episode, it is clear that the root causes of man’s bondage are abhi-mana or mamakara (attachment or the possessive sense of “mine”) and ahamkara (ego-ism).52Summer Showers 1990Both ahamkara and mamakara are the result of consuming improper food. Bad kindsof food or food earned by foul means will plunge a man in ignorance in several ways andsuppress pure thoughts from arising in him. He will forget what to talk with whom, when,where and how. The following episode in the Mahabharatha illustrates this point.Bhishma was a great jnani (man of wisdom) and also a man of great renunciation (mahatyagi). Sri Rama, the hero of Ramayana, is famous for having obeyed his father’s ordersfor only 14 years. But Bhishma followed his father’s commandments throughout his life.He got the name “Bhishma” because of his great determination and strict observance ofhis vows, which are unparalleled in human history. Such a great hero was very grievouslywounded by Arjuna’s arrows and, as a result, he fell down on the battle field on the ninthday of the Kurukshetra war.According to his own grave determination even at that critical period of the fag end ofhis life, he was lying on a bed of arrows. When the Pandava brothers, along with theirspouse, Droupadi approached their grandsire Bhishma to pay their homage to him he be-gan expounding to them all aspects of dharma from his bed of arrows. After hearing himfor a while, Droupadi  suddenly burst into laughter. All the Pandava brothers were verymuch upset by Droupadi’s unaccountable levity and considering it as an affront to thevenerable Bhishma, they frowned upon her with angry looks. Understanding their dis-tress, Bhishma calmed them down with his soft and sweet words, and told them thatDroupadi, being an exemplary woman in every respect, must be having a valid reason forher laughter. He then asked Droupadi to explain the reason for her laughter, and therebyremove the misappre-hension of her husbands. She replied “Revered grandsire! The les-sons of dharma, which you should have taught to the evil-minded and wicked Kauravas,you are now teaching to my noble and virtuous husbands. This appeared to me bothironical and futile. Hence I could not refrain from laughing, although I knew it wouldseem impolite.”Bhishma then explained that he had been serving the Kauravas and living on theirbounty. He said, “As a result of consuming the food received from such ignoble and vi-cious persons, my blood became polluted and all the pure thoughts in me were therebysuppressed. Now that Arjuna’s arrows have drained away all that impure blood from me,the dharma that was lying buried deep in me, is gushing forth, inducing me to communi-cate it to your husbands.” From this episode, students must realise what a crucial role isplayed by food in determining one’s thoughts, words and actions.In this connection, it may not be out of place to mention that Droupadi was a “MahaPativrata”—the doyen among women who worship their husbands as veritable represen-tatives of God and serve them in that spirit moreover there is an esoteric meaning for hername. “Droupadi ” does not merely mean the wife of five husbands, namely the Pan-davas. Every human being has, within him or her, five husbands in the form of five life-breaths, prana, apana, vyana, udana, and samana. When it is said that Droupadi livedharmoniously with all her five husbands, the allegorical meaning is that she ensured themaintenance of harmonious equilibrium among her five life-breaths, which is a prerequi-site for a balanced living. In the case of most persons, one or more of these life-breathsbecome excited beyond the optimum limit, resulting in a loss of equilibrium and harmonyamong the five life-breaths, and the consequent lack of balance in life as a whole. Allshould try to follow the example of Droupadi  in the matter of leading a life full of con-tentment and harmony as well as in being satisfied with simple but pure food.Summer Showers 199053You must realise that food is mainly responsible for your feeling of attachment andhatred (raga and dwesha) as well as for ahamkara and mamakara (I  and  mine). Regu-lating your food habits is extremely important for the healthy functioning of your mindand intellect. The ways of the mind are really enigmatic. The verdict of the scriptures isthat when man follows the senses he becomes an animal. When he is guided by the mind,he becomes a man. One who acts according to the buddhi, becomes great among men,while the one who is guided by the Atma becomes Brahman. If you cannot follow thebuddhi, you should at least follow the mind, so that you may at least keep up your humanlevel. But many of you may have the doubt whether the mind itself is not prone to badtendencies and if so, how to rely on it. The fact is that the mind is pure by itself. It is byimplicitly obeying the senses that it becomes impure. Instead of indiscriminately con-suming whatever the senses bring to it, if the mind places all such intake through thesenses, before the buddhi for scrutiny and if it acts according to the decisions of the Bud-dhi, buddhi the mind will remain unsullied and retain its pristine purity.Students! Till now, in this Summer Course, we have considered the body, the senses,the mind, and the intellect which are all insentient and which together constitute thekshetra which is also insentient by itself, but which is animated by the Kshetrajna (theknower of the field.) The kshetra and in fact the entire srishti (creation) is governed bythe three gunas—sathwa, rajas, and thamas. Tomorrow we shall discuss in detail aboutthese three gunas, which are remarkably wonderful.10THE THREE GUNASStudents! Embodiments of Divine Love!The Divine shines in the rays of the Sun. It is the Divine that reveals to man throughhis eyes the vastness and glory of the world. The whiteness and coolness of the moon,which confer peace on men, are derived from the divine. The universe, which is based onthe triple nature of time and which is sustained by the Trinity—Brahma, Vishnu andMaheswara—, is permeated by the Divine in the form of the three gunas—sathwa, rajas,and thamas. In short, everything in the Cosmos is indeed Brahman—Sarvam KhalvidamBrahma.Nature presents a marvelous picture. No one can fully comprehend it. Whether it isblessing or bereavement, joy or sorrow, gain or loss, it comes from nature (prakruthi).Nature presides over the destinies of all creatures. This nature is comprised of the threegunas. The Trinity represent the three gunas. The three gunas account also for the proc-esses of creation, sustenance, and dissolution—“sristhi, sthithi, and laya”. All the variedexperiences in the world arise from the three gunas. Man should aspire not for a long life,but for a divine life. In the Cosmos, which is permeated by the divine, man should seekprimarily to divinise or deify his life by transcending the three gunas.The secret of creation is known only to the Creator. Others cannot hope to fathom it.Scientists are engaged in exploring the secrets of creation. But none can plumb the depthsof Nature’s mystery. In scientific investigations, today’s discovery is superseded by to-morrow’s findings. That again becomes obsolete in its turn day-after-tomorrow. Contin-ual change is in the very nature of creation. It is not permanent or immutable. The Creatoris the only eternal, unchanging Reality. The spiritual path aims at investigating the natureof the Creator and ultimately becoming one with Him.The entire Cosmos consisting of living and inanimate objects is permeated by thethree Gunas. Man should strive to understand the principle that transcends the three gu-nas. God is the embodiment of Atma. The terms like sathyam, jnanam, anantam, Brahma,Atma, Bhagavan, and God are synonyms.To start with, the pancha bhuthas—the five subtle elements of space, air, fire, water,and earth—emerged from the Atma. Each of the five subtle elements is constituted of thethree gunas. Under the influence of these three gunas, the five subtle elements evolvedinto the five gross elements and the entire Cosmos, through the process of panchee-kritam (fusion by permutation and combination).The Cosmos is permeated by the three gunas —sathwa, rajas, and thamas. At first,the nature of creation due to the sathwa guna has to be clearly understood. The anthakarana—the inner instrument in men—represents the total sathwic quality of the fiveelements. Akasa (space) is the first among the five elements. From Akasa emerged whatis known as suddha sathwa (pure sathwa). This accounts for the human form. The sath-wic aspect of Akasa accounts also for the emergence of the organ of hearing, the ear. Thesecond element is air. The skin is the product of the sathwic component of air. The eye isthe organ representing the sathwic principle of the fire element. The individualised sath-wic aspect of the fourth element, water, is the tongue. The nose represents the individu-alised sathwic aspect of the fifth element, the Earth. Thus, the sathwic components ofthese five elements account for the five faculties of sabda (sound), sparsa (touch), roopaSummer Showers 199055(sight), rasa (taste), and gandha (smell). As each of these faculties has emerged from oneparticular element only, the five faculties are distinct in every person and perform differ-ent functions without any overlapping.Akasa is represented by sound and the corresponding sense organ is the ear. The earcan only hear and not perform any other function. Likewise, the skin can only experiencethe sense of touch associated with Air. The eye, which is the organ associated with fire,can only see and do nothing else. The tongue, representing the element water, can onlytaste. The nose, representing the element Earth, can only smell but cannot taste. Thuseach sense organ reflects in its functioning, the faculty of the one particular element fromwhich it is evolved.While each of the sense organs is limited functionally to its specific role, the anthakarana combines the functions of all five organs, because it is the cumulative product ofall the five elements. This alone has the capacity to experience all the perceptions of thefive senses—the five jnanendriyas. Are these organs of perception functioning externallyor internally? The answer is that they perform a dual role—both internal and external. Ifonly the physical organ, the ear, is present, but if the faculty of hearing is absent, the earcannot hear. If the faculty of hearing is present, but there is no ear to receive sounds fromthe outside world, the faculty is of no use. It is the combined operation of the (jnanendri-yas) external organs of perception and the corresponding invisible internal sense-centresin the brain that accounts for the functioning of the human personality. For example, ifyou want your voice to reach a vast audience, you should have the mike inside and theloudspeaker outside. Loudspeaker without mike or vice versa cannot serve the purpose.While the combined operation of the five elements in their sathwic aspect is seen inthe antha karana, the collective functioning of the five elements in their rajasic aspectexpresses itself as the life-force (prana). Among the five elements, in their individual ex-pression of their rajasic quality, akasa is represented by the vaak (voice). Vayu finds ex-pression in the hand. Agni expresses itself in its individualised rajo guna as the foot. Thefourth and fifth elements, water and earth, find rajasic expression in the two excretoryorgans in the body.In this context, you must take note of some significant facts in the functioning ofthese elements. In its sathwic aspect, akasa expresses itself as ear. But the same akasa, inits rajasic aspect appears as the vaak (faculty of speech). It may be inferred from this thatakasa has two children, the ear representing sathwa and the voice representing rajas. Theear, which is akasa’s first child, receives the sounds coming from outside. The secondchild, namely voice, sends its reaction from the inside to the outside, in the form ofwords. Likewise the skin is the first child of Vayu in its sathwic aspect. The second child,in its rajasic aspect, is the hand. For instance, the skin recognises an ant crawling on thebody. Immediately the hand tries to remove it. It will be seen from these examples thatthe sathwic quality is concerned with receiving impressions from outside, while the ra-jasic quality is concerned with casting them out by way of reaction. In other words, thejnanendriyas originating from sathwa receive stimuli from outside and the karmendriyasderived from rajas respond to the stimuli.In the world today what is happening is the exact opposite. What is rajasic is beingtaken in and what is sathwic is being rejected. In the natural scheme of creation, whatshould be received is that which is sathwic and what should be rejected is all that is ra-jasic.56Summer Showers 1990The primary quality of Nature (Prakruthi) is sathwa. Prakruthi is called “Stri” madeup of the three syllables—sa, ta, and ra. The significance of this term is: first of all, youhave to take in what is sathwic, secondly ta implies developing some thamasik qualities,like submission, humility and modesty. ra, representing the rajo guna, implies that thereare occasions in life when some firm resolutions and stern actions will have to be taken.The rajasic quality comes last, and it means that rajasic actions have to be done as a lastresort when they are unavoidable.In the cosmic process, it is the sathwic quality—the “sa” kara or the syllable “sa” thatcomes first. Hence the duty of everyone to develop the sathwic quality in every as-pect—in thoughts, attitudes, words, and deeds.The next aspect to be understood is that under the influence of thamo guna, the fivesubtle elements evolve themselves into the five gross elements by the process ofpanchee-kritam (fusion through permutation and combination.) This highly complicatedprocess may be illustrated by the following example for purposes of easy understanding.Suppose the five elements come together as five individuals each having a one rupeecoin. Now, each of them exchanges his one rupee coin for one-half rupee coin and fourtwo-anna coins. A two-anna coin is equivalent to one-eighth of a rupee. Then, akasa re-tains half a rupee and distributes among the other four elements one-eighth of a rupeeeach. The second element, vayu, also does likewise and retains half a rupee for itself.Fire, water, and earth also follow the same procedure. As a result of this redistribution,each has one rupee, but its composition is affected by the exchanges among the elements,of parts of their respective nature. Originally each element was whole by itself. The proc-ess of mixing has resulted in the presence of all five elements in every “rupee”. Thismeans that ultimately each element is composed of half of its original nature, the secondhalf consisting of one-eighth of each of the other four elements. For example, the compo-sition of earth will be 1/2 earth + 1/8th space + 1/8th air + 1/8th fire + 1/8th water. Simi-lar will be the composition of the other four elements. In relation to the human being, theprocess of panchee-kritam makes man a mixture of the five elements and creates diver-sity from unity. These have been described in spiritual parlance as shodasa kalas (thesixteen aspects). What were these sixteen aspects? They are, the five jnanendriyas (or-gans of perception), the five karmendriyas (organs of action), the five elements, and themind. Every man has these sixteen constituents, although the sixteen kalas are attributedonly to the Divine. The implication is that man has to realise his divinity.Today man’s desire for worldly pleasures has exceeded all limits, and what is more,he wants quick fulfillment of his innumerable desires, by resorting to short cuts. But hemust realise that short cuts are always dangerous and riddled with thorns, stones, etc. Thehighway is always preferable, though it may seem longer. The ways of the Divine are noteasy to comprehend. Wishing the welfare of everyone in the universe, the Divine uses amyriad of methods. It may be illustrated by the story of a devotee aspiring for riches, whoperformed a severe penance for securing a boon from the Goddess of Wealth, Lakshmi.Man is prepared to undergo any ordeal for achieving material wealth but will not take anytrouble to realise the Divine. Lakshmi appeared before the devotee and asked him whathe wanted. He replied that he wanted Lakshmi Herself. She agreed and said that adorningHerself with all ornaments, She would follow him and asked him to go ahead. She saidshe would come to his house and hand over all her ornaments to him. She imposed, how-ever, one stipulation. “You must go ahead of me and never look back. If you look back, Iwill stay back at the spot.” Filled with joy, the devotee strode ahead toward his home.Summer Showers 199057The Goddess’s jewels were making all kinds of sounds as She walked behind. Unable torestrain his curiosity to find out what were all the jewels she was wearing, he turned backto have a look at her. He could not repress his desire till he reached home. The momenthe looked back, Lakshmi stopped there and did not follow him. This is what happenswhen one cannot control one’s desire. Even though he got the grace of the Divine, thedevotee could not benefit from it. This means that even if you are blessed with an abun-dance of divine grace, you must acquire the capacity to benefit from it. To get this capac-ity, you have to obey implicitly the injunctions of the Divine. If the devotee in the storyhad adhered to Lakshmi’s conditions, he would have benefited from her bounty. Failingto abide by her conditions, he forfeited what he had been offered.The situation in the world is something similar to this. The world is permeated by thepotency of the three gunas. Even our vision of the world is influenced by the three gunas.Examine your eye. The outer rim of the eye is red, representing the rajo guna. After that,you have the white area, representing sathwa. At the centre is the black circular cornea,representing the thamo guna. Thus even our vision is tainted by the three colours, red,white, and black representing the three gunas.When you pose the question, “Where is God?” the answer is given by nature herself.The revolution of the Earth on its own axis at the speed of 1000 miles per hour accountsfor the phenomenon of night and day. The earth’s rotation round the Sun at a speed of66,000 miles an hour accounts for the various seasons, for rainfall, and for the cultivationof food crops. Thus the divinely-ordained motions of the earth enable living beings to gettheir food. This is a visible proof of the existence of God. The scriptures declare that thefoolish person, even while seeing the acts of God, declares he has not seen God. He doesnot realise that Nature is the vesture of God. What is the lesson to be learnt from the ob-servance of Nature? It is “Kriyaseelata (being always active in the performance of one’sduty).” It is because Nature ceaselessly performs its duty that the world is able to deriveso many benefits.The secret and mystery of creation lies in the due performance of one’s duty withearnestness and sincerity. In the pursuit of the mirage of sensual happiness, men are go-ing on the wrong path. This can be seen in the life-style of people going to work, or car-rying on business. After what they consider as a day of hard work, they go to clubs,where they become slaves of drink and ultimately ruin themselves, because:First the man drinks the wine,Second the wine drinks the wine,Third the wine drinks the man.Real happiness can be got only by rendering service to the public. Go to the help ofthe poor and the forlorn. You will derive strength as well as peace from such service.Your conscience also will feel satisfied. It is a pity that neither the rich among the publicnor the administrators are inclined to do such service. It is all the more essential that stu-dents should have some ideals before them and look forward to serving society selflessly.You should realise that you are a part of society and that your welfare is bound up withthe good of the society as a whole. You should utilise your knowledge and skill for thebenefit of society, duly recognising the fact that “Knowledge without action is useless,and action without knowledge is foolish.”58Summer Showers 1990Whatever sadhana (spiritual exercise) you may or may not do, your primary concernmust be to develop the love of God. When you develop that pure love, you can achieveanything.In this context, the advice which Hanuman gave to Vibhishana when the latter la-mented that though he had been chanting the name of Rama since long, he had not hadthe benefit of a vision of Rama, is relevant. Hanuman told Vibhishana that it was notenough to merely chant the name. One should also engage himself in the service of theDivine. Hanuman declared that while meditating on the name of Rama, he was also en-gaged in constant service to the Lord. That was how he had earned Rama’s grace and be-come near and dear to Him.On another occasion, Vibhishana complained to Hanuman, saying, “My dear friend, Iam in the midst of cruel rakshasas (demons), just like the soft tongue which is sur-rounded by the sharp teeth. Hence I am unable to calmly concentrate on Rama.” Hanu-man promptly replied, “My dear Vibhishana! Do not be worried on that account. In oldage the teeth fall away but the tongue remains in tact. Likewise the demons will be de-stroyed in due course like the teeth, and you will remain safe like the tongue. So behappy.”That is why Vibhishana used to praise Hanuman as Gunavantha (highly virtuous),Balavantha (extremely strong and powerful), and Saantha (always calm and peaceful.Remember that like Hanuman, you too can derive strength and peace only through loveand service, together with control of the senses. The young student Prahalada told his fa-ther, Hiranyakasipu, “You have conquered all the worlds in a trice, but you are unable tocontrol your senses. How can you call yourself a ruler, when you are yourself ruled byyour senses?” So, students should strive to control their senses, and develop love of God,fear of sin, and morality in society.11KNOW THYSELFO Gudakesa!—Conqueror of sleep, Arjuna!I am the Atma residing in all beings.I am also the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.                                                             Gita (ch. X, verse, 20)Embodiments of Divine Love!In the above verse of Gita, Krishna tells Arjuna, “I am the Atma (the Self) residing inall beings; I am also the beginning, the middle, and the end of all beings.” That is to say,the entire Cosmos consisting of moving and non-moving objects is only the Atma. Noth-ing exists other than the Atma or the Self. What today’s man needs to do is to constantlycontemplate on the Self, to realise the Self, to be firmly established in the Self, and to ex-perience the bliss of the Self.Atma is also known as “Awareness”. It is this awareness that is responsible for the “I”consciousness in all beings, which is called “aham”. When this aham identifies itself withthe body, it becomes ahamkara. This is the false “I”, and not the real “I”. What hides theAtma always, is the mind. The clouds that are formed due to the Sun’s heat hide the Sunitself. Likewise, the mind, which is the offspring of the Atma, hides the Atma itself. Aslong as the mind is there, man cannot hope to understand anything about the Self, not tospeak of realising and experiencing the bliss of the Self. That state in which one is estab-lished in the Self, at all times and under all circumstances, is called “Sakshatkara (Self-realisation)”.The first sound that emanated from the Self is “I”. The entire creation began only af-ter the emanation of this “I” sound. If there is no “I”, there is no creation. The terms “I”,Brahman, Atma, and Self are all synonymous. The “I” sans mind is the Atma, or the Self,in its pristine purity. The “I” associated with the mind is the false self or mithyatma.There is only one Atma or Self and that is the “I”.The paradox, however, is that to experience his own Reality—what he alreadyis—man is undertaking several sadhanas (spiritual practices). All such practices under-taken for seeking the Self are activities in which man engages himself during the state ofajnana (ignorance) only. You will not find the jnani (the realised one) doing such sad-hana, because for him, there is no distinction such as the means and the end. If man ispractising sadhana, it is for his mental satisfaction. Such practices that are pursued formental satisfaction will only serve the purpose of strengthening the mind instead of de-stroying it, as recommended in the teachings of Vedanta. If at all you want to do sad-hana, the only right approach to it, is to dispel the “anatmabhava” (the false notion of the“non-self”). If, instead of doing this right thing, you go on worshipping three millionGods and Goddesses, disregarding the common truth taught by all the scriptures of theworld that there is only one God, or if you pursue all sorts of so-called sadhanas to attainSelf-realisation and liberation, what does it indicate other than your mental aberrations,hallucinations and delusions?It is important to recognise that as long as the mind is there, desires will not leaveyou. As long as you have desires, the false notion of “I” and “mine” will not leave you.As long as the feeling of “I” and “mine” is there, ahamkara (your wrong identification60Summer Showers 1990with the body) will not leave you. As long as ahamkara does not leave you, ajnana (igno-rance) too will not leave you. In effect, it means that there is no way other than the anni-hilation of the mind to attain Atma jnana (knowledge of the Self), or Atma darshan (vi-sion of the Self), or Atma ananda (bliss of the Self), whatever you may choose to call it.The mind, the buddhi or intellect, the chitta or memory, the ahamkara, or the egosense—what is the substratum from which these four have emerged, by which they aresustained, and into which they will merge back? That substratum is the Brahman; that isthe Atma or the Self. So, instead of recognising the source of your origin and your ownidentity, what is the use of your trying to attain it by taking recourse to other pathways? Itlooks as ridiculous as a thief putting on a policeman’s dress in an effort to catch the cul-prit i.e. himself!What is the need for all other sadhanas in order to recognise yourself? There is asmall story in this connection. Once a party consisting of ten fools happened to cross ariver. After fording the river, one of them wanted to verify whether all ten of them hadreached the bank safely. He counted all the others, forgetting himself, and began weep-ing, telling them that one member of the group was lost in the river. The other fools inturn also did the same mistake by repeating the counting in a similar manner. As a resultthey all began making a hue and cry. In the meanwhile, a passer-by who noticed theirmiserable plight approached them and asked them the reason for their piteous lamenta-tions. When they told him that one of the ten members of their group was washed away inthe river while crossing, the passer-by understood their ignorance and asked them tostand in a row. Then he counted them aloud one by one, thereby convincing them that allthe ten of them were intact, and that their wrong conclusion about the loss of one manwas due to the fact that everybody forgot himself while counting.One who has forgotten himself cannot recognise the truth proper. When you are your-self the Atma, how can you recognise it by praying to some other being or doing suchother Sadhana. Because the “One has become many” (Ekoham bahusyam), you have de-veloped a liking for the diversity, forgetting the unity. All these things that you seearound you are your own reflections, as if in a mirror. Leaving the actual object, you arerunning after the reflected images. Your own bhrama (delusion) is binding you hand andfoot. One who is bound by bhrama cannot reach Brahman (God). All your sadhanas arefutile if you want to experience the Self. All these sadhanas will serve only the purposeof quietening the mind. The quietened mind may again become agitated. What is impor-tant is to get rid of the mind, by understanding its true nature.The right kinds of sadhana for seeking the Atma are only those that are directed to-ward the destruction of the mind. Because of his identification with his body, man is be-ing helplessly tossed hither and thither in various ways by his ego. “I am doing this; I amenjoying that; I have conquered this” thus saying to himself, man is lending strength dayby day, to his sense of doership (kartritva bhava). Students! Remember that success andfailure do not depend on your efforts or sadhana and such other activities. You are sim-ply inflating your ego (ahamkara), by deluding yourself that you have been able toachieve things by your own effort. Look around and see the many instances where thebest of efforts have not been crowned with success, while with little or no effort victoryhas come unsought in the case of many others. Instead of getting frustrated due to failuresby depending on your efforts have not been crowned with success. While with little or noeffort only, you can surely win success by dedicating all your activities to the Divine, byconsidering them as the Lord’s work, and by undertaking them with unwavering faith inSummer Showers 199061God. You should have the firm conviction that nothing happens due to human effort.Proof for this assertion need not be sought for in some far-off place. It can be found rightwithin your own body. For instance, what effort are you making for the ceaseless beatingof your heart or for the incessant breathing of your lungs? Does the digestion of the foodeaten by you take place, because of your will? Are you able to live because you want tolive, or die because you want to die? Does your birth take place according to when andwhere you desire? If you ponder deeply along these lines of thought, you will discoverthat your feelings of “I” and “mine” (ahamkara and mamakara) are being unduly fos-tered by your false sense of doership and enjoyership (kartritva and bhoktritva).Today, we are preoccupied with various activities just for our mental satisfaction. Butthe mind never knows any satisfaction, whatever we may do and for how long. Mindalone is maya (illusion). Mind alone is desire. Mind itself is avidya (ignorance). Mindalone is Nature (Prakruthi). And mind alone is delusion (bhranthi or bhrama). Deeplyimmersed in this bhrama, how can you hope to attain Brahman, without getting rid ofyour bhrama? Seeing your own shadow, you are trembling with fear! You are afraid ofyour own feelings and imaginations! However, “Reality is one” (Ekam Sath). And that is“Atma”. Scholars describe God as the embodiment of sath, chith, anandam (existence,awareness, bliss). It is not correct. He is sath itself, He is chith itself, He is Ananda itself.These three are not different or separate from God.“There is some mighty power, unknown to me, different from me and far away fromme,”—thinking thus, some people resort to meditation. “There is some secret and sacreddivine power distinctly separate from me and I must acquire it”—imagining thus, someothers observe many vows, perform several rites and undertake various austerities. Allthis is sheer ignorance. As long as you think there is anything different from you, so longare you submerged in ignorance. There is nothing in the universe other than you, orhigher than you. To think otherwise or to try to prove otherwise is nothing but your“Mano Bhranthi” (mental delusion), resembling a dream. In your dream you see manysights and experience various things, but for how long are they real? Only as long as yourdream lasts. When the dream ends, they are all unreal. Similarly, your hardships, losses,worry and sorrow etc. are real, only as long as your mind is under delusion. Once the de-lusion leaves you, they will all be unreal. They will then turn out to be castles of mythscreated by your mind. Relying on the false “I,” you are rejecting the real “I.” You areboosting your Ahamkara by thinking continually that you are the body.If only we can understand one small but subtle truth, we can expand the horizons ofour thoughts and feelings to any extent. There is nothing other than the Self in the uni-verse. All the things you see as existing in the phenomenal world are but reflections ofthe One Self. In the case of mundane affairs, the subject, the object, and the predi-cate—all these three are present. But in spiritual matters relating to the Atma or Self,there is only the subject but no separate object or predicate. In fact all these three aspectsget merged into one Atma Thathwa—the principle of the Self, which pervades every-where as chaitanya (consciousness). There is no place where consciousness does not ex-ist. This very chaitanya has been partitioned, so to say, into three aspects of Sath, Chit,Ananda for the satisfaction and understanding of the laity. These three aspects have beendescribed by the Vedantins as mutual reflections of one another. They have used theterms Asthi, Bhathi and Priyam for Sath, Chith and Ananda respectively. But all thesethree refer to one and the same entity. For example, here is a tumbler. It exists—hence itis sath. When it is seen by us, it creates in us an awareness that it is a tumbler—so, it is62Summer Showers 1990chith. We are making use of it—therefore it is ananda. But the tumbler has not becomethree; it is only one in which all the three aspects are united. This illustrates the unity indiversity relating to the Self. The Self is formless, but it appears in different forms. Let usconsider the example of air. It is formless, but we cannot deny its existence, just becauseit has no form of its own. Actually it assumes the form of the container that is used tohold it—the form of a balloon, or football, or air-pillow. Although the Self has no form, ithas the quality of chaitanya (consciousness).It is difficult to understand the nature of this principle of consciousness. There arethree aspects of this consciousness, depending upon its association with specific aspectsof the human personality. When this consciousness or awareness is associated with thesenses, we use the term “conscious”. When it is associated with the mind, we call it “con-science”, and when it is associated with the Self, it is pure consciousness. These threeterms are being used in daily parlance for convenience, just as we call one doctor a heartspecialist, another doctor an E.N.T. specialist, and so on. But all of them are doctors.Likewise all men are embodiments of one and the same Self, although they may be en-gaged in different occupations like agriculture, business, government service, labour, etc.As long as you have the body, the senses, and the mind, etc., it is very difficult to experi-ence the unity of the Self. But just because it is difficult, you should not give up or relaxyour effort to experience it, because it is worth much more than all your effort.We have till now understood the human body as the chariot, the senses as the horses,the mind as the reins, and the buddhi as the charioteer. But we should recognise that allthese are only meant to serve the master (the Atma or Self). Our wakeful state representsrajo guna (the state of activity); the deep-sleep state symbolises thamo guna (the state ofinertia); and the transition between the waking and sleeping states represents the sathwaguna (the state of equilibrium and equipoise), which is of the nature of the Self. You haveto understand what Self-knowledge is to appreciate the nature of the Self. We shall dis-cuss the subject of Atma jnana or Self-knowledge tomorrow.12SELF-KNOWLEDGEDear Students!God is more taintless than the sky. The sun, the moon, and the stars are His eyes. Heis all-pervading, like the air. It is only when we thoroughly recognise the nature of theupadhis or vestures of man like the body, the senses, the mind, and the buddhi, that wecan understand the sacred, pure and infinite Atma or the divine Principle.Know Me as the Kshetrajna (Knower of the fields) in all kshetras (fields);The knowledge of the kshetra and Kshetrajna is alone true knowledge, in My view.                                                                                                 (Gita, Ch. 13, Verse 2)The whole world is a combination of kshetras and Kshetrajna (the fields and theknower of the fields.) The kshetra of the human body is but a reflection of Prakruthi(Nature). All the sentient and insentient aspects of the universe are in the human body.The entire universe is a reflection of the inner being of man. It will not suffice to knowonly about the body, the senses, the mind, and the intellect. There is a distinct Kshetrajna,who animates all the kshetra. If you understand the Kshetrajna, there is no need to knowabout the kshetra but till then you should pay the required attention to the kshetra. To un-derstand the Kshetrajna, you need a special kind of knowledge. Book knowledge, super-ficial knowledge, general knowledge, discriminative knowledge, experience knowledge,practical knowledge —all these pertain to inert matter and mundane things and have anindividual bias. All these kinds of knowledge will not help in understanding the Self. Youneed a diamond to cut another diamond. You need a thorn to remove another thorn thathas pierced your foot. To experience the Self (Atma), you require only Self-knowledge,Atma jnana. Today what we regard as knowledge (jnana) in this physical world is noth-ing but ignorance (ajnana.) Self-knowledge alone is true knowledge. In fact, whether youcall it Atma (Self) or jnana (knowledge), they are both one and the same. True awarenessis jnana. Jnana, jneyam, and jnanam (the knowing, the known and the knower) predicate,object, and subject respectively—such triads are not applicable to this Atma jnana orSelf-knowledge.These triads and such other classifications pertain to the level of the mind, whereasSelf-knowledge reveals itself after the annihilation of the mind. The still and peaceful si-lence that follows the destruction of the mind is itself true knowledge. This true knowl-edge is our very nature, and not something to be newly acquired. However, this knowl-edge is hidden by the mind and its aberrations, like the cinder covered by the ash, gener-ated by the cinder itself, like the water shrouded by the moss produced by water itself andlike the eye covered by the cataract arising from the eye itself. Remove the cataract andyou get back your sight. Remove the mind and the self-knowledge stands revealed auto-matically.This knowledge can neither be obtained from books, nor given by gurus (the spiritualteachers) nor can it be conferred as a boon by the Paramatma (the Supreme Soul). Indeedyou are yourself Paramatma, Atma, or Jnana. Sitting in solitude, when you calmly en-quire how this jnana is present in all, you will hear from within yourself a spontaneousvoice that is eternal and changeless. All the things in this manifested world are subject to64Summer Showers 1990constant change due to the process of union and separation of atoms, that goes on end-lessly. However, this divine voice within is not only the same in all beings, not only eter-nal but also it remains unchanged by anything. The changes due to the changes in the ageof a person, or due to the changing states of consciousness like waking, dreaming andsleeping affect only the gross, subtle and causal bodies, but they do not, in any way, af-fect the voice referred to above. What then is that voice? It is the divine inner voice ema-nating from the Atma as I, I, I—Aham, Aham, Aham. It is this Aham that is the source ofSoham mantra that goes on repeating itself, without any conscious effort, in all of usduring the process of breathing. It is this Aham again that appears as ahamkara when itidentifies itself with the body. Ahamkara is human; Aham is divine. This Aham can berealised only by purifying one’s heart, never by studying scriptures and becoming ascholar.You see the phenomenal universe, only as long as you have not crossed the thresholdof the mind. Once you go beyond the mind, you will experience nothing but the Self. Onreaching the sea, the river loses its individuality, its name and form and becomes onewith the sea. So also the knower of Brahman verily becomes Brahman.When there is a pot, and also water in the pot, you will see the reflected image of thesun in the pot, but even when all these are absent, the Sun is ever present. Similarly, evenwhen the reflecting media of the body (the pot), the mind and the water are not present,the Self will always be present, although one may not be able to see the Self or even itsreflection. A noteworthy point, in this connection is that the image of the Atma that youget through the media of the body and mind is not true to the original Atma. It is similarto the reflection of your face in water, wherein your left eye appears as your right eye andvice versa. So also, when you are traveling in a train, your sight deceives you by givingyou the impression that the trees and mountains etc. outside are in motion. These two ex-amples serve to illustrate the point that all the distinctions you see in the phenomenalworld are due to the distortions of your mind only. You have to go beyond the mind torealise the eternal truth.People believe that every man has a free will. It is an entirely wrong belief. Theyimagine that it is because of man’s will, determination, sadhana, and effort that he is ableto achieve success. This is all due to the aberrations of their ahamkara and the reflectionof their false sense of doership. Take the case of Karna, the hero of the Kurukshetra warin Mahabharatha. He had all the wherewithal needed for victory, mighty weapons, greatphysical and intellectual prowess, dauntless courage etc. etc. But with all his resourcesand assets, he suffered a crushing defeat and humiliating death in the battlefield. Why?Because he lacked only one thing, namely, the grace, help and support of the Divine. So,even for attaining success in the matter of attaining Self-knowledge, it is foolish to relyon one’s physical, mental, and intellectual abilities and resources. What is needed is torecognise and cultivate the spirit of oneness of all that exists.It is an undisputed fact that today a number of modern facilities, conveniences, andgadgets like aeroplanes, automobiles, cinemas, television sets, computers, radios, andvideos, etc. are available in plenty. However, the basic and pertinent question that shouldbe asked in this connection is: “Who is the beneficiary of all these amenities?” No doubt,the answer to this question will be “I”. If only the “I” is there to start with, all the rest willfollow. In the absence of this “I” there is no producer and no consumer; hence, no need toproduce. Thus, it can be seen that everything centres around the “I”. In other words,“Men are more valuable than all the wealth of the world.” However, it is important toSummer Showers 199065recognise that, man is essentially divine. And this divinity cannot be experienced exceptthrough Atma jnana (Self-knowledge).Bhakthi (devotion) is the best means to experience this Atma jnana and enjoy Atmaananda (the bliss of the Self). What is bhakthi? It is constant contemplation on the Self.Bhakthi and jnana are not two different things. Bhakthi itself is jnana. And jnana itself isbhakthi. They are closely interrelated and interdependent. The singular bond that unitesbhakthi and jnana is prema—Divine Love. With this sacred cord of prema, you can bindthe Lord Himself.The Bhagavad Gita exhorts, “Uddareth Atmanaa Atmaanam (Elevate yourself byyour own efforts).” Contrary to this exhortation, many persons are labouring under thewrong notion that if they beget sons, the latter will help them to reach heaven after theirdeath, by performing the sraaddha ceremony. It is foolish to think that those having sonsreach the higher worlds and those having no sons will go down to the nether worlds.Further, sraaddha does not mean inviting the Brahmin priest, washing his feet, feedinghim sumptuously, and obtaining his blessings. The real meaning of sraaddha is to offerpinda and sraddha or faith at the Lotus Feet of the Lord. And what is pinda? Pinda is notthe rice ball as usually understood but the human body. Therefore, the true pindadana isto offer your body, all your physical and mental faculties and skills in the service of theLord who has manifested Himself as the universe.In Vedantic parlance, the human body is also called “tunga-bhadra”. Tunga meansvery high, vast, great etc. Bhadra means good, sacred, auspicious, effulgent, etc. The im-plication of calling the human body “tunga-bhadra is that it is intended to undertake suchnoble activities as will bring about the welfare of the society. Therefore, to be worthy ofthis name, you should dedicate your body and mind to the loving service of all beings. Inthis context, you must remember the shining example of the great musician, Saint Thya-garaja, who proved himself worthy of his name, which literally means the “King of re-nunciation”. When the ruler of Tanjavur sent him a number of precious jewels and provi-sions necessary to run a household, he refused to accept them and sang extempore, ad-dressing his mind thus, “Oh my dear mind! What is it that gives real happiness, wealth orthe Lotus Feet of the Lord? Please tell me the truth.” Then he also sang a prayer to theLord as follows, “Oh my beloved Lord Rama! Do you want to tempt me with theseriches, and make it an excuse for deserting me? I have held fast your Lotus Feet with bothmy hands. How can these hands now leave your sacred feet, which are my permanent andprecious treasure, in order to receive this transient tinsel of tempting wealth?” Therefore,just like Thyagaraja who proved himself worthy of his name, you should also prove your-self worthy of the name “tunga-bhadra”, which the scriptures have given to the humanbody.Students! This Summer Course is a golden opportunity for you. So many elderly andeminent persons with rich experience behind them are giving you very valuable informa-tion. You should, however, utilise all this information for your transformation, which ispossible only when you put into actual practice at least a few things out of the manythings you have been hearing.13WHAT IS FREEDOM?How glittering and quivering is the waterdrop on the lotus leaf!So is man’s life in this transient world.Life is rife with strife, disease, and delusions.Alas! Sorrow and suffering reign supreme in this sordid world.Therefore, O foolish mind! Take refugeIn the Name of Lord—Govinda, Govinda, Govinda!Dear Students!People in general cannot understand what is aadhyaatmikam or spirituality and whatis individual freedom. Spirituality does not mean living in solitude, far away from soci-ety. On the other hand, true spirituality consists in sowing the seeds of love in the heartsof all people and facilitating the blossoming of peace and divine love among all mankind.If you enquire deeply into the nature of the divine principle, there are not two things likespirituality and individual freedom.If one is allowed to express one’s feelings and thoughts from a public platform with-out any let or hindrance, it is said to be freedom for the individual. But the truth is that noone has absolute freedom in this universe. The word freedom has been used freely andfrequently in the political field. What is freedom? To get rid of foreign rule and to estab-lish the rule of the natives of the nation was considered as freedom before India got herpolitical independence. But that was neither individual freedom nor fundamental free-dom. It was only a replacement of foreign rule by indigenous rule, with little or nochange in the aspect of freedom as such. After the departure of the foreigners, we thoughtthat the natives got their freedom. But in what aspect did we get freedom? What is the useof simply repeating “freedom”, “freedom”. It is only when we have achieved unity thatwe can claim to have attained freedom. Without achieving unity, if we talk of freedom, itis merely the freedom of words but not the freedom of the individuals. True freedomsprings forth from the level of the heart.What is meant by the heart? Not the physical heart full of flesh and blood. The realheart is that which has no connection with any particular place, time, individual or coun-try. It is the divine principle, which is equally present in all persons at all times, in allplaces, and in all countries. This heart has no form. What we consider as the heart insidethe human body comes in the middle and goes in the middle. But what we call as heart inthe spiritual parlance knows no coming or going. It is eternal and changeless. Therefore,true freedom consists in recognising and realising this heart or divine Principle, knowingwhich, one becomes the knower of everything.“Yatha Andande tatha Brahmande.” As is the microcosm, so is the macrocosm. Mi-crocosm refers to the individual and macrocosm to the aggregate or sum total. One whoknows one’s Self knows all. Today’s man tries to know everything about the world. Hefeels proud that he knows everything. But he forgets that he does not know himself.Mention is made in one of the Upanishads of a great sage by name Uddalaka, who senthis son Svetaketu to another guru for his education. Svetaketu took twelve years to ac-quire proficiency in all the branches of learning. Puffed up with pride, he returned to hisfather and told him about his profound scholarship. Then the father questioned him, “OhSummer Showers 199067my son! have you known that, by knowing which you would be knowing everything.”The son was baffled by this question which gave a shattering blow to his pride of learn-ing. Of all the kinds of pride, the pride of learning is the worst. By putting that questionwhich intrigued his son, Sage Uddalaka made him recognise the superiority of Self-knowledge or Atma jnanam as compared to loka jnanam or secular knowledge.When you ask someone, “Who are you?” and if he replies, “I don’t know who I am,”what will you think of him? You will consider him to be a mad fellow. Similarly, if youtry to know about everything else without knowing who you are, are you any better thanthat mad fellow? Therefore, first of all, you should try to know who you are. You maysay, “I am Ramaiah,” but Ramaiah is the name given to your body. But who is that “I” inyour reply, who is separate from Ramaiah? You should understand the nature of that “I”.That “I” is nothing other than the “hridayam” or the heart. That “I” is the Atma or Self.That “I” is Brahman or the Supreme Reality. This heart is All-pervasive or Omnipresent.Consider this illustration: A painter has painted a beautiful picture of a dancing girlon a sheet of paper. The picture shows her body and limbs with several bends and curves,ups and downs in the process of dancing. In another painting, there are high mountainsand low valleys. But if you feel the paper by touching with your fingers, you will not findactually any ups and downs or elevations and depressions in either painting. So also, inthe phenomenal world, you find many differences like ups and downs, good and bad, sinsand virtues, truth and untruth, pain and pleasure etc. But at the level of the heart, you willnot at all find these dualities or pairs of opposites.Let us consider another example. Here is a tumbler. It has a name and a form. If youremove or ignore the name and form, what remains? Only silver. It was silver before be-coming a tumbler. When it has the form of a tumbler also, it is only silver. If the tumbleris destroyed and made into a round mass, it will continue to be silver only. So it is noth-ing but silver in the beginning, the middle and the end. The name and form of tumblerwere there only in the middle, but neither in the beginning or at the end. That which doesnot exist in the beginning and the end but exists only in the middle is considered to bereally non-existent even in the middle also. Its apparent existence in the middle is only amyth or illusion. That is why the phenomenal world is called mithya jagath (illusory uni-verse.)Ekam Sath (Existence is One). When there is no second, how can the question offreedom or bondage arise? So these concepts of freedom and bondage are the concoctionsof your own mind. We give attention and value to the moon, only when there is no sun.Why do we give value to the moon when there is no sun? The moon has no effulgence ofits own. It shines only due to the reflection of the sun’s rays. Similarly, when we do notsee the sun of Self, we give value to the moon of the mind. The Vedas have revealed thatthe mind is a reflection of the moon. Therefore we cherish the mind and nourish it by de-voting more and more time and attention to it, as long as we do not engage ourselves inAtma vichara or Self-enquiry. It is only when you have the mind, that you see all suchdifferences as spiritual and secular, sacred and mundane, freedom and bondage, man andwoman, Prakruthi and Para Thathwam, Nature and Absolute Reality. All the dualitiesare the creations of the mind.I wish to clarify some points relating to the debate that took place here on the subjectof freedom and bondage. Suppose a man is suffering from dire poverty. He is very hun-gry. Even in spite of begging no one gives him food. Then he feels that he has the free-dom to resort to stealing, in order to appease his hunger. Although he may rationalise68Summer Showers 1990thus, because of his selfishness, his conscience does not approve his stealing. So how canit be called freedom, when it is disapproved by his conscience? It may, at best, be calledfreedom with bondage. When does one have real freedom? Only when the mind is de-stroyed. When you use words “swabhava” and “swechcha,” you have to understand theirtrue meaning. “Swa” means Self or Atma. Hence “swabhava” means the nature of Atma.Likewise, swa + ichcha = “swechcha”, which means the volition of the Atma. Strictlyspeaking, it should be understood as volition that is in line with the Atma, since Atma perse  has no volition. In the light of these meanings, it is incorrect to use the terms “swab-hava” and “swechcha” in connection with matters relating to the activities of the body,senses, mind, and intellect. It should be recognised that man’s life is regulated by thelaws of nature on the one hand and by man-made rules and regulations on the other. Suchbeing the case, there is no validity in everyone thinking for himself that he has freedom toact as he likes. It is only God that may be said to have freedom. Even this is a relativetruth, because in absolute terms, Existence is only one, so the word “freedom” is out ofplace in this context.People talk glibly about surrender. Some persons complain, “I have completely sur-rendered myself to Swami, but there is no end to my problems, hardships, suffering, andsorrow.” In My view, this is no surrender at all. True surrender never takes into cogni-sance the presence or absence of sorrow, suffering or misery, and the like. There aresome others who say, “When I sit in meditation, I sometime go into samadhi.” But whatis samadhi? In books written by worldly people with mundane views, one may find vari-ous descriptions of samadhi. While in meditation, a person may lose body-consciousness.But this cannot rightly be called samadhi. It may be a symptom of weakness, fits, hysteriaor emotion, but never a sign of samadhi. Merging the mind in the Atma is alone samadhi.In that state, one does not see or experience duality. samadhi = sama + dhi, which essen-tially means equal-mindedness. In that condition, there will be no trace of such differ-ences like pleasure and pain, gain and loss, virtue and sin, or “Prakruthi and Paramatma”(Nature and God). This alone is the evidence of equal-mindedness. This truly is “swab-hava” (nature of the Self). In contrast to this, if a man aspires for something in his lifeand pursues various paths to achieve it, you may take it all as an indication of mental ab-errations.As long as the mind is there, no one can claim to be enjoying freedom. In the worldlyparlance, one may say, “I have money, I am giving it to him. This is my freedom etc.”But truly speaking, this is neither freedom nor free will. The mind is a mixture of thethree Gunas—sathwa, raja, and thamas. One or more of these three may become domi-nant at a given time in a given person. In the present instance, the mind of the man who isgiving some money to another person is motivated by the sathwa guna to give somethingin charity to the needy person. Hence, when a man acts under the influence of the gunas,how can he claim to have freedom of will? It is, therefore, impossible for any body whois a part of the creation to have freedom. Justice Khastagir told you, a little while ago,that a person has freedom to take exercise by waving a stick as he likes in the compoundof his house, but he has no such freedom to do so in a public road, because it is againstgovernmental rules and regulations, and he is liable to be arrested by the police. How-ever, strictly speaking, where the man takes exercise by waving his stick in the premisesof his residence, what is involved is not freedom but only the fulfillment of his wish ordesire. Whenever a man does something for the sake of his personal benefit, it signifiesSummer Showers 199069only his desire for that thing. That alone can be termed as true freedom that emanatesfrom the Heart, irrespective of the place, time, person, or thing.The highly talented persons in different walks of life have not acquired their skillsfrom somewhere outside. All these are but manifestations of their own innate potentiali-ties. It is sheer ignorance to think that any person can be developed by some other person.Everything is in you alone. All that you do by way of your effort is to manifest or give anouter expression to what is already inherent in you. So, even in the spiritual field, all thesadhana that you need to do is to remove the obstruction, namely, the ignorance that ispreventing the manifestation of the divinity already present in you. Krishna too taughtthis very truth to Arjuna as follows:“Arjuna, you did not know the art and science of archery when you were born. Youare under the impression that Drona instructed you and therefore you acquired the skillsof warfare from somewhere outside. It is not correct to think that Drona taught you andthat you learnt these skills afresh. All that Drona did was to facilitate the manifestation ofwhat was already in you. Remember that any teacher or even any great man endowedwith extra-ordinary powers cannot bring out what is not already inside you. Luck or illluck, bliss or misery—all these are in you only. Suppose you are digging a well. Onreaching the depth of, say, 100 feet from the ground-level, you strike a good spring withcopious supply of water. Now, have you created the water or brought it from somewhere?No, no. Water was there all the while. It came to view because the earth that was hiding itwas removed. So too, there is divinity ever present in you. But you have forgotten it.Why did you forget? Because of your wrong identification with your body.As long as there is mind, man cannot escape from thoughts of various kinds. Theseindicate the freedom of the mind, but not freedom of the man. Sampath told you that astudent has the freedom to question the teacher and obtain answers. But this does notcome under “freedom”. It comes under duty; the duty of a student is to abide by theregulations of the educational system, which provides for asking questions and obtaininganswers. You should understand the difference between freedom and duty. Duty may beconsidered under three categories: sambandham (relationship), nirbandham (compul-sion), and kartavyam (obligation). The differences between these three will be clear if weconsider some examples.You wanted to give a tea party to your friends on a Sunday evening. Accordingly,you invited your friends in advance. But at 4 p.m. on Sunday you developed high tem-perature. So you informed all the invitees that the tea party is postponed. In this situation,you may or may not have the tea party, as you wish. But this is not freedom; it is “sam-bandham” (relationship), something voluntary and optional.Next, about “nirbandham”. You are in the office. Suddenly, you are attacked by highfever. On that very day, your director or boss is coming to inspect your office. So youcannot go on leave of absence. Therefore, you run to the doctor, take an injection andsome tablets for your illness, and attend office compulsorily in spite of your sufferingfrom fever. This is a case of “nirbandham” or compulsion.Thirdly “kartavyam”. Due to some reasons, a quarrel arises between you and yourwife. In a fit of anger you beat your wife. She goes away into the bedroom and lies down,weeping in agony. She does not attend to cooking. You are sitting in the drawing room.You are extremely angry on two accounts: firstly for the reason that led to your quarreland secondly because your wife has not cooked food and you are very hungry. So, due tothe combination of both anger and hunger, you are very restless. Just then, a good friend70Summer Showers 1990of yours comes to visit you. You greet him with a smile, saying “hallo, hallo” and afteroffering him a seat, you go inside and tell your wife in a hushed voice but with an angrytone, “My friend has come; prepare coffee.” You show an angry face to your wife but ahappy countenance to your friend. You don’t want your friend to know that you are angrywith your wife, nor do you want your wife to know that you are jolly with your friend.Since you are thus obliged to adjust your behaviour to suit different persons and situa-tions, in conformity with the social norms and etiquette, it is called kartavyam or obliga-tion.Nowadays, people in general, have given the go-by to all the three—sambandham,nirbandham and kartavyam (relationship, compulsion, and obligation). Hence there is“dharmaglani” (an all round decline of righteousness in the modern society). It should benoted that there is no freedom for man in acting according to “relationship, compulsion,and obligation” as illustrated above. There is freedom only at the level of the Atma orSelf.Engage yourself in any activity, but always keep in view your true nature as the Selfor Atma. If you do so, you will surely enjoy real freedom. There are not two kinds offreedom—individual and spiritual. “Adhi atmikam” or spirituality alone is “swatantryam”or freedom. Freedom alone is spirituality. It is not possible for these two to exist sepa-rately. There is only one entity that has assumed different names and forms. Just as thesame milk assumes the different names and forms of curd or yoghurt, buttermilk, cream,butter, etc. Similarly saalokyam, saameepyam, saroopyam, and sayujyam are differentnames for the same spiritual experience. These four, however, are progressive steps in theprocess of God-realisation. “Saalokyam” means always thinking of God and living in thespiritual world or God’s world, so to say, as against the material world. “Saameepyam”indicates moving closer to Swami or God. “Saroopyam” means becoming one likeSwami. “Sayujyam” is the final stage of becoming Swami Himself i.e. complete mergerwithout any trace of duality.If anyone in this phenomenal world says he is having freedom, we can call it only“verri swatantryam” or crazy freedom. It may also be called “ahamkara swatantryam”i.e. freedom of the ego, and “abhimana swatantrayam,” i.e., freedom of infatuation orattachment. It is foolish on your part if you think you have the freedom to scold and beatyour wife or children. If you want to enhance your freedom by suppressing the freedomof others, it is utter selfishness only. True freedom lies in not interfering with the freedomof others. You do not find such freedom in this world. What you find in this world is ahierarchy of controls, the one at a higher level controlling the one at a lower level. Thisresults in lack of freedom for all except perhaps for the one top-most person in the hierar-chy. But, strictly speaking, even this one person occupying the top-most rung of the hier-archical ladder cannot be said to have freedom because the question of freedom does notarise when there is only one without a second. What we call “individual freedom” and“fundamental rights” may serve the purpose of enabling us to carry on our mundane af-fairs. But in the absolute sense, there is no true freedom involved in these matters.From the above discussion, we arrive at the conclusion that, from whatever angle wemay consider the matter, there is no freedom for man and there can be no freedom forman. In fact, man does not know what true freedom means. One who has freedom doesnot take birth in this world. One who enters the world with a body, cannot have freedom.Jayamma gave you the example of an animal tied to a peg or stake with a rope of ten feetlength to illustrate that the animal has a limited freedom within a diameter of ten feet. ButSummer Showers 199071how can you speak of freedom when the animal is tied by a rope to the stake at one endand to its neck at the other end, and when it cannot go beyond ten feet? Anything that isbound by any limitation whatsoever cannot and should not be said to have freedom. Thisonly shows that we are in the habit of using words without knowing their correct mean-ing.If you understand the true meaning of the “heart”, you will recognise that it is beyondall limitations. The same heart that is within you is also within all others including eventhose who are hated by you or who hate you. You may have the doubt that if all have thesame heart, why should their thoughts, attitudes, and actions be different. Students! Re-member that all these differences are created by the mind, and they have nothing to dowith the heart. This is not the physical heart but the spiritual heart, which is omnipresent.It has no form, but it is the substratum for all forms, just as sugar is the common basis forall kinds of sugar dolls of different animals, which are liked by different children.All the differences you find in the world are only reflections of your mind. Whetheryou love someone or hate someone or ridicule someone, they are all only your reflec-tions. If you gave up these “reactions, resounds, and reflections” of your mind, which ap-pear to you in the phenomenal world, and get hold of the Heart called Reality, then allthese differences in thoughts, feelings, action; etc. would disappear. God does not havethoughts and feelings of any kind. But He appears to respond suitably according to thethoughts, feelings, attitudes, and actions like worship, prayer, etc., of the devotees. Hehas no likes and dislikes. Nor is He angry with some and pleased with some others. Hedoes not have moods that change from time to time in respect of the same person or dif-ferent persons, as is imagined by many of you. Of course, as a result of putting on a body,the Avatars also appear to have such reactions, resounds, and reflections but it is only toset an example to others and to help them to reform themselves, so that they may makethe needed progress in their spiritual journey. God does not differentiate or discriminatebetween “high” caste and “low” caste, between the young and the old, between men andwomen, between people of one country and another etc., etc. These are all mundane dif-ferences pertaining to the phenomenal world but have nothing to do with Divinity. It isonly narrow-mindedness to think that Rama was born in a Kshatriya family, Krishna inthe Yadava or cowherd family, or Sai Baba in Raju-Kshatriya family and so on.God will never have such differences. If one understands rightly the nature of the di-vine principle of the Atma, there will be no scope for such petty, narrow-minded differ-ences and discriminations.Living in this vast universe, you must develop broad thoughts and feelings, to under-stand the nature of the infinite Atma. Spirituality should not be approached from a narrowstandpoint. Doing worship, Bhajans or devotional singing, meditation and the like areconsidered by many as signs of spirituality. But all these are only mental aberrations, andserve to give only mental satisfaction to the practitioners. You praise God, saying, “Lord,you are my mother, my father, my friend,” and so on. But why all this mumbo-jumbo orgibberish? Why not simply say, “You are I; I am you,” and be done with it? In this con-nection, it is not correct to say, “You and I are one,” because you and I are we, but neverone. It is better to say, “We and we are one,” because I am in you and you are in Me.Therefore, when we come together, we become one. However in the statement: “We andwe are one,” there is duality, because the “we” consists of the physical body and the di-vine principle of the Atma. If you understand the nature of these two aspects of your per-sonality, you will not think of the relationships like mother, father, friend, etc. between72Summer Showers 1990yourself and God. You are both one, although you may appear as two. Here is a concreteillustration for this. The mike in front of Me appears as two but functions as one only inthe process of amplifying my voice so as to make it audible to all of you. Similarly youshould visualise and realise the unity of the body and the Hridayam or Atma. This is theone sadhana you should practice.Students!Spirituality means merger with God. You are not different from God. You are God,God is you. If you are firmly established in this faith, you need not undertake any othersadhana or spiritual practices. Of course, some people repeat parrot-like, “I and you areone,” but they do not live up to it. Here is a small story to illustrate this. A guru gave themantra “Sivoham” to one of his disciples and told him that the mantra means “I amSiva.” As the disciple was uttering, “Sivoham, Sivoham,” a friend of his came and askedhim about the meaning of the mantra, the friend questioned him, “If you are Siva, how isParvathi related to you?” The immediate response of the disciple was: “May God forgivemy offence! Goddess Parvathi is far superior to me and deserves my adoration and wor-ship.” The point to be noted here is that if the disciple had real faith and conviction in themantra, “Sivoham”, which implies that there is only one God who appears to have as-sumed all the names and forms of all gods and goddesses, as well as of all beings in theentire universe, then the correct answer to his friend’s question would have been, “I amParvathi too.” Instead of that, this wrong reply was due to his belief in the traditionalhusband-wife relationship—that Parvathi was Siva’s consort. Therefore, this kind ofcomplications will arise if you think of God in terms of such worldly, physical relation-ships like mother, father, etc. Instead of that you should have unshakeable faith in theunity of Godhead and assert, I am you, you are I; we are not two, but one.” This is thetrue freedom inherent in you. In this context you should understand the correct meaningof the terms “swa dharma” and “para dharma” used in the Gita. The meaning of “swadharma” is Atma dharma, and not the dharma or duties enjoined on the different casteslike Brahmana dharma, kshatriya dharma, and so on. Like-wise, “para dharma” means“deha dharma” (dharma pertaining to the body). It is in this sense that you should under-stand the declaration in the Gita, “Paradharmo bhayavahah”, which in effect means thatif you follow the “deha dharma or the dharma of the physical body, fear will be your lotin life. On the other hand, if you follow the “Atma dharma”, there will be no fear for you.If you thus understand the real meanings of the verses and words in the Gita and if youmould your lives accordingly, you will have no fear of calumny, ridicule, sorrow, andsuffering.Students! You may or may not believe Me, when I say, “I do not know what sorrowis, what worry is, or what hardship means!” Some may praise Me and worship Me. Oth-ers may criticise and vilify Me. It is their will and pleasure in either case. I am not at allbothered. My attitude toward others abusing Me is: if they abuse or scold Me aloud, Isay, “Gone with the wind,” if they abuse Me silently within themselves, I say, it hurtsonly them, for it does not reach me.” In either case, why should I be worried at all?Therefore, if you are established in Truth, you will never be affected by praise or blame,by joy or sorrow. People come to Me and complain about the bereavements in their fam-ily or some suffering or pain etc. I respond to them by saying, “Challa santosham,”which means “Very happy.” You should note that this kind of happiness remains thesame under all circumstances, because it is based on the “Atma Thathwa”—that is, “Eve-rything is Atma.” However, sometimes I pretend to be angry with students because ofSummer Showers 199073their wrong behaviour. But it is only outward anger; it does not come from inside. I maynot speak to some persons for months together. That is the medicine to cure them of theirdisease of misbehaviour and to set them right. What right has anybody to ask why Swamiis not talking to him?A small example for this. Four patients come to a doctor. They have all come with thesame complaint of stomach ache. The doctor examines them one after the other. He sendsone of them away with the advice to have hot water fomentations. For the second patienthe gives a mixture of mag sulph and soda bicarb and tells him that he will be relieved ofhis stomach ache, which is due to gas trouble. For the third person, he gives some tablets.But he wants the fourth person to undergo a surgical operation immediately, because hisstomach pain is due to appendicitis. Similarly, I give different treatments to different per-sons based on their needs and for their own good. I don’t look at all at some people. Idon’t speak to some. I avoid or bypass some people although they try to attract my atten-tion. These are all my prescriptions for their respective diseases. Why do I administersuch medicines or treatments? I have got principles. My word is very precious. Even ifyou don’t give value to My word, I attach great importance and value to My word. Ifsomebody does not heed My word, I don’t like to waste My words by speaking to him.Hence in order to save the value of My words, I stop talking to such persons. Instead ofcomplaining that Swami does not talk to me, why don’t you blame yourself for not actingaccording to Swami’s instructions? This is not “One-way traffic”. It is a matter of “giveand take”. If Swami’s orders are implicitly obeyed by you, His Grace is showered on youautomatically. You need not specially pray for His Grace. First of all, attach value to yourown words. Remember the wise saying, “Truth is the life of a word; a battalion of bravesoldiers is the life of a fort, modesty is the life of a woman, and signature is the life of apromissory note or bond.”All cannot understand the nature of Divinity. God is never elated or depressed. Evenif the whole world blames and reviles Me, I will not be depressed. Even if the entireworld extols Me, I will not be elated. This is because I am established in Truth. Therewill be no room for any worry or anxiety if you are firmly established in the Heart orAtma or Truth,—all of which mean the same. Try to understand the divinity of Swami,who is the changeless support or adhara of all that changes (adheya), and thus sanctifyand justify your stay here for this summer course.14PRACTICE  AND  PRECEPTDear Students!The world in which we live is impermanent. Youth comes in the middle and goes inthe middle. It is not a sign of the educated to gloat over their impetuous and turbulentyouth. As for wealth, it is as momentary as the lightning. Wife and children join you mid-stream and leave you midstream in the river of life. Before marriage, who was the wifeand who was the husband? So also, before birth, who was the mother and who was thechild? Wife, children and other relatives are like the travellers who meet and depart overnight from a caravanserai. All these are transient. What then is permanent? Only twothings: dharma (righteousness) and keerthi (fame). As the scriptures have declared: “Yatdrisyam tat nasyam (whatever is visible is perishable). The entire manifested universewill be washed away by the river of time. The eye that sees and the world that isseen—both are short-lived.Without developing the jnana chakshu (the eye of wisdom), if a man is content withthe charma chakshu (the physical eye) only, he is no better than the birds and beasts.Human life is invaluable, purposeful, and worth experiencing and enjoying. For the ful-fillment of such a precious and sacred human life, the acquisition of Atma jnana (Self-knowledge) is highly indispensable. The scriptures proclaim, on the one hand, that amongall beings in the animal kingdom, it is a rare privilege to be born as a human being. Theyalso declare on the other hand, that a man devoid of jnana is equal to a brute. The physi-cal eyes of man can see only the gross external world but not the inner divinity, which ishighly subtle. As a matter of fact, the physical eyes cannot even see all the gross things;for example, the eyes cannot see themselves without the aid of a mirror; they cannot seesome parts of the very body to which they belong, for example the head and the back. So,when these physical eyes are incapable of seeing even the entire gross body to which theybelong, how can they see the subtle mind? When they cannot see even the subtle mind,how can they see the Atma, which is the subtlest of all? Therefore, the physical eyes arehelpful to man, only for carrying his mundane activities in the phenomenal world.The eye of wisdom is highly essential to every man. Jnana netram (the eye of wis-dom), divya netram (the divine eye), Atma netram (the eye of the Self), Brahma netram(the eye of Brahman) —all these names are synonymous. Only when you have the firmfaith that all is Brahman (Sarvam Brahman), you will see the entire universe as Brahman.That is why the scriptures have exhorted: fill your vision (dhristi), with jnana (wisdom),and you will see the srishti (creation), filled with Brahman (The Supreme Absolute). Thecolour of the entire Prakruthi (Nature) depends upon the colour of the glasses throughwhich the physical eyes look at it.All things that are visible are subject to change. However, the substratum of all thischanging phenomena is the changeless Divine Principle (Brahman), just as the stationaryroad supports the movement of the fast running buses and cars. Only if you recognise thechangeless Divine Principle that supports the changing universe can you easily under-stand the entire secret of the universe. Your mind is the cause of your inability to under-stand the real nature of this world. The characteristic of the mind is pravritthi—externalorientation. Man is wasting his life, night and day, for acquiring external things likehouses, lands, vehicles, wealth and other so-called “properties” which, in fact, are notSummer Showers 199075“proper ties”. Is it for the sake of these trifles that man is born? No. No. No. To realiseGod is his foremost task in life. Man must realise God, feel God, see God and talk toGod. This is realisation. This is religion. It serves no purpose if one knows everythingelse but does not know God.A few minutes earlier, Anil Kumar spoke to you about botany. The flowers and fruitsthatwe want from the tree and that are seen on the tree top depends on the unseen rootsbelow the ground for their growth and development. So, in order to get a good harvest offlowers and fruits, we need to apply water and manure not to the visible flowers and fruit,but to the invisible roots, which alone can give them nourishment. Likewise it is the Di-vine Principle (Atma Thathwa) that serves as the root for the tree of this world. It is men-tioned in the Gita that God is the seed of all beings. What is the significance of thisstatement? When you plant a seed in the soil, it germinates and in due course of time itgrows into a big tree with several branches. Each branch puts forth many flowers, whichdevelop into so many fruits. Each of these fruits will have a seed in it similar to the seedthat gave rise to the tree. Thus from one seed, you have got hundreds of seeds of the sametype.Now, according to the Gita, God is the seed that has given rise to the tree of this vastuniverse. Each country is a branch of this tree. In each branch there are a number offruits, namely, various kinds of living beings, each of which carries within it the seed ofDivinity. It means that in every being, God is there in the form of the spirit or Atma. Stu-dents of today are not making effort to recognise this subtle truth behind the gross uni-verse. They spend all their time for specialising in one of the subjects like physics,chemistry, zoology, botany, mathematics, commerce, etc. so that they may earn theirlivelihood, never giving any thought to the goal of life, which is more important thanmaking a living.According to one of the most important mantras in the Veda, immortality can be ob-tained only by thyaga (renunciation) but not by good action, progeny, or wealth. etc. Butwhat exactly is renunciation? It does not mean giving up one’s wife and children, orhouse and other properties. What actually is your bondage? It is the delusion of youridentification with the body. You must give up the false idea that you are the body andimbibe the truth that you are the Atma. Only then alone can you achieve liberation (mok-sha). Deha virakthi (detachment from body consciousness) will free you from the grief ofbondage, and Daiva asakthi (attachment of God) will give you the bliss of moksha andmerger with God. How to get rid of deha bhranthi (body-consciousness)? Not by givingup food and drink, reducing the body to a skeleton, and courting death but by assertingwith faith that “I am not the body. The body, the senses, the mind, and the intellect are allmy instruments (upadhis).” You must give up your body consciousness, just as you re-move your soiled clothes.In the debate that took place the day before yesterday, it was argued that one has thefreedom to eat when hungry and drink water when thirsty. But how can you call thisfreedom? You are forced to eat food to appease your hunger and drink water to quenchyour thirst. Here you are simply following the law of nature. There is no question of free-dom in this. It is only bliss that is connected with freedom. How can you have that bliss?Can you get it from the body or the mind? Not at all. The bliss that you may derivethrough the body and mind is but momentary. You have not been born just for this kindof transient and trivial joys. You have yourself put on this human body to enjoy everlast-ing bliss.76Summer Showers 1990All things happen according to the divine will (Daiva sankalpam). By your own effortyou cannot achieve anything. The day before yesterday, I told you how, in several in-stances, men could not achieve things in spite of all their efforts and how success cameseeking those who had not tried for it. It is only due to ahamkara that you wrongly ap-propriate to yourself both doership and enjoyership (kartritwa and bhoktritwa). You arethe very embodiment of bliss. Bliss is your very nature. But it is a tragedy that you areunable to recognise it and experience it. This bliss is veiled by likes and dislikes, thesense of “I” and “mine”, hesitation and doubt, pleasure and displeasure etc. Raga anddwesha (attachment and hatred) are the thick clothes that shroud the bliss in you. Whenyou get rid of attachment and hatred, you can discover your own real nature. How strangeand foolish it is that despite yourself being the very embodiment of bliss, you are search-ing for bliss elsewhere! Although everything is within you, you are unfortunately runningafter petty desires and silly sensual pleasures in the phenomenal world. What is the rea-son for this mad race? Ignorance of the truth that you are yourself the source of all bliss.Students! You know that the gigantic elephant with a giant’s strength meekly submitsto the control of the puny driver holding the spur. Why? Because the elephant is ignorantof its own strength. Similarly, the black bumble bee can burrow holes into a very hardwooden beam, and go in and out of it. But the same bee enters into a tender and soft lotusflower, gets entrapped, and dies because it knows not its own strength. Likewise, mandoes not try to recognise his innate divinity, sacredness, and bliss. Leave alone his failureto try, what is still worse, he refuses to believe even when told about it. Students! If youput forth the required effort, you will definitely experience the truth of your own divinityand bliss. The musk-deer, not knowing that the musky fragrance emanates from its ownnavel, roams about restlessly all over the forest, in search of the source of that smell. Atlast it becomes very tired and lies down in the shade of a tree for taking rest. While lyingdown, it keeps its nose near its navel, and then recognises that the fragrance is coming outof its own navel. And now it says to itself, “Alas! what a great fool am I! Not knowingthat I myself am the source of the fragrance, I was searching in vain all through the for-est, putting myself to unnecessary trouble!” This is the nature of ignorance. This exactlyis the plight of man too. Nityanandam (eternal Bliss), Brahmanandam (infinite Bliss),and Adwaithanandam (non-dual bliss) are the very nature and form of man. But, lured bythe momentary sensuous worldly pleasures, man is unable to seek, to understand and toenjoy this supreme divine bliss. Unlike the so-called bliss derived from material things,the bliss of the Atma is never tainted by sorrow. If you fill up a vessel with payasam, asweet made by boiling a cereal in milk with sugar, and then make several holes in thevessel, what comes out of any or all of these holes will be only the sweet payasam.Similar is the case with Atmananda (the bliss of the Atma), which manifests itself in vari-ous ways. That is why the sages have named the Atma as Ananda and described it vari-ously as eternal bliss, supreme bliss, absolute bliss, bliss of wisdom, bliss transcending allthe pairs of opposites, pure bliss, unshakeable bliss, bliss that is beyond the grasp of themind, bliss which transcends the three gunas, and so on. When such priceless treasure ofbliss is readily available within you, why should you foolishly run after this phenomenalworld, which brings you trials and tribulations, sufferings and sorrow?The treasuries and banks that contain huge sums of money are provided with the re-quired safety and security measures—strong iron gates, steel chests, and huge locks, be-sides night and day watch by fully-armed watchmen. Likewise, the invaluable treasury ofbliss is being constantly guarded by the highly poisonous serpent called ahamkara. ButSummer Showers 199077what is the cause of this ahamkara? Is it wealth, strength, position, power, or learning?No, none of these. The root cause of ahamkara is deha bhranthi (mistaken identificationof oneself with his body). As for the other things like wealth, position, power, etc., itmust be clear to you that all the past history and the present happenings in the world, aswell as the teachings of the Gita and scriptures, reveal that all these are highly transient.They do not follow you even up to the grave, not to speak of beyond the grave. What ac-companies you even after death is the good or the bad done by you during your lifetime.Students! Don’t forget that “as you sow, so you reap.” This is the inviolable Law ofKarma, in which Indians have firm belief. Before entering into action, ask yourself thus:“I am the embodiment of the divine Atma; is it proper for me to engage myself in thismean, despicable action?” If you practise such self-restraint and self-discipline, you willbe able to keep yourself away from evil and move closer and closer to the Atma. Makeuse of your talents and resources for the welfare of the world rather than for makingquick money by resorting to treachery and corruption in pursuit of self-interest.Patriotism—love for the land of one’s birth—is extremely important. Once whenSubhas Chandra Bose was a student of the Calcutta University, a British Lecturer spokedisparagingly about India and Indians. Young Subhas Chandra was upset by this but re-strained himself from retaliation for quite some time. However, when he found the Lec-turer exceeding the limits of decency and decorum, he could not contain himself anylonger. He sprang to his feet, swiftly jumped across the benches and pouncing upon theLecturer, thrashed him with his shoe. In a few minutes the news spread like wild firethroughout the University Campus. The authorities held an emergency meeting andpassed orders debarring Subhas from the University for a period of five years. Thus Sub-has sacrificed his education for the sake of upholding the honour of his motherland. Con-sequently his father sent Subhas to London for his higher studies. There, too, Subhasevinced his sense of patriotism. He had distinguished himself in his studies there andhence ever had good opportunities to stay back in London, had he been interested in hisself-advancement. But prodded by his patriotic fervour, Subhas returned to India afterpassing I.C.S. (Indian Civil Service) examination with a high rank and entered politicsinstead of Government service. Students should follow his example and sacrifice their“swartha” (selfish interest) for parartha (the welfare of others) and attain Paramartha(the supreme goal of life).Remember that Bhagavad Gita, Bible, Koran, Granth Sahib, and other holy scripturesare not intended for “parayana” (mere recitation). They are meant for acharana (prac-tice). It is not a sign of Bhakthi (devotion) to memorise all the 700 verses of the Gita orgive learned commentaries thereon. It is only a proof of ostentation.Today, what the world needs are men of action (aachara manavas), and not men ofwords in human form (aakara manavas). By your intellectual acumen, you may aspirefor such titles of honour like Padma Sri and Padma Bhushan, but you cannot hope to winthe title of Amrita Putra (children of immortality) the title that the Veda proclaims as thebirthright of man. There can be no other title equal to, or higher than this title of AmritaPutra. And it is for this title that you must all strive. You should develop desabhimanam,Daivabhimanam,  and dharma-bhimanam (love of country, love of God, and love ofdharma). There is no Dharma higher than sathya, and no sathya higher than dharma.Sathya and dharma are inseparable and interdependent. Try to practise them to some ex-tent, at least, and spread the benefits to the society at large. Only then will you understandwhat bliss is. Bliss is the goal for which you undertake any activity—mundane or spiri-78Summer Showers 1990tual. Bliss is the goal of all religions. The paths may be many but the goal is one just asjewels are many, but gold is one, and cows are many, but milk is one. Therefore youshould never criticise any religion. Along with your education, try to develop equal-mindedness, and universal love, so that you can experience the unity in diversity.15ASCENT OF MANIt is God’s greatness, grandeur and majesty that yousee in the sky-scraping peaks of the high mountains.It is His sublime silence and His supreme peace that you     find in the remote forests and the vast deserts;It is His glorious effulgence and beautiful splendour that you     witness in the sun, the moon, and the countless galaxies in the sky;It is His love and creativity that you find reflected in the      inhabitants of villages, towns and cities that adorn the earth.Whatever thing of beauty you come across in this universe is a     reminder of, and a tribute to the “Source of All Beauty”—the Divine Lord!Mallamma of Karnataka State gave a simple but charming description of God’s om-nipresent beauty in the following words: “Lotus flower is the ornament for the lake.Houses are the ornaments for a village. Waves are the ornaments for the ocean. Moon isthe ornament for the sky.” Whatever things of beauty you see in the world are but the re-flections of the one source of all beauty—the divine Lord. That is why the Upanishadshave described God as Sathyam, Sivam, and Sundaram (Truth, Goodness and Beauty).The ornament for mankind is “mana-vatvam”. This “mana-vatvam” is indispensable forhuman society. Whether one is a reputed scholar, an eminent scientist, or a great admin-istrator, the development of human qualities is most essential for everyone. The devel-opment of society, the state, and the nation is proportionate to the development of mana-vatvam or the human state. If human qualities are lost, the honour of society and the na-tion will be lost.The honour of mankind depends on its morality and integrity. It is essential for thestudents of today to foster the human qualities. The human values can progress and thriveonly in a spiritual environment. It is only when seeds are sown in the soil and wateredregularly that they will sprout and develop into big trees that yield good fruits. Instead ofthis, if the seeds are kept in a tin and watered, they will only rot and perish. Likewise,morality and integrity can thrive only in the human heart. Morality is the fulfillment ofcharacter and conduct. Morality elevates man to a higher level. Since time immemorial,India has been sharing her spiritual wealth with the other nations of the world andspreading among them the message of morality and integrity. Morality and integrityalone are the real and eternal temples of God. In the absence of morality, the human racewill go to rack and ruin. Today, the supreme need of this country and the world is moral-ity. It is extremely necessary to observe morality in all places and in all situations. Mar-shal Pope taught that morality should not be violated even in times of war or any crisesincluding risk to one’s life. William Gladstone, Prime Minister to Queen Victoria,strained every nerve to safeguard morality at all times, so people respected him more thaneven the queen.80Summer Showers 1990Morality is achieved through the control of the senses. He alone can control otherswho can control himself. How can one who has no self-discipline enforce discipline onothers? Only when there is harmony between one’s words and actions can a man achievegreat things in his life.If a man practises what he preaches,He is not an ordinary man, but a mahatma (great man).If a man says one thing and does another thing,He is only a beast, not a man.In modern society, there is no concord between words and deeds. If there is harmonybetween one’s words and action, it is sathyam. If there is harmony between one’sthought, word, and deed, it is ritam.Today’s students do not know what is sense-control. This is called samyama (self re-straint). Only man is capable of this samyama. Man is forfeiting his divinity by giving afree reign to his senses. The control of sense organs is called damam in Sanskrit. Onewho has achieved damam is called a daanta. What we need in today’s world are daantulu(people with control over their sense organs), but not Vedaantulu (people well versed inVedanta). Today, Vedanta is confined to oratory and ostentation; the practising of Ve-danta is on the decline. No wonder, therefore, that there is scarcity of Ananda or bliss.Every student should become a daanta. Even before acquiring knowledge, today’sstudent is becoming saturated with egoism, pride, and ostentation and is running amuckin society. Students are not even aware of discipline and obedience. They do not knowhow to talk and behave with elders. Of course, the students are not to be blamed entirelyfor this state of affairs. The parents and the teachers are neither setting a proper exampleto them, nor encouraging them in such matters. That is why the condition of students isdeteriorating day by day. Students should try to behave properly, to control their senses,and thereby to foster peace in society. The youth of today are fond of frivolous talk. Thishas become a hobby for them. They are allergic to good and gentle words. Spirituality isa matter of ridicule for them. Such deplorably bad atmosphere among the students is everon the increase; so much so they are not in a position to understand even the purpose ofeducation. They should, first of all, disabuse their minds of the wrong notion that the pur-pose of education is for securing jobs and earning money. They should not forget the factthat education is intended to help them to reach the goal of life. Of course, they need totake up some jobs for earning their livelihood. But they should scrupulously adhere tomorality and integrity in performing their duties, without stooping to indulge in immoralpractices like corruption and cheating etc. Knowledge and money are not bad in them-selves. Goodness or badness depends upon how you make use of them.Students! The air that we inhale has to be exhaled. Otherwise the lungs will be dam-aged. Likewise, the knowledge you learn and money you earn should be used for thegood of the society. Otherwise they are as worthless as the dust under your feet. Youshould repay your debt to society, which has contributed to your education and earnings.This is real seva or Service. This kind of spirit of sacrifice is conspicuous by its absenceamong the present-day students. Earning and hoarding—this sort of one-way trafficseems to be their ideal in life! Many of you know how to swim. You must be aware thatunless you push back the water, you cannot move forward in the process of swimming.This shows that without sacrifice, you cannot achieve progress in life. You have to sacri-Summer Showers 199081fice not only your money, but also your bad qualities. Giving up bad qualities is the truesacrifice or renunciation. Renouncing your wife and children, or wealth and property, isnot a great sacrifice. It is easier than giving up your evil propensities. And the latter alonewill lead to the full blossoming of the human personality.Students! To live as a true human being is the great task of man. It is a blot on thehuman state for a man to live like an animal. The humanness in man is being crushed toextinction by the arishadvarga (the gang of the six internal foes), namely, kama, krodha,lobha, moha, mada, and matsarya (desire, anger, greed, delusion, pride, and jealousy).The moon can shed her cool, bright light on the earth in full measure only when she hasdeveloped all her sixteen kalaas (attributes in full). Man, on the other hand, can shed hiseffulgence on society only when he gets rid of the sixteen bad qualities, namely the sixinternal enemies (arishadvarga), eight kinds of mada (pride), and the two qualities ofrajas (restlessness) and thamas (inertia). He must also give up kartrithva and bhoktrithva(the sense of doership and enjoyership). With the faith that all is Brahman (SarvamBrahman) if one engages oneself in good actions and dedicates them to the Divine, onewill receive God’s grace and the help needed by Him. Potana, the great devotee and poetwho wrote the Telugu Bhagavatam, dedicated his work to Lord Rama at the outset, bysaying that Rama was the real writer and he (Potana) was a mere instrument in Rama’shands. There is a great spiritual significance to Potana’s verse of dedication, which is arestatement of the famous mahavakya, viz. Thath-thwam-asi (that-thou-art). In the pre-sent instance, Thath or That is represented by the divine Lord Rama, Thwam or Thou bythe poet-devotee Potana, and Asi or Art by the book Bhagavatham. In other words, Bha-gavan, Bhaktha, and Bhagavatha—God, the devotee, and the scripture—are three in one.Moreover the five letters, “Bha-ga-va-ta-mu” have their own spiritual significance. Thesefive letters may be considered as the five elements, five senses, five sheaths or panchakoshas and five life-breaths or pancha pranas. The letter bha stands for bhakthi or devo-tion, ga for gyan or jnana or wisdom, va for vairagya or renunciation, ta for thathwam orrealisation, and mu for mukthi or liberation. Thus, these five letters represent the progres-sive steps for man’s liberation from bondage or ignorance.Students! You celibates or brahmacharis are the foundation for the mansion of life.The life of a householder may be compared to the walls and that of the recluse or va-naprastha to the roof. If the foundation is not secure, the whole mansion will collapse.Hence you have to develop good qualities without which there can be no peace for you orfor society. Unfortunately, today’s man thinks only about himself and his family, ignor-ing society. Without society, where are you and where is your family? This kind of nar-row selfishness is prevalent among the so-called devotees also. The devotee thinks abouthimself and his work first, and about God and His work next, if at all. It is because of thiskind of self-centredness that man is unable to enjoy peace or bliss. The Kauravas’ for-mula for life was: “First I, next world, and last God. That is why they lost everything, in-cluding their lives. On the contrary, the Pandavas’ formula was “First God, next worldand last I.” Hence they came out victorious. There are a number of such instances in ourhistory, which illustrate the prime need to kill the ego.Students! It is natural for you at your young age to be proud and hasty or impetuous.But true education should result in humility. Sanctify your life, your body, your youth,your time and your actions. Study well and pass with distinction. Make use of yourknowledge for the benefit of the society. Recognise that pride and spirituality are the op-posite sides of a see-saw. If pride goes up, spirituality goes down and vice versa. It is due82Summer Showers 1990to ahamkara only that man forgets himself. The greatest and the real bondage is to forgetone’s own reality. To recognise one’s own reality is the true sakshatkara or realisation. Ifthere is no change in your attitude, all your spiritual practices like japa, meditation, yoga,karma, seva or service will serve no purpose. It is not the man but the mind that shouldchange. The change of character is more important than the change of clothes.There are three things you should never forget, “sathya, dharma, and nyaya” (truth,righteousness, and justice). Our ancestors were staunch followers of these three principlesin their daily lives. But nowadays these values are being neglected in India itself, not tospeak of the other nations. As future guardians of Indian culture and tradition, you haveto restore these values, by actually putting into practice what you have learnt here duringthis fortnight. Cultivate love for your country, your culture, and your religion. But on noaccount should you hate or criticise other countries, other cultures, other religions, andother persons. Give up narrow-mindedness and cultivate broad-mindedness. Always prayfor the welfare of the entire world in accordance with the Vedic chanting: “Lokaasamas-tah Sukhino Bhavantu” (Let all the world be happy).Develop love for God. Don’t give up your devotion to God even if others ridicule youon that account. Don’t lose faith in Him when you are in difficulties. Consider every-thing—pain and pleasure, loss and gain, joy and sorrow—as God’s Prasad (divine gift orgrace.) Don’t forget to chant His Name under any circumstances. God’s Name is the onlyreliable boat to ferry you across the river of life.16VEDIC WISDOMThere is no disease equal to greed.There is no enemy greater than anger.There is no sorrow that is greater than poverty.There is no happiness equal to wisdom.Belief in God has declined.Dharma has disappeared.Atheism is on the increase.There is no respect for the guru-preceptor.Devotion to God, respect for our ancient culture,    and tradition have been given farewell.There is no patronage for true education.Only bread-earning education has become the order of the day.These, alas! Are the signs of modernity!“I am in the Light;The Light is in me;I am the Light.”The jnani who has realised thus will surely become one with Brahman.Dear Students!The Vedic literature is the most ancient in the world. It is a treasure house of wisdom.It has contributed to the all-round development of man. The Veda is the first-ever book inhuman history. It is the birthplace for human culture and the basis for all kinds of powers.All branches of learning have their origin in the Veda. All dharmas and virtues havesprung from the Veda. The Veda is endless, unfathomable, indefinable, and blissful. Theword Veda is derived from the Sanskrit root Vid, meaning knowledge of jnana. Easwarajnana (knowledge of the Lord) is Veda. Atma jnana (knowledge of the Self) is Veda.Brahma jnana (knowledge of the supreme Absolute) is Veda. Adwaitha jnana (non-dualknowledge) is Veda. Veda is vijnana (knowledge par excellence). All these terms aresynonyms for Self-knowledge or Atma jnana. The divinity of the Veda is all-pervasiveand has eight aspects of splendour, viz., sabda Brahma-mayee (sound Brahman),charachara mayee (movable and immovable), jyothirmayee (effulgence), vaangmayee(speech and literature), nityaananda mayee (everlasting bliss) paratpara mayee (tran-scendental), maya mayee (delusion), and sree mayee (prosperity). This is indeed thePrajnanamaya Brahma (constant integrated awareness). It does not pertain to one indi-vidual, one place or time. It is universal. Knowing that it is not possible for ordinary peo-ple to understand such sacred Vedic literature, Sage Vyasa compiled it into four volumes.The Veda consists of three “kandaas” or Cantos, namely, Karma Kaanda (cantosdealing with rituals and other actions), Upasana Kaanda (cantos of devotion), and JnanaKaanda (cantos of wisdom). These three divisions represent the progressive steps in84Summer Showers 1990man’s spiritual evolution. Man starts with actions, recognising that the human body ismeant for achieving dharma (righteousness) through karma. When he goes on perform-ing good karmas, he will in due course become fit for understanding Upasana (devotionalpractices). When he worships God over a period of time, with love and in a spirit of dedi-cation, he attains the final stage of Jnana. On the whole, karma, upasana, and jnana maybe considered as three stages of one process, comparable to the flower, the raw fruit, andthe ripe fruit respectively. Since the common people cannot understand and practise theteachings of the Veda, subsidiary literature has been created later in the form of Puranas(mythological treatises) and Ithihasas (epics), so that even the lay people can practisekarma, upasana, and jnana.The end of the Veda is Upanishad, which is therefore, called Vedanta. The Upani-shads have named the three paths of karma, upasana, and jnana as yogas. The essence ofkarma yoga is to dedicate all actions to God or to perform all activities as offerings to theLord, for His pleasure. Upasana yoga consists of loving God whole-heartedly and withtrikaranasuddhi i.e., harmony and purity of thought, word, and deed. It is not trueupasana if one loves God for the sake of achieving his worldly desires. It should be lovefor love’s sake. The followers of jnana yoga consider the whole universe as the manifes-tation of God. Believing that Divinity resides in all beings in the form of Atma, is calledJnana. Students may wonder how there can be Ekatwa (Oneness) when there are so manydifferent forms and names, different kinds of behaviour, and different doctrines etc. Thisdoubt can be cleared by considering the example of an ocean. In the fathomless ocean,there are numberless waves. Each wave is different from the other in its size, shape, etc.and it looks as though there is no connection between one wave and another. But a littlethinking will reveal to you the fact that they are all different manifestations of one and thesame water, and also that they are not different from the ocean. In the same manner, allthe different names and forms in the universe are the waves or manifestations of the oneand the same ocean of Sath-Chith-Ananda (Existence-Awareness-Bliss). Hence, the es-sence of all manifested beings is only Sath-Chith-Ananda, despite the superficial or ap-parent differences in names and forms and their behaviour.The Bhagavad Gita, which came into existence later, is the essence of the Upani-shads. However, it deals with the path of karma, upasana, and jnana in three shatkas,each shatka comprising six chapters, thus making up the total of eighteen chapters in theGita. The first shatka deals with the path of karma, the second one with the path ofupasana, and the third one with the path of jnana. To sum up, the Veda gave rise to theUpanishads, which in turn gave rise to the Bhagavad Gita, which serves as a practicalguide for human conduct. The Bhagavad Gita is not the property or monopoly of the In-dians. It is the word of God and is, therefore, a universal scripture. There is only one Godfor all, although there may be different religions and different names and forms of God.In whatever name and form one may worship, it reaches the one and only God. There isonly one sun. There are no separate suns like American sun, British sun, Chinese sun, In-dian sun, Pakastani sun, and so on. Each country may see the sun at a different time. Justbecause all of them cannot see the sun at the same time, it will be foolish to think thatthere are different suns for different countries.Vedas have very vast, profound and deep meanings. The gurus or preceptors of an-cient times used to adopt stern measures and enforce strict discipline while teaching theVedas to their students. That is why the Vedas have survived till today, successfully with-standing the onslaught of time. Actually, the Vedas are not books in the usual sense ofSummer Showers 199085that term. No one claims authorship for them. They are called Sruthis or knowledge ac-quired through hearing. Since time immemorial, the Vedas have been coming downthrough a succession of gurus and disciples through the process of hearing. The gurusused to utter the mantras with particular intonations, which were prescribed for the pur-pose and scrupulously followed by the disciples. The gurus of those days were selfless,pure-hearted, and overflowing with love for their students, but unsparing in the matter ofdiscipline among the students. The students too were generally observing the requireddiscipline very scrupulously. If anyone disobeyed the master, he would be summarilydismissed from attending the classes. The gurus would never tolerate any student whowas guilty of one or more of the akara panchaka arishtas or the five transgressions be-ginning with the letter “A,” viz., alakshyam (negligence), avinayam (disobedience),ahamkaram (ego), asuya (jealousy), and asabhyata (lack of social etiquette).Vysampayana was the foremost among the disciples who learnt the Vedas from theSage Vyasa. Vysampayana sanctified his life by implicitly obeying his guru and bylearning his lessons studiously and thoroughly. After completing his studies, Vysam-payana established a Gurukula—for teaching the Veda to his disciples. By Gurukula isnot meant a separate institution with its own set of rules and regulations like the present-day schools and colleges. The guru’s house itself constituted the Gurukula. Whateverkind of food the guru ate was given to the disciple as prasad—holy food. The discipleshould stay with the guru day and night. One disciple by name Yajnavalkya joinedVysampayana’s Gurukula. He had a keen intellect and could learn his lessons very fast.The guru was also highly pleased with him. People who knew Yajnavalkya began prais-ing him with the result that he developed ahamkaram (ego) followed gradually byalakshyam (indifference) and asabhyata (lack of decorum.) Vysampayaan noticed theselapses on the part of Yajnavalkya. One day, he called him and told him sternly, “Yajna-valkya! You don’t deserve to stay in this Gurukul any longer. You must leave this placeimmediately. Before you leave, you must return all that you have learnt from me.” Ac-cordingly, Yajnavalkya, who recognised his own shortcomings, vomited all that he hadlearnt from his guru. His vomitings were eaten by tittiri birds, and the latter beganchanting the Upanishad, which was therefore named as Taittireeya Upanishad.There are two traditions or sampradayas in the Veda, viz., Brahma sampradaya andAditya sampradaya. That which was vomited by Yajnavalkya came to be known as theBrahma Sampradaya, also called the Krishna Yajur Veda. After leaving the Gurukul ofVysampayana, Yajnavalkya sincerely repented for his delinquency and atoned for it bygiving up food and drink and practised Suryopasana (Sun worship) ,undergoing severeausterities by way of penance. Pleased with this penance, the Sun God appeared beforehim in the form of Vaaji and told him, “My child! What is past is past. You should guardyourself against such lapses in future. Betraying the guru or God is highly dangerous. Becareful hereafter, I will now teach you the Vedas again.” So saying, the Sun God taughthim the Vedas. The reason for the Sun appearing in the form of Vaaji was that Yajnaval-kya’s forefathers always used to do anna dana (free distribution of food), so their familygot the name Vaajasam. The Veda taught by him was also called by the alternative namesof Sukla Yajur Veda, Vajasas Khanda, and Aditya Khanda. Yajur Veda has been dividedinto two. For this reason, although the Vedas were originally four in number, they havesubsequently become five, namely Rig Veda, Krishna Yajur Veda, Sukla Yajur Veda,Sama Veda, and Atharvana Veda. Recognising that the Sun appeared before him as Vaajiand taught him the Vedas because of the free distribution of food by his ancestors, Yajna-86Summer Showers 1990valkya gave primary importance to anna daana in his teaching which, among others, in-cluded the following:“There is no gift higher than the gift of food and no God higher than the parents.There is no truth higher than japa and thapas (reciting the holy Name and doing pen-ance). There is no dharma higher than compassion and no gain higher than the companyof the good. There is no enemy more dangerous than anger and no disease more seriousthan indebtedness. There is no death more horrible than ill-fame and no wealth morevaluable than fame. There is no ornament more beautiful than smaran (remembering Godthrough chanting His names).” Yajnavalkya, moreover, emphasised specially in histeachings to his disciples the extreme importance of service to parents and guru, as wellas anna dana (free distribution of food).Students! we began these classes on the holy Ekadasi day—day eleven of the lunarfortnight, and we are also concluding the classes on this Ekadasi day. Hence, you shouldconsider all these classes as Ekadasi Vratam (observance of the vows of Ekadasi). Duringthe fortnight, you have had the valuable opportunity of listening to the lectures fromhighly distinguished speakers, with rich experience behind them. What they taught youwith wholehearted zeal and enthusiasm you have listened carefully with much interestand faith. But what is more important than listening is to put into practice at least some ofthe things you have learnt and thereby to set an example for others to follow.You must always remember the five life-breaths relating to the Vedas, which I men-tioned earlier. You should avoid these five things: (1) indifference to what the guru, par-ents, and other elders teach you, (2) disobedience to the aforesaid, (3) ahamkara (ego),(4) jealousy or envy toward those who are better off, and (5) violating the social etiquetteor decorum.Students! What has been taught to you during these fifteen days is the essence of thesacred Vedanta. What has been given to you is the nectar obtained by the churning of allthe holy scriptures—Sastras, Puranas, and Ithihasas. You are the future leaders, plead-ers, and patrons of Mother India. You should lead exemplary lives, treading the path ofsathya and dharma (truth and righteousness). Under no circumstances should you deviatefrom this ideal path. Let your secular education go hand in hand with spiritual education.The Vedas have taught about two kinds of dharma: vihita dharma and nishiddhadharma (prescribed dharma and prohibited dharma); in other words, the Do’s and Don’tsfor regulating one’s life. Unfortunately, today, the prescribed things are being given upand the prohibited things are being taken up. This is sheer folly and ignorance. The pro-hibited things should be rejected, even though you might have taken lots of trouble to ac-quire them. For instance, you have purchased from the market a big mango fruit for fiverupees. Just because you have spent five rupees on it, will you eat the skin outside and thestone inside the fruit? No, no. You will eat only the pulp and reject both the skin andstone. Similarly this world is like a fruit, and you have to accept what is good in it andreject what is bad for you.Students! You are highly fortunate. Even though there are several millions of peoplein the world, is it not your exceedingly good luck that only you, who are but a few hun-dreds in number, have been able to get the benefit of this golden opportunity? However,the purpose of this Summer Course will be served only if at least some of you stand asexemplars to others. You may take up any job, business, or agriculture and occupy anyposition in your life, but it is extremely important that you do not lose self-confidencewhile discharging your duties. Lack of Self-confidence is the main cause for all the pre-Summer Showers 199087sent-day problems like foul play, injustice, losses, failures, sorrow, and pain. People donot believe in themselves, not to speak of believing others. First of all, develop Self-confidence, and that in turn will give you self-satisfaction. Without self-satisfaction, youcannot have contentment. Once you have gained self-satisfaction, then automatically youwill be ready for self-sacrifice. Needless to say, where there is self-sacrifice, there will beSelf-realisation naturally.Every student should undertake sathkarmas (good actions) which lead to chitta sud-dhi (purity of mind). Where there is purity, there will be jnana siddhi (dawn of wisdom).These are all within yourself only. You need not search for them anywhere outside. Inthis connection, let us consider the example of the wall-clock over there. It has threehands to indicate seconds, minutes, and hours respectively. There are sixty points, andtwelve hours marked along the circumference of the clock. When the second-hand movesacross all the sixty points, the minute-hand moves by only one point. When the minute-hand moves over sixty points or the full circumference, the hour-hand moves by only onehour-mark or one-twelfth of the circumference. Now, the second-hand may be comparedto our actions. If a large number of good actions are done, the minute-hand, which repre-sents chitta suddhi (the purity of mind), will move by one point. Chitta suddhi is the stageof upasana when one engages himself in loving God and worshipping Him in variousways over a period of time, leading to Atma viswaasam (Self-confidence), which repre-sents the hour-hand. The perceptible move-ments of the second-hand and the minute-hand should bring about the imperceptibly slow movement of the hour-hand. Otherwise,no purpose is served by the second-hand and minute-hand. So also, unless your good ac-tions, worship and love of God, lead to Atmaviswas or Self-confidence, the former twowill be futile.Whenever you have time, it will suffice if you take up at least one of the nine modesof bhakthi (such as sravanam, kirtanam, etc., already explained to you in My earlier dis-courses). God does not consider how wealthy or how learned you are; He is concernedonly with the sincerity and purity of your mind and heart and about how whole-heartedand genuine your love is. Valkimi was a hunter. Nanda was an untouchable. Kuchela wasa pauper. Dhruva and Prahalada were mere lads of five years. Sabari was a tribal woman,illiterate and uncivilised. But all of them had won God’s Grace in abundance, because oftheir wholehearted devotion, love and surrender. Follow the example of Sabari, who al-ways thought of Sri Rama and His happiness, and dedicated all her thoughts, words, anddeeds to Him alone, so much so that every action of hers was transformed and sublimatedinto the highest thapas (penance.) From her example, you must learn the lesson thatmeditation does not mean sitting idle in a particular posture of the body, as if you areposing for a photograph. As in her case, your entire life must become a continuousmeditation wherever you may be staying and whatever you may be doing. Whatever youeat or drink must be offered to God as naivedya or holy offering. In this manner, if youoffer everything to the Lord, you will naturally be prevented from engaging yourself inbad actions or evil ways in your life. Therefore, students! I am bringing My long dis-course to a close, with the hope and blessing that you will practice with your hands whatyou have heard here through your ears, and thereby sanctify your lives and also contrib-ute your share to make the future of Bharath (India) bright and prosperous.