SUMMER SHOWERSIN BRINDA V AN1974Part - IDiscourses by
BHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABAonBrahman
Delivered during the summer coursein Indian Culture and SpiritualityMay-June 1974
SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUSTPrasanthi Nilayam - 515 134Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, IndiaGrams : BOOK TRUST      STD : 08555       ISD : 91 - 8555Phone: 287375.  Fax: 287236PRASANTHI NILAYAM© Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications TrustPrashanthi Nilayam, IndiaThe copyright and the rights of translation in any language arereserved by the Publishers. No part, para, passage, text or photograph orart work of this book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilized, inoriginal language or by translation, in any form or by any means,electronic, mechanical, photo copying, recording or by any information,storage and retrieval system, except with prior permission, in writingfrom Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prashanthi Nilayam(Andhra Pradesh) India, except for brief passages quoted in bookreview. This book can be exported from India only by the PublishersSri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, Prashanthi Nilayam(India).       International Standard Book No.   81 - 7208-355-681 - 7208-113-8 (set)First Enlarged Edition  :Published by :The Convener,Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications TrustPrasanthi Nilayam, India - Pin Code 515 134Grams : BOOK TRUST   STD : 08555  ISD : 91- 8555Phone :  287375    Fax : 287236Printed  atPUBLISHER’S NOTEThe Book “Summer Showers in Brindavan 1974”was first printed in 1993. As this book was of smallerfont, the need for a revised and enlarged version with abigger font was strongly felt. This has resulted in anincrease in the number of pages and, therefore, it is beingbrought out in two parts – first part dealing with Brahmanand second Bharath. Accordingly, the present volumedeals with Brahman.There is no doubt that both parts will be cherishedand studied with love, faith and concentration for thesolution of every manner of difficulty or dilemma onemay encounter in spiritual sadhana.20 June 2004 CONVENERPUBLISHER’S NOTEThe Book “Summer Showers in Brindavan 1974”was first printed in 1993. As this book was of smallerfont, the need for a revised and enlarged version with abigger font was strongly felt. This has resulted in anincrease in the number of pages and, therefore, it is beingbrought out in two parts – first part dealing with Brahmanand second Bharath. Accordingly, the present volumedeals with Bharath.There is no doubt that both parts will be cherishedand studied with love, faith and concentration for thesolution of every manner of difficulty or dilemma onemay encounter in spiritual sadhana.20 June 2004 CONVENER
PART I PART IIContentsPART I: BRAHMAN1. Opening Discourse ............................................................. 12. “Brahman” And “Bharath” As The Theme Of TheDiscourses  That Will Follow .................................. 173. Brahman Denotes The Totality Of Prajna In The World ... 354. Sath Chith Ananda Are Natural To Every Person ............. 615. All Religions Lead To The Same Goal ............................. 796. Brahman Is Within You And Is Realisable By AnUnwavering Mind .................................................... 977. Karma And Dharma Lead To Realisation Of Brahman ..... 1098. All Creation And All Streams Of Life Ultimately Merge               In Brahman ............................................................. 1239. Man Lives For Himself,  For His Family And For The Whole Society .......................................... 13710. All That We Take In Through The Five Senses ConstitutesOur Food.................................................................. 14911. A Child Begins To Take Shape Even As It Grows In TheWomb Of The Mother ............................................. 16512. Ghora And Aghora Aspects Of God Are Only  Reflec-tions Of Your Thoughts In The Mirror Of Brahman 17913. One Who Protects Dharma Will In Turn Be ProtectedBy Dharma ............................................................... 19714. Following The Path Of Dharma Will Always Lead OneTo Victory ................................................................ 21315. Strength Arising From One’s Own Righteous ConductIs The Only Meaningful Strength ............................ 22716. Karma Marga, Jnana Marga, Bhakthi Marga: All LeadTo The Same Destination ........................................ 241i ii1. Opening Discourse
Do not feel proud of your learning and thinkthat you are a very knowledgeable person.What, after all, is the extent of the knowledge that youhave acquired when you are not able to help others withthat knowledge? To think that, because of the limitededucation you have had, you are better than others is amatter of unwarranted pride and ego; and you have togive this up. In truth, you are the embodiment ofignorance. You must realise that out of your limitedknowledge and education, correct ideas cannot come toyou.Young students and others who are organisers andpatrons of education! Today we are going to begin a verysacred experiment. The purpose of this sacredexperiment is to make you realise the meaning of dharmicnature and the need for an adhyatmic environment. ManyPART I : BRAHMANSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 19742 3
people who are at the helm of education and who areexperienced educationists are going to function asRithwicks (Vedic priests) and participate in this greatyajna or experiment. The sacrifice that we have to makein this endeavour is to give up our pride and selfishnessand promote selflessness and concern for others’ good.Life strictly symbolises a journey from the position of“I” to the position of “We.” In this journey which wehave to perform, if only we can give up all incorrect ideas,will we be able to enjoy the unity of this universe.Nowadays, we are forgetting the sacred Indianculture and we are adopting the pattern of westerncivilisation. By doing this we are learning variousmethods of earning money, but neither the students northose who are at the helm of educational programmesseem to be giving any thought to knowing the purposeof life and how we are to be useful to other human beingsduring our lifetime. Earning money cannot be the solepurpose of education. Acquiring good qualities can bethe only purpose of education. Individual capacities ofany special nature are not necessary if we are merely toearn money, learn to sleep, and eat food. From the timeof our birth till the time this body perishes, we are makingmany attempts to earn money and acquire food. In thisprocess of amassing wealth, we are adopting means andmethods which are adopted, also, by the birds andanimals. In the matter of acquiring food, different kindsof strength, abilities, and skills are used by us; but thesevery same skills are used by animals and birds as well. Itis not right that we use all our knowledge and skill fordoing just what the animals and birds, also, do. In theprocess of our spending all our energies in acquiring food,we are going far away from the aspect of Atma (Divineprinciple).For the purpose of feeding ourselves, many livesare being sacrificed. In this process of our searching forfood, many things like trees, birds, fish, and animals arebeing sacrificed. Because these various living things arebeing sacrificed and are merging with human beings, theyhave also been acquiring human lives in their rebirth.None of these Jivas (individual souls) are getting anychance of rising higher than human lives.The entire life is being spent in making an effortto be reborn after one’s death, thus repeating the cycleof birth and death. We are becoming slaves to theprocess of birth and death. We should not allowourselves to become slaves to this process. We shouldmake an attempt to become one with the great effulgentSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 19744 5
spirit. Man today does not make an attempt to understandthe basic difference between the dharma (code ofconduct) that has been entrusted to him as a human beingand to others. He does not ask the question as to what hehas achieved during his lifetime and how he has beenuseful to others. He ends his life without answering anyof these basic questions.When one finds around oneself several people whoare ridiculing his culture, it is surprising that one is notaroused by such a situation. It is surprising that the greatIndian culture—the contents of which have beenimproved and reformed from time to time—is today anobject of ridicule and that we are putting up with such asituation without any discomfort. We should make peoplerealise that no one can ridicule any religion or any goodtradition. It is unfortunate that the students of the presentday are not able to reply in a fitting manner when otherscriticise and ridicule our religion and our practices.This inability on the part of our young people tomeet the criticism is a very sorry state of affairs. Thereason for this is that our young students do not acquaintthemselves with the great traditions of our culture. Inthe present situation where there is confusion the worldover, you young people should understand the aspectsof Indian culture and should, by citing appropriateexamples, meet all criticism and expound what isvaluable in our culture.The welfare and the decline of our country’s futurerests on your shoulders. Those of you who have thisburden on your shoulders should be prepared tounderstand the basis of our culture and put the injunctionsof our culture into practice. An average student of todaydoes not understand the sacred contents of our culture.He gets information only from hearsay; he does not readbooks like the Ramayana or the Bhagavatha andtherefore has wrong and imperfect notions.The first thing that you should do is to understandthe contents of our culture and then you should follow itup by putting the injunctions thereof into practice. Thereis a small example for this. In all the countries the worldover, religious scriptures like the Bible, the Quoran, andthe Vedas are regarded as important. No one belongingto any one particular religion is asking the reason forthese being regarded as important texts. It is a verydifficult matter to understand or comprehend divinity.One who does not understand his own individuality istrying to understand divinity and this is a ridiculoussituation. For our spiritual life, dharma is the basis.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 19746 7
Dharma does not depend on an individual. Dharma doesnot depend on a period of time or a particular situation.Dharma depends only on truth. That is why it has beensaid that there is no dharma other than truth. To conductoneself in a manner which, on the spur of the moment,comes to one’s mind and to think that it is dharma isvery foolish. To think that to conduct oneself inaccordance with one’s own ideas is practice of dharmais very foolish. To be able to develop equal-mindednessand to be able to develop equanimity are the correctaspects of dharma; and for this, one must have anunwavering mind and thought.In the history of Indian thought and Indianculture, the Mahabharatha has been often taken as anauthority. In Christian thought, the Bible has been takenas an authority. When we read the Bible, we look at Christas an ideal figure who proclaimed truth to the world.When we learn about his life story, we come to theconclusion that he was born of Virgin Mary. Themoment this story of Christ’s birth to Virgin Mary isrevealed, all those who follow Christianity rightly feelvery proud and feel that this mysterious birth is theresult of some divine power and that Mary was a verysacred woman. They further proclaim this fact to theworld with great pride. We should understand thisaspect and learn how they accept such an event.On the other hand, if we take an example fromour own tradition, we note that when we are told thestory of Karna, who was born of Kunthi, at the time whenshe was an unmarried woman, we feel ashamed aboutthe incident. It is not understandable why we should putourselves in an embarrassing situation when this story istold. Today, we are taking such stories contained in ourtradition and giving them wrong meanings by settingaside the real meanings. We further persist in giving thewrong meanings. Therefore, in the very first instance,you should make an attempt to understand the historyand traditions of our culture and get the correct meaningthat is implied in each incident. There is no trouble ifyou are fully knowledgeable. There is also no trouble ifyou are completely ignorant but there is great trouble ifyou are neither knowledgeable nor ignorant and you arein a state of great confusion resulting in your takingalways the wrong meanings.In the sacred task to which we have committedourselves during the next one month, with the help ofthe elders who will tell you our traditional stories, I hopeSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 8 9
that you will be able to understand the full significanceof such stories which are part of our culture.The kind of education that you are getting todaycannot be called true education. As a result of theeducation that you are having today, you are getting onlysuperficial acquaintance with a large number of textbooks and are not getting the essence thereof or righteducation. As a result of the vast amount of informationthat you are getting, you are simply losing all the energythat you have. We cannot find even one student who hasacquired general knowledge. He chooses one small partof the totality of knowledge or one special aspect and hetries to acquire a higher sense in that aspect and in thisprocess he loses common sense.Our Minister explained to you that there is adifference between science and spirituality. He also toldyou that if only you can synthesise and co-ordinate thetwo, there is a great deal of similarity between them.Science should grow and as a result of such growth, itshould help people. We should acquire such educationwhich will strengthen our physical body organs as wellas our mind and spirit. Science is good, science issacred and science can be useful to the country but weare not learning the correct methodology of science soas to make it useful to mankind. In developing sciencethey are reaching great heights and they are discoveringmany things. But because of our inability to use suchscientific discoveries for individual and common benefit,we are falling very low in human values.During the month that follows, in order that youmay learn to control your sense organs, we are going toput you to practise the Yoga Asanas. If at this time whenyou are young and when your body, mind, and spirit areall strong, you cannot control your sense organs, howwill you be able to do this when you grow old? Goodeducation consists in training you to control your senseorgans and to make them grow in the right direction.That process which enables you to control your senseorgans should be regarded as the right type of education.The excitement which comes from your sense organs issomething which destroys the human qualities andsometimes brings disgrace.Pavitratma Swarupas!The country is not made up of dust. It is aconglomeration of human beings. It is the human beingsthat give it the name of a country. If there are no humanbeings, it is not called a country. A country is very muchSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 10 11
like a human body. The divine strength of the country isthe human nature in the body. If there is no divine strengthin the human body, what is the use of this body? A bodydevoid of divine strength is equivalent to dust. Todaywe see only the human form, but the human nature andhuman qualities are dormant in this human form. Thequalities which are precious and which characterise thehuman being are morality, adherence to truth and dharmaetc. and if these are not evident, then the human naturedoes not shine at all. We should promote human qualityand human nature. We should not cultivate simply thehuman form and appearance. These two are like thenegative and the positive. If the unity and the oneness ofthese two aspects are not properly brought about, thenboth of them are useless.Enshrine divinity in your heart and make it sacred.Then you can use the human form in a manner in whichyou like. The fact that today you are not enshrining sacreddivinity in your heart and thereby becoming distant fromit and that you are letting your body go where it likes isnot a human quality at all. It is behaving very much likean animal.Freedom is very necessary but before we enjoyfreedom, we should understand what is meant byfreedom. The freedom that is implied here should ariseout of wisdom and out of character which you build upas a result of your education.To make an attempt to transform the humannature in yourself and elevate it to the sacred divinenature should be the purpose of all the education thatyou wish to have. You should give up the idea of startingfrom the nature or the environment around you andmoving to the aspect of Atma. On the contrary, youshould believe that you start from Atma and move on tothe aspect of nature. If you start from the base of Atmaand get into nature, then the pure ideas that characterisethe Atma will be with you. You should believe that allcreation is divine.Paramatma is present everywhere and is allknowing. He is present everywhere in His creation.By seeing Him everywhere, it will be possible for youto live in this world by getting correct knowledgeof the nature around you; and by having suchAdhyatmic knowledge, you will be able to enjoyhappiness in the spiritual side of the world. Paramatmais the embodiment of truth, wisdom and infinite andin that form He is present in all the organs that makeSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 12 13
up your body. He is effulgent in the form of Atma inour body.Today, many incredible and surprising things arehappening in the world. Several people feel very proudthat they are very knowledgeable and think that they canattain a very high position by their knowledge ofscience. These people question the very existence of Godand say that even if there is a God, there is no place forHim in their thinking and in their hearts. This is aridiculous argument. There is need to examine what isimplied in this statement with care. A person who claimsto be a very knowledgeable person cannot be so, becauseif he is really a wise person, then God must be in hisheart, for God is the very embodiment of knowledge andlearning. To say that such a God has no place in his mindis only to say that he has no wisdom in himself. God isthe very embodiment of Atma and He is the self that ispresent in everyone. To say that such a God is not presentin one’s mind is to say that he, himself, does not exist,and that is the same as proclaiming that one does notbelieve in himself.At one time, Hiranyakasipu of our tradition wasmoving about with great pride saying that he was theonly God and that he was all powerful. Even such aHiranyakasipu had the need for God on one occasion.Are these proud people of today, who proclaim that thereis no need for God, cleverer or stronger thanHiranyakasipu? If with all his physical and mentalstrength, he had the need for a God, these proud peoplewill certainly need the help of God and will one dayrecognise this. God exists in everyone and, therefore, tosay that God does not exist is to show one’s own lamehand and say that he himself does not exist. To say thatGod does not exist is as ridiculous as saying that he isborn to a barren woman. To argue that there is no God isas bad as insisting that the one that is arguing cannotspeak. All these are meaningless words intended to makeup meaningless arguments.We should really strive to understand the sacredsignificance of our culture. You must make up your mindand have it implanted in your mind firmly that you wishto understand and experience what is sacred in ourculture and traditions. In the sacred culture of ourcountry, there are five injunctions which form its verybasis. These are “Mathru Devo Bhava”, “Pithru DevoBhava”, “Acharya Devo Bhava”, “Sathyam Vada”,“Dharmam Chara”. Regard your mother, father, andGuru as Gods. These form the essential basis of ourSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 14 15
culture. Added to this, we have to speak the truth and actin the right manner. Our very body, our clothes and ourfood are such that they tell us that we share our bloodwith that of our parents. If we cannot show gratitude tosuch mothers and fathers, what is the human quality thatis left in us? If you do not show such gratitude to yourparents, can you expect your own children to show yougratitude in the future? If you do not show the gratitudedue to your parents now, where is the guarantee that yourchildren will show gratitude to you?All the future depends on the present and on whatyou do now. Every action of yours at the present time isbound to have a reaction, resound and reflection in thefuture. In your ignorance today, you may show disrespectto your elders, you may follow bad ideals and bad paths,you may do these things in fun and in an attitude ofhumour; but as time goes on, you will have to inescapablyexperience all the consequences.It is in this context, therefore, it has been said“Be good, do good, see good. This is the way to God.”Therefore, during the one month of the summer classes,you should have the sacred ideal of learning about Indianculture and concentrate on it and should be able to imbibethe good qualities enshrined in our culture. May be in the food that you get and in themanner of your living, you will have someinconveniences; but you should not let that hinder theone sacred purpose of your yearning to imbibe the rootcontents of your culture. We will have to accept andsubject ourselves to different kinds of experiences in ourlife. We should not pay any attention to theinconveniences and call them difficult or undesirableexperiences. It is only when we are able to bear severalkinds of hardships will we be in a position to experiencethe sacred truth and pleasures. If there are no twoperiods of pain, there will be no experience of pleasure,as pleasure is described only as an interval between twopains. In this young age of yours, to be able to sacrifice,to be able to shun all comforts and to be able to developbroad-mindedness will stand in good stead in future.Sacrifice is a very big yoga for you. Bhoga or enjoymentis a great disease. If you give yourselves to enjoymentand bhoga now, you are sure to get into some kind oftrouble in the future. On the other hand, if you giveyourselves to sacrifice today, you will have happinesstomorrow.All the boys and girls who have assembled herein Brindavan should regard themselves as brothers andSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
sisters and they should try and see only the divinity thatis present in each one of them. They should use thisoccasion to develop and promote the sacred principle ofbrotherhood of man and fatherhood of God. Today,people come on a platform and address others asbrothers and sisters, but they do not share their propertywith them. We should not talk of brothers and sisters inthe aspect of a bodily relationship but realise the onedivine principle that is present in all, and it is in thatcontext that we should regard all as brothers and sisters.There is no escape from our having to follow this sacredprinciple. You should spend the next one month in thedirection of purifying your vision, your talk, and yourhearing.
2. “Brahman” And “Bharath”As The Theme Of The DiscoursesThat Will Follow
We can get the harvest of paddy only bysowing the seeds of paddy. We cannot getsuch a harvest if we sow fried paddy as seeds. One whohas the necessary wisdom will get rid of repeated births.It is only by acquiring the correct kind of knowledgethat one can escape repeated birth. Listen to this greattruth, Oh brave son of Bharath! Citizens of this countryalways live on hope. To lose hope is not a characteristicfeature of our countrymen. To suffer from lack of faithand to lose hope is a weakness; and by entertaining suchweaknesses, you will lose all the human strength thatyou have. Enthusiasm and care are things which willshow the way for the prosperity of man. Every individualhaving such enthusiasm and care will surely achieve16Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 18 19
success and attain glory in any kind of work that heundertakes. Our own culture tells us that one who hascare and interest will always succeed. We should makean attempt to go through the journey of our life withinterest and enthusiasm.Citizens of our country believe in Karma, the fruitsof which come out of our own actions. Because we havestrong faith in the doctrine of karma, we always undertaketo do good deeds and keep away from doing bad deeds.We readily come forward to do good deeds but hesitateto indulge in bad deeds. Vyasa has written in the Puranasthat we come forward to do good acts and to say goodthings, but we hesitate to do bad deeds and hesitate totell unsacred things because we know that this hurtspeople.The karma philosophy which we accept in thiscountry is something which is very sacred and there is asaying that we believe in doing good karma. It is animportant characteristic of our culture that as anindividual, as a family, and as a society, there isconsiderable forbearance and mutual dependencetowards each other. When one can recognise theconnection between these three, and when one canrecognise and respect the adhyatmic injunctions given tous even while paying and at the same time, pay sufficientattention to worldly duties, there is no doubt that thesociety will become prosperous and there will be peacein the world. Because our people have recognised theconnection that exists between the worldly thought andthe spiritual aspect, it is possible for them to take thecorrect path and become leaders in the world of thought.They have always taught that the worldly aspect and thespiritual aspect cannot contradict each other. Imagine that you have a golden necklace aroundyour neck. When you look at the form of this, we call ita necklace; but when we look at the basic material in it,we say it is made up of gold. It cannot be that gold is onething and the necklace is a different thing. It is notpossible to make a necklace without gold. So, when wecall it a golden necklace, it only demonstrates theoneness of the basic material that is the gold and thename and form, namely the necklace. It does not giveplace to any difference between the base and theornament. In the same manner, we should be able toproclaim the greatness of our culture and of oureducation by recognising the oneness of humanity onthe one hand and underlying divinity on the other hand.20 21
 The relationship between the Jiva, Easwara, andPrakruthi (nature) is an inseparable one. Withoutcotton, we cannot have yarn and without yarn, wecannot have the cloth. For a piece of cloth to take theshape which it has, the basic material is the thread. Whilethe cloth has for its basis the thread, the thread itself hasfor its basis, the cotton. Cotton, thread, and cloth are threenames for three different forms; but what is contained inall the three is the same and that is cotton.Prakruthi, or nature, is like the cloth in thisanalogy. It is the conglomeration of our desires that takesthe form of nature. These desires emanate from our heartand have their origin in our heart. We do not see thedesires around us. We are able to see in externalappearances what is latent in our hearts in the form ofdesires. It is not possible to see anything externally if itsorigin does not lie as a latent entity within us. If we closeour eyes, all nature around us will look as if it does notexist. But, when we open our eyes, we see so manydifferent heads. Have the people who are here gone awaysomewhere when we close the eyes, or have they comefrom somewhere when we open our eyes? No—thesepeople have been here all along. If we do not have eyes,we cannot recognise even our own body. Therefore weare able to recognise the entire creation only through ourvision. There is nothing distinct as a creation; thisbecomes a reality because of our vision.In the same manner good and bad, right and wrong,heaven and hell are all appearing to us as a result of ourown vision. The mind of man alone is responsible bothfor his bondage and for his liberation. The differencebetween bondage and liberation exists only in ourthought. There is no intrinsic or basic difference betweenthese two. We will be able to appreciate the aspect of thedivine only when we sacrifice the aspect of the jiva. Thereis nothing that we can get by causing harm to the jivaand doing puja (ritual worship) to the divine. We haveto recognise that the living and visible jiva and theinvisible divine are the same, and we have to recognisethe unity between these two aspects.Our ancients have prescribed various rituals whichwould enable us to shed our arrogance and ego. Theserituals which have been prescribed to us have also beencalled Yajna and Yaga. The word Yajna has come fromthe root word Yaj. We have come to recognise this ritualyajna as important in the context of our worshipping theLord. The statements that are in our Vedas have told usSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 22 23
to sacrifice everything, and through sacrifice we shouldbe able to get a vision of the divine in us. The creationand its maintenance depends only on sacrifice. If thereis no sacrifice, the society will not remain intact. If thereis no sacrifice, there will be no life and one cannotrecognise the truth and if there is no sacrifice, there is nocreation and there is no sustenance.Looking at things from a worldly aspect, if we donot give out the breath that we take in, we cannot live. Ifwe do not give out the food that we take in afterdigesting it, we cannot live. If the blood is not constantlyflowing from one place to another every instant, wecannot live. Unless the clouds that have gathered watergive up the water that they have gathered, they cannotremain as clouds. That is why it is said that what youcannot get by your knowledge and effort can be got bysacrifice. Whether it is the good or the bad, we have tokeep on sacrificing. In this process one should never payany attention to the body. If we think that something isgood and we welcome what is good, some bad may alsocome in this process. That which gives you happinesswhen it comes to you will, also, cause sorrow when itgoes away from you.There is a small example for this. If a son is bornin a family, there is considerable happiness; but the deathof the same son will cause untold sorrow and grief. It isthe same son that is either born or is dead, and the changeof the act of birth to an act of death changes the happinessto sorrow. Without sacrificing, man cannot live; but hedoes not undertake sacrifice knowingly. Every individualdoes undertake sacrifice, but he does not know that he issacrificing. One should have sacrifice as his aim, andone should enquire into what is permanent and what isnot permanent and enquire into what is to be given upand what is to be accepted.The body and the country are like the object andthe image. The body is the place where the divine resides.The difference between Kshetra and Kshetragna, that isbetween the place of residence and the resident, is theone “Gna.” We interpret this difference by saying thatone who is full of knowledge and wisdom is the onewho resides in the body, and since this syllable “Gna” isnot present in “Kshetra” it is said that the body itself iscompletely devoid of knowledge and wisdom. So,bearing in mind the Lord who is the embodiment ofknowledge and wisdom and who resides in the body, weshould be able to give sufficient attention for theSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 24 25
well-being of the body. If the All-knowing does notreside in the body, then there is no sanctity of the body.But, are we giving the name Kshetra to everything?No—only specific cities, villages, and rivers go by thename of Kshetra. It is only that particular place wherethere is some sacredness recognised that is called Kshetra.Benares, Tirupati, Gaya, Badri, and Prayag are some ofthe places which are called Kshetras. These places arecalled Kshetras because with these places is associateda recognised sacredness, and the presence of suchsacredness gives them the name Kshetra. In a superficialway, one recognises this as a place where God is residing.In the Bhagavad Gita, our body is described asthe Kshetra and the Paramatma who resides in the bodyis called the Kshetragna. We are not able to realise howwe should use our own body in which God resides.Devotees who have a sacred heart and who entertainsacred thoughts go on pilgrimage to such sacred places.They are undertaking a pilgrimage to such centres onlybecause they believe those places to be sacred. If theyare not sacred, there is no need for them to undertakesuch a pilgrimage at such expense of money and energy.As in this analogy, because the human body is sacred,many people establish connections between each other,and they try to make a pilgrimage and take their life alonga sacred path. If truly the body of an individual does notundertake a sacred task and lead a sacred life, no onewill want to have any relationship with such a body.Therefore, anyone who claims to keep his body sacredshould make an attempt to indulge only in good actions,good thoughts, and good deeds.If we take a pot which is full of toddy and apply acoating of ghee externally on the pot, does the fragranceof the ghee remove the bad smell of the toddy which isin the pot? In the same manner, if your heart is full ofbad ideas and bad thoughts and externally if you pretendto be good and be in good company for purposes of show,does that remove the impurity in your heart? It does notmatter if you do not enter good company and do gooddeeds. It does not matter if you do not participate indhyana (meditation) and japa (repetition of holy names),but it is absolutely essential that you should keep yourheart pure and clean. The essence of all religions teachesthat you should keep your heart clean. Both in thematerial world and for spiritual attainments, control ofyour sensory organs is essential. It is not good tocompletely and rigidly control all your senses nor is itSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 26 27
desirable to give them complete freedom. One shouldadopt the middle path.There is a small example for this. Many men areaccustomed to shave and they know that if they pressthe razor too hard they will cut the skin and if they donot press at all, it will not be possible to remove the hair.Therefore, in this process, only when we applymoderate pressure will we be able to attain thenecessary result. The human mind is like a razor’s edge.Without controlling the mind too rigidly and withoutallowing it to go too freely, we should encourage it to dogood acts and we should control it when there is anytendency to participate in bad acts. Thus by distinguishingbetween good acts and bad acts, we should be able toguide the mind in a moderate manner between the twoextremes. To control the mind and the thoughts issomething basic to Yoga, and this has been said by manypeople. We should regard the body as synonymous withman, and man is synonymous with mind. If one’s mindbehaves in a manner in which it ought to, then hebehaves like man. If one’s mind is not in a state in whichit ought to be, then he does not behave like a man. Theentire country depends on the men that constitute thecountry. If the country today is not in the shape in whichit ought to be, it simply means that the minds are notbehaving as they should. Therefore the country is notwhat it should be.The good and bad of a country are entirelydetermined by the men that make up the country. Theconfusion that is prevailing in the country and the lackof discipline and fear that are seen all round are theresults of our own conduct. Because we are not able tokeep our minds in a manner in which we ought to keepthem, and because men constituting the country are notconducting themselves in a manner in which they oughtto, such a situation is prevailing. If the minds and thethoughts are good, then the men will be good and if themen are good then the country will be prosperous andthe country will be enjoying happiness. We say that thisis our country, but remember that the country does nothave a separate bodily entity. It is the conglomeration ofpeople that is called a country.There is a small example for this. We refer to asmall group of people as a society or association.Neither the society nor the association has anydistinctive form. The individuals who constitute thesociety have specific forms. Because these individualsSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 28 29
with specific forms have become members, that grouphas been called an association. We should ask thequestion whether that association has the qualities whichit should have.We should not regard the number of members in asociety as a primary criterion. Mere numbers do notjustify the name society. It is only the oneness of thoughtbetween the various members that makes it a society. Itfollows that when the individual is right and when allthe individuals that compose the society are correct, thenthe society itself will be right and correct. Today in allspheres—ethical, moral, educational, spiritual, andscientific—because there is no unity or oneness amongthose that compose a group, there is confusion and lackof peace everywhere. A group consisting of differentindividuals can be referred to as a society only when allof them stand on one common base and accept onecommon thought. Today, in a society which has tenpeople, you find ten different individual thoughts andplans. When these ten people follow ten different pathsand when there is no unity among them, is there anymeaning in calling them a society or an organisation?Because in such social groups and associations they donot have the strength to bring the individuals together,these associations and societies are coming to grief. Weshould make an attempt to convert individual ideas intosacred ideas.One should not undertake to discuss the good andbad in others. An individual who undertakes to keep thebad in him away from him and attempts to promote thegood in him can really go forward. If we use a thousandeyes for locating the faults in others and spend all ourtime in this process, our heart also gets impure and wedevelop bad ideas. Our heart is like a camera lens. Theobject on which we concentrate our attention getsimprinted on the mind by the lens of the heart.Young people should try to see that qualities likejealousy, hatred, lack of forbearance do not enter theirminds. People who have such bad ideas will be destroyedin course of time in spite of the wealth and knowledgethat they might possess. If you entertain these badqualities in your mind, it is taking to a bad path willinglyand you will surely fall down.Pavitratma Swarupas!It has been the custom in these summer classes totake a particular theme and give importance to thecentral idea and synthesise and correlate the ideas thatSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 30 31
are connected with that theme and imprint them in yourmind. This year, the important idea will be the history ofthe name of our country, Bharath, and the significanceof the name Bharath. This country has been calledBharath or Bharatha desa. It is customary to associatethis with the name of the son of a king who at one timeruled this country. This is not the correct meaning. Thewhole world has been called Bharatha desa. Therelationship between the name Bharatha and the Vedashas to be understood. We should be able to derive theauthority from the Vedas for this name Bharatha.It is, also, common for our people to use the wordBrahman very frequently. We must understand what thisword Brahman means. Does this mean the traditionalfour-faced God or does this mean the Sabda Brahma,that is sound typified as Brahma, or does it represent thecreator of all this creation? In the thirty days that are tofollow you should understand the two important words—Brahman and Bharath—by quoting authority from ourVedas, Puranas, and Ithihasthas. I will spend the nextthirty days in explaining to you the inner meaning ofthese two words. If one cannot understand the meaningof the name given to one’s own mother country, what isthe use of being born in a country and calling oneself acitizen of Bharath?One who cannot recognise the significance of thename of one’s own mother country should be regarded asblind, not being able to recognise his own body. Todaythere are many who are not able to recognise the meaningof the name given to their own body. If one does not knowthe meaning of the name given to his body, how is hegoing to understand the significance of the name of hismotherland? Therefore the first thing that one has to do isto understand the significance of his name and the nameof his motherland. During these thirty days, many teachersmay tell you the significance of various other matters butI will tell you the significance of the two words “Brahman”and “Bharath.” I hope that you will be able to appreciatefully the meaning of these words.People who have sacred thoughts and ideas willalways have the viewpoint of Adwaitha (Non-dualism)in whatever they say. You should make an attempt tofind good in whatever you see. Whether you see good orbad you must regard it as good. On the other hand, ifyou begin to look for bad in the good things that yousee, it is very sinful. In the Bible there is a very goodSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
example provided by Christ for such a situation. Therewas a dead dog in a particular place, and the birds andother animals were eating the various parts of this deaddog, and the pieces of flesh were thrown all around in ahelter skelter fashion. Several people would not look atthis repulsive situation. They were turning away fromthis dead dog and were moving at a distance. At thattime Jesus was going along that path and learnt that allthe people were abandoning that path because of the deaddog on the path. He then said that one must learn to seethe good aspect of everything. He asked if any one hasever thought of the very clean set of teeth which belongto the dog, and he asked if anyone ever brushed theseteeth for them to be so clean. He thus advised them tosee only the good in all aspects. He, also, taught themthe lesson that there is bad blood in everyone and badflesh in everyone which should in reality keep allpersons away. We should practise to see only good things,do only good things, and hear only good things and eachof our experiences must become a sacred experience.Truly, when we come to think of the fact that fromsuch a vast country only a small number of students havehad this opportunity of attending this summer course, itshows that you are very lucky. I am hoping that you willbe able to get the best out of this and put into practice allthat you learn here. Do not abuse the good opportunitythat you have been lucky enough to get. You may haveto put up with some difficulties. You must collect all thegood that you can get from such an opportunity. I amhoping that you will be able to do this in spite of the factthat you may have to put up with some inconvenience.32 333. Brahman Denotes The Totality OfPrajna In The World
Diverse branches of Education are like thedetails of the art of cooking, but each oneof these diverse branches corresponds toeach item that we are cooking. Why do wegive up the individual item and go to learnonly the method of cooking? Listen to thetruth that is contained in this question, Oh!youth of Bharath.
The theme of today’s discourse is to acquaintyou with the meaning of the word Brahman.For the Vedas and the Vedic religion, this wordBrahman is synonymous with all the contents thereof.However, many historians who have given the meaningof this from time to time, have adopted an alternate pathSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 36 37
and have also inserted into the commentary their ownnotions and ideas and have thus made available adistorted version to the people. Although this wordBrahman has infinite number of meanings and could beinterpreted in infinite number of ways, thesecommentators have given it a colour and meaning which,in each case, depended on the individual taste andindividual experiences. This word Brahman has been explained by someas having something to do with the Brahmanas in theVedas. On the other hand, when some writers gave it themeaning of the purohit (performer of rites) in the RigVeda, they also explained that he is not to be confusedwith one of several Rithwicks of the yajna, but they gavehim a special place and called him by the name Hota.These historians have explained that the particularRithwick who has the responsibility of looking after thesacrificial ceremony of the Yajna and seeing that the ritualis conducted properly is called by the name Hota, and hehas been regarded as the important Brahman in the Yajna.Several scholars have been giving this kind ofconnotation for this word. In this explanation of the wordBrahman, they have not taken care to see that the aspectof Easwara or divine is included in this word.Some other historians have understood this aspectand given this a meaning which covers the aspect of thedivine. In this context we have to take intoconsideration the comments of some of the westernscholars who have made an effort to understand ourVedas, our civilisation, and our culture. One greatwestern scholar has taken this word Brahman asoriginating from the root word Bruh. This root wordindicates expansion, or to swell, or to grow. He has takenthis word as the starting point for understanding thedivine aspect of the creation.Another western scholar has given a differentmeaning for this word Brahman. He has regarded thisword as something which is specially related to thedivine strength and to the force of will which is directedtowards God. There is a necessity for us to enquire intothe interpretations given by these western scholars aswell.Apart from these two scholars who may not be sowell known in this country, there is another westernscholar by name Max Mueller who is more widely knownin this country. He has also commented and given ameaning for this word. He started with the idea that thisis a word which signifies sound and linked it with namesSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 38 39
like Vachaspati, and so on. At this point, we have toexamine whether all these interpretations have theauthority of the Veda and whether these interpretationsare contained in the Veda. We have to examine whereand how this word Brahman occurs in the Vedas and whatmeaning is conveyed by the word in that context. Thishas been mentioned in Sama Veda by equivalents likeBrahma and Veda Rupa. Sama Veda has established thatthe form of Veda is Brahman. In the Rig Veda, it has alsobeen said that the song of Brahman is the essence of  theVedas. Again, when we look at this word from the pointof view of Bhagavad Gita, we come to the conclusionthat everything in the creation is filled with Brahman.Our Vedas have not stopped at this point by merelygiving a form and a meaning to this word Brahman. Theyhave also given a more distinctive and specialsignificance for this word Brahman. It has been taughtto us that an aspect of the word Brahman means that it issomething which has no discernible dimensions andwhich is limitless. If in this world we have things thatcan grow, then the aspect of Brahman has the capacity togrow so much that it is far beyond the growth of suchthings. The growth capacity of whatever is signified bythe word Brahman exceeds the growth capacity ofeverything that we can comprehend. That aspect whichis not discernible, and which is beyond ourcomprehension, and which is infinite, has been describedby the word Brahman. It has been established that this issynonymous with growth and with complete growth. ThisBrahman which represents complete growth in allrespects has been represented as the characteristic ofPurusha. This word Purusha refers to one who hasexperienced completeness or fullness. OurPurushasuktha has described this aspect of Purusha assomething which has one thousand heads, one thousandeyes, and one thousand feet. In this interpretation, weare not taking the true inner meaning; instead sometimeswe are getting the wrong meaning as well. The words“Sahasra Seershaha Purushaha” should not beinterpreted in a limited way by thinking of only onethousand heads. This really means that thousands andthousands of heads are contained in this aspect ofPurusha. The word head immediately conveys to us themeaning and picture of the head that we see in theordinary worldly way, and we think of the Lord ashaving a thousand heads. This is not correct. When weuse the word head, it connotes Prajna or wisdom in thisSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 40 41
context. The totality of Prajna, or the wisdom that is presentin all the heads, represents the concept of Purusha here.When we describe the Purusha as Sahasrakshawhat we mean is that we worship the concept that theLord has thousands of eyes. In accordance with theauthority of the Vedas, the inner meaning of this is thatall the energy and effulgence that comes out from theeyes of the various people, or the totality of that energy,represents Paramatma. This is the inner meaning ofreferring to Him as Sahasraksha or one with a thousandeyes.We also describe him as Sahasrapad, or one whohas a thousand feet. What is it that we mean bydescribing God as one who has a thousand eyes, athousand feet, and a thousand heads; and what benefitdo we get by describing him in this manner? Thephysical ability to carry this material body rests in ourfeet and in our legs. Because such strength is containedin our feet, however big the body may be, we are able tomove the body with comfort. The totality of the capacityto understand or Prajnana and the totality ofbrightness and the effulgence, and the capacity oflocomotion have been given the name Brahman.The ability by which we have our vision and wesee, the ability by which we are able to hear, and theability by which we can have our mind functioning, andthe ability by which we can bear the weight of the materialbody are given to us by God and because all thesestrengths are given to us by God, God is also referred toas Prajnanam Brahma, or the embodiment of wisdom.When we say, Purusha eva idam sarvam, what we meanis Paramatma, who has got all these strengths in Him, ismoving about everywhere manifesting all these strengths.Whether we talk of the Veda or use the wordBrahman or the word Purusha, these are only differentnames given to the same aspect and to propagate the sameidea that is contained in all these words. The words aredifferent, but they describe one and the same idea. Allthe energy that is present in the gross form and also inthe minutest and infinitesimally small thing representsthe aspect of Brahman.It is only by having this all-knowing, all-powerful, and omnipresent personality of the Lord in hismind that Arjuna prayed to the Lord in the form of ViswaVirat (Cosmic being). “Can we understand you? Oh Lord!Krishna, You are smaller than the smallest particle andSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 42 43
bigger than the biggest body. You are present everywhereand always in the eighty-four lakhs of the living speciesand one knows you as the biggest thief among all thethieves.” Arjuna had prayed to the Lord by understandingthese aspects of the Lord.Because of this, Arjuna could understand the realaspect of the Lord. “Brahmanam Brahmana Vahanam.”Brahma has also been described as the carrier of theBrahman. We must examine the meaning of the wordBrahma in this context. The word Brahma has beenunderstood to connote Manthra. In this place, themeaning is that the Purusha, who is the embodiment ofVedas, has the manthra as his carrier. This is the reasonwhy people in our country have relied on such great menwho achieved their greatness on the basis of manthra.They started learning these manthras and gettingpurification for themselves with the help of these greatpeople. Mere utterance of words like “Om NamoNarayana,” or “Om Nama Shivaya,” cannot constitute amanthra. A manthra has two aspects. The first is Mananaor what has been learned has to be taken into your mind.The second is the aspect of Trana that is what has beentaken into your mind has to be established firmly therein.By taking the divine into your mind and firmlyestablishing it therein, if you can carry on your life anddo the work that is ordained for you, then your life willbe full of happiness.Such meaning of the word Brahman which hasthe authority of the Veda has been distorted by thehistorians and because of this we have also startedgetting a distorted picture of the nature and creation thatis around us. In this situation, we see that the innermeanings of these words which have the authority of theVedas and the interpreted meaning given by the varioushistorians are very different because the historiansbrought their own ideas into the interpretation. We shouldnote that there are essential differences between theactual meaning and the interpreted meaning. Commonpeople have begun to lay complete confidence in whathas been given by these historians and having acceptedthe meaning that is given by the historians, they arepromoting wrong notions and wrong meaning.Whether it is for our own countrymen or for peoplefrom outside our country, there is no escape from ouraccepting that the meaning contained in the Vedas is theauthoritative meaning. Veda is something which doesnot have its origin in human beings. It has come fromSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 44 45
sources other than human beings. All history issomething that is created by experienced people. In suchthings which have been created by men, there arepossibilities for changes, additions and alterations; butthere is no such possibility in the case of the Vedas whichhave not had their origin in human beings.Because Veda has been obtained merely bylistening to sound, it has been referred to as Sruthi. Thisis something which is directly connected with the Lordtaking in and giving out His breath. Such divine breath,which constitutes the Vedas, is our life and if there is nobreath and life, there will be no belief and faith; and ifthere is no faith, man will be lifeless. Therefore, anycitizen who has faith in the Vedas can really be describedas one who has life in him. When the aspect of Easwarais not present in your heart, then you have no humanquality in you. Because we have forgotten the Vedicculture which has had neither a beginning nor will havean end, and placed our faith in material comfort, and wehave tried to give more importance to what we see aroundus in the form of material comforts, we have given upwhat is essential for our own culture and brought ourlife into great difficulty.To have faith in the Vedas and to accept theinjunctions of the Veda is being regarded by the modernyouth as outmoded and uncivilised. Young peopletoday are not making an enquiry as to what is containedin the Vedas or in the Sastras. They go further and saythat those people who have faith in the Vedas and theSastras are only having blind faith. This is the kind ofattitude which the young people are developing. If oneargues, after acquainting oneself with the contents ofwhat he is arguing about, one can argue for any lengthof time, but if a person is arguing without knowing thecontents, it is not possible to argue with him.A blind man will always see darknessirrespective of how bright a light you might put in hispresence. As far as the limited capacity of the blind manis able to discern, the truth is that it is dark even thoughyou might put a bright light there. In the view of the restof the people, this is not the truth. Therefore, absolutetruth is not something which can depend on and varyfrom individual to individual. It is something which candepend only on the entire cosmos.But, modern man has recognised the individualaspect and he is proclaiming that what he sees as anindividual to be the truth is also the truth for the rest ofSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
the world. He is not making any attempt to recognise theinfinite divinity. Our Vedas have been teaching usseveral aspects of Sathyam or truth, of Jnanam orwisdom, and of Anantha or infinity. We should askourselves whether the people who describe truth as truthand knowledge as knowledge are foolish, or the peoplewho describe truth as untruth and knowledge asignorance are foolish. These questions can be answeredand decisions reached by yourselves. People who havefaith in the Vedas are like people who say that 2+2=4,while those who do not have faith in the Vedas are likethe people who say that 2+2=5.We shall ask ourselves a question regarding theextent and the basis of the world. In the world there aremany people. Some of them are believers, some of themare non-believers, and some of them are believingnon-believers. There are many people in other countrieswho have no faith in God and who believe in individualstrength. They are proclaiming and honouring individualstrength. Not only this, there are people who belong toother countries and many other religions. There aremultitudes of people, religions, and faiths. Christians mayworship Jesus, Muslims may worship Allah, and Hindusmay worship Rama, Krishna, and so on. Different peoplehave different faiths and they adhere to different faiths.But all these people, although they may have differentfaiths, and profess different Gods, and worship differentGods, yet none of them can be distant from truth. Truthis something that is common to all of them. Whether thepeople are Russians or Chinese or Pakistanis, 2+2 isalways four and this truth is recognised by all of them.People of all countries and all religions mustunderstand that Vedas are something which establish theauthority of truth. I mentioned yesterday that during thisone month I will explain the meaning of Brahman andthe meaning of the word Bharath. Some of you may feelthat these words Brahman and Bharath are wordsrelevant only to the citizens of this country. This is notcorrect. These words are significant for people of allcountries. Those who belong to Bharath might use theword Brahman and others may use a different name, butno one will be against the aspect of Brahman. Suppose we take water in a tumbler. Foreignersmay describe this as water while people belonging tothe north will call this Pani, and those people who speakTelugu will describe it as Neeru, and so on. Althoughdifferent names are used, the contents are the same. Theplace may be different, the names may be different, but46 47Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 48 49
the material for which you have given the name cannotchange. In the same manner, the significant divineaspect is the same although different people describe itby different names in different places. What is mainlyresponsible for growth in different places is beingreferred to by different names. For Bharath, this is theaspect of Brahman. Some call it the “Force of nature.”They are using the words “Force of nature” to describethe aspect of Brahman, but they do not understand whatis signified by the word “nature.”Every matter in any form must have some basisfor its existence. We must examine and find this basisfor its existence. Even if you are not able to see the onethat is responsible for its birth, there should be presentsomeone who has given birth to it. When you wear awristwatch, for example, and ask where it wasmanufactured, you will state that it was made by someSwiss company. We have neither seen the SwissCompany nor the persons who made the watch, but weare using the watch. Has this watch come spontaneouslyor has someone taken the time to manufacture this in aworkshop? The person who has made this watch mustknow how to divide the time and how time is to bemeasured. If he does not know about this, he cannotprepare a watch. Therefore, some individual who knowsthe process of assembling a watch has to existsomewhere. We readily accept that there must be someindividual who has assembled such a watch.Similarly, there are artificial satellites in the skywhich are going round as temporary planets. We acceptthat some scientists have put them up, but these rocketsand satellites are alive only for a limited time. If youaccept that these rockets, which have only a limited life,have been created by individuals, we ask who hascreated the permanent planets that we see. The motionof the sun, the moon, and the earth takes place regularlyand without faltering. We have to ask who has giventhem such steady motion. The creation of this infiniteworld, the creation of the sun and the moon, which aremoving so regularly, or the generation of a steady heatin a human body, the functioning of the lungs, are suchmysteries that unquestionably there is a divine hand ofcreation behind them. Who can create all these thingswhich are so permanent and steady? When we ask sucha question, people simply push away the question andsay that these are natural. They do not recognise thecreator who has created all this.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 50 51
Not to accept the existence of such a creator is tobe very foolish and hard-headed. The divine strength orthe divine aspect who is the creator of all these things isBrahman. Our people have been able to go up to acertain point, using their intelligence. Having gone upto a certain point in that manner, they have learnt thatthere is a limitation and that they cannot go beyond thatpoint. In that context, it is better to accept that there issomething which they do not know; instead, to say thatnothing exists beyond what they comprehended is veryfoolish. We must make an attempt to understand andsearch for the truth and put it into practice.Even today what the scientists have really learntis a very small fraction of what there is to learn, but thepride they have accumulated after having learnt such asmall fraction is out of all proportion. When we giveroom to such ego and pride, we are not able to understandeven the things which we can understand. Thedecisions which the scientists are arriving at as a resultof their work are being altered in a short time by thescientists themselves. They are criticising and changingthe very same conclusion which they arrive at, and thereis no scientist who can say that this is the final stage andthere is no more to be done.In the adhyatmic path, as well as in our traditions,it has been usual to declare that this is not the truth, thisis not the truth, and so on. Ultimately they reach a stagewhere, by their inner vision, they are able to say that thisis the truth and signify the aspect of the Atma and realisewhat ultimate truth is.The scientists of today are devoted to a machinephilosophy. They do not recognise the capacity ofmanthra. Their knowledge is something which isaccumulated from studies of the external. It is notsomething which is generated from within as an essence.Those who are devoted to machines and those who stuffinformation from outside into one’s self are scientistsand those who develop the inner strength and who aredevoted to the strength of Manthra are saints.This difference between a scientist and a saint isvery deep and is one of essence. It is very difficult tounderstand this basic difference. Trying to understandthis difficult relationship and spending our time in sucha pursuit is something which you should not do. Thatwhich is the basis for everything and that whichconstitutes the power and the strength which is at thebase of all this creation has been recognised by ourculture and has been named Brahman. You may try forSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 52 53
years and years to understand the aspect of Brahman andyet it will not be completed. The moon that we cannotreach can be only pointed at with a finger and shownfrom a distance. In the same manner, we cannotunderstand the aspect of the infinite and unreachableBrahman, and we should only recognise its divinity interms of something we can adopt. The aspect ofBrahman is something which is beyond time and easyreach and if we want to understand it, we ourselves mustadopt methods which are above and beyond time. It is inthis context that our ancients have said “BrahmavitBrahmaiva Bhavathi” meaning that one who knows theaspect of Brahman will himself become Brahman.Vivekananda once said that if anyone wants tounderstand his sagacity and his ability, he must firsthimself become an able and sagacious person. Theresult of your effort would depend on the extent of youreffort and your sacrifice. The final result will onlycorrespond to the effort that you put in.This power or strength which we attempt todescribe by the word Brahman is not something whichis external to and outside you. It is present in you and isin your own self. If you acquire some good or bad, and ifyou have the misapprehension that Brahman outside iscausing good or bad to you, or that He is giving somepunishment to you, this is not the right attitude. Do notcultivate the habit of building castles in the air andgetting tired by thinking that you will do this and that,you will achieve this and that. The fruits that you getwill correspond to whatever seeds you plant. If the seedis one thing and if you have the ambition to get adifferent fruit, how is it possible? You may be very clever,but all the cleverness is of no avail if you are not givingup your mean qualities. Whatever good or bad you mayhave done, the aspect of Brahman is not going to breakthe good and bad into separate parts.Paramatma is going to give you an unbrokengarland of all the good and all the bad that you haveaccumulated. This is the invisible garland whicheveryone wears round his neck, and it surely consists ofall the good and all the bad that you have done. Whenyou are born from your mother’s womb, you do notphysically see this necklace. You do not have a necklaceof pearls round your neck; nor do you have a goldennecklace when you are born. You neither have a necklaceof diamond nor one of emerald round your neck. But,while all these things are absent, whatever good or badSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 54 55
deeds you may have done in your past are being broughtalong with you when you are born.By doing a good act, you cannot get an evil resultand by doing a bad act, you cannot accumulate good.Whatever kind of work you do, the result will correspondto that kind of work. Therefore, it follows that today youshould make up your mind to do only good things andthus you will reap, in your future lives, the benefit ofonly good things. You should do good things today andthus aspire to get good for yourself. Brahman is presentin your own heart and is functioning as a witnessingconsciousness all through. To imagine and to deceiveourselves into thinking that there is no one seeing us doa bad thing is not correct. Whether anyone sees it or not,the aspect of Brahman which has been described as onewhich has thousands of heads and thousands of eyes isalways watching you and the good and bad that you do.This aspect of Brahman is always with you and isconstantly present in you. Without recognising andunderstanding this basic truth that Brahman is alwayswith you, you spend a great deal of time and energythinking that God is somewhere and that you should findHim elsewhere and outside of your heart. In theBhagavad Gita, this is the reason why God has beendescribed as being present wherever you go. When youwalk, God is walking along the same footsteps; and infact, we hear His footsteps often. There are devotees whopray to God and say, “Oh! God, are you not seeing mydifficulties and are you not seeing the situation in whichI am?” For such people, only the eyes of God becomeapparent. In the case of devotees who say, “Oh! God, areyou not able to hear my prayers and why is it you are notlistening to my difficulties?” For such people, it is onlythe ears of God that become apparent. For one who asksthe Lord whether He does not see troubles, only the eyesof Lord become manifest, while for one who asks theLord whether He does not hear his troubles, just the earsof the Lord become manifest; and to one who wants theLord to be always present with him following Him in hiswork, only the feet of the Lord will become manifest.One devotee once prayed to Krishna, “I have somany difficulties which I want to convey to you, but Iam so distant from you and I can convey my difficultiesto you only if I get near you.” Then she requested theflute with which Krishna uses to play music, because itgoes so close to the lips of Krishna, to convey her troubleto Krishna because the flute has a chance of going verySummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 56 57
close to Krishna. Asking for such recommendations is apractice prevalent from that day to this day. Asking suchrecommendations to the Lord through instruments closeto the God was a practice prevalent then and continueseven today.We should also recognise what kind of instrumentsand what kind of people will be close to the Lord. In thisstory, the flute has been mentioned and it is a very goodexample of an instrument close to the Lord. There is onegreat quality in the flute and that is its completesurrender. There is nothing left in the flute, and there areno residual desires. In fact, the inside of the flute iscompletely hollow. The flute has nine holes in it, and theflute of our body has also nine holes. That flute has beenable to go close to the Lord because there is no pulp leftin the flute, and it is completely hollow. So also, if wecan remove all the pulp of desires from our body, thenthere is no doubt that this flute of our body can also goclose to the Lord.This word, surrender, has been misinterpreted andpeople promote idleness in the name of surrender. Wethink that our mind, thought, and body have beensurrendered to the Lord. This, in fact, is not true and is inthe direction of deceiving the Lord. We are undertakingto cheat the Lord. Your mind is not under your owncontrol and under such circumstances, how can you holdit and give it to the Lord? You have no control over yourown body. If you have a small cut, blood oozes fromyour body and you run to a doctor asking for a bandage.If this is your body and if you have complete controlover it, why is it that you are not able to control theoutflow of the blood. In this context to say that you havesurrendered your mind and body to the Lord is astatement which is untrue.This word “surrender” conveys that there issomeone who gives and someone who accepts and thatyou are surrendering to someone. There is a feeling ofduality implied in this word surrender. A man with a dualmind is half blind. In this manner, while he remains withthis dual thought, how can he recognise the non-dualaspect?The true meaning of surrender is the recognitionof the fact that in everyone and everywhere God ispresent. The recognition of the presence of God in allJivas is the true meaning of the word surrender. We shouldperform all the tasks enjoined upon us as our duty and itis not right to neglect our duty, sit idly and say that youSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 58 59
have surrendered everything to the Lord. If you have thefeeling that all the work that you do is to please God,then that is the right aspect of surrender or Saranagathi.It cannot be the meaning of surrender to give theconsequences of all the bad that you do to God and takethe consequences of all the good that you do to yourself.The unity that is present in the diversity is theaspect of Brahman. That such an aspect of Brahman ispresent everywhere and always is the truth that we shouldrecognise. To develop faith in this statement from thebottom of your heart is also an aspect of surrender.Therefore, if you want to understand the meaning andsignificance of the word Brahman, you have to put in aconsiderable amount of effort and care and you have tounderstand and listen with much care and attention towhat is being said.To be able to develop concentration, you shouldalso practise Yoga; but the learning and the type ofeducation that you are getting today is giving you habitswhich are contrary to these requirements. Manyexperienced educationists are coming and telling you onvarious aspects every day. You should listen with greatcare, to what they say. You must never miss the ultimateobjective. The methods to which you are accustomed inyour daily college classes must change as a result of yourstay here in the Summer classes. Sometimes, even insmall classes, when the teacher is teaching some specialaspects, some students, sitting in the back benches, keepreading useless novels which have no relevance to whatis being taught. When the teacher finds out about this,the students simply grin. Do not do such things in ourSummer classes. We have started to learn sacred thingsin this summer school. Therefore, you should try tocontrol your conduct. There is no reason for excessivetalking. This is no place for such talking. If you needsomething or want to get something, you need not goout. There are people who are assigned with the specifictask of helping you in this regard. Do not go out of thecampus and lose control over your conduct.Similarly if you are habituated to smoking ordrinking, you must stop such things and any small needscan be obtained with the help of volunteers. You are goingto be the future citizens and guardians of the welfare ofour country and so you should develop the habit ofcontrolling your behaviour. If you are not able to giveup small trivial habits like smoking, how are you goingto develop the capacity to control your sensory organs?Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 60
How are you going to control the difficult things whenyou are not able to control the small things? In the courseof this month, if you are not able to control these smalland trivial habits, how can you achieve the object ofcontrolling bigger things? You would simply have beena burden on the earth and wasted the food that you haveeaten. When you go back to your own homes, yourparents and your friends should recognise the manydesirable changes in you and they should be able to seethe good that you have acquired in the summer classesand speak well of the summer classes.
4. Sath Chith Ananda Are NaturalTo Every Person
One can get wisdom out of participating inwork. Whatever work a wise man performsis only for the benefit of the ignorant. If wecan follow the path that has been laid downby wise persons, then we will becomeknowledgeable about the aspect of Atma inthis world.Pavithratma Swarupas, Students, Boys, And Girls!
The Taitreya Brahmana begins with the soundof the word Brahman. The word Brahman,which occurs in the Vedas, is also used to give the samemeaning in the Upanishads. This aspect of Brahman isuseful because it has been expounded in the Vedas, andSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 62 63
the Vedas are also an aspect of Brahman. The word Vedaas a meaning for the word Brahman and the wordBrahman as a meaning for the word Veda areinseparably interlinked with each other. There is asacred saying in the Rig Veda which means that the wordBrahman is basic and constitutes the basis for all soundand the words that come therefrom. Words compose theManthras. Thus, Brahman is the basis for all the spiritualtexts and Vedas. In accordance with the syllables thatmake up words, various words take shape. It is theutterance of the speech in the form of sounds that takethe form of words. The conglomeration of such wordsconstitutes the Veda.Whatever is conveyed through speech has got aname Adhideyam. This word also means the aspect ofBrahman. It is the grouping of such words, which is theAdhideya, that constitutes the text of the Veda.Therefore, it becomes clear that for everything speech isthe basis, and for speech to generate itself the wordBrahman is the very foundation.Amongst the speeches one recognises twodifferent types of speech. One kind of speech isassociated with the Sanskrit language. The other kind ofspeech is linked up with the ordinary normal colloquiallanguage. We will take a small example to illustrate thisdifference. There are the two words “Go” and “Aswa,”but when we use them colloquially we use the words“Cow” and “Horse.” When we examine if there is anydifference between the meanings that are conveyed, wecome to the conclusion that although the words may besomewhat different, the meaning is exactly the same. Inthis context, we can consider another example. There isanother word mruthhu which means dust. This is anordinary colloquial type of word. There is another wordcalled ghata which is the pot and which is the name fora special form made out of mud. These words ghata andmruthhu, which respectively stand for the pot and themud which make up the pot, arise out of speech. If thismud which constitutes the basis is not existent, the ghataitself would not exist; and we cannot get this special formof mud.In the same manner, speech is an ordinary andcommon form and the word arises as a special form ofthis speech. For the resulting special form called word,the basis is the speech. Here we have to see the intimateconnection between the resulting word and speech. Inasking ourselves the relationship between the specialform and the foundation, or the basis which gives rise toSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 64 65
this special form, we come to the conclusion that thisspeech stands as the very basis for the special form ofword. When we ask ourselves what is the meaning ofPadartha (matter, object), we come to the conclusionthat it signifies the meaning of the word. On account ofthis inseparable relationship we come to the truth thatthere cannot be a word without a meaning and therecannot be a sensible meaning without a specific word.It has been said in the Rig Veda that for both theword and the speech which form the basis for this word,Brahman is the very foundation. Therefore, we come tothe conclusion that for both these things, the word andits basis—the speech, the foundation is Brahman. In thiscontext, we must realise that the world itself has Brahmanas its foundation. Not to realise this is foolishness.Brahman is, therefore, the basis for the world which issimply the conglomeration of various created items. Thewhole world simply consists of various special forms ofspeech. In this, we come to the conclusion that the entireworld is filled with Brahman.Whenever we utter any sound, that sound willresult in a word, and that word signifies the existence ofthe item for which the word is a description. Thisconnects our speech with the reality of the world. Thatall creation has arisen from sound and speech issomething which many people know. By neglecting thiscommon fact that sound is the basis for all the world, weforget the word and we attach greater significance to thematerial items corresponding to the meaning of the word.In this manner, we forget the Brahman and payimportance to the words which are names of materialthings. We must first recognise the relationship thatexists between the object and its basis or thefoundation. Once we get this clearly, we will realise thatthe sound and the words that come out of the soundconstitute the Vedas.Because the Veda is simply a grouping of thewords, and the Manthra is simply the utterance of thewords, we come to the conclusion that all that iscontained in the Vedas is synonymous with Brahman. Inthis context it follows that Veda and Brahman are twoinseparable things which are synonymous with eachother. By this reasoning, we say that sound is the basicthing and that special form of sound is the word, andwords denote the names of various things. Therefore,the entire world which consists of various items, thenames of which are words, has sound as its basis. Wethus come to the conclusion that the aspect of BrahmanSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 66 67
that is contained in the Veda is something which connotesthe Veda itself.In the Brahmanas it has been said that Brahman isidentical with Sabda or sound. The aspect of Brahmanshould not be regarded by us as something separate fromwhat we see in the world. Sabda or sound itself is thebasis of all things and this sound gives rise to the word.Such words connote what we see around us. This willhave association with eight different aspects of life. Theyare Sabda Brahman or the aspect which relates to sound,Charachara mayi—that which relates to moving andnon-moving, Jyothir mayi—the aspect of effulgence,Vang mayi—that which relates to speech, Nityanandamayi—that which relates to eternal bliss, Paratparamayi—that which relates to this world and the otherworld, Maya mayi—that which relates to illusion, andSri mayi—that which relates to prosperity. All that isfilled with sound, with movement, with brightness, withspeech, with maya, with prosperity, and so on will becalled Brahman. Latent in these important Sanskrit wordsis some very significant meaning. We know that a bigtree is latent in a tiny seed. Similarly these small Sanskritwords look ordinary; but when we go deep into theirmeaning, we realise that each one of these words containsimportant and significant inner meaning.For this endless aspect of Brahman, people havealso ascribed three different meanings. They are Sath(Being), Chith (Awareness) and Ananda (Bliss). The firstword Sath is regarded as more important than the others.Chith has been regarded as something which givesknowledge about the infinite. Ananda has been regardedas the bliss of happiness of a type quite different from,and higher than, the sensory happiness. The first qualityis “Being” and refers to that which signifies permanence.The second quality is Awareness and the third quality isBliss. These three qualities are associated with Brahman.For the first word, Sath, we shall take an examplefrom common daily life. In this world many people dieand we all see the dead bodies being disposed off. Inspite of the fact that several people die and leave theworld, each individual thinks that he is going to bepermanent. In spite of the fact that this person sees somany people die, he still has the desire to live foreverfor he genuinely feels that he alone is permanent. If weask ourselves whether this feeling is due to ignorance orlack of knowledge and whether it is an illusion, we cometo the conclusion that to him, it is a very important truth.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 68 69
Within him there is a quality of permanence, and thedivine self that is indestructible gives him this feeling ofpermanence.Man daily sees and experiences sorrows andpleasures, which are quite common in this world, but heaspires to have bliss and Ananda. What does thissignify? This signifies the aspect of Brahman and this isthe aspect of Ananda in him. Everyone knows that whenhe is in some temporary trouble he tends to say, “OhGod! why not let me die instead of putting me throughthis torture?” These words are not really coming fromthe depths of his heart. Nobody would say, from thedepths of his heart, that he would prefer to die ratherthan live a troubled life. This is only an apparent feelingwhich arises because of the temporary troubled state ofhis mind.One day an individual, who lived by theoccupation of cutting firewood and selling it, was on thetop of a hill. He gathered a lot of firewood. After this, hewas running down the hill with the intention ofselling this firewood. By the time he came down the hill,he was very tired. He could not continue to carry theload of firewood. He put the firewood on the ground andwas resting. Later, he attempted to put the load back ontohis head, but this was not possible. He was very tired andfrustrated and in that frame of mind, he said tohimself that he was very unlucky and that even theGoddess of death was not taking pity on him and takinghim away from his vexatious life. When he was in this frameof mind, the Goddess of death appeared then and there.The Goddess said that she had come because he had calledher. But the individual was not willing to give up his lifeand go with the Goddess of death. Then he said, “I calledyou because I could not get help for lifting this pile ofwood onto my head. All that I wanted was some help.”Sometimes as a result of distress and difficultcircumstances, we think that we better die, but in truthand in fact even an old woman who is not able to use herlegs would not want to depart from life. In this, we shouldsee that we are really hankering after permanency, aninherent quality of the Brahman in each one of us. Weshould ask what is it that makes us want to live foreverand hanker after. We get the answer that it is Brahman.So, whether we are in the adhyatmic path or in a pathcompletely devoid of belief in God, we are hankeringafter something, and that is the aspect of Brahman. When we try to understand the second word,Chith or awareness, we should ask ourselves what it isSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 70 71
that we are really wanting to be aware of. We want to beaware of everything that we see or hear. If anyone sees afew people who are grouped together and talking aboutsomething, immediately he tries to go there and find outwhat they are talking about. Even if that is somethingwhich is not relevant to us, we want to know about it.Mothers who continually spend their time with theirchildren, and fathers who are affectionate and concernedabout their children, will understand this aspect well.When the parents take the children either to a cinema orto an exhibition, the parents will be subjected to a streamof questions about various things. The mother andfather are often fed up with the large number ofquestions which these children ask. Children,accompanying their parents, keep on asking what is this?who is that? why is this? and so on, and so on. Theykeep on asking these questions till the parents are fedup. In these questions, we see an attempt on the part ofthe children to look at this beautiful world and take theentire world into themselves.To what aspect does this desire to knoweverything belong? Is there any connection between thesechildren and the various things which they want tounderstand? Is there any relevance of these children tothe things they want to learn? There is no suchconnection or obvious relevance. There is some internalurge and an intense feeling in these children by whichthey want to become aware and learn of all themanifestations around them. This is an aspect ofBrahman. That is why it has been said that “Awarenessis life.” In other words, this desire to be wise abouteverything is something which is present inside in yourheart.We come to the third aspect, Ananda, or bliss. Manalways wants to have bliss. In fact man is hankeringafter bliss. He does not want to have sorrow at any timeor under any circumstances. Bliss is something naturalto us. Sorrow or pain are unnatural to man. There is asmall example. When a child is happy and playing, eventhe mother does not ask him anything nor does shequestion how this happiness has come about. But if thesame child is crying, the mother will come running,irrespective of the importance of the work in which sheis engaged. The cry of the child is something unnaturaland immediately attracts the attention of the mother. Ifsomeone is happy and is enjoying himself, no one willgo and ask him why he is so happy. If someone is crying,anyone who notices it would go and ask why he isSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 72 73
crying. Sorrow is not natural to us. So, only if someoneis steeped in sorrow does another person want toenquire why one is in sorrow. If you are happy, no onewill come and ask you why you have not been crying inthe recent past. So what is natural to us is the Ananda orbliss, and this is a strength for us. It is such bliss andhappiness that has the form of our Atma. This truth ofexistence or being, this awareness and this blissconstitute the Brahman in us. If we try to look for theseaspects of Brahman somewhere outside of us, we willnot find them; that is not the right thing to do. This aspectof Brahman is a part and parcel of our life. This aspectof Brahman has been described by Sankara as “JeevoVedai.”All the Vedas have also been described by thewords, Thath Thwam Asi. This means, “That is you.”This kind of identity between the supreme, or theParamatma, and the individual, or the Jivatma, has beenproclaimed by the Vedas. Because we have beenassociating this immortal aspect of Brahman with ourimpermanent body and not with our Self, sometimes thereis a chance of our taking a wrong meaning. When wetouch a pot of cold water, we feel that the pot is cold; butin fact it is not the pot that is cold. It is the water insidethe pot that is cold. Coolness is a natural property of water.If there is no coolness in water, we think that there issomething unusual. Many people may have gone on apilgrimage to Badri, and they will recall that there is ahot spring near Brahma kund. While large quantities ofcold water are present in the Alakananda river, no oneasks why the water is cold but when they find some hotwater in a spring, they ask in surprise how such hotwater is coming. Whenever there is something unusualor contrary to the natural situation, then all kinds ofdoubts arise and questions are asked.What is the reason for man to become a bundle ofdoubts? The main reason for man to have so many doubtsis that man is not leading his life in the way in which heought naturally to lead it. He is not conducting himselfin a way in which he should. Because he has notunderstood the real meaning of the Self in him, he is notbehaving as a human being which he ought to behave.This is the basis for all his doubts. He must make someenquiry and understand the aspect of Brahman, becausethis is the basic cause for the relationship between manand man. Therefore, in the very first instance, we shouldunderstand these three aspects of Brahman namely Sath,Chith, and Ananda. In everyone there is this aspect ofSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
Sath, in everyone there is wisdom, and everyone hasthe bliss in him. Therefore, everyone must attachimportance only to the aspect of Brahman. But, we arepromoting the illusion of attachment to the body andbecause of this, we are unable to understand the realaspect of Brahman.Here is one small example. Today we prepareladdus in our house and the main ingredient in this ladduis flour of Bengal gram. Have you ever enjoyed the tasteof this flour? The flour, by itself, cannot give any taste.It is because we have added sugar to the flour, it hasacquired a special taste. In some other parts of the countrythey prepare special sweets with rice powder which byitself has no taste. The sugar that is added converts therice powder into a sweet and gives it a sweet taste. Inother places they prepare a rava laddu, and this is preparedwith wheat flour which has no taste at all. It acquiressweetness only when sugar is added to it. Thus, in all thedifferent kinds of sweets, the basic ingredient is sugar.The thing that is common in all these is the sugar.As in this analogy, because in all the things thatwe see around us in the world, the divine sweetness ispresent as a common constituent, it gives the sweet tasteto all of them.In the same manner, Brahman in the form of Prema(love) enters various minds and creates attachmentbetween man and man. If a mother shows affection to achild, we should interpret it as an aspect of the divineBrahman and not just a body relationship. This is theaspect of Brahman present as Prema in the mother. Thisaspect of Brahman enters the mind of the mother in theform of Prema and takes the shape of affection. Whenthis aspect enters the minds of friends, it takes the shapeof friendship. When this enters various relations it takesthe form of bodily relationship. When this enters thehusband and wife, it takes the aspect of lust andattachment. When this spreads to various things that welike, it takes the form of desire. If this aspect is directedtowards God, we call it Bhakthi. This prema is theaspect of Brahman and because this prema is present ineveryone, when we say, “Sarvam Vishnu mayam, SarvamBrahma mayam,” (All this is Brahman) we are stating atruth, an irrefutable truth. This is also why we say,“Love is God, Live in Love.” We also say, “Start the daywith Love; spend the day with Love; fill the day withLove; end the day with Love, and this is the way to God.”The one aspect which fills the day, and is synonymouswith God, is Love; and so we should fill the mind withthe aspect of Prema.74 75Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 76 77
Prema is not multifarious or manifold. It is justone, and in the same way Brahman is also not manifold.That is why we say, “Ekam Eva Adwithiyam Brahma.”That is, Brahman is One and is the only One without asecond. If, therefore, we wish to understand the onenessin everything, we can understand that oneness byrecognising the latent Brahman in the different livingbeings. If we are to understand this aspect of Brahman,wewill have to start from the aspect of man and graduallyrise to the aspect of Brahman.Simply because you have acquired the humanform, you should not think that you are truly human innature. Only the external form indicates that you arehuman. The inner aspect is the real aspect of Brahman.Brahman is One with no specific form or qualities andsuch Brahman is present in the depths of your heart.While He is present in your heart, it is not right for youto put up several pretences and false appearances. Thebody is the temple, and the Jiva is the eternal Lordresiding in that temple. Therefore, the aspect ofBrahman which is permanent and is symbolic of truth isresident in your heart and if under those circumstances,you begin to exhibit desires and show distortions, it willbe doing injustice to this permanent aspect resident inyour heart. Therefore, we should make an effort to enterthis aspect of Brahman, even if it be to a small extent,and thereby help others take to good actions, and a goodpath, and enjoy the fruits of such good deeds.Boys And Girls!Your minds are sacred; in this one month, whileyou learn sacred things, you should be transforming yourlives into ideal lives and be an example to others. Inorder that such a transformation may take place in you,several elders who are acquainted with the culture ofour country have undertaken to give you theirknowledge and share with you their experiences to helpyou achieve this goal. Having been born as a citizen ofBharath, if you are not able to bring credit to yourmotherland and understand and assimilate our cultureand our history, it will be a matter of shame and disgrace.Therefore, in understanding the culture of our country,the first attempt that you should make is to understandthe divine aspect that permeates our culture. This divineaspect of Brahman and its connection with the materialworld, and the spiritual world, and how it manifests itselfin various situations will be told to you in the comingdays. The discourses that you will listen to in the comingSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 78
days about this divine aspect of Brahman must berecounted and recapitulated by you when you go to yourrooms and you must get your doubts, if any, cleared fromelders.After the lectures for the day are over, you shouldnot spend your time in irrelevant things but you shouldtry to recapitulate and put into practice what you learnhere. You hear while you sit here and you must eat anddigest this material when you go to your rooms. Aftertaking in what you have listened to here, you must put itinto practice so that you may digest it. After you havebeen able to digest all this, all the doubts will be clearedand you will get the strength of doubtlessness. One whodoes not have the capacity for digestion will get thedisease of indigestion. Unless you try to digest and putinto practice all that you listen to, learn, and assimilate,it is of no use. The person who keeps on saying that he isfull of doubts is the one who suffers from indigestion.One who can understand himself clearly will never havedoubts. The person who cannot understand himself andwho cannot understand what others tell him, is alwaysfull of doubts.
5. All Religions Lead To The Same Goal
If one can conquer one’s mind, peace willresult. If one can find peace, he can look atall other things with an equal mind. Goodand bad, respect and disrespect, likes anddislikes are all aspects of one and the samething and that is Brahman.Boys and girls!
The words that come out of the Vedas refer toand contain in themselves, the names of allforms and for this reason it also has a name Bibarthi.This has been explained in Manusmrithi by saying thatall the Jivas have this aspect of Bibarthi in them. Thus,identity of this aspect of Bibarthi with the Brahmanfollows. In this sequence, the identity between the Vedaand the word Rishi has been established as the very firstSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 80 81
step. While expanding the meaning of the word Rishi,we need to take account of the aspect of the Vedas.In this context, we recognise the inner meaning ofthe word rishi. For that individual who can experiencethe Vedas and Brahman directly, the name Rishi isappropriate. One who can explain and expound theessential form of the Veda can be called a Rishi. OurPuranas have been telling us that Vasishta is the firstRishi. Vasishta had the aspect of Brahman in him, andhe was called the Brahmarishi. Viswamithra, also, wantedto acquire this name of a Brahmarishi and he himselfundertook great penance and then acquired the aspect ofBrahman. As a result of his penance, Viswamithra couldhave the vision of Brahman. As soon as he had thevision of Brahman, he was addressed as Brahmarishi byBrahma Himself. Viswamithra was not satisfied and hetold Brahma that he was not satisfied by his merelybeing addressed as a Brahmarishi. He said that he wantedto directly experience the Omkara and the vashatkarawhich the Veda has explained. Viswamithra understoodthat by getting merely the name of Brahmarishi he wasnot going to get the aspect of Brahmarishi. He wouldtruly become a Brahmarishi only when he grasped fullythe meaning of the sound Om and of Veda.Vasishta had a title which meant that Vasishta hadunderstood all that was known to the Suras, the sacredpeople, and Vasishta was known as the head of all thesesacred people. It is quite easy to call oneself by the nameBrahmarishi, but it is very difficult to get the qualitiesof a Brahmarishi. If one wants to acquire the aspect ofBrahmarishi, one should merge in the Brahman andbecome identical with Brahman. Because Viswamithrahad surrendered everything to Brahma, these aspects weretaught to Viswamithra by Brahma Himself.If one is able to get the grace of Brahma, theneverything will be under control. If you are far away fromthe grace of Brahman, all the evil planets will begin toinfluence you. Viswamithra was one who had noacquaintance whatsoever with the contents of the Veda.He did not understand the aspect of Omkara. In spite ofthis, Brahman himself taught him these things becauseof His grace. Sakthipata was given to Viswamithra bythe Lord and we have to examine the meaning of thisword. Sakthipata means that the guru hands over in oneshower all the capacities to the disciple. This, however,is not the correct meaning. When we make thisstatement, it means that there is a guru and there is adisciple to whom the Sakthi is being handed down. It isSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 82 83
in contradiction to the statement, “Sarvam Brahmamayam” (Brahman is immanent in all). This sakthipatais something that is given only when there is adeservedness. It is not given where there is nodeservedness. In all individuals this sakthi is present ina hidden manner and is in a latent form. What the gurudoes is simply to remove the veil of ignorance which ishiding the power that is intrinsically present. He doesnot hand out anything new.The aspect of Brahman is not something whichcan be given by one to another. But today, because of theinfluence of Kali, it looks as if someone pays for thisand someone else receives payment and sells it ortransfers it to a disciple. This bliss is such that one canonly experience it. If we do what we should do and adoptthe path that we should adopt, then naturally the strengthof Brahman will automatically come to us. Because theancient scholars of our country have been describingBrahman as something which is unattainable andindescribable, our people always felt discouraged anddisappointed. In fact, they have been abandoningattempts to understand this aspect of Brahman. Toexplain this aspect of Brahman, they have been usinginappropriate and confusing words.If we ask any of the ancient scholars to tell us themeaning of the word Brahman, they simply use variouswords, the meaning of which they themselves do notknow. These are not the right type of interpretations. Itis very easy to recognise the aspect of Brahman. It iseven more easy to experience Brahman. In the absenceof knowledge about the methodology of understandingBrahman, man is unable to recognise what is right infront of him. He is groping in the dark.There is a small example for this which can gostraight into your heart and which you can understandeasily. Suppose you have a book in your hand and yougo to a friend when you are reading the book. On seeingthe friend you ask for a loan of ten rupees. The friend iswilling to give you the loan but before that, he wishes tosee the book you are holding in your hand. While thefriend was looking at this book, he finds a ten rupee noteinside the book and asks the person who asked him for aloan why he was asking for a loan when the ten rupeenote was already inside the book. Immediately the formersays that he had forgotten about the ten rupee note thatwas placed in the book and that he no longer requires aloan and he goes away. Now we have to ask if this friendhas given the ten rupee note from somewhere or whetherSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 84 85
he simply pointed out to an already existing ten rupeenote which belonged to him. The fact is that the tenrupee note really belonged to him and he had kept it in abook which was pointed out by his friend. He was notaware of the existence of the ten rupee note which is hisown property.In the same manner, nowadays, we are having thebook of our heart and forgetting that there is wisdomlatent in our heart. We go to some pundit and requesthim to show us the sacred path of wisdom andknowledge. This guru, who has been approached,simply says that there is the basic wisdom in the book ofhis heart and only points this out to him. On realisingthis aspect, the disciple feels that there is a divine aspectin him and feels that he no longer needs a guru. So whenwe talk of a guru and the sakthipata, it is not as if we arecommunicating something which is exterior to us. Whatwe are doing is simply drawing our attention to theexisting strength and wisdom in our own heart. As in this analogy, what Brahma did toViswamithra was to simply remove the clouds that havebeen hiding the strength that was present in Viswamithraintrinsically. The thapas (austerities) which Viswamithrawent through gave him the darshan of Brahma, and thenBrahma enabled him to realise the strength which wasalready present in him. He taught Viswamithra torecognise the presence of Brahman everywhere and toldhim to sing about the grace of the Lord and aboutBrahma’s presence everywhere and then he disappeared.So the aspect of Brahman is not something which isseparate or distinctive but is present everywhere. It isnot a material item which has some specific features. Itis parartha (spirit) and not padartha (matter, object). Itis something present everywhere.There are many names for Brahman. This aspectof Brahman can be called as Vakpathi or Vachaspathi orBrihaspathi.  These are identical and synonymous namesfor Brahman. We may get a doubt as to why Brahmanshould have so many different names. In our own houses,we are worshipping God with a thousand names and eachof these names refers to a particular quality of the Lord.We may get a doubt as to whether each one of thesethousand names is appropriate to the Lord or not andwhether they really signify a true aspect of the Lord. Inour daily life we are experiencing the significance ofthese different names. When there is a householder whois the head of a family, we know that the son comes andaddresses him as father, while the daughter-in-lawSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 86 87
addresses him as father-in-law, the grandson addresseshim as grandfather, and the wife will address him as “Mydear husband”. Here we see that because he hasestablished different types of relationships, he isaddressed by different names by different people. ABrahmin is called a pujari if he is performing puja andhe is called a cook if he is cooking. He acquires adifferent name depending on the nature of work that heperforms. Similarly, depending on the time, situation andthe country, Brahman has been given different nameswhich are appropriate to the situation and work.Yesterday we have understood the meaning of thenames Vakpathi and Vachaspathi. Today we shall take thenames Brahmanaspathi and Brihaspathi. Indra and Varunahave recognised the Manthra as the basis for everything,because Brahma is the master of these Manthras he is calledBrahmanaspathi. Because he is the one who controls theseManthras they have accepted him as Brahmanaspathi.Brahmana is a word which comes from Brahman. Brahmarides over these Manthras or the Manthras carryBrahman and, therefore, he has also been calledBrahmanaspathi. If we want to get control over Brahmanor gain his grace, then his carriers, namely the Manthrasover which he rides, must first be brought under control.Such inner meanings are contained in ourBharatha and Bhagavatha in many ways. On oneoccasion Brahma came to Valmiki and told him thatthe gift of Saraswathi was given to him and that heshould write the Ramayana. When we say that Brahmacame to Valmiki and handed over Saraswathi to him asa gift, we find it difficult to understand the statementbecause we regard Saraswathi as the wife of Brahma.Because of the word Pati we take Brahma as thehusband of Saraswathi. That is not correct. Pati reallymeans Kartha or the head of a situation. When we saythat Brahma is the head or controller of all Manthras,we should not readily interpret Brahma as the husbandof Saraswathi. Brahma is to be regarded as the masterof Manthras. Brahma is really the controller or themaster of the Manthras, and to misinterpret by sayingthat he has a wife and a family is not correct. Brahma,the master, does not have any such relationship and suchan interpretation is erroneous.Here, we should understand the meaning ofSaraswathi and what she stands for. Saraswathi has forher vehicle the Hamsa (Swan). This word Hamsa standsfor Soham or the taking in and giving out of the breath.Thus, what Brahma has handed over to Valmiki as a giftSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 88 89
is the aspect of Soham. You cannot get a word outwithout taking in a proper breath. Here breath is the carrierHamsa, or the Swan, and who rides over it is Saraswathi.This means that Brahma has given to Valmiki the aspect ofSoham or the breath which brings out the words, and heasked him to use this in writing the Ramayana.By the title Brahmanaspathi, we have to under-stand that Brahman is the master, and that he is in fullcontrol of the Manthras. The world is made up of all thematerial items that we see around us. Matter has arisenout of words. The meaning of the various words arisesfrom the words themselves. We learnt that Brahman isresponsible for the sounds that emerge. If, therefore, themeaning of the word Brihaspathi is that Brahma is themaster of this whole world, we come to the conclusionthat Brihaspathi is only an alternative name forBrahman. In this way, if we recognise the true meaningand interpret each of the names appropriate to Brahman,we can easily understand the presence of Brahmaneverywhere and the significance of these names.Citizens of Bharath always liked to move closerand closer to God and, therefore, they created more andmore names which are appropriate to God. For thisreason and because each one is close to God, eachindividual has given an appropriate name to the Lord. Eachindividual has given Him a name which pleases him most.They have enjoyed giving different names and forms.Westerners have questioned why we create different namesand forms while God is only one. They think that weought to have had only one name and form. We havebeen creating various forms of God based on our ideasand our capacity.There is a small example for this. Ten children goto a cloth shop and choose some material which is to theirliking. These children take the cloth to a tailor, and eachone gives measurements appropriate to himself and getsa suitably stitched shirt. All the children have used thesame cloth for making their shirts, but each one will haveto adopt appropriate measurements. This is the right thingto do; but if the tailor stitched all bush shirts to the samesize and asked all the children to somehow manage withthat shirt, it would not be proper. If each one wears a bushshirt appropriate to his size, that gives satisfaction. If thiswere not so, they would not be satisfied. If one is givena shirt that is not suitable to him, he would rather gowithout a shirt than wear a shirt which is not suitable.Therefore, if any religion tells all individuals tofollow only one path and accept one uniform interpretation,Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 90 91
then it is something which is meaningless. To dictate uni-formity is not right. There should not be anydifficulty in allowing devotees to take into considerationtheir desire and strength and create a form which pleasesthem. In the old days, Westerners used to compel peopleto adopt one uniform religion and this is a situationsimilar to asking all the people to wear the same bushshirt. This is not the correct method. Whether it is for thecitizens of our country or of other countries, this is notan acceptable situation.The aspect of Brahman is shining in the heart ofeveryone and depending upon his own picture of theeffulgent Brahman, which is present in him, he has theright to adopt that particular aspect. If we do not acceptthis much choice, how can we understand the aspect ofBrahman? When we use the words “freedom of choice,”we use these words only with regard to our understandingof the divine. The reason for this is that God is limitless,and one can have freedom in this regard and yet enjoythe limitless aspect of God.In order to understand this limitless aspect, it hasbeen said, “Ananto vai vedaha,” which means that theVedas, through which we can get an idea of the divine,are limitless. Sometimes we may ask why there shouldbe so many Vedas to describe the one aspect of God. Ifwe want to understand this well, we must realise thatreligions are all different but all of them lead to the samegoal. The cloth may be different but the basicmaterial, namely the thread which makes the cloth ofdifferent kinds, is the same. Ornaments are all different,but the gold which goes into making the ornaments isthe same. The colour of the cattle may vary from one toanother, but the milk that comes from these cattle is thesame. The flowers may be of different types, but theworship for which they are used is one and the same.Human beings have missed the essential point andare unable to understand this as a result of theirignorance, and men have submitted themselves to a greatmany difficulties because of such ignorance. God is one,but each individual should be able to create a form forhimself according to his taste. When salt is in the sea, itis not distinct from the sea. It is a part of the ocean. Whenwe talk of this salty taste, it is a quality present in theocean. When we say that the water of the ocean is salty,have we to drink and taste the entire ocean to experiencethis? One drop of water is enough to tell us that the oceanwater is salty.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 92 93
In the same manner, even if you experience a smallpart of the aspect of Brahman which is in your heart, youcan understand the entire divine aspect of the Brahman.So when we talk of Brahman, we need not think thatthere is one Brahman in each country. There is only oneBrahman all over, and He is not different in differentpersons. There are many tube lights here, and we thinkthat there are different tube lights. Indeed the lightcoming from each tube light appears to be different, butthe current that flows through all the tube lights is thesame. All the human bodies in this world are like tubelights, and the aspect of Brahman, in the form ofSakthipata, flows in all these human tube lights.However, in some of these tubes the fuse is absentbecause of ignorance and the light does not glow in suchtubes. Simply because there is no light in him, theindividual should not say that there is no Brahman inhim. In everyone this capacity to shine is present, and ithas been said, “Prajnanam Brahma” or Brahma isPrajnana.From the four Vedas, our ancients have picked upfour very special statements and taught their meaning tous. These four are “Prajnanam Brahma”, “Ayam AtmaBrahma”, “Thath Thwam Asi”, “Aham Brahmasmi”.These statements imply that Brahma is synonymous toPrajnana, and that the Atma is Brahma, and that Brahmanis yourself. In these we will be able to see that in thedissolved state everything is one and the same. In thisstate of dissolution all bad and good, things that areattractive and things that are not attractive, appear asone and the same. All things look as if they are one andthe same. We will not recognise the difference betweennames and forms. In this state one can only experiencebliss.There is a small example for this. They bring alarge number of oranges in a lorry and dump them in afactory. Out of these oranges, they extract the juice andbottle it under a trade name. When the oranges arebrought in, some of them are green, some of them areyellow, some of them are ripe, and some of them areoverripe and so on. But once the juice is extracted andput in a bottle, you do not any longer see the differentforms of the oranges which were present before. Youwill not be able to say that this part of the juice comesfrom this orange and so on. It is indistinguishable.If all of us have merged ourselves in the aspect ofBrahman, it will not be possible for us to recognise theindividual form and name. We can only see the commonSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 94 95
aspect of Brahman in all the individuals. Only one whois clearly above the concept of name and form can becalled Brahmarishi. There are cases of people who arein the stage of a Brahmarishi but for the sake of theprosperity of the world, they will be doing certain things.They do such things, not because they do not have theaspect of equality in them. Today in the world there areseveral people who go by the name Brahmarishis. Thereare also several yogis, Rishis, Maharishis andYogeswaras. But these people are not recognising norpossessing the qualities that are essential for deservingthese titles. The meaning and the significance of the wordYoga was being expounded to you by several people inthe past few days. How can individuals who do not getcontrol over their own mind get control over other things?When we are not able to divert our mind from bad desires,how can we call ourselves Yogis and Yogeswaras? It issuch people who are bringing disgrace andmisunderstanding on the true meaning of the word yogi.One who sees the dirty water in the drain along-side the road on which he moves should not think thatthe rain water which comes from the clouds is also dirty.To think so is foolishness. Simply because the waterwhich one has seen is dirty or the experience which onehas had is dirty, it does not follow that all water is dirty.Because many persons only see such unclean andimpure water, they do not even make an attempt to see ifthere is clean water anywhere. They cannot evenrecognise clean water when they see it. They arewasting their time in this manner. Such persons arebringing disrepute to our own culture and traditionsthereby giving scope to others who do not belong to thiscountry to ridicule us.It should be the aim of the students and the youngpeople who have gathered here to understand ourculture well and to know what Yoga truly means. Theyshould also put such knowledge into practice. I firmlybelieve that students are the only people who can setthings right in future and can demonstrate the strengthof these principles by putting them into practice. Do notundertake to follow anything in a blind manner. Alwaysmake an enquiry into the truth and the permanent orimpermanent nature of what you are seeing.In every country of this world good and bad comeas a mixture. We should believe only in the good andforget what is bad. If people are not able to control theirminds in trivial matters, what is it that they can controlin their lives?Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 96
Pavitratma Swarupas!With the hope that you will understand the sacrednessof our culture and develop the strength to establish ourculture, I am explaining to you these things and not with aview to criticise anyone. In the coming fifteen days, whenyou make an attempt to understand the meaning and theaspect of Brahman, you will find everything becomes asclear as if you are seeing it in a mirror. When all of youlook at this piece of cloth in my hand you will call it ahandkerchief but if I do not let you see it in its entirety andshow you only one corner and ask you what it is, you willnot be able to say what it is. Today what you know aboutBrahman is a very small aspect and in the nextfifteen days you will see it in its entirety. Once you do seethis, there will be no room for any further doubt in thismatter. Similarly, after you have learnt all aboutBrahman, you will know it in all its detailed aspects.
6. Brahman Is Within You And IsRealisable By An Unwavering Mind
Morality and discipline bring respect andreputation to man. Whatever one acquiresin his young age remains with him in his later life. Peoplewho could convey such noble ideas were accepted asteachers in ancient days. In the human body, such of theorgans in which the life force is not specifically presentgradually decay and perish. On the contrary, such organsin which the life force is present will remain healthy andcontinue to show vitality. One can say in this contextthat the life force is the essence of all organs. For thisreason, the life force has been called in our Vedanta bythe names as Angirasa Bhuta. Such Angirasa, taking theform of essence of life, protects all the organs and enablespeople to live in this material world comprising ofdifferent forms and names.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 98 99
This Angirasa has also been called the God of life.Because this God of life with the name Angirasa isclosely associated with Brihaspati, Angirasa has acquiredan alternative name Brihaspati. Sruthi demonstrated thatAngirasa and Brihaspati are synonymous. The wordBruhati means voice. One who is the master of Bruhatior voice is called Brihaspati. It is in the context of suchBrihaspati that words which have special significancehave been named Riks . Sama is another name for suchRiks. These Riks are associated with Bruhat and are calledBrihita prosody.There is another meter by name Anushtup. Thismeter is associated with the Riks. Thus Anushtup, Brihita,Brihaspati, Sama are all synonymous words. In the wordSama, there is something which we have to know by aspecial effort. Sa here signifies voice. Ama signifies life.The combination of voice and life is the meaning of theword Sama. Thus Bruhu, the word which is acombination of voice and life, is equivalent to Brihaspatiand it has manifested itself as Sama or Brahman in thismaterial world. The material world which is made up ofname and form has been taken by people as themanifestation of Purusha. Brihaspati, Brahman andSama have all appeared in this world as the Purusha.Name and form have an inseparable connectionbetween each other. It is not possible to separate the namefrom the form in this world. When we point our fingertowards the eye, we call attention to the eye. The nameand form of the eye are inseparably connected to eachother. Thus Angirasa and Brihaspati, who have createdthe name and form for each item in this material worldare closely connected to each other. In fact, Angirasa isBrihaspati and Brihaspati is Angirasa.Brahman does not have a specific name and form.It encompasses all names and forms that weencounter in this world. All the business of this materialworld is contained in the words that signify all formsand names. Whether it is in the tiny insects or in thehuge forms that we see in this world, the all-pervadingaspect is that of Brahman. Since the aspect is equal in allliving things, Brahma is also called Sama, one who isequal-minded. Because this aspect of Brahman is notconfined to equal mindedness to living things only, butsince it is all-pervading and covers the entire creation, ithas been said that Easwara is present everywhere andenvelops the entire universe. Just as from the shiningsun, the sun’s rays come spontaneously, so also from God,who is the source of all energy, come spontaneously allSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 100 101
the words of the Veda which are like the rays of wisdom.The kind of inseparable relationship that exists betweenthe sun’s rays and the sun also exists between the Vedasand God who is their source.If today, students recognise such sacredness in ourVedas, you will turn into future citizens of this countrywho will have the capacity to re-establish the supremacyof Vedic culture. Our elders have taught us that theunderstanding of God is above the sensory capacities ofman. To be able to experience the aspect of Brahmanwhich itself is above sensory capacities, we should alsorise above the senses. How can we understand somethingabove the senses while we remain in a stage which isbelow the senses? When we become equal-minded, wecan rise above the trivialities of name and form.There is deep significance in saying that all theworld is filled with Brahman. We recall that Sankara hassaid that Brahman is truth and the world is an illusion.This is a piece of cloth. How can this be made withoutthe yarn? Here is a golden ring. Can this be madewithout the gold? Can there be a pot without the mud?Thus cloth without the yarn, pot without the mud,ornament without the gold, world without Brahman cannotexist. Thus, the entire world is permeated by Brahman.Without Brahman, there is no world. The whole universeis only an illusory manifestation of Brahman. Onedevotee described this situation saying,“When the whole universe is the Lord’s mansion,where do we search for a main entrance to thismansion? Play on the strings of life as you play onthe strings of a veena so that tears of joy and blissflow. The door to the Lord’s mansion is always open.There is something unnatural in asking such an opendoor to be opened for you. Queries and doubts areonly the result of distortions of one’s mind.”One does not have to search for Brahman in somedistant chosen place. One should find Brahman in one’sdaily life in all things from the smallest thing that onecomes across to the biggest thing that one sees. If withsome reason and with some depth we make an enquiry,there is a chance of finding Brahman in our own heartand within ourselves. If we can get into a state ofmeditation, we can enjoy the bliss of recognisingBrahman everywhere. If the mind is made steady andunwavering, we can enjoy permanent bliss and see theaspect of Brahman.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 102 103
If the mind is wandering like a monkey, we cannever enjoy all this. If in the Adhyatmic path we wish toattain the bliss of Brahman, we generally go to apilgrimage centre or meet elders and learned people.Brahman is not to be sought in a pilgrimage centre nor isit to be looked for in the teachings of elders. It is withinyou and can be known by controlling your own mind.It is in this context that Meera sang:“Oh! mind, travel to the banks of Ganga andYamuna. Ganga and Yamuna represent the twoNadis (nerves), Ida and Pingala. Move on to wherethese two Nadis, through which one inhales thebreath and exhales the breath, meet. Move on andlocate yourself in the clear, clean and pure place,the centre of your forehead.”When one tries to understand the inner meaningof what has just been said, he comes to the conclusionthat Brahman can be realised only in a quiet, clear, andpure place. Is there such a place in this world and howcan we find and reach it? Such a place does not existoutside you. It is present in your own internal self. Fromtime immemorial, Maharishis have searched for a placeof that kind all over and in the end, they came to theconclusion that they should turn their vision and theirthoughts inward to find such a place. By such a processthey could get a glimpse of Brahman and enjoy the blissthereof. They spread these processes, which theydiscovered, to the rest of the world. While such anomnipotent, all-knowing and sacred Brahman is presentwithin one’s own self, it is ununderstandable that onegoes about searching for it in all places outside himself.When you have the wish-fulfilling tree, theKalpavriksha, available to you, why look for ordinaryfruits? When you have the Kamadhenu available to you,why look for milk from ordinary cows? When you havethe mountain of gold available to you, why go aboutpurchasing silver? Today we have turned ourselves intopersons who, while having rich food in their own homes,go after stale food that one can get by asking for it fromone’s neighbour. The aspect of Brahman is not outsideyourself. You should not waste your time and life lookingfor it externally. Time is Brahman. Rendering such timeunsacred is wasting your life and rendering Brahmanunsacred. What we should do today is to make an attemptto develop an inner vision to realise the Divine strengthof Brahman which is omnipresent.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 104 105
I will give you an illustration for this which I havegiven you several times earlier. There are two importantstatements. The entire world is filled with Vishnu. WhileBrahman is the only truth, the world is an illusion. Boththese statements arise from the Veda; but people are likelyto get a doubt as to which one of them is correct, as thereis an apparent contradiction between them.I will now cite an example from daily experience.Ninety-nine percent of the boys and girls assembled hereare used to going to a cinema. When you go to see apicture, you sit looking at the screen. One would notlike to sit looking at a blank screen for too long a time.After some time, when pictures appear on the screen youfeel relieved. But if the same pictures remain there, youfeel impatient. You expect the pictures to change. Evenas you feel that a set of pictures are real, they disappearand others come. The pictures are not real. Theirdisappearing and others appearing in their place is areality. Thus, this is neither truth nor untruth. In Vedanticlanguage, this phenomenon is termed true-untruth, amixture of truth and untruth also called by a special wordMithya. These pictures, which are coming and going,depend on the screen for their appearance. The screenneither comes nor goes. The pictures are not stationary.They come and go. The screen is a reality. The picturesare a Mithya. In this analogy, the screen is comparableto Brahman and is a reality. The pictures are comparableto the creation and the men and women who come andgo are a Mithya. That is why we say Brahman is truthand the world is a Mithya. The illusory world is like thepictures that depend for their manifestation on the screen,in this case, Brahman.The second statement talks of the entire worldbeing filled with Vishnu. When the illusory pictures comeon the screen, the true screen is mixed up with the unrealpictures. Just like this, the true Brahman is mixed upinextricably with the Mithya of creation. If there is noBrahman, there is no creation. We are like pictures whichcome again and again on the screen of Brahman.It is in this context that Sankara described ourcoming into and going out of this world in a slokasaying, we are born and die again to be born, and so on;the cycle of birth and death envelops us. If we live a life,die, and are reborn again, what is it that we are achievingin each life? We must try and make an attempt to see thatonce we come into this life and go, we should not comeback again into this world.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 106 107
Boys and girls!This world is like a newspaper. Once we read anewspaper from the beginning to end, we do not want toread it again. It becomes a waste paper and we throw itaway in the basket. In the same manner, once we see thisnewspaper of the world, we do not wish to see it againand again. All our experiences in this world are like anewspaper. This has been described in two concepts, viz.,no birth, rebirth. What is the meaning of these two. Tobe born again is rebirth. Not to be born again is no birth.When does one get rebirth? It is only when there is aresiduary life force in him that one gets rebirth.There is a small illustration for this. We have thecase of paddy. If we sow paddy in the earth and water it,we note that it sprouts. There is some rice inside thepaddy, covered by husk. This is the reason why it sprouts.If we remove the husk and plant the rice alone it doesnot sprout. Because of the presence of husk, we call itpaddy. If there is no husk, we call it rice. If the grainwith husk is planted, it sprouts. In this analogy, rice hasno rebirth and paddy has rebirth. Our life, when it iscovered with the husk of desire, has rebirth. Once weremove this husk of desire, there is no birth.In this context, it has been said that man’s mindalone is responsible for his bondage as well as liberation.Thus in the content of Brahman, life plus desire is manand life minus desire is God. How can it be possible tolive without desires? It is not possible to eliminate alldesires. If, however, we turn all our desires towards Godand whatever we do, if we do it remembering that we doit for the pleasure of God, those desires will not bind usfor rebirth. Whatever work we wish to undertake, weshould do so without the desire to claim the fruit thereof.We have the right to do work, but we have no right to thefruit thereof. This is what the Gita also says.One may ask what does it matter if we desire toenjoy the fruits of work. It is possible to have peace inour life only if such desires are limited and kept undercontrol. Take your own experience as an example. Youhave come here for a stay of one month. You would haveargued that if you carried a small bag with a limitednumber of clothes in it, that would suffice. A big bagwould be a burden and would make your journeyuncomfortable. Not only this, there are instructions in therailway carriages to the effect, “Less luggage gives morecomfort and makes travel a pleasure.” Thus, when on atrivial journey which lasts for a few days, we try to lessenSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 108
our luggage should we not lessen our luggage in the longjourney of our life?Desires constitute the luggage of our life. InVedantic parlance, giving up  desires is called vairagya.Vairagya does not consist in giving up one’s home, one’sfamily, and going away to the forest. There is also anothermeaning for this word. It does not matter if you live inthe world, but do not let the world live in you. You mayundertake work to the extent necessary for living in theworld, but do not let the consequences and results fillyour mind and bother you. Do not entertain high desiresin your heart because if you wish to fulfil them, you willbe subjected to troubles. Are such desires appropriate tous? Are they such that you are entitled to entertain them?In promoting your desires, do not be selfish.You should also consider the well-being ofothers. Your life should be such that you do not givetrouble to others and to yourself. Be good to others.Giving trouble to one aspect of Brahman and worshippinganother aspect of Brahman is not the right path. Followa good path. Do not harm others. Do not harm yourself.Recognise the aspect of Brahman in every living thingand in all the work you do. Promote this aspect in youand lead a life filled with such ideals and principles. Youwill be happy and will have no worries.
7. Karma And DharmaLead To Realisation Of Brahman
Amongst all the qualities, the quality of truthis the greatest. This quality of truth will beshining as the most prominent one in thewhole world. One who has such a qualityin his daily life can be termed as a punyatmaor a person who has done good.Pavitratma Swarupas, Students!
The Vedas are referred to by several names. Ofthese, adhyayana and swadhyaya are twonames which we should understand well. Adhyayana alsomeans practice. When we use this word, we have also tounderstand what it is that we practise. What we practiseis Brahma Yagna. It has been said that adhyayana beginswith Brahma Yajna. In the context of our attempting to knowSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
the inner meaning of the word adhyayana, we come tothe conclusion that Veda and Brahman are one and thesame because we utter them together. When we want tounderstand the meaning of the word swadhyaya, manypeople regard this as representing one’s own branch.Taking the meaning of this word as Swasakha or one’sown chosen special branch, they are misinterpreting theVeda. If we regard swadhyaya as swasakha or a specialbranch of the Vedas, then we imply that the Vedas do notdeal with other aspects. The word Swadhyaya has beengiven the meaning swasakha, implying that the Veda hasthe form of swasakha. If one wants to feel that onebelongs to a particular branch or sect, Veda does notaccept such an interpretation.Other scholars like Jaimini and Badarayana haveinterpreted this word by calling it Dharma jijnasa andBrahma jijnasa; that is the desire to learn the meaningof dharma and of Brahma. Even if we want to go alongwith the meaning of Swasakha as one particular branch,it is the interpretation of these two Rishis that afterreading of swasakha, or one particular branch, one hasalso to follow dharma and Brahman. When we say thatthe knowledge of Vedas or of dharma and Brahmarelates to all branches of knowledge, there is nomeaning in regarding Veda as referring to one particularsect. Many people have argued on this point as well andsaid that this cannot be referred to as one branch orswasakhadhyaya.We must understand the inner meaning of thisword “swa” which has been given in Amnaya which tellsus about the word swa and its intimate relationship withAtma. In our daily life we are using the words swa andbhava combined as one word swabhava. In commonparlance, we interpret the word swabhava as the naturalcondition of man. This is not correct, and the word swarelates to Atma. All ideas emanating from one’s ownmind cannot be described as swabhava.There is another word swa-ichha (or swechha) inwhich this swa comes. This word does not mean that wecan move about in an uncontrolled manner. Swechha canbe described as the desire which comes from the depthsof one’s heart, or the seat of Atma. Today we neitherrecognise the correct meaning of swabhava nor do werecognise the correct meaning of the word swechha. Wealso do not conduct ourselves on right lines. In thesetwo words swa has to be taken to imply something whichrelates to the Atma or Brahman. In all aspects of Veda,this should be the correct interpretation.110 111Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 112 113
Several Rishis have described how we shouldunderstand the meaning of the word swa in the twoplaces—Swasakha and Swechha. They have enquiredinto and provided an answer as to which people can readthe Vedas with reference to Swasakha and Swadhyaya.When we are on the swadhyaya, we must understand theVedas with special reference to mimamsa. We will takethe first injunction, “Adhato Dharma jijnasa.” We haveto first understand the details of the methodology andduties which go with the word dharma. It becomes clearthat the aspect which envelops everything or that whichwe see all around us is dharma. Before dharma jijnasaand Brahma jijnasa, we must recognise the need forkarma jijnasa. Only when we understand karma jijnasa,or the knowledge relating to karma, can we understanddharma jijnasa. Only after that can we understandBrahma jijnasa, or knowledge of Brahman.The relationship between Karma, Dharma, andBrahman can be best explained by using an example withwhich we are familiar in our daily life. When we do aparticular type of cooking and then undertake to eat thefood, we should remember that bringing together thethings that we need—namely various ingredients like thefire, the vessel, etc.— constitutes the primary process.The fire that is necessary for the cooking and the vesseland the various ingredients form part and parcel of thework of the karma. Once we have brought all thesetogether, we undertake to do the cooking. The act ofcooking is the karma or work. After having made all thepreparations, eating the cooked food is like dharmajijnasa. If we then try to find the merits and demerits,such as shortage of salt, sugar, pepper, etc. in the cookedfood, that is Brahma jijnasa.If we want to compare these with different stagesin another analogy, our being born is itself karma jijnasa.After being born, realising the details of life and doingthe duties that are appropriate to the time andcircumstances is dharma jijnasa. After fulfilling suchduties, the realisation of the fact that merely fulfillingsuch duties gives no Ananda or the realisation that thereis no Ananda in dharma jijnasa alone is Brahma jijnasa.If one is not born at all there is no possibility ofperforming one’s duty, and unless you perform theduties, there is no possibility of realising that there is noAnanda in performing these duties. In other words, fromthe karma of birth follows the doing of dharma, and fromdoing dharma follows the realisation of lack of Anandaand therefrom follows Brahma jijnasa. The connectionSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 114 115
between birth or karma, dharma and Brahma is very closeand one must follow the other.If we take another analogy, karma occupies thevery first step of a pollinated flower. Slowly, and as timegoes on, the petals drop out and what is left is the bud ofthe fruit. When these petals drop out and we do what wehave to do to the bud, it develops into a fruit. When wetaste the unripe fruit, we realise that there is no sweetnessin such a fruit and we keep doing what has to be doneuntil the unripe fruit becomes ripe and sweet. Thus,gradually sweetness replaces the sourness. In this wholeprocess, the flower, the unripe fruit, and the fruit are alltransformations of one and the same and they are notessentially different. In the same manner Karma,Dharma, and Brahma are simply three different aspectsof the same Brahman. In the two early stages of karmaand dharma, there may be some difficulty, but in the thirdstage of Brahman there is no difficulty and one is full ofAnanda or bliss. But whatever path one follows, the goalwhich one reaches is the same.There are four purusharthas (Goals of life) namely,Dharma, Artha (wealth, prosperity), Kama (desire) andMoksha (liberation). For Kama and Artha, we haveDharma and Moksha on either side. We should try toregroup the four into two groups. If we take these fourand treat them as four separate entities, we will not getany benefit out of our actions. If we can combine dharmawith artha and kama with moksha, then we realise thatwe will have to acquire wealth for the sake of dharmaand we must turn all our desires to acquire moksha.Wealth is not permanent and kama is something whichwavers. Wealth and lust are things which areimpermanent and keep on changing. It is not possiblethat man can become happy by the possession of thesetwo things. The reason for this is that they are unsteadyand impermanent and such things cannot givehappiness to man. When these impermanent things,wealth and lust, are combined with permanent things likedharma and moksha, they also acquire such sanctity andbecome somewhat true and permanent. If wealth iscombined with a permanent truth like dharma andsimilarly, lust, which is a wavering type, is combinedwith permanent moksha, then we will be able to acquireAnanda in the aspect of Brahman. Our purpose shouldbe to combine the impermanent things with thepermanent things of life. We should strive to move onfrom the minutest aspect to one of infinity.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 116 117
When we have a drop of water in our hand, it willappear to us only like a small drop. When we take thisdrop of water and merge it with the infinite ocean, thedrop also takes the form of the infinite ocean. Moksha isan endless and infinite thing and dharma is equallylimitless. Our purpose should be to take all ourtemporary desires which have several limitations andmerge them with more permanent things like dharmaand moksha.The word moksha does not represent somethingwhich is exhaustible and which you can purchase from ashop. Moksha is regarded as a limitless entity. So longas there is attachment in you, the world will appearpermanent. On the lotus of your heart, this attachmentalways moves like mercury. This kind of mercurial lustwhich is continually moving from place to place shouldbe removed, and this process of mohakshaya (attritionof attachment) is moksha. Once this attachment goes,what remains is simply Ananda. To convert our lives, tosome extent, in this manner is the path of Brahman. Oncewe make a proper enquiry and understand this aspect ofBrahman, we realise thatBrahman is latent in Karma.Karma, or work, is latent in Dharma, and Dharma islatent in Brahman as well. One’s own self is the aspectof Brahman, and to recognise this aspect of Brahman ineveryone is the state of bliss which we should seek.One who is in the path of karma will be thinking,“I am in the light.” One who is following the path ofdharma will be thinking, “The light is in me.” One whohas moved on to the aspect of Brahman and learnt toexperience Brahman in everything will say, “I am thelight.” Thus, “I am the light” is the aspect of Brahmanwhile “I am in the light” is the aspect of karma and “thelight is in me” is the aspect of dharma.So long as you say, “I am in the light,” you arenot an independent person; but you are dependent. Tosay that you are in the light is to imply that you aredependent on the light. If we state that “this cloth is inmy hand,” we imply that the hand is in control of thecloth. The cloth is not an independent entity. When yousay that the light is in you, you control the light. Thisimplies that there is something which is being controlledand someone who controls and, therefore, a dual aspectis introduced by implication. Here we have two things—one is the nature and the other one is following theinjunction laid down by nature. That is why we say,“Adhato Dharma Jijnasa.” It is only when there isSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 118 119
Prakruthi or world around you, that you require a codeof dharma to follow.In this context, if you came to the conclusion thatthose who are in the family, living as a part thereof, donot have the right to follow the path of Brahman, it isnot the right idea. There is a good example for this in theRamayana. The family life is like a chariot. Husbandand wife are the horses. Dharma is the charioteer.Family, or the bundle of worldly desires, is the path andmoksha is the goal. Thus the horses, namely thehusband and wife, can lead the chariot of life to mokshaif they follow the path of dharma. It is not right and it isa weakness to think that only yogis, jnanis, and rishisare entitled to moksha. The destination is available foreveryone. Whether one is a brahmachari or avanaprastha or a sanyasi, the destination is the same forall of them. From one point of view what we see in ourdaily life the four states—Brahmacharya, Grihastha,Vanaprasatha, Sanyasi—may be different but in theaspect of Brahman, they are one and the same. The fourhave taken the paths arthi, arthaarthi, jijnasu, and jnani,and by journeying on these four different paths, they allreach the same goal. When one aspires to reach the rightdestination, God is always ready to respond to everyonewith the same attitude. He is even prepared to lead themto the destination. God does not have different thoughtsor opinions about different people. Such differences ariseonly from the different ideas which we have. It is wrongto attribute differences to God.There is a small story for this. One richbusinessman was conducting his business. He had fourwives. The first one was continuously ill and sufferingfrom some disease or other. The second wife was givento worldly pleasures. The third wife was always pursuinga spiritual path and was wanting to meet learned personsand learn about religious aspects. The fourth wife wasvery healthy but was not given to worldly pleasures andhad no desires of any kind. She had only one thoughtand that was to become one with the Divine. Thebusinessman went to a foreign land and wrote to the fourwives just before coming back, asked them what theywanted to be brought. The first wife replied that shewanted a special kind of medicine for her illness. Thesecond wife asked for special gifts like saris,jewels, etc. The third wife asked for religious books ofthe foreign land. She also asked him to search forinformation given by learned scholars concerning theaspect of Brahman. The fourth wife had nothing to askSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 120 121
except the safe return of her husband. As soon as he gaveall the things which he had brought with him from theforeign land to the respective wives, he himself went tothe house of the fourth wife. The other wives grew jealousand asked him why he was spending all the time withthe fourth wife especially after being absent from thehouse for such a long time. He replied that he had giveneach wife what she had asked for and as the fourth wifeasked for him, he had gone to her house.In the same manner Brahman is the master of arthi,arthaarthi, jnani and jijnasu, and gives each one whathe asks for. Brahman will give bodily comforts to onewho is an arthi. For one who is a jnani, Brahman willtell him about the paths of journey to the state of bliss orwisdom. For the jijnasu, He gives Himself as that is whathe desires. Difference may exist in the method of ourasking and what we ask for, but there is no difference inthe aspect of Brahman. Changes that come about in yourprayer and in the manner of your prayer have theirorigins in you. Those changes do not belong to Brahman.It is in this context that we come across the statement,“Yadbhavam tad bhavati” (The thoughts will determinethe action). Therefore, if your thoughts are pure andsacred, whatever experience results from this will alsobe pure and sacred. Out of such pure and sacredexperience will result jnana.Many people do not see faults in them as theirown and try to hide them. By way of excuses for theirfailings, they blame God. Such defects or faults are notpresent in God. In fact, God is like fire and whatevergoes near the fire is burnt up and so also all bad qualitiesare burnt up in the presence of God. This is the reasonwhy Brahman is often compared with fire by saying AgniBrahman. There is a significant meaning here inrecognising Brahman as the fire of wisdom. To associatean impurity with such sacred and effulgent wisdom is asign of our own impurity. Therefore, we must purify ourthoughts and ideas. We can then recognise the aspect ofBrahman.The Vedas demonstrate and establish the all-knowing aspect of Brahman and that everyone has theright to study Vedas. There is some amount of lack ofknowledge and misconception in thinking that only someclass of people can study the Vedas. We were told thatthe Pandavas had studied the Vedas and that they hadfull acquaintance with the Vedas. This is told to us in theMahabharatha. In the Ramayana, while Dasaratha wasperforming Aswamedha yaga (Horse sacrifice) he wasSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 122 123
advised by Vashishta to invite King Janaka who was fullyconversant with the Vedas. In the Bhagavatha also weknow that Krishna himself was well versed in the Vedas.Further, when Valmiki completed composing hisRamayana and was looking for people to whom he couldcommunicate this, Lava and Kusa (Rama’s sons) camerunning to him to learn this and Valmiki taught them allthe Vedas. If we examine to what sect or class theseindividuals Lava, Kusa, the Pandavas, Rama, Krishna,etc. belonged, we come to the conclusion that everyonehas the right to study and imbibe all that is contained inthe Vedas. Because everyone has the right to study andput into practice the Vedas, the first thing that you haveto do is to recognise the existence of such a right. Thenyou should be in a position to read and also communicatetheir contents to others. This is what I am hoping youwill be able to achieve.
8. All Creation And All Streams Of LifeUltimately Merge In Brahman
As the poison in the fangs of the snake doesnot affect the snake itself, the maya that ispresent in Brahman does not affectBrahman. It is only trying to come roundinto the world and cause an illusion in theworld. Listen to this truth, students—boysand girls!
For the past six days, we have been trying tounderstand and recognise the aspect ofBrahman. You have been told that Brahman is known byseveral names. Today, we will pick up one such nameand acquaint ourselves with it. The name which we willtake today is Prathishta!Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 124  125
The correct meaning of Prathishta is what wegenerally regard as the basis. Because nature appears tobe the basis for all things that you see around us, naturehas also got a name Prathishta. There is an authorityfrom Taitriya Bhashya for such an interpretation. Becausethis name Prathishta signifies the basis for all creationand maintenance, such an interpretation gets support. Forthe rise and fall of a bird, it is its tail that is responsible.Just as the tail in this example is the basis for the riseand fall of the bird, there is a basis for everything in thecreation. Brahman is this basis and it is known asPrathishta.In this context, the basis for the world is the Vedaand Veda is, therefore, the Prathishta. For Veda,Brahman is Prathishta or the basis. In other words, if welook at the basis and the thing that depends on the basis,we come to the conclusion that between the basis andwhat depends on the basis, that which is important is thebasis or the Prathishta. Created matter which arises inone’s mind from an illusion simply gets merged in whatconstitutes the basis.For instance, by illusion, we imagine a snake whenwe see a rope. This created or illusory snake gets mergedin the basis or the rope, once the illusion is removed. Inthe same manner, this entire world which is the result ofan illusion gets completely merged in the basis or theBrahman, once the illusion is removed.There is a small example for this. With our eyeswe look at several created things. Here we ask what isthe basis and what is it that is supported? What issupported is the creation and the basis is the eye.If there is no eye, we cannot look at this createdworld. Therefore, the created world is dependent,whereas the vision is the basis on which the created worlddepends. If we go deeper and enquire if the eye is thebasis or the vision is the basis, we come to theconclusion that neither of them is really the basis.Behind both is the real basis and this is the mind.If we merely open the eyes, it is not possible torecognise the things that we see with the eye. If the mind isnot concentrated on this process and does not constitute thebasis, we will not be able to recognise what we see.If the mind is engrossed elsewhere and even if theeyes are open, it is not possible to recognise all the itemsthat we see.If the mind and the vision are directed at differentplaces, it is not possible to recognise the true form ofwhat one sees.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 126 127
In this context, we say that what we see or what isbeing seen has the eye as its basis. Further, the mind isthe basis for the eye.In this chain, even as we recognise the mind asthe basis, we note that there is still a further basis for themind and that is one’s intelligence.When the intelligence takes the place of the basis,the mind becomes what is being seen. By going one morestep, the intelligence itself becomes what is being seenand the Atma takes the place of the basis.For the vision the basis is the eye and for one’s eyethe mind is the basis and in some circumstances theintelligence becomes the basis for the mind, and at a laterstage the Atma becomes the basis for the intelligence. Atmais the final step and there is no possibility of havinganother basis for the Atma. Atma as the final step isBrahman itself. When we consider that for all creationPrajapati (Creator) is the basis, for Prajapati whorepresents all the material aspects of the world, Brahmanbecomes the basis. As the rays spread out from Brahman,we should recognise Brahman as the basis for everything.In another example we can take the case of a river.If we examine what the basis is for the river, we concludethat rain drops are the basis. There must be some otherbasis for these drops of rain. When we look for the basisof the rain, we come to the conclusion that the basis iscloud and for the clouds themselves, the basis is the watervapour. The origin for the water vapour is the ocean andthat which connects this result of water vapour and thesource, namely the ocean, is the Sun. Sun provides theconnection between the ocean—the basis—and theresulting water vapour and water vapour in turn formsinto clouds and the clouds are the basis for the drops ofrain and the drops of rain in turn constitute the basis forthe river which is the end.Finally the created water vapour, clouds, rain, andthe river, all go and merge in the original basis itself,namely the ocean. The statement “Nadeenam SagaroGatihi” means that all the rivers go and merge in theocean and in the same manner all the created things andall the streams of life go and merge with the source,namely Brahman.The inner meaning of this is to recognise thatBrahman is in the place of Prathishta and that Brahmanis the basis of all creation. Understanding this innersignificance, we must recognise that all aspects of ourlife have Brahman as the source. In this, we have toSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 128 129
recognise that truth alone establishes the basis ofeverything. That is why in Rig Veda it is said, “TasmatParamam Vadanti.” This is an answer provided to aquestion asked by Aruni when he wanted to know fromhis Guru the path that he must adopt to know theBrahman. It has also been said that in a manner ofspeaking, truth constitutes the basis for all things. It is inthis context that Brahman itself was described as SathyamJnanam Anantam. In this, we must examine the meaningof the word sathya or truth. Does this relate to sayingthat what you have seen is as you have seen it or sayingthat what you have experienced is as you haveexperienced it or saying that what you have heard is asyou heard it? This is not the real meaning. Truth issomething which is beyond time and is unchangeable. Ithas for its basis Brahman itself. That is why in this worldthey have described truth as being one and not two. Thatis why they have described Brahman as “Ekam EvaAdviteeyam Brahma,” i.e., Brahman is one and only onewithout a second. Our primary duty is to understand andrecognise the unchanging truth.We have learnt yesterday that wherever the wordSwa occurs, it pertains to the heart or the Atma or theplace of Brahman himself. This establishes that any workor any sentence that comes from the depth of your heartis a form of truth. Therefore, when we take the sacredplace where Brahman resides as the basis, then everyword that we utter becomes a true word of Brahman.This Swasthana, the place which is the source ofBrahman, will give only words of truth. For illustratingthis, a very good example has been provided in theRamayana. Ravana recognised and understood thattaking away Sita was wrong and in spite of knowing thathe was doing wrong, he did the wrong thing. Since hecommitted the sin knowingly, he was put to a great manydifficulties later on.If there is a person who has recognised andunderstood the truth and yet adopts a bad pathcontrary to the dictates of his own heart, then the factthat he has taken to a wrong act must be due to qualitieslike anger or jealousy. Such qualities must have promptedhim to do the wrong act. One night, Vibheeshana, brotherof Ravana, went to Ravana to tell him that what Ravanadid was wrong. Vibheeshana held his brother’s hands ingreat endearment and said that the sin which Ravana hadcommitted had brought distress to all the citizens ofLanka. He said that because of Ravana’s sin, there weresnakes and cobras moving freely in every house whereSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 130 131
there should have been only recitation of the Vedas. Inthe temples where Shiva should have been worshipped,there were all kinds of insects and bad omens were seenbecause of the sin committed by Ravana. That there wereinsects in the food offered to God and that in places whereShiva was worshipped, there were snakes were allconsequences of the fact that Ravana, though well versedin all the Vedas and knowing what was righteousconduct, still committed sin.It is only when an attempt is made to refrain fromcommitting a sin that we do justice to human life. Evenif a single individual commits the wrong, its consequencespreads to his entire household and to his family. If theKing of a land commits a sin, then the entire land becomesa sinful land. This is why we say “Yatha Raja thathapraja”. The happiness and joy of the people depend onthe happiness and prosperity of the king. The country’swelfare and prosperity depends on the rulers of thecountry. If our country, which is known for its immortalspirit and which is the embodiment of the spirit ofBrahman and of all that is good, has today fallen to adesperate and frustrated level, there is no doubt that ourrulers are responsible for this. If you young people aredesirous of rectifying this deplorable situation into whichour country has fallen, you must be able to cultivate goodthoughts, do good deeds and have a strong determinationto remove the evil in our country. Recognising theimportance of truth, righteousness and morality and stillnot being able to put those values into practice is thegreatest sin.Once, Adi Sankaracharya went to Benares andprayed there to Lord Viswanath specifically for three ofhis sins to be pardoned. The disciples who followedSankaracharya were surprised and were wondering whatthose three sins were for which he was seeking pardon.Sankaracharya then explained that the first sin was thatknowing fully well that the Lord is omnipresent and allpowerful, he had undertaken the journey all the way toBenares to have the Lord’s darshan as if the Lord waspresent only in Benares. This, according to him, was thefirst sin. The significance of this is that his practice wascontrary to what he already knew.His second sin was that after recognising the Lordas one whose glory cannot be described, or as one whoseinfinite nature cannot be described in mere words, hehad attempted to describe him in a string of words andthus had ignored what he already knew about the Lord.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
His third sin was that having recognised that thehuman body itself is the temple of the Lord and havingrecognised that it is made of five perishable elements,he had not put this knowledge into practice. The jiva,that lives in the body, is indestructible and if studiedcarefully, we come to the conclusion that the one whoresides in the body has no birth and death and neitherattachment nor detachment. He realised that the almightyis residing in him as the Atma and yet he undertook thelong journey to get the darshan of the almighty in a placeoutside to his body. This was his third sin. Knowing thatthe Lord is in him, he has committed the sin of undertakingthe journey to see the Lord.If we examine the matter in this way, we will realisewhat actually sin is. When we think of what sin is, weask the Lord, “I have not killed anyone. I have not hurtanyone and yet why do I get this punishment.” Sin doesnot consist of these things only. Sin is not a separateentity. All the sins and all the good deeds are containedin your own actions and in what you do and are notexternal to you. Atma takes the form of Brahman andadopts the human body as his chariot and moves aboutthe world. Therefore, the world is Brahman; the marketis Brahman; the body is Brahman; Brahman is Brahman;and everything is Brahman. Sankaracharya hasdemonstrated that everyone is Brahma. Everyone is thesame and should not be treated as being different fromany other. It is in this context that Sankara advocated theAdwaitha or non-dual philosophy. Sankaracharya is agreat individual who handed to the world the non-dualphilosophy. His is not merely knowledge by learning,but by experiencing it himself.When the individuals who are accustomed to therighteous path take to the wrong path, then everythingthat comes one’s way is also distorted and crooked. Thereis a small example for this. A shepherd was oncelooking after his goats and sheep and found a niceshining jewel in the open fields. He thought that if thisprecious stone was tied round the neck of one of his blacksheep, it will shine even more brightly. He tied it roundthe neck of one of his black sheep after putting a smallhole in the stone. His sheep were very endearing to himand all his prema and affection were being showered onthose sheep. He never bothered about the value of thisstone and whatever precious thing he got he used it foradorning the sheep that were very dear to him. One dayhe put the goats and sheep to rest under a big tree. Onthat day, a businessman also came to rest under the same132 133Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 134 135
tree. During this period of rest, the merchant, who dealsin precious stones was attracted by the shining stone andhe realised that it was worth several lakhs of rupees. Heapproached the shepherd and offered fifty rupees for theprecious stone. The shepherd then thought that fiftyrupees would enable him to adorn fifty of his goats andso he gave the valuable stone to the merchant. While themerchant was gloating over his acquisition, the stonebroke into a thousand pieces and the merchant heard anunseen voice emanating from the stone to say, “You knowthat I am very valuable and yet you paid the shepherd avery small sum of money for me and therefore with abroken heart, I have broken into a thousand pieces”. Herewe see the moral in this story. The individual who knewthe truth and the correct value of this stone did not followthe correct path and wanted to acquire the stone cheaply.In those days, truth was so important and powerful thatit got angry and the stone broke into a thousand parts.Divyatma Swarupas!Once you have recognised truth, you must alwaysfollow the path dictated by the truth. It is the aspect ofBrahman which teaches us the nature of truth. We shouldunderstand that Brahman stands as the basis for all thatyou see in this world. It is possible that we commit somewrong, but we must not commit it after realising it iswrong. It is inescapable that you will have to suffer theconsequences of all that you do. Even when Vibheeshanaexplained the truth to Ravana, he could not recognisethe truth because he was steeped in lust. This wasresponsible for his losing his kingdom and his gettinginto a lot of trouble. Ravana knew all the four Vedas andall the Sastras and did penance for hundreds of years toget the vision of Brahman. Yet his knowledge did notget him out of his difficulties. He was also acquaintedwith several branches of material learning and could eventravel in the air. There is evidence for this in theRamayana. In spite of all this knowledge, Ravana raninto difficulties because of one bad quality, namely lust.It does not matter how many branches of Vedas oneknows, but all this is useless if you do not put theknowledge into practice. If you understand theomnipresent nature of Brahman, you would haveunderstood all the Vedas, as that is the essence of all theVedas. I am hoping that from today you will acquire thestrength and determination to put into practice what youlearn during your stay here.9. Man Lives For Himself, For His Fam-ily And For The Whole Society
If rain falls on sand, it gets completelyabsorbed. If the same rain falls on soft earth,the rain drops will form into a pool and willnot be absorbed. On the other hand, if rainfalls in an oyster shell the rain drops willturn into pearls. In the same manner, edu-cation which comes to each individual willtake a final form which depends on his owndeservedness.
Brahman has an infinite number of names andyesterday we had understood in detail themeaning of one of these names “Prathishta”. Today wewill take another name “Srihi” for Brahman. ForSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 138 139
recognising the aspect of God, we shall have to makeseveral attempts. Brahman is an aspect which constitutesthe basis for Rig, Yajur, and Sama Vedas. If properlyunderstood, it will not only help one to attain realisationbut will give all the wealth and prosperity that onedesires. That is why it has been given the name Srihi.This has also been recognised as the beginning ofcreation and hence called Hiranyagarbha which standsfor a bright jyothi and for this reason it was also calledAdhyatmika. The same thing has also been called asMahagni or the great fire. The name Srihi hasbecome immortal and is an aspect of Brahman whichhas gone into Rig, Yajur, and Sama Vedas. In thismanner it has taken a particular form called Sri Vidya,which is synonymous with Brahma Vidya.In the context of Brahma Vidya, this has taken theaspect of a Goddess and in our scriptures it has the nameSreesukta. In one of the Brahmanas, it has attained aparticular name “Subrahmanya Sama”. This song ofSubrahmanya has also taken another appropriate name,“Brahmasri”. In this word, Brahmasri, the aspect ofBrahman is joined to the aspect of Srihi and this has thefuller name Subrahmanya. When we take the rootmeaning of the word Subrahama we realise that it meansprosperity. The appellation Brahmasri has been usedbefore the name of people who are well versed in theVedas.If we want to understand the Vedas, we shall haveto study the Sastras, Puranas, and Ithihasas andunderstand the aspect of Brahman. It is not enough if oneonly recites the Vedas. He has to understand and imbibethe full meaning thereof. The Vedas and the authoritiesthat one derives from the Vedas are intended for and arevalid for the entire world and not for India alone.Veda is made up of and consists of words whichare arising from sound as the basis. In this context, wehave to regard Vedas as a personification of sound. Soundin the form of words that compose the Vedas is somethingwhich is essential and necessary for all the people theworld over. This has the form of three different kinds ofknowledge. Only when the words that appear in the Vedasare used correctly, will there be proper significance forthe Vedas. The sweetness of the Vedas is apparent only ifthe proper meaning of the words is taken.Brahman has infinite number of names and is tobe understood in infinite number of ways. We shouldregard these aspects as endless. We should be aware ofSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 140 141
the unity and the oneness in reaching all these diverseaspects. It is in this context that the citizens of Bharathhave been trying to follow the injunctions that are givenin the Vedas.A lead in this regard was given by the three greatscholars—Ramanuja, Sankara, and Madhwa. Althoughwhat has come from these scholars has been given to usunder different names such as dualistic philosophy,non-dualistic thought, and qualified non-dualism, we willsee that there is a basic oneness in all these three typesof philosophy if one carefully looks at them. Our ownpeople have treated illusory differences between thesethree philosophies without realising the inner meaning.They have been creating unnecessary arguments amongthemselves regarding the differences between the threebasic philosophies—Dwaitha, Adwaitha, and VisishtaAdwaitha. I hope that you young people will recognisethe basic truth that is contained in all these three systemsof philosophy with the help of the teachings that areavailable to you here. Having recognised this truth, I hopethat you will endeavour to spread this divinemessage throughout the world. It is only when youundertake such a sacred task would you have justifiedhaving been born in India and only then would you bedoing appropriate service to your country.Participating in active work will always create thebelief in you that the world is real and you will neverreach the conclusion that the world is maya. Mangenerally undertakes work only if he wants somebenefit from it. In this context, we will understand thatthe result is dependent on the kind of work you do. Themeaning of this is that we should undertake to do goodwork and thus expect to receive good results and handover those good results for the benefit of the societyaround us and the country.Good and bad are not intrinsic qualities of thingsthat you see. They really come out of the work that youdo. If your heart is filled with good, the result that youget will also be good. Therefore, you young people shouldfill your hearts with good ideas. Your first attempt shouldbe to promote good ideas, good thoughts and goodactions in your homes. Man cannot live isolated andseparated from the society. Even before one is born, thesociety stands before him as his guide and, therefore, anindividual should recognise the society and direct hisactions in consonance with the society in which he lives.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 142 143
If you ask anyone for whose benefit he is living,he will reply immediately without any hesitation that heis living for himself. He will state that he is living for hisown sake. To support this, he gives an example to saythat when his leg is broken, he will bandage his own legbut he will not put a bandage on his mother’s or his wife’sleg. Further, even if two persons are sleeping on one andthe same cot, they will have different dreams and thedreams which they have are not going to be common toboth. In this context, he clearly states, with the supportof such examples that both in the waking state and in thedreaming state he lives for himself but not for others.While in these two examples man asserts that heis living for himself, we see that even when a person isengaged in eating something which he likes very much,he will abandon that and go out quickly if someone comesand tells him that his son has been involved in a caraccident. So also, if he learns that his wife is seriouslyill, he will be prepared to take leave with loss of pay oreven resign the job and be present in the hospital for thesake of his wife. In these two examples, we see that thisindividual, who has been asserting that he is living forhimself, lives for his family as well as for himself. Inthis context, the individual who lives for his own sakeand for the sake of his family must ask a questionrelating to his role in a society. If the society were notthere, his family would not be there. It is only whenseveral other families which constitute a village, alongwith his own family are all in good shape that his ownfamily can experience happiness and pleasure. If thevillage is in some danger, his family will also besubjected to the same danger as it is a part of the village.This situation is similar to a body of which several limbsare a part and even if one of these limbs is damaged, theentire body will suffer. Only when all the limbs of a bodyare well will the entire body be happy. It is the safety ofall the individual limbs and organs that results in thesafety of the entire body and its happiness. It is only whenthe whole society which is composed of so manyindividuals, is happy that one can feel that the familywhich consists of these individuals, is also happy. Thismakes it quite clear that our own happiness issynonymous with the pleasure and happiness of all theindividuals of a society of which we are a part.The world is full of Ananda or bliss. What then isthe reason for so many difficulties and so much sorrowin this world? It is only the change in our own attitudesthat is responsible for such unwanted situations.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 144 145
When we are in the aspect of the Atma or Brahman,then everything looks like Ananda. If we are immersedin the bodily aspect, everything looks like sorrow to us.For this I shall give you a small example which isappropriate to all three systems namely Dwaitha,Adwaitha, and Visishta Adwaitha. Not only can one givean answer to this from our own culture, but one can givea good example from the Bible as well. In the Bible,Jesus Christ said at one stage, “I am the messenger ofGod”; at a later stage he said “I am the son of God” andat a third stage he said “I and my Father are one” and inthe final stage he said “Holy Ghost”. We must examinethe basis on which he said that he was the messenger ofGod and then that he was the Son of God, and finallythat he and the Father were one and the same.Let us think of a water surface on a big tank. Thesurface of the water keeps on swaying and moving whenthere is a breeze. We see the reflection of the moon orthe sun in this water. This reflection of the sun or themoon also appears to move along with the surface of thewater. But the original sun or moon is not moving. Theyare steady. That is, while the image of the sun appears tobe shaking or trembling, the original is not moving. Ifthe water is steady, the image of the sun will not movebecause the water surface is not moving. Both thestationary and the moving images of the sun are not theoriginal, but they are the images. Because of illusion,the moving image of the sun may be called a messengerof God. The stationary image of the sun has beendescribed as the Son of God. One who has understoodthe situation properly and one who has recognised thefact that both the stationary sun and the moving sun areonly images of the true sun will proclaim in this context“I and my Father are the same”.These three ways of looking at this phenomenonhave been called Dwaitha, Adwaitha, and VisishtaAdwaitha, that is dual, non-dual, and qualified non-dualism. Jiva, Easwara and Prakruthi are three namesgiven to these three aspects. Although the Sun, as theoriginal object, is the same in all the three cases, just asthe divine principle is the same in all these threesituations, we are looking at it in different ways. In onecase we are looking at it from the aspect of one’s ownmind and in another case we are looking at it from theaspect of one’s own body and depending upon how welook at this, we have been calling it by different names.There will be no result coming from all ourefforts if we spend all our time in the dual aspect. WeSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 146 147
must strive to move from dualism to qualified non-dualism and from there to pure non-dualism. On the veryfirst day, I mentioned to you that you should recognisethat your life is a journey from the aspect of “I” to theaspect of “We”. In this aspect, Prahlada gave a very goodexample. Prahlada’s devotion was never confined to aparticular name and form. Hiranyakasipu came to theconclusion that God does not exist anywhere; Prahlada,however, believed and demonstrated that God exists inall places where you look for Him. Hiranyakasipu’sbelief was that God is not to be found wherever you lookfor him, whereas Prahlada’s view was that God is to befound wherever you look for Him. If we examine thedifference between these two attitudes, we will come tothe conclusion that Prahlada’s attitude was to seeNarayana everywhere and in everyone whileHiranyakasipu recognised only the particular name andform. Among the five attributes,—Sath, Chith, Ananda,Nama and Rupa—the last two refer to temporary thingsand the first three relate to the Divine. When we areconsidering the aspect of Brahman, there is no point inpaying attention to a particular name and form whichkeeps on changing. It is important only to bear the aspectof Brahman in mind.If you want to enjoy the divine, we should be ableto develop the inner vision and towards that end gothrough certain practices. This has been taught to us inour scriptures as the embodiment of the divine strengthand it has also been called Parameswari. This is theUniversal mother. Ability to appreciate and understandthis aspect of the universal mother depends on thestrength that each individual has in him. It is quitecommon that this gift of Sri appears to us in this worldin the form of wealth and prosperity, as a very transientone and not a permanent Ananda. However, you shouldunderstand the true significance of this word Sri and thenalone will you enjoy permanent Ananda. It is only byrecognising this feature and meaning that we canexperience daily the continued bliss which is above allideas and gunas (attributes). That is just one and has nosecond and is totally free from the aspects of gunas.This is how our scriptures have described theaspects of Sri. If we are desirous of having Ananda andmoving into the sphere of bliss, we should recognise thissacred and all-powerful aspect which is presenteverywhere. Having recognised this aspect, we shouldcompletely surrender ourselves to this aspect. Only thencan we have complete bliss.10. All That We Take In Through TheFive Senses Constitutes Our Food
If one’s feet slip and he falls, one can pick one’sself again and set matters right; but if one letshis tongue slip, one has no remedy.  Similarly, if one hastaken to wrong path, no one can change his path andpull him out of such a situation. We will see today thatPratishta, Swadhyaya and Srihi stand for one and thesame thing. The aspect of Brahman which has beendescribed by the names Pratishta, Swadhyaya and Srihiwill now be described by another name Swadha. In oneof the Brahmanas, the same thing has been called Pitruyagnesu Swadha bhoota. Taking such sacred words ofthe Vedas as the basis, we should try to give the relevantmeaning for the word swadha. In the Aitreya Brahmana,it has also been said, “Swadha name iti vashatkara”. Thismeans that this aspect of vashatkara will also be taughtto us by the word swadha.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 150 151
In common parlance, the word swadha has themeaning of food. When we give this meaning, it becomespossible for us to recognise the equivalent word food aswhat we normally eat by our mouth. In this word swadha,we must take it to mean not only the food that wenormally eat but all other things that we take in. Here,there is a meaning which we may extend so as to includethe five senses, that is sabda (sound), sparsa (touch),rupa (seeing, form), rasa (taste), gandha (smell) andregard all that is absorbed through the sense organs asincluded in the word swadha. All the items that we seearound us that can be experienced with the five senseshave been included in the meaning of this word swadha.For all things which we can experience and enjoy in thisworld, this word swadha has stood as the basis.Therefore, this word is the very basis for the environmentaround it.It is in this context that our scriptures have beenexplaining that for nature or Prakruthi a synonym wouldbe swadha. This kind of Prakruthi does not manifestitself in different aspects but manifests itself in a chosenway and is called Parameswari.This Sakthi or energy which goes by the name ofParameswari is the basis for swadha because swadha isthe equivalent of this Parameswari or Sakthi. In thecontext of this, we see that maya or illusion, avidya orlack of knowledge and karma or work have beenexplained as the basis of creation. Here illusion andignorance are synonymous.It is not possible for us to undertake work withouta basis. For work, desire is the basis. For desire,ignorance is the basis. Here we see that the basis of allwork is desire and the basis for desire is ignorance andfor all these things, this word swadha has been standingas the basis. In other words, when we try and see theinner meaning of this, we come to the conclusion thatfor whatever we see in the world, swadha becomes thebasis. For this word swadha in all its forms, theParameswari Sakthi is the basis. This Parameswarisakthi is no doubt the basis, but this sakthi does not byitself independently do anything.Parameswara (Almighty God) is the one who hasmaya as his instrument. This maya is taking the form ofignorance. Ignorance also occasionally takes the formof illusion. The body that is maya and the Parameswara,who is resident in the body are closely associated witheach other. These two aspects, maya and Parameswara,are inextricably linked to each other. We have seen thatSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 152 153
swadha is the basis for maya, ignorance and creation; andtherefore, swadha also becomes a meaning for the wordParameswari. For this Parameswari sakthi, Parabrahmais the pratishta or the basis and therefore, this word swadhaalso becomes appropriate for Parabrahma. Here theignorance which is the Parameswara sakthi can beexperienced and enjoyed. In this context, Parameswara,who is the basis for sakthi, turns out to be the one whoexperiences. This relationship between the experience andthe experiencer itself has been established by swadha.This word swadha has also given a meaning toPrakruthi as if it was a woman, and a meaning toParabrahma as if He was a Purusha; and swadha givesthe relationship between these two. If the aspects ofParameswara and Sakthi do not come together, therecannot be creation in the world. Specifically these twoaspects are such that one cannot exist without the other.In this context, there is no objection to regarding thewhole of Prakruthi as a woman and the aspect ofParabrahma as Purusha. The fact that ignorance andParabrahma are intermixed with each other is impliedby the word swadha.Creation is something which is the result of ourimagination. This creation by imagination has desire asits basis. If this sankalpa which is latent in us is not there,it is not possible to have a view of the created world. Inorder that this sankalpa or desire in us may be of theright type, we shall have to perform the necessarysadhana.The seeds that we plant will determine the kind oftree that will sprout and the kind of tree will determinethe kind of fruit that we will get. The sankalpa is theseed and when sankalpa gets into action, the result willbe the tree. The fruit that will come on the tree is thefinal result. The kind of seed that we put in willdetermine the kind of fruit that we get from it. If anindividual desires to have sweet and good fruit, he musttake care to see that he selects sweet and good seeds.Therefore, that which is the basis for our sankalpa, ordesires and the world is the aspect of swadha. Thisswadha which is the aspect of Brahman is the basis forall these things.We should recognise and understand the meaningof the statement Sarvam Brahmamayam Jagat. Thismeans that the aspect of Brahman is the basis for all thework we do. Keeping this in mind, we should not bedisappointed with the result that we may get. If weunderstand correctly the meaning of what has been said,Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 154 155
then we will understand the spirit of the Shiva Sakthi Atmaof the world. We have to recognise the oneness of theexperience and the experiencer himself.The mother of the universe is maya, and thefather, Parabrahma. If there is no maya, we will not evenattempt to understand the aspect of Parabrahma. Mayais the form of God, whereas Parabrahma is the name ofGod Himself. This form and name are related to eachother in an inseparable manner.Therefore, this ignorance or maya, which is a formof God, can be controlled only by praying to get over it.There is a good example for this in the Ramayana. In theforest, Rama, the embodiment of dharma, is showing thepath and going ahead and behind him was his wife, Sita,following him. Lakshmana is following both of them asthe protector. The point here is that Rama, Sita, andLakshmana are going one behind the other in a single line.At that time, Lakshmana representing the Jiva, decided tohave the darshan of Rama, the symbol of Brahman. But ifhe wants to have a glimpse of Rama, he has Sita,representing Maya, standing as an obstruction betweenhim and Rama. Thus if jiva wants to have a glimpse ofParabrahma, Maya stands as an obstruction in betweenthem. Under those circumstances, Lakshmana cannot useharsh words and ask Sita—representing Maya—to makeway for him. This will only make matters worse. Ramawould not like to hear such harsh words. In such asituation, neither using harsh words nor getting angry withSita would be the right way. The only method, therefore,would be to pray and ask Sita to move aside a little, thusallowing Lakshmana to have Rama’s darshan. Then Sitawill take pity on Lakshmana and will move aside to enableLakshmana to have a glimpse of the Divinity.Sita symbolises Maya and accompanies Ramalike an inseparable shadow. One cannot becomeangry with Sita because Rama will not like such asituation. God wears this maya as “form” and becauseof this, we must bear with maya and welcome it and treatit with reverence. Swadha constitutes the basis for mayasakthi as well. Either for the creation or for the existenceof the world both Maya and Parabrahma constitute thebasis.If we examine this aspect carefully, we will cometo the conclusion that Parabrahma alone cannot beresponsible for creation that we see around us. Creationis possible only when Parabrahma and Sakthi or Mayacome together. This becomes the basis for creation. Apotter cannot make pots with dry clay. If he wants toSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 156 157
make pots, he has to use both water as well as clay. Wecannot make pots with clay alone or with water alone,but pots can be made only when both water and clay aremixed together.One cannot run a machine like a railway enginewith fire alone, nor can such a machine be run withwater alone. It is only by bringing fire and water intointimate contact and generating steam that we can run amachine. Parabrahma Sakthi and Parabrahma areinterdependent and are both needed for creation like theclay and water for a potter or like the fire and water for arailway engine. Thus, we get a basis to regard theentire Prakruthi as having the nature of a woman. Theone who has taken endearingly to this woman calledPrakruthi is the Parabrahma. Such a Parabrahma is alsopictured as wearing the ignorance or the maya sakthi asHis form.In this context, there is only one Purusha and theentire creation consists of women only. You may get adoubt at this point and may feel that when so manypurushas are sitting here, how is it possible to describethe entire creation as women only with just one Purusha?You are all only wearing the apparel of a Purusha, butyou are all not really purushas. The qualities that markout the word Purusha are not present in you, andtherefore you cannot be appropriately called Purusha.You can call yourselves purushas only when you developqualities which are above the gunas and above all worldlyideas and thoughts. You may get a doubt here and askhow God who is present everywhere and in all the gunas,is described as being above gunas. Gunas are all artificialcreations. God exists in all these created gunas, but thegunas themselves do not exist in God and therefore wecan correctly describe Him as being above gunas.In the example that we have considered, we getan understanding of this aspect. We have considered potsas having been made out of soil and water and thereforein all the pots there is soil, but there are no pots in thesoil. The pot has been artificially prepared, like the gunas,and in the pot there is soil but in the soil there is no pot.In a similar manner, God is present in the artificiallycreated gunas, but the gunas are not present in God.Therefore, gunas are also described as those that bindone. They may be understood as the ropes that bind one.In this context, it may be mentioned that you are all boundand not free. You are all bonded to this artificially createdworld. God has no such bondage and is a free individualat all times. You can call yourself a Purusha only whenSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 158 159
you get rid of these bondages and become a freeindividual. To call yourself a Purusha without doing thisis not correct. You are having the aspect of Purusha inyour inner self but you are not giving any attention tothe qualities that go to make a Purusha or that entitleone to call himself a Purusha. When you aspire to becomea Purusha, you must be prepared to accept and imbibeall the qualities of a Purusha.If a man or woman is hungry, both the woman andthe man eat food, irrespective of their gender and thusboth men and women react to such situations in an identicalmanner. It follows that man is as weak as a woman. Inthis sense, they both have a weakness for hunger. APurusha should have strength. On the contrast, a womanis characterised by weakness. It is for this reason that awoman is described by the word abala or one withoutstrength. Today in order to fulfil the normal requirementsin the world and in order to do the various tasks on thestage of this world, some of us are calling ourselves menand others go by the name of women. This is purelyrelated to the worldly life but spiritually and in truth, allare characterised by the qualities of a woman.You can take a very good example for this.During the college day at the Anantapur girls’ College,usually adhyatmic playlets are staged. In one such playlet,one of the girls played the role of Sakkubai while anothergirl played the part of Kasipat; but behind the screen,she knows and calls herself by her real name, say“Sudha”.  In a similar manner on the stage of this world,some of us call ourselves men while others callthemselves women. Such a nomenclature is appropriateonly for the purposes of acting on the world stage; butso long as one does not possess the qualities of a Purusha,one should not call oneself as a Purusha.In the realm of the Divine, I mentioned yesterdaythat there are five different aspects, namely—Being,Awareness, Ananda, Name and Form. Of these five, nameand form are relevant only to the aspect of the body andthe world, but in matters relating to the realm of God,name and form have no significance at all. Even if wecannot fully understand the aspects of Brahman, it ispossible for us to study the Vedas, scriptures and theSastras. Since we are students and since we want to studysomething, it becomes imperative for us to submitourselves to some kinds of discipline, to observe somerules and to accept some limitations in our daily lives.Whatever work we undertake, we should recognise ourduty and discipline appropriate to the work that we haveSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 160 161
undertaken. If we strictly adhere to the rules and disciplineof the work allotted to us, then we will not meet with anyobstruction and nobody can stop us from fulfilling ourtask.There is a small story illustrating this aspect inthe Mahabharatha. Once Kausika was sitting under atree and was reciting the Vedas and doing penance tounderstand the aspect of the Brahman. As he wascontinuously engaged in thapas and always uttering thename of Brahman, his mind was full of Brahman and heacquired a special kind of strength.There is a small example in this context whichwill clear some doubts regarding the Grace of God. Ifwe take two pieces of wood and rub them against eachother vigorously for sometime, we can generate fire. Thusby these two pieces of wood coming together and rubbingagainst each other, a new feature, namely fire, has beengenerated. This fire is not apparently visible in either ofthe two pieces. In a similar manner, if we concentrate onthe name and form of the Lord and continuously striveto bring them together, in that process there will begenerated a new feature, the fire of Wisdom. Our sacredculture has taught us many processes by which this fireof wisdom can be generated.In this manner, while Kausika was sitting underthe tree and continually reciting the Vedas, a bird sittingon top of that tree dropped excreta and it fell on the headof Kausika. This enraged Kausika and he angrily staredat the bird. Because of this anger, the bird was instantlykilled by the fire generated from Kausika’s eyes as a resultof the discipline to which he was submitting himself. Atthis display of strength, Kausika felt proud and elatedthat his vision had the power to burn things. So long ashe was one of pure and unwavering mind, this wisdomwas like a burning fire; but the moment he started feelingproud and allowed a certain amount of ego to enter hismind, the great divine strength began diminishing slowly.The moment this ego entered his mind, a small desiresprouted in him and he wanted to test his newly acquiredstrength. He went to the front of a village house. Thewoman of the household was very dutiful and would notswerve from her duty. At that time, her husband was notin good health and she was serving her husband and wasthus immersed in her duty. Kausika asked for alms butthe woman did not pay any attention to this because ofher immediate preoccupation. Finally when she did comeout, she found that Kausika was very angry and that hiseyes were red with anger. The woman was so devoted toSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 162 163
her husband and so disciplined that she could immediatelysee through the mind of Kausika. She said, “I am not apoor bird to be killed by your anger. I am a woman whohas been discharging her duties, and I have not doneanything wrong”. In fact she advised Kausika to get ridhis anger as that was not a quality which a Rishi can have.The lady said that whoever protects dharma will beprotected in turn by dharma. Not only did she haveconfidence in herself but she conveyed the truth andstrength of self-confidence to the Rishi, also.Education should bring humility. A person who iseducated should be humble. Humility will lead you todeservedness and deservedness will, in turn, get youwealth. Wealth, in turn, will get you righteousness ordharma and you will be able to give charity of the rightkind. If you want to realise the aspect of Parabrahma,you should not feel proud that you are an educatedperson. You should first show humility if you want torealise yourself and have happiness. If you show egoand feel proud of your qualifications and your degree,you will be bringing disgrace to the qualifications thatyou have acquired. If one is not humble, he will not becalled an educated person. He may think himself to beeducated. Our scriptures, which have given theinjunction that a person who has acquired ordinaryeducation should be humble, surely lay down much morerigid rules for those who are well versed in Vedas. Forall this, the word swadha is the basis. Whether it is theVedas or the Veda Purushas or even the creator of theVedas, they are all one and the same and merge in thisone word swadha. Therefore, in our being able toperform, with discipline, the tasks that arise out ofcertain duties, there is pleasure. Having dharma as ourobjective, recognising our objective and not swervingfrom the path of dharma if we conduct ourselves, thenwe can get the blessings of the Vedas and the grace ofGod.11. A Child begins to take Shape even asIt Grows in the Womb of the Mother
Swa is truth, swa is dharma, swa stands forVeda, swa stands for ahimsa, swa is yajna,swa is conduct, swa is kindness, swa is, infact, everything that we find in all theworlds.Prema Swarupas! Students!
What has been given to you yesterday as themeaning of the word swadha is also themeaning of the word swaha according to the Vedas. Thisword swaha is something in which there is considerableimportance. Some persons have argued that the originfor this word swaha is not in the Vedas. It has been saidthat this word swaha has something to do with theceremony of homa (offering ritual articles in sacrificialSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
the fire be burnt up? However, in the Vedas, they havebeen using the words swadha and swaha. Veda has beengiving us the inner meaning that these two words areintended to satisfy the God in the context of the homaand also satisfy the person who is the head of theceremony. If you look at the word swaha, we come tothe conclusion that the word comes from the combinationswavakaha. In such a combination, we also understandthat this word swaha is the spoken word of Prajapati.In this word, swaha, we describe Saraswathi asvakrupuni or the embodiment of all speech. We have alsoto understand that this word signifies the fact that she isthe embodiment of all that is contained in the Vedas.Another way of looking at the origin of this word is tolook at it as Su-aha. This means that the prosperity whichgoes along with the voice of Prajapati is being handedover to the world. There is another combination Swa-atmanam-aha which gives the word swaha. Weunderstand this to mean something which deals with theknowledge of Atma and this will give us the full meaningof the word Sakthi.In this manner, this word swaha has beeninterpreted in different ways and several alternativefire) and is not directly derived from the Vedas. In thecontext of homa, while we offer something to the Gods,the word which describes the offering usually ends withswaha, and hence people thought that it has nothing todo with the Veda. Others believed that the word swadhahas some relationship to our forefathers because we usethe word swadha when making an offering to ourforefathers, while in fact, the word swaha is associatedwith gods. The meaning of these two words swadha andswaha has been explained as if the two are related toeach other. This word swaha has also been seen as anending for words such as Kesava ya swaha, Madhavaya swaha, Indra ya swaha and so on. In our daily ritual,these words have been occurring quite frequently. Whilemaking the offering, we use several words and severalmaterials are placed in the fire and the word swaha is usedto mean that everything should be burnt up and digested.They also use the word Suhuta to mean the same thing.One is bound to get a doubt in this connection.Whether you utter the word swaha or not, whatever youput in the fire is sure to be burnt up. It is the nature andquality of fire to burn up and swallow everything that isput in it. If this is the case, why is it that we use thewords swaha and swadha and pray that what we offer to166 167Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 168 169
meanings have been given. We understand that it issomething related to the sakthi of Prajapati, but tomistake it as something to do with the ending of theoffering is not correct. For every word in the Veda, thereare two aspects: one of Prathyaksha and another ofParoksha, that is—what you see directly and what youhave to infer.For the word Agnihi there is an aspect which comesfrom Agrihi the form of direct authority. These wordsAgrihi and Agnihi represent Prathyaksha and Paroksha,the direct manifestation and the inference. The sameaspect has been described by Kalidasa in the text KumaraSambhavam, that Prajapati has two aspects—one directand the other the aspect of Paroksha. What is theevidence that enables us to understand that the wordswaha will satisfy the Gods and by being satisfied Godswill confer satisfaction to the master of ceremonies? OurVedas have told us that because of the strength of lifecontained in the word swaha, Gods are satisfied by theuse of this word and thereby they give satisfaction to themaster of ceremonies.Manthras contain various types of strength. Wesometimes feel that manthras are simply a collection ofwords without any specific strength. The power behindthe manthra can be understood only by those who arewell versed in them. Although we are not able to seedirectly the connection that exists between the divineand the humans, yet as a paroksha or by inferentialevidence, we are able to feel that through the manthrasthere is a connection between the divine and the human.In simple things, like the machines which are created byman, we see direct evidence of their strength, but to thinkthat the manthras created by God do not have suchstrength in them is not correct.There is an example for this. Suppose you aretravelling by plane from Bangalore to Delhi. You knowthat the pilot of the plane can keep in contact with Delhias well as Bangalore airports even though you are unableto see any direct and visual evidence of a connectionbetween the plane and either of the airports. In this case,we don’t see pratyaksha, or direct evidence, but thestrength that is present in the machines at the airport andin the plane enables them to have contact. This kind ofconnection is an inferential connection.As an example of direct and visible evidence, wecan take the case of a telephone conversation betweenSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 170 171
here and Bangalore. In this case, we see that there arewires which connect one station to another and that thesewires are transmitting the information. This is an exampleillustrating pratyaksha.Today, when we offer different materials into firewe see they are being reduced to ashes. This is what wemay call pratyaksha or seeing directly. But the fact thatthe material which was reduced to ashes gets conveyedto the person for whom it is intended by the manthrasakthi is something which we cannot directly see aspratyaksha. It is the paroksha or inferential connectionthat is responsible for such a transmission. Only thosewho have complete mastery over the Vedas canunderstand this aspect. The inference that the sacrificemade while uttering the name of Indra, Rudra or Varunareally reaches them is paroksha and can be wellunderstood by those who know the power of thesemanthras. For them it is as good as direct evidence.We will take another worldly example for this.Once an old man who had faith in the formal ritual wasoffering something to his dead father on his deathanniversary. A somewhat modernised young grandsonof this old man approached the grandfather and ridiculedthe old man for thinking that the offering would reallyreach his father and for his having such blind faith. Thewise old man told the grandson that the power of themanthra was such that it would definitely convey theoffering to the dead father and he also told him that thiswas really beyond the understanding of the commonpeople as only those well-versed in such aspects ofmanthras can appreciate this. This grandson was cleverbut was lacking in good qualities. He wanted to put hisgrandfather on the first floor of the house and see if theoffering reached him when the manthra was recited. Heasked his grandfather to go to the first floor and relatedthe manthra while making the offering and asked him ifthe offering had reached him. When the grandfather saidthat the offering did not reach him, he began to arguethat if with the help of the manthra, the offering couldnot even reach the first floor, how could it reach hisgrandfather’s father who was probably very far away ina distant world? The experienced grandfather then told himthat the manthra which was recited was appropriate to adifferent world and asked how under these circumstances,could this be reaching the grandfather who was in thefirst floor of the same house. He further asked, if yourfather is resident in Madras and if you write a letter toSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 172 173
him and address it to Bombay, how can it reach him inMadras? Manthra Sakthi is something which is relatedto the other world but the grandfather is sitting in thefirst floor of the same house and how can the offeringreach him. Therefore, if you recite the appropriatemanthra relevant to the place where you want the resultsto appear, surely there is no doubt that the result willappear, where it ought to appear. Even if you do not knowthe place where the offering has to reach and even if youare not acquainted with the person who is to carry theoffering, there is no doubt that such persons whose dutyit is to carry the offering to that place will be ready to doso.In this context, we can also take a worldly example.Suppose one of your friends is in California living in ahouse on Napoleon Drive and you post a letter to thataddress. You know neither the people in the post officethat are handling the letters nor have you seen the house,street, or address in California; but the letter reaches yourfriend. How do you reconcile this situation when thepersons whom you have not seen and known are takingthe letter to a place which you have not seen? Will youhave any doubt about the letter being delivered to himjust because you are not acquainted with the individualswho work in the postal department and because you arenot acquainted with the place to which the letter isaddressed? Your duty is only to write the correct addresson the envelope. Responsibility for delivering the letteris that of the postal department and not yours. Althoughthe individuals who are to deliver the letter are not knownto you, your letter is being delivered at the correct address.In a similar manner, if you have uttered the wordsswaha and swadha and uttered the appropriate manthraand made the offering to the Fire God, there is no doubtwhatsoever that the God of fire will deliver it to theintended destination.Because in those ancient days there were sacredpeople who understood the strength of such manthras, itwas possible for them to hold the entire world in theirpalms. There is a small story for this. Uddalaka had adaughter by name Sujatha. She was married to a greatscholar by name of Ekapada, who was happily spendinghis time teaching Vedas to his disciples. While the husbandwas thus teaching Vedas, the wife was also engagedherself in the work connected with the teaching of Vedasor by helping her husband. Sujatha who was spending hertime in this manner learnt the proper accent andpronunciation of the Vedic manthras. Every time a mistakeSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 174 175
was made, the baby in the womb was saying that it was amistake. Uddalaka was enraged that a baby inside thewomb was already correcting him and cursed that thebaby would be born as a crooked one. In course of time,a son was born to Sujatha and the boy had eight crookedcurves on his body because of the curses of Uddalaka.The name of the son was Ashtavakra.When Sujatha was in her ninth month, Uddalakaleft home to go to the court of Janaka to participate in aVedic argument, attain victory and thereby earn money.In those days, the Rishis were not in the habit of savingfor the future because they realised that life is a transientthing and they were not thinking far ahead of the present.In the present day, we try to see far into the future andeven as the son is born, we deposit money in the bank tosend him abroad for higher education without giving athought to whether the boy would even live that longand even if he lived whether he would be able to learnthat much. Therefore, Ekapada set out to get some moneyfor the expenses of the baby. When he learnt of Vedicargument in King Janaka’s court, he went there. However,due to bad luck, Ekapada lost the argument which hehad with the other scholars and having lost the argumenthe became a bonded person at the court of King Janaka.After some time Sujatha realised that her husbandwas not coming back. At this time she gave birth to theson, Ashtavakra. At the same time Uddalaka’s wife alsogave birth to a son called Svetaketu. Svetaketu andAshtavakra were thus cousins. Uddalaka broughtAshtavakra and Sujatha to his house, as Sujatha’shusband was not there. From that day Svetaketu andAshtavakra grew up together as very close companionsand Ashtavakra thought that Uddalaka was his father.One day when Ashtavakra was sitting on the lap ofUddalaka, Svetaketu came and asked him to get downand sit on his own father’s lap if he wanted to.At this Ashtavakra ran to his mother and askedfor the true story of his birth and for the name of his father.Sujatha then told him the entire story and on hearing thisnews, both Svetaketu and Ashtavakra went to the courtof King Janaka and attained victory in the argumentsthere. In this manner they liberated Ekapada and broughthim back home. The mother Sujatha was very pleasedand happy and said that although many fathers had gottheir sons released or given birth to them, this was a rarecase where the son gave back a father and she praisedhim for giving her such a gift. The child in the womb gotthese qualities only because of the power of the manthra.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 176 177
Another instance in our Puranas where the childin the womb got such knowledge was the case ofAbhimanyu, who learnt the details of Padmavyuha(labyrinth of lotus shape, particular type of maze), whilein the womb of his mother. In view of this, it was thecustom in those days that pregnant women were takencare of with great effort and they were always kept happyand were permitted to listen only to sacred stories andsacred things. They were always given only good news.It is in this context that the baby in the womb will beexperiencing only happy situations and as a result willturn out to be a happy individual. But today, pregnantwomen see various kinds of pictures during the periodof pregnancy and in this process the child also developsbad ideas even from the time of its being in the mother’swomb and they take to an unsacred path once they areborn. Thus the entire future of a child depends on themanner and conduct of the pregnant woman in whosewomb the child is growing.If today we take to a sacred path and do the rightthing, there is no doubt that our children in the futurewill also attain reputation and will take to a sacred path.Although one does not directly see the greatness of amanthra, it is sure to hand in the consequence byinference. Some people argue that it may not benecessary to read the manthras with the proper accentand the proper stress at the right place and that it may belooked upon as a mere collection of words. Our youthhave no understanding and familiarity with the divinepath or with anything that relates to the culture of ourcountry. It has become a fashion to take a crooked viewof everything and they give a reply which is quiteirrelevant. A devout grandfather was once reciting hisSandhya manthra and in the process he was uttering“Kesavayaswaha,” “Narayanayaswaha,”“Madhavayaswaha”, and so on; and with each of thenames he was swallowing a small quantity of water. Thegrandson who was sitting at a nearby table and doing hishomework was watching all this and asked hisgrandfather why he did not take the entire glass full ofwater in one gulp, if he was feeling so thirsty. Thegrandfather did not reply immediately because he didnot want to be disturbed while doing the Sandhya Manthra.Later, the grandson was doing his homework andin this process he was constantly dipping his pen in theink bottle and writing. He was doing this each timewhenever the ink dried out. The grandfather saw thisSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 178 179
and asked the grandson why he was doing this instead ofoverturning the entire ink bottle at one time and have theentire ink in one lot. The grandson replied that if the entireink was put on the paper, the words would not be seen.The grandfather said that if he swallowed theentire water at one time, the manthras cannot be heard.In the case of the manthra, unless you utter the propername at each time and have the appendage of swaha eachtime and do what has to be done, you will not get thereal benefit. Just as in the case of the writing, unless youuse the ink moderately, bit by bit, the letters will not bedistinct but will be muddled up; so also, we mustrecognise the situation when the Vedas held sway. If youdo not understand, it is much better if you refrain fromraising irrelevant questions. You should try to understandthe significance of these manthras.In the one month that you are attending the classeshere, I am hoping that you will listen to the content thatis conveyed to you by different scholars and acquire thenecessary strength to understand what is being taught toyou by the teachers during the evening discourses.
12. Ghora And Aghora Aspects Of GodAre Only Reflections Of Your ThoughtsIn The Mirror Of Brahman
It is only after a digit that the zero will haveany significance and value. Similarly wemust first think of God who is only one,and the living world after Him. The worldwill acquire some value only if it comes afterGod.
Adharva is one of several names forParabrahma who is also known by the nameSwaha. The meaning of the word Adharva is somethingwhich is steady and unchanging. In addition to this, inthe Vedas it is also known as Pranatma or Prajapati.The Adharvana Veda has declared that this Adharva wasthe first to generate fire. The Rishis first used this fireSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 180 181
generated by Parabrahma for their rituals and ceremoniesand gave names like Brahma, Vasishta, Prajapati,Brihaspati and so on. In this way while performing thesacrifice, they recognised the importance of Atharva—the source of the fire—and also the aspects that wereimplied in these names given to persons functioning asRithwicks. This Atharva has been installed as the basisin many places of origin and used as the basis for theprosperity of the world. In the context of the namePrajapati, Atharva was understood as Atharva Veda andin the context of Rithwicks some other aspects were alsorecognised. These Vedas were propagated in the worldthrough the name of Prajapati. For all the manthras inthe Vedas, there is a beginning and an end. The soundthat is uttered in the beginning and in the end is calledPranava. That this Pranava is the same as Atharva hasbeen said in the Atharva Veda.In this Veda, it has been said that Prajapati hastwo distinct aspects. One of these is called Rudra Akaraand the other is the opposite of it and it is Arudra Akara.In the context of Shiva, one of these aspects has beendescribed as Mangalakara or one who gives prosperityand good. There is an opposite side of it called RudraAkara. These two aspects differ in form and appearance,but we have not tried to realise the oneness or unity thatis present in both aspects. Not only in God do we seethese two aspects of anger and peace, we see them alsoin the whole created world—occurring side by side. Theaspect that one really notices depends totally on theattitude of one’s mind. When the fearsome Narasimha(Man-lion god), emerged out of the pillar, Prahladawitnessed His form but enjoyed the serenity enshrinedwithin.Prahlada was deeply immersed in happiness whenhe looked at this peaceful attitude. To Hiranyakasipu,who regarded himself as an enemy of God, the very sameNarasimha appeared in an angry mood. That the samewas seen by one as Shiva and another as Rudra has to beinterpreted by saying that these two aspects are notintrinsic to God but arise from the different attitudeswhich the devotees themselves possess. As an illustration,we note that when we eat some things within limits it isnot going to cause any harm and will be useful. On theother hand, if we exceed the limit and overeat, the verysame thing can cause disease and lead us even to death.Atharva Veda has been telling us that this word food hasbeen coming from the root word Ad which means to eat.Adyate means some material which is edible. Adti standsSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
aspect of Parabrahma is not simply the words in the Vedabut is the Veda itself. It was proclaiming the aspect ofShiva for the prosperity of the world and in addition tothis, it has been giving us manthras which are directlyresponsible for the creation, sustenance, anddissolution. In the Atharva Veda, these aspects arerepresented by two words Ghora and Aghora.In common parlance, we use these words onlywhen we want to describe some fearful or troublesomethings. In this context, the word Ghora has, however,been used to signify something which is an obstacle toAnanda. But if we do what we should do and if wefollow the right path which we should follow in this life,we can get a kind of Ananda called Aghora. Limitedeating gives us Ananda which may be called Aghora.Unlimited and uncontrolled eating gives somethingdifferent from Ananda. It gives trouble which may becalled Ghora. We should ask ourselves if it is the foodwe eat that is responsible for this Ghora or Aghora. Thefood is not responsible for either the feeling of Ghora orAghora. These are only results of the aspects of the mindand the desires of man.With a sharp knife, we can do several useful thingslike cutting fruits and vegetables; but if one gets into afor something that is being eaten. The one who eats, thematerial that is being eaten, and the act of eating are allrepresented by the root words Ad, Adyate and Adti.This sacred name which applies to what is edibleand to the act of eating and to the one that is eating hasbeen recognised as a form of Brahman in the word Angirasa.By the grace of Prajapati and the Rithwicks andwith the help of Atharva Veda, we are able to recognisethe great qualities in this. This Veda has been called byother names like Kshatra Veda, Brahma Veda, AngarvaVeda and so on.The Atharva Veda which has these alternativenames has acquired and incorporated into itself somechanges which are important. According to tradition, forGayatri Parameswari, there are three feet namely Yajur,Rig and Sama Vedas. Mimamsa stood as her body andAtharwa stood as the head of Gayatri Parameswari.Thus, while Atharva Veda had acquired such a prominentplace over time, we are still giving prominence only tothe other three Vedas.Amongst all the Vedas the Atharva Veda has thedistinction of being the oldest and the most important.The Atharva Veda has also been telling us that one182 183Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 184 185
fit of temper, one can also cause harm to the lives ofother people. If a doctor has a sharp knife with him, hewill put it to good use. If the same sharp knife is in thehands of a murderer, he will kill people. For both thesethings, it is the attitude of the individual that isresponsible and not the knife. The inner meaning of whathas been said above regarding the attitude of the mind iscontained in the statement, Manayeva KaranamManushyanam Bandha mokshayoh. That is, as a resultof the attitude of mind, these two aspects Ghora andAghora arise. Because Brahman is omnipresent, Brahmanis present even in the minds of all people. The Ghoraand Aghora have been used to represent the two aspectsof mind. Ghora and Aghora are not two distinct attitudesnor are they separate situations. One happens to be theopposite of the other.This may be referred to as one being a reaction ofthe other. Such contraries or opposites are present in everyaspect and in every situation. Pain and pleasure alwayscome together and no one can separate them. Pleasure issomething which we cannot see in an isolated condition.If pain fructifies, we call it pleasure. Just as pain andpleasure are not two separate things, so also, Ghora andAghora are not two separate entities.For the prosperity of the world, Prajapati is takingthe aspect of Ghora as a kind of cure. The aspect of Ghorawhich Prajapati is taking for a specific purpose is beingregarded as something which signifies terror. This is notright. From time immemorial, several Maharishis wereperforming thapas and used to undergo many troubles.In this process, in order that the person who is doingthapas may reach a certain stage and get recognition,God creates obstacles in his path. This is not a trick onthe part of God nor is it the purpose of God to give troubleto the devotee. After a year of education, the Universityconducts an examination. This examination is beingconducted with a view to sending you to a higher classand is for your own good. It is not conducted to troubleyou. We are calling this examination a test. So also, Godintroduces an occasional test to find out the strength ofthe person performing the thapas. Because our attitudetowards the test is not correct, it sometimes gives us thefeeling that the test is causing us great trouble.Sometimes, we pray to God and say: “Oh God! why areyou subjecting me to all these tests?” We pray that thesetests be stopped. If the tests are stopped, you cannot riseto a higher level. If one wants to learn to drive a plane ora boat, one must obtain a certificate of fitness or a licenceSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 186 187
and for this one will have to go through a test. In orderthat we may receive a certificate, these tests are anabsolute must. If one desires that there should be no test,it means that there is no desire to reach a higher level andthat one wants to remain where one is.There is a good example in our ancient Puranas.King Sibi was a person who had sacrificed many things.He had all the good qualities and was always immersedin the thought of God. While Sibi was a great king andhad all the wealth, Indra and Agni had a plan to test thereal sacrificing nature of this king. Agni took the formof a dove and Indra took the form of an eagle whichattacks the dove. Agni, in the form of a dove camerunning to the King and appealed to him to save him ashe was being attacked by a big eagle. The king promisedto protect the dove which was being attacked andtherefore the eagle could not get hold of the dove. Atthis time, the eagle started arguing that since it washungry and since it came as a hungry bird, it was theduty of the King to give up the dove to satisfy its hunger.The King then said that since he had undertaken to protectthe dove, it was not possible for him to hand over thedove but he would instead offer to give an amount of hisown flesh equivalent to the flesh of the dove and therebysatisfy the eagle’s hunger. The King got a pair of weighingpans and placed the dove in one of the pans. In the other,he began placing chunks of his own flesh. Even afterlarge amounts of flesh from his body were put in, thepans were not balanced. Finally, finding that he hadnothing more to offer, he himself sat in the pan andoffered his entire body to the eagle. Agni and Indra, inthe form of the dove and the eagle, were very muchmoved at this selfless spirit of sacrifice. They presentedthemselves before the King in their true form. Indra andAgni then said that no amount of learning in the Vedascan bring one as much satisfaction as the spirit of sacrificewould,  and in this manner they praised the King.When such tests come from God, they come in orderto shower grace and not to trouble the devotee. It is notpossible for all persons to understand and comprehendGod’s strength. One who knows Brahman becomesBrahman himself. The saying Brahmavid BrahmaivaBhavati means this. In other words, unless one rises to thestature of Brahman, he will not understand Brahman.Similarly, through truth alone can one comprehend truth.One cannot understand truth through untrue methods.Neither we nor our minds are behaving in amanner in which they should. Because our minds areSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 188 189
not what they ought to be, the world is not as it ought tobe. Man is synonymous with mind and mind issynonymous with desires. If there are no desires, there isno mind. If there is no mind, there is no man. Therefore,if you really want to recognise the country, we shouldrealise that the country consists of men and it is theconglomeration or grouping of men that constitutes thecountry.This is a piece of cloth and it is prepared from abundle of threads. If there are no threads, there cannotbe a piece of cloth. This thread has been prepared fromcotton. If there is no cotton, there can be no thread and ifthere is no thread, there is no cloth. Our desires whichare in the form of cotton get woven up into our mindwhich is in the form of thread and our mind which is inthe form of thread comes together and makes up the man.The desires have, no doubt, to be there and they neednot be completely eliminated, but these desires have tobe consistent with our education and culture, and theyshould be such as will bring us respect.One must examine the desires that one has in himin the context of his country, his education and thereputation of his parents and one must ask if he isconducting himself appropriately. Therefore, the kind ofdesires with which we fill our heads should be such thatthey are consistent with accepted norms. If these are notso, it is better to have an empty head rather than fill it upwith the wrong kind of desires. You can introduceanything you wish into an empty head, but it is notpossible to put anything into a head already filled withall kinds of things. If the head is filled with things whichare characteristic of this Kali Yuga, how can your headhave any place for good things. If you cannot get goodthings in the head, then what is the use of this head?Because there is no place in our country whererighteousness can thrive, dharma has fled to the forest.Cruelty and sin that should have remained in the foresthave entered the populated villages. The reason is thatour ideas and thoughts are not in a position to retaindharma. Pandavas who were the embodiment of dharma,had to go to the forest because all the habitable placeswere occupied by people like Duryodhana. The latterdid not leave any place for dharma.Today in the Kali Yuga, the behaviour of peopleis taking a weird shape by which heads filled with badthoughts, ears always prepared to listen to criticism ofthe people around and eyes with which people constantlySummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 190 191
watch stealthily what is happening elsewhere, are inevidence everywhere. Our talk is such that it wants todeceive others. If such bad actions and thoughts prevail,how can dharma stay on? These good and bad aspectsare called Ghora and Aghora.In this context, you may have a doubt as to howthese terms Ghora and Aghora are relevant to theaspects of God. It is easy to understand that if badthoughts and actions are in an ordinary person, that isGhora and if they do not occur, it is Aghora; but onemay ask how one can associate these with God. Are theregood and bad qualities associated with God as well? Butwhen we ask this question, there is one truth which wehave to recognise in the aspects of Brahman. Brahmanhas no form. Brahman has no qualities or gunas.Brahman has only a name and is like a mirror andlooking into the mirror, we create a form.If we go and stand in front of a clean mirror, whatwe see is a reflection of ourselves. In this context wehave to ask whether the image we see is simply areflection of ourselves or whether it is a part of themirror. This clean mirror is only reflecting the image ofyourself, but your image is not already present in themirror. The bad and the good that are present in you arereflected. God has neither good nor bad qualities. Whenyou stand in front of the mirror, your own image isreflected therein. If you do good, it is reflected as goodor Aghora; and if you do bad, it is reflected as bad orGhora. Thus, these bad and good aspects are arising fromwithin your own self. One cannot find fault with Godand attribute motives to Him. If, inspite of it, you do sothey are only artificial and are the result of your ownimagination.If you do not notice or experience the grace ofGod, you think that God is not close to you. You alsosometimes say that you have tried your best in many waysto go close to God and God is going farther away fromyou. This is a meaningless statement. There is no pointin saying that you are going close to God and God isgoing farther away from you.Here is a small example for this. A person who isstanding close to me may be thinking that Swami is faraway from him. We can examine this statement on thebasis of the laws of physics. If the distance from aperson to me is small, the distance from me to thatperson cannot be different and larger. Similarly if I hit aSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 192 193
piece of wood, I say that I have hit the piece of wood butthat is not all. The piece of wood has also hit me equallyhard. This is in the nature of a reaction. It can never bethat the reaction is unequal to the action. In the samemanner, in the spiritual aspect as well, there is noquestion of your thinking that you are going close toGod and that God is going away from you or yourthinking that God is keeping at a distance in spite ofyour getting closer to Him. As close as you are to God,so close is God to you. If you understand this truth, thenyou will realise that God is everywhere. There is no suchthing as God being far away from you when you are closeto Him. Those who recognise the truth in this statementand realise that God is omnipresent will experience theproximity to Divinity.The Atharva Veda has given us clearly adescription of what nature is and the laws that governmatter as well as spirit. From this Veda, we can also learnwhat path we must take in order that we may escape thesorrows and pain which are to be found in this world.Because Atharva Veda has taught us how to overcomethe strength and power that is stronger than ours, it isalso regarded as one which tells us about all the weaponswith which we should defend ourselves. We should notconsider Atharva Veda as something connected with thesecrets of material weapons, or weapons with which onefights another in this material world. Atharva Veda hasreally given us the weapons with which we can fight theinner human problems like sorrow and pain.An individual who has gained control over themind is far stronger than an individual who has gainedcontrol over the material world. An individual who hasdiscovered the atom bomb may be able to destroy theworld and reduce it to ashes, but he has no weapons withwhich he can diminish or destroy the Ananda in a place.If one can gain mastery over one’s own senses, then hecan get Ananda in an abundant measure. The contradictionthat arises between the internal aspects or feelings andthe external aspects or feelings can be removed by theknowledge of Adharva Veda. Today we are regardingAtharva Veda as something that is separate from the otherthree Vedas—Yajur, Rig, and Sama. This is not correct.The Atharva Veda is something which is latent and is infact present in all the three Vedas. Just as Yoga is latentand is present in all the Karma, Upasana and Jnana, soalso, Atharva Veda is present in all the Vedas.In Bhagavad Gita we have all the chapters takingthe name Yoga like Karma Yoga, Jnana Yoga, VibhuthiSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 194 195
Yoga and so on. It is not possible to say that one is moreimportant than the other. This is because Yoga is commonto all the chapters and is indeed most important. If wewant basically to look at all things as one and find thecommon content, then the position is different. On theother hand, if you do not have this oneness as the basis,then you look at individuals and say that one is wearinga blue shirt, another a red shirt and yet another a yellowshirt; it means that our eyes are giving importance to thedifferences rather than the oneness that is present in allof them. If we put blue glasses on our eyes, then all theshirts will look blue. Similarly if we wear the glasses ofPrema or love, then all that you see in the world will beprema. If your vision is not filled with prema, how canthe things that you see with your vision be full of prema?It is the Atharva Veda which tells us that if you want tosee Brahman in the entire creation, you must have yourvision filled with prema.It is a great folly to neglect the sacred Vedas whichteach us such sacred paths. It is very undesirable to cometo regard the Vedas as useless books and to put themaside. When we go to bed, we make an attempt to readstorybooks which do not bring you any noble thoughts.We are not willing to read books which give us valuableadvice in life. Some students have a few other bad habits,too. They have transistor radios by their bedsides whichplay some music and they regard this as a lullaby forsending them to sleep. Some other students wish to readsome useless story books and put them on their chests.Then only they will go to sleep.You must regard your heart as a temple. You shouldmake an attempt to install God in the temple of yourheart. The human body is like a temple and in this livesJiva, who is an ancient representative of God. To be bornas a human being is an exceptional gift. To enable such ahuman birth to reach its destination and make it sacred,our Vedas have been teaching various paths. The Sastrasand Puranas also enable the Jiva in the body to reachthe sacred destination.13. One Who Protects Dharma Will InTurn Be Protected By Dharma
When one is prosperous, one will not carefor God. In that condition he will be asinner and he will be moving aboutwithout caring for the Lord. On the otherhand, he will open his eyes when hisprosperity disappears. Listen to this plaintruth, oh boys and girls of Bharath.Pavitratma Swarupas
The Veda Brahman has many names and todaywe will take one particular name, Chandas,and try to understand Him through this name. This wordChandas is known in several ways. Vedas have beendivided into four parts. Some parts constitute themanthras and the other parts constitute the Brahmanas.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 198 199
These four parts have the names Samhita, Aranyaka,Brahmana and the Upanishad. Samhita has been takento mean that part which contains manthras and the otherthree parts together have been given the other names.Chandas has been given different kinds of original orroot meaning and it has also been described in manydifferent ways. Not only this, sometimes the Sruthi whichcontains the manthra and the Brahmana have also beencalled Chandas. Gayatri, Vishtubh, Anushtubh andSishtubh have also been called Chandas. The sacredSruthis have been describing this Chandas in differentways they have been introducing this word into variousdescriptions and thus spreading prosperity to the rest ofthe world.Although Chandas in a way is synonymous withthe manthras and the Brahmanas, some people considerthat this word has nothing to do with the Vedas orSwadhyaya or Amnaya and they have been arguing in adifferent way. Some also argued that this word Chandascan be applied only to Gayatri and that we cannot usethis word in relation to the manthras and Brahmanas.Some have even undertaken to argue that it has norelation to the Vedas either. They have been arguing andcriticising the views expressed earlier, in this manner. Inall these cases, the people who argue thus, do it on thestrength of their own intelligence and the prejudiceswhich they have in their minds. We have to say that thesearguments have nothing to do with the actual merits ofthe problem. They are more related to their ownindividual prejudices. Not only in the various texts andbranches of learning such as Viseshika, Nyaya, and soon, but in the Mimamsikas such as Poorvamimamsa,Uttaramimamsa and the Darshanas, they have explainedthat the word Chandas has the full meaning andsignificance as has been just described here.Some who took a limited and restricted view ofthings were of the opinion that what is contained heremay at best be described as Puranas and Ithihasas, butyou cannot ascribe to it the authority of the Vedas. Inone particular Kosa (Vijnanamaya Kosa) it has beenmaintained that the Chandas can be related to this Kosa.In vyakarana or grammar, a rishi by the name of Arunihas also been supporting this in several ways. In thisway, by drawing authorities from the Sruthi and theSmruthi, they have been establishing that the wordChandas relates to the Veda.In this context, it is necessary for us to understandas to how this word Chandas has come to represent theSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
immersed only in the thought of the body and itscomforts, and forget the aspect of Atma, that is death. Itis only when we are able to clearly recognise theconnection between birth and death that the sacred desirefor securing immortality will sprout in us. There is birthand death for the body, but there is no birth or death forthe Atma. To be able to understand this eternity of theAtma is the real meaning of attaining immortality. Wemust enquire about the process by which we can attainthis immortality. Not only by doing good deeds, by keepinggood company and by having good thoughts in thematerial world and in all matters relating to our daily lifebut also by imbibing the sakthi obtained from reciting thesacred manthras can we secure this aspect of immortality.The rishis have shown us this alternative path. Inthe context of the daily life, the good work that we do islike a negative pole but the divine sakthi which we canget through the utterance of the Veda manthras is like apositive pole. In this process, both the negative and thepositive will have to be in their appropriate strength. Itis true that by doing good deeds we can keep this negativeterminal in a good condition but, if we have no regardfor the strength that we can get from the divine manthras,then there would be no positive terminal and we cannotimportant statements in the different Vedas and whatexactly the origin of the word Chandas is. There are someauthorities which tell us that particular manthra whichmakes you distant from death and which gives youimmortality should be called Chandas. This is thereason why the great rishis who have understood andidentified themselves with Brahman, while uttering themanthras in the three Vedas—Rig, Yajur and Sama—were seeking immortality for themselves. While offeringthe Havis (oblation) for the God of fire, these rishis wereuttering the manthras which were life-giving manthras;and by uttering such manthras, they have given adistinctive meaning to the word Chandas.Here we have to clearly understand the meaningof the words death and immortality. We regard death assynonymous with all kinds of strength in the body beinglost. In other words, death is the ebbing away of the lifeforce from the body. If the life force remains in the bodyforever, we regard that situation as immortality. Theseare not the correct meanings. It is a mistake to think ofimmortality as life remaining permanently in the body.To be able to completely identify one’s self with theaspect of God and completely forget the aspect of thebody is true immortality. If at all times we are totally200 201Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 202 203
get the full strength. Here we have to recognise the closerelationship between the negative and the positiveprinciples.Today, whatever good work we are undertakingin the world is being done in a casual manner withoutunderstanding its significance so that it may be imprintedin the heart. In the worldly aspect, we are doing severalthings either to attain a high position or to attain areputation or just for the sake of exhibition or in the hopeof getting some material gain. Each one can judge forhimself whether he is undertaking a particular work toget some gain or not.Of all things that we do, those intended forattaining self-satisfaction are very few. All kinds of workthat we do, which are not intended for the satisfaction ofthe self (Atma), can be described as actions which aretemporal or actions which are related to the materialworld. I have told you several times that we can get self-satisfaction only when we have confidence in our ownself. It is only when there is self-confidence along withself-satisfaction will you get the capacity for self-sacrifice. It is only after you have the capacity for self-sacrifice, can you get self-realisation.Thus, you attain immortality only out of sacrifice(tyaga). It is for this reason that all the yajnas and otherrituals in this country have been intended to symbolisesacrifice. These yajnas are not undertaken just for theirown sake. They have a definite purpose of promotingdivine strength. Once upon a time even the devas lostthe spirit of sacrifice. It was then realised that the devasof the yajnas could not be in their place and the goddessof the yajna took the form of a deer and left the place.The form of a deer is called the form of a Krishnamriga.When the goddess of yajna took the form of a deer andleft the place, the devas could not bear this and so theyalso followed this animal. The Devas wanted to get thedeer but they were unable to do so. They could get holdof the skin of the deer and so they brought back the skin.In the skin of the deer, there are three colours, namelySukla (white), Krishna (dark), and Babru (brown). Thesethree colours have been identified with the Rig, Yajur,and Sama Vedas. This is the reason why the master ofceremonies in a yajna sits on a deer skin. This is symbolicof the fact that the ceremony represents God, and therebythey want to get God’s grace. Since God likes Veda andmanthra, our rishis have regarded the skin of the deer assomething which is pleasing to the Lord. It was theirSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 204 205
belief that God is pleased with the deer skin and thereforeby having the deer skin with them they thought that theywould please God and obtain His grace.So, those individuals who wish to acquirescholarship and knowledge of Brahma Vidya put a pieceof the deer skin in their sacred thread before they beginstudying Brahma Vidya. Since the deer skin has the threecolours, sukla, krishna, and babru, it is considered to besymbolic of all the three Vedas and the trinity of the gods.Although in the common worldly parlance it maysimply be viewed as a deer skin, in the yajna when it isused for the sacred purpose it is described by a specialname Sarma. Sarma here stands for happiness or bliss.This kind of Ananda, which is beyond and above thesensual pleasures is called bliss. This bliss which isdifferent from the ordinary pleasures can come to us onlythrough Brahma Vidya.What we generally call happiness relates to thebodily comforts and is transient. Such transient pleasurewhich relates only to the body comes to us in a fewmoments, but immediately afterwards it plunges us intodeep a sorrow since it is only momentary. But the kindof bliss that one gets through the Atma is permanent,pure and selfless. This is the reason why Brahma Vidyahas been preaching to us that prema has to be cultivatedfor the sake of prema only.You should not show prema for the sake ofobtaining material benefits. If prema is shown for thesake of obtaining some material benefit, then it will lastfor a very short time and will wear out quickly. Nomaterial object is permanent and therefore prema shownfor acquiring such object is also not permanent. Atmasymbolises truth and hence is permanent. Therefore,prema, which is attached to Atma will also be true andpermanent. This kind of prema and truth are present inevery jiva. If we develop prema and truth for their ownsake, then the prema and truth which each one developsand the prema and truth present in everyone will all jointogether and will become prema and truth in infinity.That is why it has been said in the Upanishads, “Satyasyasatyam” or the truth of truth.We should understand the purpose for which thislife has been given to us. It is but proper that we devoteour life for achieving that purpose. For every manthraan appropriate path has also been shown by that manthra.While uttering the manthras our ancestors took care tosee that they were observing the cleanliness and the pathSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 206 207
which was demanded by that particular manthra. Just asthese root words at, adyathe, aththa represent eating,the act of eating, the subject who is eating and togetherthey represent the unified aspect of food, the work thatone is doing, the act of doing work, and the subject whois doing the work should all be unified. Then only willthe work that you are doing be sacred.Students can easily understand if these conceptsare explained in terms of the subject, the object and thepredicate. It is common knowledge that a proper sentencecan be formed only when these three come together andwhen there is proper co-ordination between them. Whenthere is no correlation between these three, there is roomfor several doubts and questions. If there is a sentencesuch as “Rama has beaten”, then, the one who has heardthis sentence will ask who was beaten. This will furthergive rise to another question as to who has beaten whom.Then, the question will also arise about what has beenbeaten. If instead of all this, we say, “Rama has beatenthe dog”, there will be no further questions. In the samemanner, when the manthra, the utterance of the manthra,and the fruit of the manthra are all properly explainedand co-ordinated, there will be no room for further doubtor question. It is because Veda had the strength ofestablishing the triputi (Trinity of thought, word, anddeed), it encompasses the three aspects—the subject, theobject, and the predicate.There is a very appropriate incident in theMahabharatha which illustrates this. While going aboutin the forest, the Pandavas had the desire of helping oneBrahmin. They therefore started chasing one animal andin the process they were very tired and stopped under atree for rest. All the five Pandavas were there. After sometime, Dharmaraja was feeling thirsty and he asked hisbrother Bhima to look round and bring some water.Bhima, who went looking for water, did not return forquite some time. Bhima was a strong person and coulddefend himself, but even he had not returned and soDharmaraja asked Nakula and Sahadeva to go togetherand look for Bhima as well as water. But Nakula andSahadeva also did not return for quite some time. Afterthis, he asked Arjuna to go and even he did not returnfor a very long time. Finally Dharmaraja went himself,looking for the other brothers. Under a tree near a smalltank, he found all the four brothers lying in a state ofunconsciousness. They were looking as if they had nolife in them. Dharmaraja could not contain his thirst andhe thought that he would drink some water and then doSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 208 209
something about his brothers. At that time, he heard someunseen celestial voice asking him questions. This voicesaid that Dharmaraja will get the right to drink waterfrom the tank only after the questions have beenanswered. But, Dharmaraja said that he will be able togive replies to the questions only after he knows whothe questioner was. Then the voice gave a reply that Hewas a Yaksha. These questions are referred to as Yaksha-prasnas. Dharmaraja replied to all these questions withgood and appropriate meaning and he passed the testwith flying colours.The Yaksha was happy and pleased and permittedDharmaraja to ask for any boon but with some conditions.According to the conditions Dharmaraja can ask for onlyone of his four dead brothers to be brought back to life ifhe so chose. At that time Dharmaraja started to thinkdeeply. After having given deep thought, Dharmaraja saidthat Nakula might be brought back to life. At that, theYaksha, in surprise asked another question. You are toface the battle of Mahabharatha in the near future andin that you will need the support of Bhima, who is full ofstrength and Arjuna who is well versed in the use ofweapons. How is it that you have chosen Nakula insteadof Bhima or Arjuna? Then Dharmaraja said that his fatherhad two wives—Kunthi and Madri. While he, Arjuna andBhima were Kunthi’s sons, Nakula and Sahadeva wereMadri’s sons. Since he was alive as a son of Kunthi, it isbut appropriate that he asked for the life of one of thesons of Madri. He said that he could not ask for the lifeof another son of Kunthi while Madri is left without ason. Yaksha was very much pleased with this reasoningand he immediately said that he was giving life back toall the four brothers.Following the true path of dharma, we will be ina position to receive much more benefit than what isanticipated. To Dharmaraja, who asked for the life ofonly one of his brothers by treading the path of dharma,the Yaksha was prepared to grant him the life of all thebrothers. On the other hand, if we tread a path differentfrom dharma, then we will find that if we have a thousanddesires, not even one of those desires will be fulfilled.One who destroys dharma will in turn be destroyed bydharma, but one who protects dharma will in turn beprotected by dharma. Whether it is punishment orprotection it can arise only out of dharma. It is only bydharma that we can attain prosperity. We should try tofollow the path followed by Dharmaraja at least to acertain extent.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 210 211
It is natural that enmity and bitterness growsbetween the children of stepmothers but in these days ofKali, even the sons born of the same mother are quarrellingamong themselves. In this Age, when there is so muchhatred developed between two brothers born to the samemother, where is the question of anyone protecting thelife of a brother born to a stepmother? When there is nounity between two brothers born to the same mother, isit possible for us to bring about unity amidst all personsin this world? In the discourses of platform speeches wehear every day people addressing others as brothers andsisters. It is necessary to ask ourselves whether suchwords are coming from the depths of our hearts orwhether we are simply reading them from a piece of paper.Students, boys and girls!If you use the words “brothers and sisters” fromthe depths of your hearts, then there is no doubtwhatsoever that you will merit the grace of the Lord andgood consequences will follow. Just because you say“brothers and sisters”, you do not have to worry and fearthat you may have to distribute your ancestralproperty to those brothers and sisters or that you mayhave to distribute your wealth and ornaments amongstthem. What you have to realise is the one commondivinity that is present in all of you and that is the basisfor accepting the brotherhood of all humanity. When youhave recognised that the divine Atma present in eachone is the same and when you have recognised that thisis the only truth, then you will become truly brothersand sisters. It is because they entertained such good ideasand ideals that the scholars, the kings, the people, andthe rishis of ancient days had one common idea. Theythought as one body and enjoyed all the common aspects.Students:It is necessary for you to understand the good thatis contained in the sacred Indian culture and Vedas, theIthihasas and Puranas. With great care you shouldunderstand the sacred inner meaning of all these things.For the last ten days we have been trying to grasp theaspect of omnipresence of Brahman and learning thatBrahman is not affected by changes in time or environmentand that Brahman is present everywhere. If you understandthis aspect, then there will be no room for differencesbetween any two people, for Brahman is present in all.There is no room for cruel and bad ideas, and it is possiblefor everyone to lead a good and happy life.14. Following The Path Of DharmaWill Always Lead One To Victory
When the mind that is comparable to a rootgets destroyed, then the big tree of naturewill fall. Thereafter, man’s desires grow inthe form of big horns. This is the bare truthI am revealing to you.Prema Swarupas students, boys, and girls!
Today, Veda which is the embodiment of themanthras and the Brahmanas will bedescribed by one of its many names i.e., Prusni. Thissacred word Prusni has an inner meaning and throughthis inner meaning it has been giving prosperity to theentire world. Prusni indicates cleanliness, the cleanlinessof the Antahkarana. The correct meaning for this wordSummer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
is clean, clear and unwavering. On the basis of themeaning of this word, many rishis have been gettingdifferent kinds of strength from the manthras. Themanthras are sacred and faultless. Hence, they arereferred to as Prusni. By chanting these faultless manthras,great rishis were also described by the name Prusni.What is contained in these sacred manthras is theVeda Rasa. Therefore the Veda which is a conglomerationof such manthras is also referred to as Prusni. The basisfor this Veda Rasa is the aspect of Brahman and this hasalso been called by the name Prusni. Off and on, whenwe try to understand the real inner meaning andsignificance of this word Prusni, we realise that itrepresents everything that is faultless, clean and clear.Since these words signify the establishment of the clearand clean aspect of the Parabrahma, this word also refersto God in the common parlance.There is another synonym for the word Prusni thatis Ajaha. Since our ancient rishis were able to attain thatstage of immortality by uttering such sacred and faultlessmanthras, they were also called ajaha. Every individualwho does karma is after the fruits of the work which hedoes. On the other hand, the wise people, because oftheir wisdom, do not crave for the fruit of their karma,but perform it for the benefit and prosperity of humanityat large. Because of this, they are called ajahas.One can attain wisdom out of doing karma, butwe have to understand that wise people undertake actionfor the benefit of the ignorant and whatever karma theyperform are for the sake of setting an example or idealfor the ignorant people to follow. The sacred rishis couldhear the sacred word of the Veda through their thapasand because of this they could also hear the sacredmanthras. Hence, they were sometimes called tapoja.Because these sacred words of the Veda could be listenedto only through the strength and the power of thapas,these words have also been referred to as Brihaspati,Vakpati, and Vachaspati. The sacred words, which couldbe heard because of the power of rishis, were describedby these names.The source for these immaculate manthras has beenBrahman himself. Hence, Brahman is also described asPrusni garbha. It is not possible for such a sacred Brahmanto have any faults. In fact, Brahman is without any attributes.We have the authority of the word Rasovaisaha,which is a description of the Lord. Out of Rasa, we canget only rasa that is out of Brahman, who is full of rasa,we can get only rasa and nothing else. Therefore, what214 215Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
There is a small example for this. When oneenters the elementary class, one learns the alphabets: A,B, C, D. Thereafter, one tries to combine these lettersinto words. The twenty-six letters can thus be groupedto form different words. When we undertake to composeone word God, we have to group three of the existingtwenty-six letters to form the required word. There is avery subtle aspect which we have to comprehend fullyhere. In forming this word God, we must ask ourselveswhether we have used the letters which already exist inthe language or whether we have used a new alphabet informing this word God. When we look at this with somecare, we realise that our effort was only in picking upsome letters and making them into a word like God.Taking the words Prusni, Apishtuhu, Thistuhum, we seethat we are taking them out of the manthras, and bygrouping them together we form another manthra.On the same analogy, from what already exists inus in the form of divine strength, namely the aspect ofBrahman, we pick up things and formulate othersadhanas which go by the names Dhyana, Yoga, orManthra. We are able to do this only by combining whatalready exists in us. We are observing the already existingdivine aspect in some form. The form depends on thehas originated from such a Brahman, namely the entireuniverse must be viewed as Brahman Himself. But whathas originated from Brahman—faultless aspects of allcreation which have come out of Brahman—if it iscompared with what originates from us which is oftenfull of faults, we find that there is no comparison at all.In order that we may understand this aspect ofBrahman, we have ourselves to reach a stage whichcorresponds to that aspect. We have made a statementthat rishis have acquired this aspect of Prusni with thehelp of thapas. We have to ask ourselves whether theyhave by their power of thapas outlined something whichdoes not exist or whether they have revealed tothemselves something which already exists.It is impossible for anyone to find something whichdoes not already exist. What already exists has been learntby the power of the thapas. One can reveal the existenceof something which already exists. In the same manner,we can try and understand something which alreadyexists but no one can comprehend what does not alreadyexist. The rishis have understood this immaculateaspect of the Brahman by means of their thapas. Thisonly means that they have uncovered this aspect ofBrahman which already exists.216 217Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
time, circumstances and the country where one resides.After the lapse of some time one may change this aspect inaccordance with changes in environment, culture or country.At one time, on a particular piece of land you maysee that there is nothing green growing on it. On anotherday you may see that there is rain and as a result of whichthere may be green vegetation in its place. A barren landbecomes full of greenery because of rain and because ofseeds which were there already. What was present aslatent seeds have now sprouted and become a greenpasture.What is present in you is a desire in the form of aseed and out of this seed of desire sprouts a small plantwhich is your mind and out of this small plant, namelythe mind, grows a big tree. Out of this big tree, we areattempting to get fruits and flowers. On the same analogy,out of the seeds of karma you will have to grow the plantof upasana and through the plant of upasana, you haveto grow the tree of wisdom and from this tree of wisdom,you can get the fruits and flowers namely Ananda orBliss.Therefore, what you find as the aspect of Brahmanis not something which was not already present in you.In fact, it is something already present but latent andunseen. The thapas simply uncovers what is already there.In this context, there is another name for the wordPrusni, namely, Devayuvam. This alternative word hascome because people constantly fixed their mind onDeva. The Maharishis have also used the wordDevayuvam for the same thing. The meaning of this wordis to have your objective as God, fix your attention onGod and reach a stage when you experience the identityof your self and God. That stage is called Devayuvam.Thus, while having the aspect of God, the aspect ofBrahman, and the aspect of faultless manthras withinourselves, to spend our time as ordinary human beingsand on several occasions less than human beings that is,as if we are animals, is a very futile exercise.“Veda iti Dharmadi itihi vedaha” means that whichexpounds dharma is Veda. In common usage, it is alsosaid “Veda ititi vedaha” meaning that which explains themeaning, is Veda. Veda is that which cannot be knownby Pratyaksha pramana, or by inference. That is theaspect of the Parabrahma.Since Veda tells you something which cannot beunderstood by either direct evidence or inferential218 219Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
evidence, these two aspects are called dharma andmoksha. Of the four aspects—dharma, artha, kama andmoksha—artha and kama are matters which relate to theworld or they are worldly transactions. We are attachingimportance to artha and kama which are the commontransactions in the routine world and neglecting dharmaand moksha which are the divine aspects. Today, whatwe see in the daily life as direct evidence are mattersrelating to artha (wealth) kama (desire). We should askourselves whether these two things are giving us anyhappiness. We find that these are giving us only sorrow,lack of peace and some types of anger. In the environmentin which man lives, he has all the necessary strengths—physical and mental—but is not utilising any of these torealise truth. Even if one uses a very small part of thestrength that he possesses, he will be able to get infinitehappiness. Without realising the sacredness of ourobjective and without realising our own strength we arealso borrowing strength which we do not possess andwe put on an exhibitionist appearance and we indulge insuch things which are not backed by natural strength andfrequently land ourselves in troublesome situations. Inaccordance with our culture, I will give an illustrationwhich is common knowledge with young boys and girls.It is customary in our country that when one goesto have darshan of the Lord in a temple, one removesthe shirt, pant and other appurtenances like shoes, tie,etc. and puts on a simple apparel of only a dhoti and anupper cloth. The inner meaning of this is that God is notattracted by your appearance but that God will look atthe cleanliness of the inner self. This is interpreted bysaying that you give up your external decorations andthat God will see you in your natural condition. Anotherway of saying the same is that you have to give upwhatever you have acquired as additions to your bodybefore presenting yourself before God, but nowadaysmany somehow try to get hold of a special dress—evenon hire, if need be—to attend special functions. You cansee for yourselves how degrading it is to borrowsomething on loan and put it on instead of wearing whatbelongs to you. The meaning of all this is that everythingthat is artificially created is bound to be full of faultswhereas what is natural is bound to be good. What youborrow and add to yourself artificially will have norelationship whatsoever to you in the context of thedivine. We should realise that “Imitation is human whilecreation is divine.” Merely imitating what you see in theworld around you is purely human and there is no220 221Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
divine aspect in it at all. On the other hand, what comesfrom your own Atma contains divinity. What binds manin all circumstances are these artificial attitudes butreally, the divine aspect never lands man in bondage.What is contained in the Vedas must be accepted, adoptedand put into practice. This is the sadhana that isappropriate for the youth. Dharma is something whichmakes the entire world prosperous in addition to stirringyour heart and body to right action.In the Mahabharatha, there is a very good examplefor this. The Kauravas and the Pandavas had madethemselves ready in the battle array in the Kurukshetra.They were all holding weapons and wearing dressappropriate for the oncoming war. They were blowingtheir respective conches and uttering war cries. Thuseverything was getting ready for the battle. Their bloodwas boiling and even as the situation was tense,Dharmaraja just looked at the Kaurava army and noticedhis Guru Dronacharya and his grandfather Bhishma.Immediately, he removed his footwear and the battlearmour and started walking with folded hands and barefeet towards Bhishma. On seeing this, the Kauravas feltvery happy and thought that Dharmaraja was coming toask for peace. The Pandavas were also very muchdisturbed by the sight of their eldest brother behavinglike this at a very critical moment. Everyone became veryangry. At this, Krishna who was on the Pandava’s side,signalled to Arjuna and others that they should followDharmaraja as they had all done on earlier occasions.Dharmaraja would never do any meaningless thing.Whatever he did was always right. He had never doneanything contrary to the injunctions of the Vedas orcontrary to the right path because he knew all aspects ofrighteousness and had a name very appropriate to hisqualities. Following the orders of Krishna, Bhima,Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva also put down theirweapons and followed suit. Dharmaraja requested thegrandfather to bless them and said “Our father died whenwe were very young and ever since we have regardedyou as our father. It is not right for us to fight with onewho has been like a father to us. Hence, we request youto pardon us and bless us at this moment and give uspermission”.  Bhishma immediately recognised thedharma in Dharmaraja and the right kind of conductwhich he was adopting. He shed tears of joy. Realisingthat Dharmaraja was exhibiting the highest kind ofdharma, he blessed him and said Dharmo rakshatirakshitaha.  Dharma will itself protect one who protects222 223Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
dharma. Since you are following dharma to the veryletter, dharma itself will protect you. Thereafter,Dharmaraja went to Drona and addressing him as gurusaid that it is not appropriate for them to fight with himas he was in the position of their guru but on account ofsituations beyond their control they were forced to wagea battle with their guru and requested him to give thempermission and blessing. At this, Drona too was deeplymoved as he recognised in this act of Dharmaraja anextraordinary quality of sticking to dharma even in themost fearful conditions. Drona affirmed  that this veryquality will bring the Pandavas victory in the battle.Because the Pandavas were full of dharma, they wentand asked Bhishma and Drona for permission andblessing and won. Otherwise, could anyone defeatBhishma and Drona in a battle? Only the path of dharmafollowed by Dharmaraja brought victory to the Pandavas.Contrary to this situation, today, we find that the veryfirst people with whom one wants to fight are one’sparents and guru. Those who go against the wishes oftheir father, mother, gurus and God are Kauravas andnot Pandavas.Gandhari, the blind mother of the Kauravas, triedto convince them to stick to the path of righteousness.Dhritarashtra, their blind father also tried to put them onthe right path but they would not listen. God Himself, inthe form of Krishna, went to the Kauravas on amission of peace and tried to put them on the right path.Their Guru Drona, also tried his best to put them on theright path but they did not listen.Such people who are not following the right pathand who are not showing respect either to God or theparents are to be described as Kauravas. They cannot becalled as Pandavas. Like the Pandavas, we have torecognise the five aspects or the five pranas (vital airs)that are present in us as divine, and thereby we shouldrecognise the aspect of Brahman. This is absolutelynecessary for us. I wish to bless you young people whoare participating in this session and hope that you willgive up foolish ideas and take to sacred ideas and tryand understand what is being expounded as part ofIndian culture in the form of Puranas, stories and Vedas.224 22515. Strength Arising From One’s OwnRighteous Conduct Is The OnlyMeaningful Strength
Without having any attachment to work andwithout swerving from the dharmic path,if you do all work in the name of God, then God willalways be with you in good and bad, in happiness andsorrow. He will be the witness and a constantcompanion with you. It is quite natural that the infiniteParabrahma has a large number of names. It is alsonatural that one who has so many forms and names hasan infinite number of eyes, legs, and heads. For such aParabrahma, who answers these two descriptions, theyhave also given the names prathamaja and poorvaja.  Inaddition, there is another meaningful name for Him andthat is Suparna. It is essential for us to know the aspectof Brahman who answers such a description.Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
In order that man gets the fruit of the meaning ofthis description and to put the meaning into practice, toconstantly think of this meaning is a sort of naturalaction. In common practice we know the nature of thewriter who writes stories, books, and legends and weknow how he works. If a writer wants to produce a storyor a drama, he first creates a mental picture and thenstarts to write and finally builds a story with the pictureas the basis. In the same manner, when God wanted tocreate the world in His aspect of the Parabrahma, Hefirst created His basis and that basis was the sound. Thisprimordial sound was the first picture which wascreated. Because it represents the sound, it has beencalled the Vachaspati, Brihaspati, Prajapati.  Since thisis the first aspect of creation, it has also been calledprathamaja.For Vedas, the first important thing is the soundand so it has been called prathama, or the first word hasbeen called prathamaja. In the same manner, if weenquire about who was the basis for this prathamaja,we come to the conclusion that it is Prajapati. SincePrajapati is the earlier basis than prathamaja, He is alsocalled poorvaja. These names poorvaja and prathamajahave thus been given to the Vedas and we must make anattempt to find the basis for giving these names to theVedas. The very first in creation, namely Hiranyagrabha(Cosmic womb), uttered the very first sound as “Bhoo”.After uttering this sound, He created the form bhooradiand so this created - earth is called Bhoomi. In the Veda,it has also been referred to as bhoomamu.This has also been referred to by another nameSthirapravaham. This bhoomi or bhoomamu is calledSthirapravaha because it is a creation which has neithera beginning nor an end. Bhoomamu also means a manthrawhich is sacred and permanent. The inner meaning ofthis word is that bhoomi is born in the form of themanthras and the Brahmanas. This is the reason whythe Sastras have been creating three different aspects—manthra, yantra and tantra in man. The yantra is thebody itself, the manthra is the breath which we take inand give out, and the tantra is the heart inside.We must understand how one’s breath itselfbecomes manthra. It is so because we have the wordSoham in the breath itself and when we inhale andexhale the breath we continuously utter the word Soham.This word Soham means “I am God”, I am that andsimply means Thath thwam asi or “That are thou.” There-fore, this manthra of breath represents the swaswarupa.228 229Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
As soon as one is born and even before one is ableto see anything and experience anything, this breath is thevery first thing that a new-born baby will experience. Thisbreath and manthra tells us the aspect of life and expoundsit to the world through the sound koham which means“Who am I?” This word koham comes in the form of amanthra and takes the form of a question. With the question“Who am I?” everyone begins his life. Because one startshis life with this question in the first instance, Brihaspatican also be called Prathama.Because Brihaspati and Vachaspati could answerthis very first question, they turned into Maharishis. Tothis question the answer they gave towards the end ofone’s life is Soham. If we really understand the work ofthe rishis we will find that these rishis have raised thequestion koham and provided the answer to thisquestion. Because they were able to give the answer tothis very basic question, they have passed this worldlytest. Life is the very foundation for living and this is athing which we know. Just as for living, life is the basisso also for question, manthra is the basis.Neither creation nor life are in the control of man.Because man is fully in the control of Paramatma, He isalso called Prajapati. Such aspects of Prajapati arelatent and are contained in man.  That is the reason whythe sound or speech is latent in man. We have saidearlier “Brahmanam Brahma Vahanam,” that is, Brahmahas the manthras as his vahana or carrier.While we perform the yagas and yajnas, we comeacross the statement “yagnanga yagnavahana”. Thisyagnavahana has also been referred to as vrishavahana.This implies that it is a form of dharma. This dharma isunderstood as something which is standing on fourdifferent legs. The four legs on which it is supported aresathya, yajna, thapas, and dana (charity) and becausedharma takes these four legs as the support, one alsocalled Paramatma as the Vrishavahana. Suparna is aname for Garuda. When we call Vishnu as Supranavahana,it also means that Vishnu is Garudavahana, and in thiscontext Garuda also means manthras.The Puranas tell us that while Vishnu was goingto the rescue of Gajendra, Vishnu did not take his vahana.Lakshmi was afraid that there might be defeat for Vishnubecause he had not taken the aspect of manthras withHim. Even in her excitement, Lakshmi realised that therewas considerable strength in the manthras and that230 231Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
Vishnu should not have left them behind. But, she wasrather afraid to tell her husband to take these manthrasalong as his vahana. The poet has described herpredicament in a beautiful manner. She wanted to moveforward and ask a question of the Lord but she was afraidthat the Lord might not reply and so she was goingforward and backward. It becomes clear here thatmanthra is a very good support even for the Lord.Without the carrier of the manthra, even God cannotmove forward and this is a moral which has been told tous in the story of Gajendramoksha.We must take the inner meaning and thesignificance of the stories told in our Puranas. Insteadof that, if we simply think literally that Garuda is a carrierand that Vishnu is being carried by Garuda, it is notcorrect. Garuda stands for manthra and dharma standsfor vrishaba and because of this Suparna is a name givento our Vedas.Yesterday we explained to you the significance ofthe use of the deer skin in the yajnas. In the samemanner several words are used in the Vedas to signifydifferent kinds of carriers. We should know the innermeaning of such words. Because the sacred meaning ofthe words that occur in our Vedas has not been properlyexplained to the people by our scholars, it has becomethe practice for the youth to lose faith in our Vedas andSastras and to think that they only lead us on the wrongpath. This feeling has become common among the youth.This is only a result of the inability on the part of thescholars to explain the sacred inner meaning of thevarious words which appear in the Vedas.You may be thinking that the Vedas and Sastrassimply bind a man to several compulsory duties and thatthey do not give you any enlightenment. This is notcorrect. In fact, the Vedas and the Sastras do giveknowledge to the ignorant people. One cannot come tothe conclusion that our Vedas have told us to give upeverything, sacrifice everything, run away from thefamily and retire into a forest. Our Vedas have taught usto regard all activities and all our duties as Brahman, dothe duties that are enjoined on us and be in the worldlylife in this manner. This has been taught to us by ourscriptures. However much one may be in upasana,however much one may be after spiritual attainments, itis necessary for one to adjust his upasana to suit hiscountry and the conditions in which he is living.The Mahabharatha is something which has givenus various stories and illustrations about dharma. The232 233Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
Mahabharatha has shown several paths and severalillustrations to lift man from the human level to thedivine heights. For this reason our ancestors havereferred to it as Panchamaveda or the fifth Veda. On oneoccasion, with a view to attaining victory and success inhis efforts, Arjuna performed the Aswametha yaga (Horsesacrifice). According to the tradition, the person whocaptures the horse in such a yaga must be willing to paythe money for this or agree to fight and win. After thehorse was thus traditionally released by Arjuna, it wascaptured by one called Maharaja Mayuradhawaja.According to the rules, Arjuna was preparing for a fightwith this Rajah. It so happened that this Maharaja was agreat devotee of Lord Krishna. When Arjuna metKrishna, he was told that it would be wise to firstinvestigate the circumstances under which the horse wascaptured by the king and only then undertake to fight forthe horse. Krishna said that the horse may even bereleased without a fight. Krishna did not stop at that. Hetold Arjuna that King Mayuradhwaja was a greatdevotee and it is not right for Arjuna to go and fight withhim. He even warned Arjuna that it may not be possibleto attain victory over a sincere devotee of the Lord.Krishna also told Arjuna that Mayura was a verydisciplined man. Not only did the King go through theprescribed dharmic paths, but he was also very wellversed in the Karma Kanda, Upasana and Jnana andwas thus a very capable person. When Krishna describedMayura in such glowing terms, Arjuna becamesomewhat jealous because he always thought that he wasthe greatest devotee of Krishna and was under the proudimpression that there was none greater than him.However, Arjuna took Krishna and went to King Mayura.On the way, Krishna hatched a small plan. Krishnatold Arjuna that it is not correct to go in their normalforms because Mayura may not respect them. He advisedArjuna that it may be better to go disguised as twoBrahmins. Krishna said that Mayura will then look afterthem better as they will then be guests in the house ofKing Mayura. As these two persons went as guests,Mayura also set aside his kingly status and became anormal householder. He received the two persons whohad come to his house in the guise of two Brahmins asguests. It is the first duty of a householder to welcomeguests without worrying about who they are. This is ourtradition. In this context, when the two Brahmins werereceived well, treated well and given ample food, Krishnawanted to further play a small drama. Krishna wanted to234 235Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
show Arjuna that he had unwarranted and unbecomingpride in thinking that he was the greatest of the devoteesof Krishna, because Mayura also was a great devotee.Just before they started eating their food, Krishnatold Mayura “We are two Brahmins, the secondBrahmin is my friend. My friend has a son and we weregoing round with a view to settle the marriage of thisson. On our way we saw a tiger which swallowed myfriend’s son, but strangely, half the body of my friend’sson is in the tiger while the other half is outside. Wewanted to release the boy from the tiger but the tiger didnot yield. After some time the tiger uttered a sacred cryand said that it was willing to release the body if wewere able to feed it with half the body of a person whostrictly adheres to dharma. Krishna then said that he hadenquired from the tiger who was such a righteousperson, and the tiger had immediately replied that KingMayuradhwaja was the best person to satisfy herrequirements. Krishna then said that they would bewilling to eat food and accept the King’s hospitality onlyif King Mayura agreed to give up half of his body tofeed the tiger. King Mayura readily agreed to this as hedid not want to displease the guests who were about toeat their food in his house. But Arjuna did not believethese promises and thought that this promise was madeonly to make them eat the food. It is understandable thatArjuna expressed such a doubt because no one willordinarily believe such an impossible promise. Krishnawas assuring Arjuna that Mayura was not an ordinaryperson and that he would certainly stick to his promise.Immediately after the food, King Mayura startedgetting ready to give away half of his body to the guests.He had his wife on one side and his son on the other andwas preparing to give his body. Even in this act of his,he asked his wife to stand behind him because accordingto our tradition no wife should see the face of her husbandbeing split into two. He asked his son to stand by hisside and asked his wife to stand behind him. Krishnaand Arjuna who were in the disguise of Brahmins wereseated and the process of cutting the body into two halveswith a saw had started. After the saw had split the bodyto a certain extent, they noticed that there were tears inthe left eye.Here we will understand how hardhearted Krishnacan be when he puts any devotee to a test although he isa very soft-hearted person in the context of the slightesttrouble for others. Yet, when he undertakes to put236 237Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
someone to a test, he will be hard as a diamond. Whilelooking at this, Arjuna was trembling at the sight ofMayura being cut like this, but Krishna said that asacrifice made with sorrow in one’s heart and a tear inone’s eye was not good and that he was not prepared toaccept such a sacrifice. Mayura immediately said that hewas not one who will fulfil his promise with sorrow andtears. To clear this, one has to understand why there weretears only in one eye and not in both eyes. He begged theguests to examine the situation in detail.Krishna wanted to demonstrate the sacredness ofMayura to Arjuna and so conducted all this drama. Heasked Mayura to explain the significance of tearsappearing only in one eye. Mayura addressed Krishnaand said that there were tears only in the left eye becausethe right half of the body is having the privilege ofsaving the life of the son of a sacred Brahmin guest whilethe left side would merely be eaten by crows and jackalswhen it is thrown away and this is the reason for thesorrow and tears on the left side. When the truth wasrevealed in this manner, Arjuna’s heart melted. Herealised with surprise that there were such greatdevotees of the Lord. He prayed to Lord Krishna to stopthis extraordinary and severe test for his sacred devotee.When Arjuna uttered these words, Krishnaappeared before Mayura in his glorious divine form withall the insignia, namely Sankha, Chakra, Padma, andGada, blessed him and said that he and his children willhave Krishna permanently in their hearts. Krishnarevealed that He had brought about this test with a viewto showing to the world the great devotion of Mayura.In this context, it is also necessary for us tounderstand the meaning of the insignia which were wornby Krishna. Youth must also understand the truemeaning of the four symbols with which the Lord isassociated. Here, Sankha or the Conch stands for thesabda or primordial sound. The meaning of this is thatsound is generated from the Paramatma and the soundis under the control of the Lord. The chakra or the wheel,represents the wheel of time which signifies that time isunder the full control of the Lord. Gada or the macerepresents physical strength. Padma the lotus representsthe heart of every individual. The meaning of this is thatall these are under the full control of the Lord.Our strength should not be regarded as animalstrength. All physical strength should be understood asthe divine strength derived from Brahman. So also, thetime which we spend must be associated with Brahman238 239Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
Himself and the lotus should be regarded as the LordHimself. If we develop these ideas, we will be able tolead a happy and meaningful life in the world.The Kauravas were completely defeated anddestroyed because they relied on their physical strengthand on their strength of wealth. The Pandavas werevictorious because they relied on the strength of dharmaand on God. Young people should know that the strengtharising from one’s own wealth and physical prowess isnot real strength. The strength arising from one’s ownrighteous conduct is the only meaningful strength.
16. Karma Marga, Jnana Marga,Bhakthi Marga:All Lead To The Same Destination
From the time you wake up in the morninguntil you go back to sleep in the night, youare spending all your time earning somefood for your stomach. All the education,knowledge and ability that you have isbeing spent for this trivial purpose. Thinkof this, Oh man! and find out whathappiness you are getting by forgetting theLord in this process. What is the use of yourfeeling very proud that you have read manybooks and learnt many Sastras if youcannot have devotion to God? All suchpursuits which do not enable you tostrengthen your devotion to God are utterlyuseless. You should ponder over this truth.240 241Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
Pavitratma Swarupas!
During the past fifteen days, you have learntabout some aspects of sacred Brahman.However, realising that the worldly affairs in which youhave to live everyday are equally important, I will speakto you today about some of these worldly aspects.If man lives properly as a human being, it will beoccasionally possible for him to turn towards the divinebut if man does not live as man, it will not be possiblefor him to even occasionally think of the divine. It isonly when man makes an attempt to know who he is,can he understand the divine. Only then is there a chancefor him to enter the realm of Atma and enjoy bliss andhappiness.It is in the context of this daily living that the greatacharyas, Sankara, Ramanuja and Madhwa have giventheir philosophical expositions. Sankara established andexpounded that whatever we see around us in the worldis simply a manifestation of Easwara. He has beenproclaiming that whether in the aspect of the Jiva or inthe aspect of the Lord or in the aspect of materialcreation, everything is one and the same and there is nosecond. In all the three aspects, Jiva, Easwara, Prakruthiand all the things that we see around us, what is presentis the Paramatma; and appearances are an illusion.Although the coconut appears to us as one singlefruit, it still has three distinct parts, the fibre on theoutside, the shell as a cover beneath it and the kernalinside. These parts though being distinct, yet  constituteone single aspect of the coconut. In the same manner,Sankara regarded Jiva, Easwara and Prakruthi as threeaspects, though apparently different, in reality are oneand the same and thus he preached Adwaitha. The worldconsists of several ideas: there are many things that wesee, there are many desires on the material side and thiswas treated by Sankara as analogous to the outer fibre ofthe coconut. He further compared the human body to theshell below the fibre of the coconut. He realised that thehuman body was made of destructible items like fleshand blood and so he compared it to the shell. But theParamatma which has the form of a lotus in eachindividual has been compared to the coconut kernal. Bycomparing this triple aspect of Jiva, Easwara andPrakruthi to these three constituents of the coconut,Sankara preached the philosophy of Adwaitha.Since he was propounding that everything in theworld consists of only Brahman, the ordinary people were242 243Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
somewhat confused. They were not able to clearly grasp thebasis of Adwaitha. He was explaining through the Mahavakyaslike Thath thwam asi (That thou art), Aham Brahmasmi(I am Brahman) that all that one sees in this world is Brahman.There was some difficulty for ordinary people to comprehendthe profound truths being preached by Sankara.People find it quite easy to utter various wordsbut they find it difficult to put them into practice. It iseasy to mentally identify oneself with Brahman but tobe able to really feel and practise that identity and torealise divinity in everyone is a difficult matter. By merelyuttering such statements without understanding their truemeaning, human nature is likely to deteriorate.Realising this, Ramanuja with a view to arrest suchdeterioration, expounded what is called qualifiedAdwaitha or Visishta Adwaitha. Sankara, in the seventhcentury, preached Adwaitha or the non-dualisticphilosophy. On the other hand, in the eleventh century,Ramanuja was preaching qualified non-dualism. IfAdwaitha took deep roots, he was afraid that faith anddevotion might become weaker.  Therefore, he startedpreaching Adwaitha in a special and qualified manner.He gave it some distinctiveness and explained thatJiva and Brahman always remain as separate entities.While Sankara explained and propounded that Jivaand Brahman were identical with each other, Ramanujaintroduced a special theory that though Jiva andBrahman were close and similar to each other, they werenot really identical. In this context and in accordancewith such teachings, people tried to get closer and closerto the Lord by their devotion.Later in the 12th century, Madhwacharyapropounded that Jiva, Brahman and Prakruthi were moredistant than what had been conceived by the earlierschools of thought. He propounded that Jiva and Easwaraare to be regarded as distinct and separate from each otherand that they can never get close to each other.Madhwacharya opposed and contradicted the view ofSankara according to which Brahman was the onlyreality and the world was illusory. He asserted thatBrahman, Jiva and Prakruthi were distinct and that eachone of them was as real as the other two. We have tointerpret this as simply meaning that Madhwacharyapreached the concept of Salokya (Constant thought ofgodhead) and that Jiva simply lived in the domain of theLord but it was not identical with the Lord. In thiscontext, one can say that these three great acharyas wereteaching three different aspects of the same reality.244 245Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
Sankara was propounding Sayujya or identity with theLord, while Ramanuja was talking in terms of Sameepyaor closeness to the Lord and Madwacharya was preachingin terms of Salokya or living in the domain of the Lord.In this way, these three acharyas preached threepaths for realisation of the same truth, namely the JnanaMarga, the Bhakthi Marga and the Karma Marga. Oneshould not think that these three paths are contradictoryto one another. If we can sanctify the work that we do,the time that we spend and sanctify the use to which weput our body, then it will be possible to realise the truthand therefore they have gone from one step to another.They have gone from Karma—sanctifying the work—to Bhakthi and Jnana. That is the reason why all theseaspects must be treated as complementary and notcontradictory.If man’s effort is noble, then God will support it.The coming together of man’s effort and God’s grace isresponsible for happiness. What is called purushartha,or man’s effort, must be put in by man. Without this it isnot possible for him to acquire the grace of the Lord.Ramanuja realised this and so he talked of different kindsof effort to be put in by man and the support of God.Sankara taught that “Sarvam Brahmamayam jagat” (Theaspect of Brahman is the basis for all the work we do).He preached that there is nothing which is different fromthe Lord and that everything was the Lord Himself. EvenSankara, who preached pure Adwaitha undertook toestablish four important religious centres in our country.Through them he tried to propagate the aspect ofAdwaitha. Sankara taught that “Ekam eva AdwaithiyamBrahma” that is, Brahman is one and only one, there isno second to Brahman. Even while so preaching, at someplaces he supported the Upasana Kanda at some places.When we look at them in a superficial manner, wefeel that the philosophies expounded by these Acharyasare distinct and different from each other. This is notcorrect. If we examine them in detail and in the contextof the time at which they were propounded, we willrealise that they are not different in essence or in thebasic content. The correct attitude is to see the unityamong these three aspects and not to regard them asdistinct and different from each other. We shall have totake the essence and inner meaning of all these andappreciate the underlying unity in them.Sankara always taught pure and undilutedAdwaitha and he even encouraged upasana in the four246 247Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
centres he established. This practice is continued eventoday. The people in charge there accept and participatein offerings to the Lord. By such offerings and puja,devotees have been attempting to get the grace of theLord, even in these centres of Adwaitha. Not only is therea meaning in performing such upasanas. they wantcommon people to do the same thing in their daily lives.This is the purpose of participating in upasana.There are two kinds of people—the Jnanis andordinary people. The ordinary people can do the right thingby looking at and imitating the path followed by the Jnanis.It is only in the aspect of the body, mind and the daily lifethat these three philosophies—Dwaitha, Adwaitha andVisishta Adwaitha—were being taught. From the point ofview of the body, the path of karma or work was taught.From the point of view of the mind, the path of bhakthi ordevotion was taught. From the point of view of one’s owndaily life, the path of wisdom or jnana was taught.Therefore, in order to enable the person to practise these,Sankara, Madhwacharya and Ramanuja taught the threepaths which can be called the royal paths for humanity toattain salvation.One must recognise the purpose and the essenceof these three approaches. It is not correct to see only theoutward differences and apparent contradictionsbetween them. If we follow the pure non-dualistic pathtaught by Sankara and regard everything in the world asBrahman, then we have to ask ourselves what is it thatwe are able to see in the ordinary human life? Only whenwe take the other approaches will we be able tounderstand the human aspects of divinity. It is only froma superficial point of view that these paths appeardifferent. But from the point of view of the ultimate goal,these three are one and the same. It is necessary for us toaccept the upasana or the work aspect having thiscommon goal in mind.While recognising the importance of the KarmaMarga and involving ourselves in the necessary dutiesthat we have to perform, we should also realise theimportance of the Bhakthi Marga and know that we canreach the Lord by the path of devotion. Without innercleanliness, whatever work you might do will becomewaste. It will not yield any results. What Sankara taughtwas that we should have bhakthi or devotion towardsthe Lord in view of the temporary and transient natureof the world. In this material world, some kinds ofdesires and diseases relating to the senses are naturaland they appear in human beings. In order to cure these248 249Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
diseases it is necessary to take the appropriate medicine.There is a small story in support of this.There was a housewife who had great faith in theLord and whenever she had time, she used to take ajapamala and chant the name of the Lord. In thismanner, with the idea of sanctifying the time that isavailable to her, she used to always utter the name of theLord. She was feeling that her body was like thecontainer and her prema like the oil in the lamp. Shethought that divinity was a jyothi or a bright lamp. Inthis manner she was spending her life with a view tomaking it useful. She came to the ultimate conclusionthat even while the lamp of life still glowing in her, sheshould be able to fulfil the duties that are entrusted toher. If this light is extinguished, she would not be able toperform her duties. Hence, she thought that even whileliving, she must make the best use of it and attain salvation.Her husband who saw this kind of devotion andattachment to the Lord on the part of his wife, told herthat she will not be able to find time for looking after thefamily if she spends all the time in the contemplation ofLord. He was also of the opinion that they should thinkof the Lord only after they grow much older. The wifedid not agree with this contention. She argued that theyshould think of the Lord only when one is physically andmentally sound and not in the old age when these facultiesare failing. While strengthening her own belief andconviction in this manner, she was from time to timetrying to convince her husband. Once while she was aloneand her husband was in a good mood, she told him thatthe body was temporary like a water bubble. It is not knownhow long the body will survive and it is wrong to go onpostponing one’s duties to a later period in life. Maya issomething which will make one forget the purpose forwhich one has come into this world. To forget the Lordis due to Maya. Therefore, one should think of the Lordwhile one is still strong and should not postpone it to alater date because the body may disappear at any time.On the other hand, the husband was arguing thatshe was out of her mind and asked her to think aboutwho was going to feed them if they spend all their timethinking of the Lord. He asked her if the Lord wouldcome and look after the children and attend to other needsif they spend their time in the thought of the Lord. Hesaid that they will have to earn money because no onewill look at them if they do not have sufficient wealth.He was thus trying to divert the attention of hiswife. But the wife who had a total commitment and faith250 251Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
in the Lord said that the Lord who had sown the seedwill also water the plant. God who has given us this lifewill also provide food for us. If you spend all your timethinking that you have to find food for yourself, you arejust like an animal. The one difference between man andthe other animals is that man has wisdom which theanimals lack. This is the only faculty that distinguishesman from an animal. If you always talk of finding food,you are behaving just like an animal.Such line of thinking on the part of his wife madea deep impression on his mind and finally he came to theconclusion that these statements were really true.However, He told her that he had to think of themarriages of the children and other such commitments.He said that after these commitments were fulfilled, hewould think only of the Lord. He said that he does havefaith and devotion but he has other duties as well.That day had gone in such conversation. As dayspassed the husband contracted a dreaded disease and thelady had to consult various doctors and specialists. Inthose difficult days, she went to the bedside of her husbandand told him to think of the Lord at least under thosecircumstances and try to earn His grace. She said that thegrace of the Lord was the best medicine for the husband.The husband had great faith in the doctors and sohe forced her to call the doctors again. One doctor whowas liked by the husband came and after examinationgave a bottle of some liquid and told the wife to give themixture to the husband three times a day. This was toldby the doctor and the husband saw the bottle beinghanded over to the wife. He knew the instructions thathad been given. The wife took the bottle but did not givethe husband the medicine regularly. After three days, thehusband asked the wife why the medicine had not beengiven according to instructions. The wife had a very goodopportunity to teach a lesson to the husband. She saidthat after all, the doctor had given a medicine but whyshould it be taken in the manner in which it wasprescribed. It can as well be swallowed in one go. Thehusband said that the medicine should be taken whenthe disease was there but what is the use of taking itlater. Then the wife explained that on the same analogy,we should take the medicine for the Bhavaroga(birth-death cycle), immediately after we are born andnot postpone it to a later date. He was told that themedicine given by the doctor was for the physicalillness which he got a few days ago, but, for theBhavaroga, which starts right from the birth itself, the252 253Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
medicine is constant contemplation on the Lord. Thehusband was convinced at last and he startedcontemplation seriously on the Lord. Consequently hisdisease was quickly cured. Since then both of them werevery happy.Students, boys and girls!Our life is like that. As soon as we are born, ourmaterial desires start.  Hence, it is very necessary for usto constantly think of the Lord to acquire happiness andbliss right from the time when these desires crop up. Totake the view that you will think of the Lord only whenyou are in difficulties is foolish. It is not correct topostpone thinking of the Lord till you retire from service.We must begin to think of the Lord early. That is why, itis said: Start early, drive slowly and reach safely. If youthink that you can think of God after you grow old, it isnot right. When the messengers of Yama, the God ofdeath, come and drag you to your end, at the time whenyour body is put outside the house just before your death,at the time when the anguishing cries of your wife andchildren are being heard, is it possible for you to utterthe name of the Lord? You should think of the Lord whileyou have all your faculties under your control and whenyou have all your mental and physical strengthunimpaired. You must earn His grace when you are youngand store it for the future.Prema Swarupas!When you are still young, your body and mind arelike fruits which are just ripe. When your body is in goodand ripe condition, you must surrender the body to God.Will he accept it, if you surrender it to Him after itbecomes bad, old and rotten? From now on, surrenderyourself to the Lord, do good work with the body, havegood ideas in your mind and purify your thoughts. Itwill then be possible for you to earn the grace of God.Such good deeds and the grace thus earned will standyou in good stead in your old age when you can donothing. If today you are prepared to do good work, thenthe kind of happiness which you want will be available.If you postpone thinking of the Lord till you becomeold, there is no guarantee that you will earn His  grace.If you go early enough in the morning to a hoteland buy a ticket for your lunch, you are sure of your mealwhether you go at twelve o’clock or at one o’clock,because you have purchased the ticket early enough. Ifyou go for lunch at one o’clock without buying a ticket254 255Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974 Summer Showers  in Brindavan 1974
early, the hotel keeper may inform you that lunch is notavailable. Therefore, try and purchase the ticket for God’sGrace, which you will want in your old age, while you areyoung. With that ticket purchased early, it will beavailable whenever you go, but if you think that you willbuy the ticket for the grace of the Lord when you growold, it may not be available for you. The availability of theLord’s grace will depend upon your luck and fortune.Students, boys and girls!The young age in which you now are is a sacredage. That you are born as a human being is a special giftgiven to you by the Lord. All the animals in the worldwant to become human beings. If you do not use this giftgiven by the Lord to earn His grace in this sacred age, itwill not be possible when you grow older. As I told you inthe beginning, I intend to speak to you about the aspect ofBharath from tomorrow. I thought that between thesetwo—namely Brahman and Bharath—certain ordinarythings which relate to daily life should also becommunicated to you and therefore, today’s discourse hasbeen about matters which relate to normal daily life.256 257