SUMMER SHOWERSIN BRINDAVAN1979
Discourses ofBHAGAWAN SRI SATHYA SAI BABA
Delivered during the summer courseheld at Brindavanon Indian Culture and Spirituality
PRASANTHI NILAYAM
SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST
Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, IndiaSTD : 08555       ISD : 91 - 8555Phone: 287375.  Fax: 287236E-mail : enquiry@ssbpt.org© Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications TrustPrasanthi Nilayam, IndiaThe copyright and the rights of translation in any language are reservedby the Publishers. No part, para, passage, text or photograph or artwork of this book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilized, inoriginal language or by translation, in any form or by any means,electronic, mechanical, photo copying, recording or by any information,storage and retrieval system, except with prior permission, in writingfrom Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam(Andhra Pradesh) India, except for brief passages quoted in bookreview. This book can be exported from India only by the PublishersSri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam (India).International Standard Book No.81-7208-361-081-7208-113-8 (set)First Enlarged Edition : September, 2004Published byThe Convener,Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications TrustPrasanthi Nilayam, India - Pin Code 515 134STD : 08555  ISD : 91- 8555Phone :  287375    Fax : 287236
E-mail : enquiry@sssbpt.org
Printed atContents
Contents iii1. The Duty Of Students 12. Nishkama Karma 63. The Messenger Of God 184. Dharmakshetre Kurukshetre 255. Spirituality And Society 346. Qualities Of A Sthithaprajna 427. “I Am Thine” 508. The Word Of God 589. The Inner Dialogue 6410. Re-ligion :The Spiritual Reunion 7311. Jnana Yajna 8112. “Sraddhavan Labhate Jnanam” 8913. Karma Yoga 9714. Buddhi Yoga 10315. Dhyana Yoga 11016. “Anoraneeyan Mahato Maheeyan” 11817. Sathwic Food 12618. The Four States Of Consciousness 13719. Saranagati Thathwa 14520. The Practice Of Meditation 15321. Control Of The Mind 16022. Akshara Brahman—The Universal God 16623. AUM—The Name Of God 17324. The Perennial Philosophy 17925. The V oyage Of Death 18826. The Sovereign Knowledge 19427. The Nature Of Prakruthi 20328. Ananya Bhakthi 20929. Work, Worship And Wisdom 21630. Vibhuthi Yoga And Practical Life 22531. “Sathyam Vada Dharmam Chara” 236
○○○○○○○○ ○○○○○○○○○○○○○○○
○ ○ ○○○○○○○○○○○○
○○○○○○○○ ○○○○○○○○○
○ ○ ○ ○○○○○○○○○○
○ ○ ○ ○ ○○○○○○
○○○○○○○○○○○ ○ ○
○ ○ ○○○○○○○○
○○○○○○○○○○ ○○○○○○○○○○
○○○○○○○○ ○○○○○○○○
○○○○ ○○○○○○○○○○○
○ ○ ○○○○○
○○○○○○○○○○○○○○○ ○○○○○○
○○○○○○○ ○ ○
○○○○○○○○○○○○○○○○○○ ○ ○ ○
○○○○○○○○○○○○○○○ ○○○○○
○○○○○○○○○○○○○○○○ ○○○○○○○○○ ○ ○
○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○○○○
○ ○○○○○
○○○○○○○○○○○○○○○ ○
○○○○○○ ○ ○ ○ ○
○○○○○○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○
○○
○○○○○○ ○ ○ ○ ○
○ ○ ○○○○○○○○○○
○ ○ ○○○○○○○○○○○○
○ ○○○○○○○○○○
○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○○○○○
○○○○○○○○○○○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○
○○○○○ ○○○○
○○○○○○ ○
○○○○ ○ ○ ○Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
The Duty Of Students
The influence of Western education hasresulted in the dwindling of interest in thestudy of the Sanskrit language. It hascaused the disappearance of domesticfelicity and the erosion of the principles ofarya dharma. People are enamoured ofexternal appearances and behaviour, andconsider speaking in their mother tonguesa fault. They hesitate to honour the normsof social etiquette and regard it a burdento respect teachers and elders. Timidity isprevalent everywhere and has become acontagion.If women flock to offices and take up jobs,who will be there to look after home andperform the domestic duties? If bothhusband and wife take up vocations, whoshall perform the household chores? Ifmothers go to school to teach the childrenof others, who is there to teach their ownchildren? If women take up books and goabout like men, who will look after thekitchen? By a woman taking upemployment there would be fewer financialproblems for the family, but several otherdifficulties would arise denying happinessto her.Embodiments of Love—students, teachers, andpatrons of education!
Bharath, the acknowledged birthplace ofspirituality, has been witness to a decline inrighteousness and has gradually become a veritableabode for demoniac tendencies that nourish injustice,disorder, and unethical conduct. It is the duty of studentsin such a malaise-ridden society in this terrible age ofKali, with all its rampant vices, to see that righteousnessand love are resuscitated and peace and security assured.Just as mothers feel sorry for their children whoare backward in education or in other aspects of life,mother India too laments over the spiritual and moraldegradation of her children. To remove this agony ofmother India, the students should fulfil their duties. Indoing so, they would do well to remember that thecitizens, the elders, the men wielding authority and the1 2
1Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
great leaders were all, at one time, students themselvesand that they, too, in time and in their turn, will be theleaders and citizens of tomorrow.The Government does not have the power toguide the people along the path of morality andspirituality. The citizens, on their part, do not have theauthority to correct the Government when necessary.Viewed from the spiritual angle, both the Governmentand the people appear to be losing their right to mendthe ways of each other. The reason for this situation isthat the men who are now at the helm of affairs hadfailed to shape their lives along spiritual lines duringtheir childhood.The greatness of an individual depends on thecultural perfection he has attained. “Culture” does notconnote mere diligence. It means the removal of evilthoughts and propensities and the promotion of goodthoughts and qualities. The lives of the citizens oftomorrow depend upon and take shape according to thetype of life they lead as students today. The life a personlives as a student is the foundation for the life he willlead later as a citizen. It is only when a student lives alife characterised by peace and self-control that he willhave a peaceful and contented life later as a citizen.It is against this background that the students oftoday must act. They must realise that the moral strengthin them is being sapped by Western culture andeducation. Western culture is the culture of themetropolises where the multiplication of individualdesires has led man to misery and unhappiness. Indianculture, however, is the culture that prevails in the ruralmilieu where desires are few and contentment rides high.In the present context, therefore, we should seek thateducation which confers the joys of a contented life. Tolive such a sacred and exemplary life is the duty ofstudents today.In the field of education, as in every other sphereof human endeavour, we are faced with bafflingproblems. The present educational system does littlefor the purification, the enrichment, and the spiritualunfoldment of man. It has merely brought society tothe brink of disaster. In addition, we have the constantbabble and meaningless prattle the intellectuals andpundits trying to thrust upon the administration in thecountry, thereby reducing the nation to a “kingdom ofrabbits.” The spread of modern education has broughtin its train, spiritual retrogression and a surfeit ofselfishness. We, therefore, require today patrioticstudents with broad minds, men of action capable ofselfless service and sacrifice. “Simple living and highthinking”—that should be the ideal for us; not “highliving and low thinking” which seems to be the maximof modern education.It is to impart to you such wholesome ideas andto enrich your value systems that the Sri Sathya SaiCentral Trust has been conducting these summer courses3 4Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
every year. These courses afford you an opportunity togainfully spend a month imbibing the high ideals oflife that provide you with spiritual nourishment.Human life is comparable to a tree and thekinsmen of the individual to its branches. On thesebranches the flowers of his thoughts and feelingsblossom. These flowers gradually develop into fruitsof good qualities and virtues. The nectarine juice presentin these fruits is character. Without roots and fruits, atree is mere firewood. Self-confidence is the root of thetree of life and character, its fruit.With the hope that you will all become exemplarystudents, reap the full benefits of this course, purify yourhearts and reform society, I bless you all.
Nishkama Karma
Can one who longs for a position ofauthority be of pure heart?It is only when the servant of the nationbecomes its leader that he can renderselfless service.Embodiments of the Divine Atma!
Bharath is the country which has rightlyunderstood the secret of karma and hasthereby come to be called Karmakshetra, the land ofaction. Work done in cognition of the Atma givesprotection to life. Such karma broadens the heart andillumines the individual. It annihilates the ego andconfers the bliss of the Self on man. To recognise thissanctity of karma, we should purify our hearts. Karmaflows incessantly like a river. All creation, sentient, andinsentient, is immersed in it.5 6
2Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
The word karma may appear to be small, but itsmeaning is profound. It is not possible to define karma.It has neither beginning nor end. Just as life isbeginningless, karma too is without beginning. Thus,the nature of karma is shrouded in mystery and in tryingto comprehend its significance, one must be earnest andsteadfast. In common parlance, it is natural to regardthe performance of an action as karma. But, this is notcorrect. For example, to the question as to what someoneis doing, we get the answer that he is writing. Herewriting is considered karma. Similarly, when the samequestion is asked about someone else, we get the replythat he is not doing anything and is merely watching.Watching is as much an action as writing is. So, too,sleeping and contemplation involve karma. As long asthere is life-breath in man, he cannot desist from karma.In fact, the very process of inhalation and exhalation iskarma. There is no need to put in any special effort forwork such as this. Likewise, there is little of true effortrequired in several other activities in our daily routinefrom morning to night.Nevertheless, all these activities form an integralpart of human life and cannot be described as spiritualendeavour. Instead, we should undertake today what isknown as nishkama karma, or action performed withoutany desire for the fruit thereof. Service of thedowntrodden, the disabled and the diseased alsoconstitutes an obligation in one’s daily life and cannotbe described as being nishkama karma or motivelesswork. This is because man’s love for the universe is notwithout selfishness. If man loves any object, he does sofor his own sake and pleasure. Similarly, if a manconceals an object in a secure place, it is not on accountof his love for the object but because of his love forhimself. Thus, in the world, all kinds of love are bornof love for oneself and not out of love for others. It isthe primary duty of the members of the Seva Dal togive up the thought of the utility of an act of service toone’s own self and consider service for the benefit ofothers alone as being truly selfless in character.Man can be described as a conglomeration ofthoughts and ideas. Every little thought becomes anintegral part of his life. The quality of feelings one has,determines his future. Therefore, he must install sacredideas in his heart. The fostering of pure thoughts willpromote the spirit of selfless service in our hearts.Nishkama karma uproots the bestiality in man andconfers divinity on him. Selfless service is a more exaltedmeans of spiritual progress than such other ways asmeditation, bhajan and yoga. This is so because whenwe undertake meditation, japa, or yoga, we do so forour own benefit and not for the good of others. Theseare aimed at subjugating one’s individual desires andsecuring happiness for oneself. What we should aspirefor is the attainment of the good of others without anydesire for personal gain.7 8Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Nishkama karma, or selfless service, is thefragrant flower of altruistic love. It is not to beperformed for the satisfaction of the person renderingthe service or the person at whose bidding it is done.Man should regard nishkama karma as the purpose forwhich he is given life. This feeling should flow throughhis very nerves and bloodstream and permeate everycell of his body. Whatever be the work we do, weshould do it as an offering to God and for His pleasure.Members and office-bearers of the Sathya Sai Seva Dalshould not feel obliged to do service on the groundthat the rules and regulations require them to do so.They should not look upon the regulations ascompelling them to do service. Without beingregimented by rules and regulations, we should takeup service activities for the purification of our ownhearts.On the emblem of the Seva Dal is inscribed “Dutyis God.” Man is using the expression “duty” so oftenand in so many different contexts without realising itsinner significance. The word “duty” would have nomeaning at all if there were only one individual. Itassumes significance only if there is a society or acommunity, or at least two persons. Here we shouldunderstand two aspects closely related to “duty.” Thesemay be termed “individual freedom” and “fundamentalright.” “Individual freedom” refers to the freedom anindividual has, whereas “fundamental right” brings intofocus his relation to society. Man must endeavour toensure that there is proper balance between the two.All your life is spent in the company of others inthe society. You are not independent by yourself.Without any kind of relationship to a community, torelatives and to other individuals, it is not possible foryou to live in seclusion, all by yourself. Since it is notpossible to live in absolute isolation, our lives areinevitably full of connection with others around us. Itis in this context that the Seva Dal volunteers, realisingtheir duty to society to which they owe their existence,must remember that life is bestowed on man not forpersonal profits but for communal good.There is yet another dimension attached to themeaning of this word “duty.” We should seek only thatkind of liberty which does not obstruct the freedom ofothers. Should you hamper the independence of anotherindividual in the course of an egotistic display of yourindividual freedom, you are sure to be condemned bysociety. The man next to you enjoys the same amountof licence that your own individual freedom affords you.There is a small example to illustrate this: trying to makethe most of your own individual freedom, you may gailystroll down the road, wielding a large stick in yourhand. Yet, a man coming from the opposite directionhas just as much freedom to dodge the stick as you haveto wield it. If you behave in a manner which impairsthe freedom of another, you stand to receive societal9 10Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
disapproval or governmental censure. Thus, what weunderstand by the word “duty” is that the privileges andthe rights enjoyed by us on account of our individualfreedom, are also claimed by others who are around us.The right to walk freely does not allow you to roamabout recklessly in a village as you might in a forest. Ahundred percent freedom cannot be the prerogative ofany individual bound to society, whether it is the PrimeMinister or the President.Even the monarch of a large kingdom cannot fulfilall his individual wishes. He cannot, merely by virtueof his being the King, behave in any manner that hefancies. The kings have some codes of conduct anddiscipline, which they must adhere to. Just as the rulerof a petty earthly domain has certain norms to go by incarrying out his duty, the Supreme Ruler of the world,the Almighty, too, does have such regulations in thematter of the governance of the universe.It is puerile to say that God would do everythingby Himself simply because He is omnipotent. Here isan illustration. There are two individuals who aredevotees of the Lord. One of them prays to God for rainto prevent his crops from getting dried up. The other,however, prays to Him for the absence of rainfall for afew days in view of a grand marriage ceremony he hadintended to perform in his house shortly. Thus, they putthe Lord in a dilemma. Which devotee’s prayer shouldGod answer? Here, we should ask ourselves the questionas to whether God has received these prayers Himselfdirectly or not. Even as there is a delegation of authorityin the administration of a terrestrial kingdom by a ruler,by which various governmental functions are performedby several ministers who are assigned the charge ofcertain departments and portfolios, in running the affairsof the Cosmos, the Almighty God, too, assigns certainfunctions to certain gods like Indra, Varuna, and Rudra.Just as all earthly matters are not taken directly to aking, but are presented to the concerned ministers foraction, all prayers of man do not reach God Himself—they are attended to by His “ministers”, Indra, Varunaand others. Only those prayers which have their originsin the spirit of nishkama karma, infinite and pure loveand an unsullied heart, reach the Lord directly. It is notpossible for prayers of any other kind to reach Himdirectly. Therefore, it is only through these three media,that is, nishkama karma, boundless love, and anunsullied heart, that we can hope to secure direct contactwith the Lord and obtain His Divine sanction to ourrequest.Even among these three, nishkama karma is veryimportant and therefore the members of the Seva Dalshould participate in service activities without indulgingin selfish pursuits. To call ourselves Sathya Sai SevaDal V olunteers and have selfish interests as an endwould amount to an attempt to deceive God. Youractions should be in consonance with the nameassociated with the institution.11 12Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
A few minutes earlier you had heard Gokak saysomething about manishi. This word, when slightlymispronounced, would be heard as mahishi or somethingarising out of maheswara. By its association in terms ofthe sounds of these words, the word maharishi alsopresents itself to us as a manishi (ordinary man) andgets transformed into a maharishi (sage) by engagingin nishkama karma. Truly speaking, the merit that couldbe obtained from service cannot be acquired even fromthe practice of rigorous austerities. Service brings humanbeings closer to each other and promotes affection andfriendship. Without this friendship and feeling of lovefor one’s fellowmen, one cannot hope to attain intimacywith the Lord (sneham) which among the nine forms ofdevotion to God is next only to Atmanivedanam(complete surrender).You may be thinking in this context that you areliving as brothers in keeping with the laudable ideal of“Brotherhood of man and Fatherhood of God.” Thereis, however, a higher ideal that is to be sought after, forit is not uncommon to observe brothers quarrelling withone another and totally severing their connections.“Ekam sat viprah bahudha vadanthi”—the one truth isspoken of in different ways by the wise. “Ekohambahusyam,” I am One; let Me be many. “Ekam evaadvitiyam Brahma,” Brahman is only One, without asecond. “Easwara sarva bhootanam”—God is in allbeings. “Isavasyam idam sarvam”—The entire worldis enveloped by the Lord. This is the inner meaning ofthese Upanishadic declarations—behind the apparentphysical differences, the one basic Truth, the Atma,resides in all beings. We should, therefore, live our liveswith a constant awareness of this profound verity. Donot feel elated by injuring and hurting others, for thatharm is not being caused to another but to your ownself. In the same way, whatever be the benefit whicharises out of the good deeds you may perform, it accruesto you and not to others.Here is an illustration to explain that the gooddeeds do bring back good to oneself. Three cups ofcoffee were prepared in a home. The husband drankone cup and the wife, another. While they were debatingas to whether they should share the third cup or let oneof them have it, a friend called at the house and wascordially offered the coffee. The husband felt pleasedthat he had not only averted a quarrel with his wife butalso performed the service of offering coffee to hisfriend. Three months later, the husband visited hisfriend’s house. The friend extended due hospitality andoffered him a cup of coffee, reciprocating the favour hehad received earlier. Had he not been given the cup ofcoffee three months earlier, he would not have returnedthe hospitality. So, we see that the householder got backhis cup of coffee after three months. In the same manner,we are repaid for our deeds in some way or the other,whether we know it or not, and in the same coin.13 14Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
The Bhagavad Gita has proclaimed the path ofnishkama karma as the royal road to perfection. Itexhorts man not to crave for the fruits of action andmerely perform one’s duties in a detached manner,leaving the results thereof to the Lord. God does notenjoin man to do any work in particular. He is only thedispenser of the results of the deeds done by humans.He gives the fruits of actions according to the kind ofwork performed by man. If, without performing gooddeeds, you pray for personal gain, God merely listens toyour entreaties, but does not favour you with Hisbenediction. A story from the Mahabharatha portraysthis succinctly. On an occasion, during the celebrationsassociated with the Sankranthi festival, Krishna waspartaking of the freshly harvested sugarcane offered toHim by the gopis in accordance with the custom. Asthere were no machines those days, to squeeze the juiceout of the sugarcane, Krishna had to cut it. While doingso, He inadvertently cut his little finger. Seeing bloodon His finger, Sathyabhama, in her characteristic ego,ordered the gopis to go inside the house and fetch somecloth to bandage the finger. Draupadi who was also there,however, out of her love and concern for Krishna,immediately tore off a piece of cloth from the end ofher sari and bandaged the Lord’s finger.Years later, when Dussasana brought Droupadito the court of the Kauravas with the intention ofhumiliating her in public, she appealed to Krishna forHis Divine intervention to save her honour. Krishnapondered over it for a few moments to see whether shedeserved to be rescued from her present predicamentby virtue of any related good deed done by her in thepast, which could be recompensed. Only help offeredearlier entitles one to assistance from God. However, itis not as if any good deed done in the past would bringDivine aid in a particular situation. There must be acognate association of the deed performed by man withthe aid sought from the Divine. An ointment for the eyecannot cure the headache. After a little deliberation,Krishna remembered that the tying of a bandage,improvised by her, at one time in the past, entitled herto receive a similar gift. Therefore, He sent her anendless sari with the same little finger that had neededa bandage then. Karmanyeva adhikaraste—we mustconcern ourselves only with the action to be performedby us; the Lord will bestow on us the fruits thereof whenthe need arises.Gokak has said earlier that Swami is the greatestvolunteer and the greatest Seva Dal leader. You shouldfollow Swami, the leader. This is because from morningto night, Swami performs even the smallest taskHimself; and all His work is for the good of the world.It is in this context that I often say, “My Life is MyMessage.” God and the voice of God are one and thesame. Thus, doing what Swami does, as well as whatSwami ordains, forms work which pleases Him. Work15 16Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 197917 18
done without the thought of self and eschewing thecraving for name or power pleases Him most.(Discourse delivered on the occasion of theinauguration of the All India Sri Sathya Sai Seva DalDistrict Convenors’ Central Training Camp, to itsdelegates and to the participants in the Sri Sathya SaiSummer Course in Indian Culture and Spirituality.)
The Messenger Of God
Gita is the Messenger of God.Gita is the Universal Mother.Gita is the means for man to cross theocean of life.Gita is the support for all spiritual seekers.Embodiments of Love!
Bhagavad Gita deals with the basic facts ofthe gross material world and the subtlespiritual world; human society and the human mind.Gita is a mirror of the mind of the total, integral anduniversal man. It elevates man from the intellectual tothe spiritual love and illumines his pathway to theParamatma. It elucidates the secret of total self-surrender. It is an aid to the integral and totaltransformation of man. It is an epitome of the spiritualverities revealed by Krishna.3Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
with the external world of sensations that he has becomeoblivious of his own divinity and his natural identitywith Godhead.Men are immersed in the sea of cosmic Truth-consciousness-bliss, but they have not realised it. Sath-chith-ananda is everywhere, both within and withoutus, but it continually eludes and tantalises us. We arelike men wading through a river but incapable ofquenching our thirst. We need not search for Divinityin the external world. We have to realise it within ourown selves. The divine effulgence of Sath-chith-anandais concealed by the perverted nature of the human mind.The sun is really impartial. The entire world isbathed in sunlight. The sun sheds its light equally onall objects, men and animals, beasts and birds, andforests. But the image of the sun is not reflected inmountains and valleys. A clear mirror reflects the raysof the sun. We can see the sun’s image reflected by thecalm surface of clear water. Likewise, the sacred visionof Paramatma is revealed to an unperturbed and tranquilmind in which all thought waves have been calmed. Apure and holy heart will mirror the divine glory ofParamatma.A man with a wavering mind can neverexperience the Divinity of nature. All creatures in theworld are manifestations of the Divine. Krishna hasvividly demonstrated the Divinity of creation in thevibhuthi yoga.To appreciate the significance of sculpture, onemust possess aesthetic sense. He must also possess somebasic knowledge of its technique. You may provideyourself with a stone, a chisel and a hammer; but, youcannot carve an idol without acquiring an artistictemperament and the requisite technical skill. Similarly,a total and comprehensive cosmic awareness is thefoundation for perceiving the Universal Reality.The Bhagavad Gita expounds the secret ofcreation and the essence of Divinity. It explains thetheory and practice of all spiritual knowledge based onindividual experience. We must try and understand itstrue significance and practical relevance to humandestiny. The sun is the source of light on the earth.Without the sun the entire world will be plunged indarkness. Similarly, Lord Krishna is the source ofintellectual illumination and spiritual enlightenment.It is obvious that we cannot experience the pureeffulgence of Sath-chith-ananda or Truth-consciousness-bliss without Divine Grace. Human effortalone is not enough to attain spiritual beatitude. Thedivine annunciations of the Gita enable man to transcendthe barriers of the world and acquire divine power andspiritual energy. All creatures are equally exposed tothe celestial radiance of Sath-chith-ananda. But inapprehending this Truth-consciousness-bliss, menfollow different paths. Sath-chith-ananda is not foundin the external world. However, man is so preoccupied19 20Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
“Among the Pandavas, I am Dhananjaya. Amongthe mountains, I am the Himalayas. Among the rivers, Iam the Ganges. I am the lion among all beasts, the cowKama Dhenu among the herbivorous animals and thecobra among the snakes.” In the hierarchy of creation,Paramatma is the essence and the source of all attributesand excellences. Nevertheless, Paramatma is bothtranscendental and immanent. God manifests Himselfwherever purity of thought and unwavering devotioncoexist in a human being.There were many noble souls at that time. Therewas Dharmaraja, the personification of all dharma andvirtues. There was Bhishma, a tenacious warrior and avenerable, all-knowing scholar. There was Bhima, thepowerhouse of physical strength, wielding his mightyclub. Does it mean that Bhishma, Dharmaraja andBheema were not worthy of being the direct disciplesof Krishna? What is that special merit which Arjunapossessed and the others did not? Young men of moderntimes should ponder over this somewhat invidiousdistinction made by Krishna. They must recognise thesubtlety and sanctity of the Divine Force that sways theuniverse. Did not Dharmaraja, who had never deviatedfrom the path of dharma even under the most painfulcircumstances, deserve the Lord’s Special Grace?Arjuna knew that he was morally inferior to his brotherDharmaraja and wished to know in what way he wasmore deserving. He questioned Krishna, his guide, guru,and friend.Krishna gave an appropriate answer, “Bhishmaknows that justice is on the side of the Pandavas andhas even made a public proclamation of this. But, he isleading the Kaurava army. This means that his deedsdo not correspond to his thoughts and words. Harmonyamong thought, word and deed is the greatest virtue,and its absence is hypocrisy and wickedness.“Dharmaraja is subject to the common humanfailing of repentance rather than prior consideration.Though a noble soul, he lacks foresight and is guilty ofremorse for his past mistakes. On the other hand, Bhima,who has tremendous physical prowess and is dextrouswith his mighty club, unfortunately has a deficiency inintellectual strength, the greatest strength of all. A manwithout the power of discrimination cannot absorb thissubtle teaching.”Here, we must distinguish purvatapa frompaschattapa. Paschattapa is futile regret for the past.Purvatapa is wise concern for the future. Purvatapa isan indispensable aid to the spiritual aspirant whilepaschattapa is absolutely useless. The power ofdiscrimination is definitely more valuable than bookishknowledge, wealth and physical strength.The harmony between thoughts, words and deedsis the first step in spiritual growth. Lack of correlationbetween ideas, utterances and actions leads to self-deception, hypocrisy, and spiritual bankruptcy. The proper21 22Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
study of mankind is man. The generation, expressionand efflorescence of humanitarianism depends on theproper integration of thought, speech and action. In otherwords, the rapport between mental and physicalactivities is an essential ingredient of spiritual training.Arjuna exemplifies the harmonious blending ofthoughts, words and deeds—a quality absent inBhishma.In the midst of the din and roar of the battlefield,the clash of arms and the clamour of falling warriors,Arjuna maintains his physical composure and mentalequanimity. He does not, for a single moment, lose hisone-pointed alertness and mental agility.Krishna exhorts Arjuna to maintain his one-pointed poise, with implicit faith and self-confidence.Arjuna listens to the divine declaration of the GreatIntegral Incarnation. He surrenders himself absolutelyto the Lord. Arjuna becomes a saranagata (absolute self-surrender) and prostrates himself at the Feet of Krishna.Arjuna is superior to Dharmaraja, whose mind isalways agitated by regrets for the past. Unlike his brotherDharmaraja, Arjuna is concerned with the future. Incomparison to the mighty Bhima, Arjuna possesses asharp intellect capable of grasping spiritual profundities.This is the justification for Arjuna being the chosenrecipient of the Bhagavad Gita.Arjuna’s name has great spiritual significance.Arjuna is one who has a pure heart. Krishna used toaddress him as Partha also. Partha means “the son ofPrithvi.” There is no use of merely memorising the sevenhundred slokas (verses) of the Bhagavad Gita. We musttry and become Arjunas and Parthas.Krishna is Purushothama, the greatest being. Wecan offer our faults and foibles, and sins and sorrows atKrishna’s Feet and enjoy the highest treasure of pure,unalloyed bliss. We must enshrine the teachings ofKrishna in our hearts and practise these precepts in ourdaily lives. The slokas of the Bhagavad Gita will banishthe soka (sorrow) in our hearts and give us abiding peaceand joy.23 24Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Dharmakshetre Kurukshetre
Men who do not have purity of mind cannotacquire knowledge of their real self.Only those with pure hearts can realise thetrue nature of the Self.I am declaring the truth as it exists.
In Kurukshetra which is a Dharmakshetra,or sacred region, a place which has been theseat of holy sacrifices, the two armies were arrayed forbattle. Forgetting the supremacy of the Divine principleand giving full play to his ego, Duryodhana unfurledthe banner of war. In order to please Duryodhana,Bhishma blew his conch. Taking it as the signal for war,the armies sounded their war drums.Krishna and Arjuna also blew their conches onthe other side. The great roar of battle, proceeding fromthe soldiers on the side of the Pandavas, rent the skies.Responding to Arjuna’s request, Krishna stationed hischariot in the middle of the two armies. The chariotappeared so terrifying to the Kaurava soldiers, that theyfelt as if the war-horses galloped on their hearts.Beholding his grandfather Bhishma, his guruDronacharya and his friends and relations and thinkingof the bonds of affection between him and the peopleon the other side of the battlefield, Arjuna feltdespondent. His head reeled, his limbs trembled andthe Gandiva slipped from his hand. “Oh, Krishna!” hecried, “I am forced to wage this terrible battle againstthose friends and relations with whom I should havebeen living in happiness and harmony. My mind rebelsagainst this prospect. The cause for this is neither thefear of death nor the need to kill my kinsmen. TheSruthis have declared that the destruction wrought bywar may lead women away from the path of virtue andbring about social disorder. It would be far better tobeg and live on alms than to fight for a kingdom and beresponsible for this great sin and repent later.”Thus the great hero Arjuna entered into a state ofdespair. His dejection proceeded from his concern forthe preservation of dharma and his anxiety to strictlyobey God’s command. Dharma, which is concernedwith the welfare of all, should override the dictates ofmamakara (attachment), which confines itself to theinterests of one’s kith and kin. The dharma that relatesto societal well-being should be held higher than man’sduty to a few and, therefore, should not be sacrificed25 26
4Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
for the latter. The attachment one has for one’s relationsmay be compared to the clouds that suddenly gather inthe sky and disappear in no time. Dharma, however, isthat which sustains this earth. Thus, Arjuna felt dejectedout of his anxiety to protect dharma and adhere to God’sinjunction as indicated in the Sruthis. Had Arjuna merelyfelt sorry for his kinsmen, it might have been onlyVishada or dejection; but since he felt agonised for thesake of the protection of dharma and obeying the wordof God, his mental state is described as vishada yoga or“the yoga of righteous despair.”Generally, the ego develops in men as a result ofattachment and desire. Moha (delusion) is the result ofabhimana (egoistic feeling), mamakara, and ahamkara(conceit). The worldly relationships proceed from theseevil tendencies. Krishna advised Arjuna not to payattention to mundane bonds and added that those whokill and those who are killed are only His instruments.Arjuna was a medium used by Him to teach a lesson toall mankind.“I have chosen you as My instrument,” Krishnasaid. “You are a representative of mankind. Divinedispensation is the root cause of all; acts of God are forthe promotion and preservation of dharma. Arjuna, youhave not been able to understand My nature. For theprotection of dharma in the Thretha Yuga, I killed Valiand gave his kingdom to his brother Sugriva; I destroyedRavana and gave Lanka to Vibhishana without layingany claims to it. So also, though I had sovereign powerand could have ruled over Ayodhya, I went to the forestin obedience to my father’s wish to fulfil the pledge Igave to my father and to prove that the rulers of thelkshvaku clan never deviate from their word of honour.“Whatever I undertake is designed to promotethe welfare of the world. If I do not undertake action,the Universe would come to a standstill. Having killedKamsa who was unfair, unjust and proud, I gave thekingdom to his father Ugrasena. Similarly, I destroyedwicked rulers like Jarasandha and Dantavaktra and gaveaway their kingdoms to the nearest of their kin. I didnot retain anything for Myself. All this was done onlyfor the protection of dharma. From age to age, I havebeen working without respite even for a minute for thepreservation of dharma. I remain just a spectator withoutany personal motive. In every age, wheneverrighteousness declines and unrighteousness raised itshood, I incarnated Myself. For the protection of thevirtuous and for the destruction of evil and for therestoration of Dharma, I manifest Myself from age to age.”Hearing these words of Krishna, Arjuna said inall humility, “I shall do as you ordain.” Then Krishnasaid soothingly and lovingly, “Follow me with foldedhands and proceed to obtain the permission of Bhishma,your grandfather.” The Pandavas were given tofollowing Krishna’s words without questioning.Leaving his footwear and crown, Arjuna walked behind27 28Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Krishna with folded hands. Dharmaja, Bhima, Nakulaand Sahadeva watched this sight and realising thatArjuna was walking behind Krishna to some purpose,they too set their crowns down, removed their shoes,folded their hands and walked behind Krishna. TheKauravas looked at this scene and shouted for joy,thinking that the five brothers were frightened by themighty commanders on the Kaurava side and had cometo surrender.God’s inexplicable ways are known only to Him.Whatever God says, does or thinks, appears to bestrange. But God’s actions are never contrary to thecanons of dharma. There will be great felicity if oneadopts the attitude of unquestioning obedience. Thatday, the Pandavas enjoyed the fruits of such obedience.The Pandavas, preceded by Krishna, approachedBhishma who was standing in front of them and prayedthus, “Grandfather! We lost our father in our childhoodand you have nourished us since then with tender care.Though you are our grandfather, we may say that youare more than a father to us. By a terrible turn of eventswe are unfortunately constrained to fight against you,whom we regard as our father. Without your sanction,we have no right to commence the battle. So please grantus your permission.”Bhishma shed tears of profound joy when helooked at the Pandavas, who had chosen to observe therules of dharma even in a moment of dreadful crisis.Stroking their heads tenderly, the grandsire said, “Mayvictory be yours!”The brothers then proceeded to their guru,Dronacharya and sought his blessings. Appreciatingtheir righteous conduct, Dronacharya also blessed themwith victory. Thus, we see that Krishna had pointed outthe ideal path, bringing to the Pandavas victory evenbefore the war had begun.In fact, Sanjaya who was conveying toDhritharashtra all the details relating to the war said asmuch to the blind king. San means good, jaya means togain victory. So the name of Sanjaya denotes that hehas gained a good and righteous victory. Of pure heartand pious disposition, Sanjaya had contributed to thewell-being of the world through holy and disinterestedactions. When the blind king Dhritharashtra asked, “OSanjaya! Can you tell me how my sons are doing on thebattlefield and in what state they will return home?”,the wise Sanjaya unhesitatingly replied, “Where Krishnathe Yogeswara works in conjunction with Parthawielding the Gandiva, there will lie victory, prosperity,glory and felicity.”Yogeswara is one whose deeds are unselfish, whoworks for the welfare of the world and who embodiesthe spirit of sacrifice. The attributes of purity,permanence and bliss are applicable to Divinity. So, Godhas been described as having eight qualities. He isabsolute, immaculate, ancient, eternal, spotless, wise,29 30Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
unfettered and untainted. The devotee who takes shelterat the feet of such Divinity shall be ever victorious.The parents are the source of persons born in theworld. In the Bhagavad Gita, Kurukshetra, andDharmakshetra are described as the parents. It is calledKurukshetra because it belongs to the offspring of Kuru.It is called Dharmakshetra because it belongs to thosewho follow the path of Dharma. This is found in somebooks written upon the Gita and it is also described bypeople who teach the Gita. Kurukshetra andDharmakshetra are like husband and wife who bestowedupon the world the highest good.There is also another interpretation. This body isthe kshetra or field and childhood, during which man ispure and selfless, is Dharmakshetra. As man grows inyears, desires, evil qualities and evil thoughts enter thebody and the body becomes Kurukshetra. The innersignificance lies in the fact that Dharmakshetra andKurukshetra both exist in our hridayakshetra (heart).By cultivating good conduct and good thoughts, we canlive in “childhood” throughout our lives and therebylive in Dharmakshetra.Kshetra means a field; dharmakshetra denotes the“field” of righteousness. Kuru means to do, andkurukshetra denotes the field of activities. What shouldwe do? We should do good deeds, live righteous livesand follow the path of dharma. We should make dharmathe basis of our lives. We should try to develop hridayadharma which relates to the welfare of all beings. Theignorant Dhritharashtra asked what battle raged betweenhis sons and the Pandavas on the arena ofDharmakshetra or Kurukshetra. Mamakah means “myown,” that is, attachment arising from Rajasic qualitieswhich Dhritharashtra had. “Dhritharashtra” is one whoclaims as his own that which does not belong to him.Dhritharashtra claims as his own the body which reallydoes not belong to him. The body, the mind and theintellect are different from our real self. We are allDhritharashtras when we regard this body as the reality.We all say, “this is my body”, “my mind”, “my senses”,and so on, but “who am I?” is a pertinent question. If weenquire, we get the answer that we are not the body or themind or the senses or the inward tendencies or the ego.We are Parthas, the sons of Prithvi, when we haveuntainted minds, when we show boundless love andwhen we fully surrender to the Lord. We should cultivateabhimana (attachment) towards the Atma and not ourbodies. Partha is one who has abhimana toward hisAtma; Dhritharashtra is one who has abhimana towardhis body. The manifestation of the VishwavirataSwarupa does not show that God dwells in every object,but rather demonstrates that all things exist in Him.Therefore, we should direct our vision inwards and seethe spark of the Divine that we are and not be engrossedin external pursuits.31 32Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
In the Vedas, Divinity is compared to a flash oflightning amidst the blue clouds. Divinity exists like aflash of lightning in our own spinal column betweenthe ninth and the twelfth vertebrae. It is present as a“line” in the sushumna nadi. Gita is the form of Godand is comparable to the flash of lightning. (In Telugu,Gita also means a line). It is of no use if we simply readthe 700 verses without comprehending the innersignificance. Only when we contemplate, comprehendand meditate upon the splendour of Divinity, can weunderstand the real meaning of the Gita.On the eve of the battle, Krishna taught Arjunaseveral lessons which were framed in words. Vyasaelaborated the words of God, expanding them into 700verses. From tomorrow, we shall consider and try tounderstand the actual words spoken to Arjuna byKrishna in order to transform him. Those words whichflowed from the lips of Krishna are of paramountimportance for us. The scholars who write commentarieshave tried to bring down the Divine to their own level.It is not proper to bring down God to our level. Instead,we should try and elevate ourselves to the level of God.Rather than saying that God is this table, stick, stone ordust, it is ennobling to regard the table, the stone andthe dust as God Himself. You may worship a picture asGod, but not God as a picture. I hope that during thecourse of this month, the students will listen to the verywords spoken by Lord Krishna and strive to rise to ahigher level by understanding His inspiring words.
Spirituality And Society
The respect commanded by a communitydepends on its moral values. Moralbankruptcy leads to social degeneration.A community inspired by ethical moressurvives forever. I exhort the brave sons ofBharath to remember the strength andvalue of morality.Embodiments of Prema!
There is a widespread misconception thatspiritual values have no place in modernsociety. It is erroneously supposed that spirituality isincompatible with secular society. Krishna removes thismisconception in sankhya yoga. Many fallaciouslyimagine that spirituality is only concerned withsalvation. Spirituality is, in fact, the backbone of societyand is indispensable for social progress and solidarity.33 34
5Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Its importance for and relevance to society, cannot beexaggerated.Easwara manifests Himself among individualswho aggregate together to constitute a community.Every individual is an aspect of Easwara. Likewise,society too has emerged from Easwara. An individualhas form, but society has no such definable form. In thesame manner, the world is visible, but Easwara isinvisible. Though He is invisible, His existence becomesindisputable because there cannot be creation withouta creator. Just as a fabric cannot come into existencewithout thread and a pot without mud, so also theuniverse cannot come into existence without theprimordial substance of Brahman.Brahman is the basis, the substance, the primemover and also the “enjoyer” of the universe. Krishnaexhorted Arjuna to comprehend the omnipresent andimmanent essence of Brahman, the Godhead.
It is emphasized that we should not reject  swadharma
or our own dharma. But what is this swadharma? TheBhagavad Gita contains an elaborated and lucidexposition of the concept of swadharma. Krishnaenlightens Arjuna on the meaning and significance ofswadharma. Swadharma is mainly concerned withindividual attributes. Vishwa dharma is higher thanswadharma. Vishwa dharma is universally applicabledharma. Vishwa dharma is the cosmic dharma ofBrahman. Easwara dharma emerges from vishwadharma. Samajika dharma or the dharma of societyemerges from Easwara dharma, the dharma of God.Vyakti dharma or individual dharma emerges fromsamajika dharma, and this vyakti dharma is synonymouswith swadharma.It is said “samathvam yogamuchyate”. Thesentence is vibrant with thought and meaning. The wordsamathva may be roughly interpreted as equanimity. Thepopular meaning of swadharma is the code of conductor scale of values adopted by any particular caste,community, creed or religion. But this is not the correctinterpretation and it is not acceptable to all groups ofpeople. There are no universal and absolute norms ofmorality. Ethical relativity is an inescapable socialphenomenon. Morality depends on the time, the placeand the spirit of the age.Differences are obvious in our mundane world.There are all sorts of people in the world. There aremen, women and children of different age groups. Thereare infants, adolescents, young men and women andold men and women. The dharma of women cannot bethe same as the dharma of men. There is, in nature, aninherent inequality. Thus, it becomes ridiculous to adopta single ethical code for the entire mankind. Eachindividual has his own dharma, but it need not militateagainst the dharma of others.In the Bhagavad Gita, Arjuna finds himself onthe horns of a spiritual dilemma. He is worried about35 36Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
his swadharma. He finds himself in an unenviablepredicament. He hesitates to kill his own relatives andbe guilty of fratricide. So, he begins to detest thehomicidal glory of a battlefield. Then, Krishna teachesthe importance of swadharma. Swadharma is individualdharma or a code of conduct in conformity with anindividual’s status in society. It is also determined by aperson’s natural instincts. Easwara dharma is God’suniversal dharma based on love and compassion. It iscatholic and eclectic in its essence and is equallyapplicable to all castes, cults, creeds and communities.Swadharma or individual dharma is transcendedby a person who recognises and realises the immanenceof Easwara. “Easwara sarva bhutanam”. The momentyou comprehend the truth of this cardinal aphorism, yourealise Easwara dharma, the theocentric order in nature.Thus, swadharma is lower than Easwara dharma andvishwa dharma. When you recognise the divinity ofevery human being, you realise Easwara dharma. Youwill be subject to the dualities of pleasure and pain, joyand sorrow, good and evil as long as you identify yourselfwith the perishable and mutable physical body.Arjuna was afflicted with weakness of mind andheart. Krishna chastised Arjuna for his moral andspiritual cowardice. As long as you are weak and timid,you cannot achieve anything in life. Sentimentality andbody consciousness should be avoided. As long as youthink from the point of view of the perishable body,you cannot overcome your spiritual pusillanimity. Whenyou think from the point of view of the immortal Atma,you will have no feelings of weakness and timidity. Bythese exhortations, Krishna galvanised Arjuna intoactivity on the battlefield.The world is a stage. We are all actors in the worlddrama. But all our actions are motivated by the Will ofGod, who controls our immortal souls and perishablebodies. And we must play the game without displayingany sort of weakness or timidity.The duties, dichotomies, and relativities of theworld do not affect the immortal Atma. The coexistenceand juxtaposition of good and evil should beacknowledged. From the point of view of the Atma, goodand evil are only phenomenal and not absolute.Deha (the physical body) is composed of the fiveprimordial elements of earth, air, water, fire and ether.Sooner or later, the deha will perish. But the dehi or theinner Atma has neither birth nor death. It is indestructible,imperishable and immortal. And this dehi is one withBrahman. Atma and Brahman are essentially identical. Theidentification of the Atma with Brahman is the summum-bonum of spirituality. Spirituality and equanimity gotogether. Social justice and spirituality are closely related.Spirituality is conducive to social justice and egalitarianism.The realisation of the Atma is impeded by envy,malice, and jealousy which are caused by attachment to37 38Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
the perishable physical body. All people do not derivethe same benefit from the Gita. It all depends on thedeservedness and purity of the individual. Ultimately,the individual is responsible for everything that he does.Human beings may not be able to even imagine thesublime bliss of spirituality as long as they prefer towallow in the mire of slothfulness.The Bhagavad Gita that we read today has beenembellished and beautified by Vyasa’s poetic genius.One need not memorise all its slokas to achieve the innertranquillity of spirituality. A single sloka from the Gitais enough to transform our lives. Steadfastness (sraddha)is necessary for acquiring the knowledge of spirituality.The Bhagavad Gita exhorts us to become fittinginstruments of God. It should be repeatedly read forintellectual illumination and spiritual enlightenment.Liberation is the goal of all theists. The Atmamanifests itself in a body. It must realise its divinity throughdevotion and finally merge with the ultimate source fromwhich it has evolved. But very often man forgets his divinenature by yielding to the temptations of power and pelf.An individual’s response to good and evil in theworld depends on his karma, which is a correct measureof his gunas (qualities). Karma is the key to liberation.But man forgets his real destiny by his attachment to hiscorporeal body. Once, Indra was born as a pig on accountof a curse. He forgot his past glory, married a sow, andraised a family of little pigs. He felt supremely happyand forgot his divinity. Narada took pity on him and madehim realise his real destiny. Human beings also forgettheir divinity and attach themselves to sensual pleasures.Krishna’s exposition of the Gita benefited Arjuna,Sanjaya, Vyasa, and Hanuman. The same Gita fell onthe deaf ears of Dhritharashtra. His attachment to hiscruel sons blinded him to the justice due to the Pandavas.Every sloka in the Gita is important. There areseven hundred slokas in all. A matchbox may containas many as fifty sticks. But, a single match is enough tolight a lamp, for dispelling the darkness in a place.Similarly, a single sloka from the Gita is enough to bringthe light of wisdom and dispel the darkness of ignorance.But, without sraddha or perseverance, the BhagavadGita will remain a sealed book. There is no liberationand spiritual enlightenment for the slothful.God is not confined to any single place. He is notonly transcendental, but also immanent and omnipresent.Krishna told Arjuna, “You are not the killer in the realsense. You think that you are going to kill your enemies.Killing is only phenomenal. You are instrumental in thisprocess of destruction, purification and the resurrectionof dharma. You would not be unnecessarily perturbedif you were to remember that the corporeal body istransient and the incorporeal Atma is immortal.” RealYoga is the attainment of equanimity and control overthe sensory organs which screen the ultimate reality.Weakness is death and strength is immortality.39 40Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Krishna’s exposition of the Bhagavad Gita wasnecessarily brief. But, Vyasa elaborated the SongCelestial by his own illuminating comments for thebenefit of posterity.For instance, the words, “Samatvam yogamuchyate” or ‘equal-mindedness is called yoga’, wereexpanded into twelve verses by Vyasa; the phrase“Kshudram hridaya-daurbalyam” or ‘detestable isweakness of the heart’ was elaborated into twenty-twoverses; the verse “anityam asukham lokam imampraapya bhajasva maam” which means ‘having got thistransitory, miserable world, worship Me’ was made intoseven verses; and the aphorism, “nayamatmabalahinena labhyah” or ‘this Atma cannot be attainedby the weak’ was explained in nine different verses.Hanuman, who was on the flag of Arjuna’schariot, overheard the Gita and expounded it in twenty-one verses in the Paisachi language.The truth is one but its manifestations are many.The most essential prerequisite for a sadhaka (spiritualseeker) is infinite patience and perseverance. TheBhagavad Gita contains the quintessence of allscriptures. It should be studied assiduously by everyspiritual aspirant. It should also be regarded as a bookof great practical value in our daily lives. It has givensolace to many and it will help your spiritual progress.
Qualities Of A Sthithaprajna
Whether it is a scholar well versed in allthe Sastras, the Puranas and the Vedanta,or a king living in splendid mansions, or aworld-renowned hero who vanquishes hisfoes on the battlefield, or for that matter, aperson who has received plenty from theGoddess of Poverty and thereby languishesin penury, he will be of no use at all if he isnot endowed with devotion. A servanthaving devotion to God is more worthy ofsalutation than a ruler of the world who isdevoid of love for God. O good and gentlepeople in the assembly, what else can I tellyou than the truth stated above?
The Upanishads are the essence of the Vedaswhich are ahuman (Apaurusheya),imperishable and infinite. The Upanishads offer eternal41 42
6Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
truths which ennoble and elevate the mind. TheMahabharatha illustrates the spirit of the Upanishadsin the form of a narrative. The Bhagavad Gita offersthe quintessence of the Mahabharatha. The Upanishadstaught the people of the world in several ways to speakthe truth and follow the path of righteousness. Thosewho regard the Gita as the basis and the goal of life,attain the sacredness of the Divinity. The Gita declaresthat the spirit of Krishna envelopes and resides in allthat we see in this world. This is the significance of theViswavirata Swarupa of the Lord. To behold thisuniversal manifestation, men with divine vision havemade a conscious endeavour prompted by faith throughthe four paths of devotion, action, wisdom and yoga.The word “devotion” is synonymous with“spirituality”. Spiritual life should not be regarded asliving in isolation. Spiritual life enjoins one that he befree from attachment and hatred and look upon allmankind with an integrated vision. Action or workrelates to the world. The world, in turn, is related toGod. So, Krishna propounded that all actions must beperformed with the intention of pleasing God. This typeof action is a characteristic feature of a sthithaprajna,or a person who has mental equipoise. A sthithaprajnaperforms his actions, firmly established in the Atma.Krishna explained to Arjuna that a sthithaprajnahas an even mind which is neither elated by joy nordejected by sorrow. The sthithaprajna dwells always inthe Spirit without giving way to grief, lust, fear anddelusion. His vision beholds the Spirit everywhere.Krishna pointed out that Arjuna would be able to realisehis true nature only when he became a sthithaprajna.The primary quality of a sthithaprajna is thecontrol of the senses. It is not easy to repress the sensesor assume mastery over them. So, Arjuna said, “Oh,Krishna! It is almost impossible to keep the senses undercontrol. The mind, too, which is fickle, dangerous, andvile cannot be easily controlled.” To this, Krishnareplied, “There is nothing easier than the control of thesenses. To those who do not know the subtle process, itappears very difficult to control the mind. Those whobecome enslaved by worldly desires since childhoodand those who cultivate external vision will not be ableto control their senses and mind. The world created bythe senses goes on changing its external aspect. Thegreatest weakness of man proceeds from his dependenceon this ephemeral and evanescent world which goes onchanging like passing clouds. Though aware of itstransitory character, man believes in the world. If youonce look at the changing world and realise itstransience, it will be easy to gain control over yoursenses. Though the permanent and real Atmic Principleis very close to him, man is unable to recognise it. Truthis unpalatable and falsehood, delightful to the people.People are attracted to the tavern, though it may besituated far away, to enjoy intoxicants which areinjurious to the body and the mind. They do not accept43 44Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
milk, curds and cream which are very delicious andnourishing, even if they are supplied at the doorstep.From his childhood, man develops attachments anddesires, thereby exposing himself to many unnecessarytroubles and suffering.There is a little story. Once, Dakshinamurthi setout on a journey around the world. One day, standingon a beach, he was listening in rapt attention to thePranava-like roaring of the waves of the sea. Then,swept by the breeze, two pieces of straw fell into thesea. Wave after wave rose up and pushed the strawashore. In the meantime, some withered leaves also fellinto the sea. At once, they, too, were pushed to the shoreby the rising waves. Dakshinamurthi’s vision was notmerely external. He could grasp the inner significanceof events. Seeing the waves push away everything, hesaid to himself, “Oh! the waves have taught me a goodlesson today”, and he regarded the sea as one amonghis twenty-four preceptors.What is the significant lesson taught by the sea?The sea does not permit even one piece of straw to getinto its water, because such pieces may ultimatelycontaminate its form if they are permitted to accumulate.Though the ocean is vast and mighty, it did not permiteven a speck of impurity to contaminate its nature.Although man is frail and small, he allows impuritiesto contaminate the lake of his heart. The lake of themind must be the happy resort of the swans of SohamThathwa playing happily. Man becomes a victim ofignorance, darkness and lust if he gives unrestrictedfreedom to his senses. So, Krishna made it clear fromthe beginning that controlling the senses is essential fora sthithaprajna.Prahlada harped upon the same truth in hisarguments with his father. Prahlada addressed his fatherand said, “Oh, father! You were able to gain victoryover all the worlds in a moment; but, you are not able toconquer the world of your senses and your mind.Although you are valiant and mighty, you are not ableto conquer forces which stifle your humanness, increaseyour bestiality and make you drift away from divinity.It will be of no use if you conquer earthly empireswithout vanquishing the enemies lurking within. Evilqualities which conceal your true nature and destroyyour purity are abounding within you. Keeping themlike that, it is of no use to offer prayers and acquirepowers.”It is the royal road of the sthithaprajna to tramplethe senses and recognise the real nature of the Atma.Some of the commentators of the Gita today misinterpretthe qualities of the sthithaprajna and mislead the layman.Some of them, lacking in real experience, interpret theattributes of a sthithaprajna in a ludicrous manner. Thesthithaprajna keeps awake when all the others are asleep;that is, the sthithaprajna is wide awake in the spiritualsphere while the men of the world are in a state of45 46Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
slumber, oblivious of the matters of the spirit. While theordinary people keep themselves awake in worldlytransactions, the sthithaprajna does not take part in theseactivities and is, therefore, like one who is asleep asregards such matters.Control of the senses is absolutely essential forevery individual. Look at this paper. It is now in itsnormal form. If it is rolled up and kept for sometime inthat state, it cannot regain its original form. When wewant to bring it to its original and natural state, we mustroll it in the reverse direction. So from our boyhood,knowingly or unknowingly, we roll our mind with thepull of sensory and worldly desires. If we roll it up inthe reverse direction, in the direction of the Atma, itwill regain its original form. So, we shall be able togain control over the senses when we turn the visioninward since it had been all along focused on externalphenomena. Letting bygones be bygones, we should putin the necessary effort to restore the sacred nature ofour mind by cultivating the inward vision. Whateverwork we undertake, whatever thoughts we entertain,whatever scenes we may visualise, we must make anendeavour from today to turn them Godward.Of the eighteen chapters of the Gita, SankhyaYoga is very important. Mahatma Gandhi used to readSankhya Yoga twice or thrice whenever his mind wasrestless and perturbed. It restored the peace of his mind.Sankhya Yoga is the life of the Gita. The name is derivedfrom the enquiry of Sankhya in the chapter. SankhyaYoga revealed the features of a sthithaprajna to Arjunaand chased away his delusions.Arjuna had a very sensitive mind. If he listenedto any sentence, he at once translated it into action. Hewas a person who was an adept at the practice of thespiritual precepts. Because He could secure such a holydisciple in him, Lord Krishna, as the guru, conveyed tothe world the sacred essence of the Gita. Our lives shallbecome blessed when we develop faith in God,reverence for His words and the resolution to implementin our daily lives His sacred teachings. It is necessaryfor the students to shed the ideas and ideologies whichthey have harboured so far in their minds. It is necessaryin this sacred place to abandon and abjure all thoseaccumulated ideas.If the brain is empty, it is possible to fill it withsomething. If the brain is already stuffed with severalthings, where is the scope for such filling? Unless thebrain is kept clean, it is not possible to fill it with sacredthings. “Oh mind, the rogue! Having indulged in evilthoughts, having played several games, having put ondeceptive disguises in this momentary existence, whathave you achieved in this transitory life?” studentsshould ask themselves.We declare that the world is full of injustice,disorder, unrighteousness, falsehood and evil practices;but what have we done to set it right? Men weep at the47 48Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
time of birth. They weep at the time of death. Duringthe interregnum, they weep over this and that. Do theyweep when they see the decline of righteousness? Havethey cried to revive it and resuscitate it? For what havethey cried? Has it been for the sake of mere crying?When we take the pledge to revive the decliningDharma, when we strictly adhere to the commands ofGod, when we strive to implement the ideal of universallove, then only may we feel that this human birth isjustified and fulfilled. It is essential that students mustrealise this and mould their lives accordingly.Sacred and pure-minded students!You are really fortunate to have secured this covetedopportunity. It is My hope that you comprehend thesignificance of this message, this path and this divinity,and thereby make your lives blessed and set a shiningexample to the world.
“I Am Thine”
Giving up of one’ s evil thoughts constitutessacrifice and Yoga—leaving one’ s wife,giving up one’ s material possessions andretiring to the forest will be of no avail. Ispeak to you the truth that exists.Embodiments of Love!
Thyaga (sacrifice) is the touchstone ofrighteousness, charity, yagna (sacrifice) andyaga. Lobha (greed) is the root cause of sinful actionsresulting in injustice, unfairness, falsehood, misconductand weakness. Man should first realise his responsibility,discriminate between good and evil, sin and virtue, andthen begin to act in the right manner. It is a mistake tothink that control of senses is necessary only for yogis andsanyasins. Sense control is essential for all human beings.When all humans are able to control the senses, it will lead49 50
7Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
to the well-being of the world. Devotion without humanityand patriotism without morality will be of no use and willbring harm to the community. However, actionsundertaken to please God assume the nature of sacrificialofferings and are conducive to the well-being of all.The six evils of lust, anger, pride, greed, desire,and jealousy spring from man’s identification with hisbody. Compassion, love, and the spirit of sacrifice arise,on the contrary, from the Atma. Every individual mustdevelop and follow the virtues proceeding from theAtma. We have forsaken the noble human virtues andare pursuing instead the temporary pleasures that gratifythe senses. Krishna said, “The Lord is the father of theentire creation comprising the sentient and insentientobjects, Arjuna! There is only one Lord who holds swayover the entire universe. He is the Lord of the universe,the Jagan Natha, the Vishwa Natha and also the Masterof all life or the Prana Natha. The governance of thisworld is in the hands of the Lord of the universe. Hegets work done through all human beings. Without theLord’s prompting, human endeavour cannot progress.This Divinity is manifested and demonstrated in allcreatures in the form of Truth—Consciousness—Bliss.“Arjuna! Undertake work in order to please Godand not to gratify the senses. Your actions areresponsible for elevation to the highest state ordegradation to the lowest planes. Your joys and sorrowsproceed from your own actions. Your actions areresponsible for your sins and virtues. Fix your mind onthe Atma and do your work for the pleasure of God;your actions will then be disinterested. Disinterestedaction destroys the demoniac qualities of man andpromotes the divine tendencies. It strengthens pure andsathwic qualities in man. Thus it is said that man hasonly the authority to act and that it is God who dispensesthe fruits of man’s actions. You should not undertakeany work in the hope of receiving its fruit. You willbecome an exemplar for the world when you achievecontrol of the senses and undertake disinterested actions.As the representative of mankind, O Arjuna, you shouldtake a pledge to perform sacred actions.”The human aspect (jivatva) and the Divine aspect(Daivatva) have a close connection. You shouldrecognise the significance of the cycle of creation. Thecycle starts with akshara (indestructible); from aksharacomes Brahma; yajna comes from Brahma; from yajnacomes karma; from karma comes parjanya, and fromparjanya, our food; and from food comes life. This isthe cycle of creation. When we consider theirsequence—Akshara (The Word), Brahma (the CosmicReality), yajna (sacrifice), karma (action), parjanya(clouds), anna (food), and prana (life)—we notice thatAkshara comes first and prana stands last. All livingcreatures are born from food, live by food, and arenourished by food. It is declared that “Food is God”(Brahma). When we examine the cycle of creationcommencing with Akshara and concluding with prana,51 52Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
we must recognise what entity lies closest to Akshara.The first is Akshara, then comes Brahma, then comesyajna, then we have karma, parjanya, anna, and prana.In this cycle, prana, life, comes closest to Akshara, thepermanent reality. It goes to prove that life in its essentialquality stands closest to Akshara. Karma Thathwa(action) achieves coordination between these otherentities. On one side, we have Akshara, Brahma, andyajna. On the other side, we have parjanya, anna, andprana. Karma stands in the centre with these entities oneither side. Karma offers a synthesis of the three aspects,Akshara, Brahma, and yajna on one side, and parjanya,anna, and prana on the other side.Life is not permanent. It is encased in the bodythat is ever-changing and is made up of the five senses,five sheaths and five elements and is related to theksharapurusha, whichis subject to destruction and decay.But, life endowed with Divinity is related to Aksharawhich cannot be destroyed. These two aspects, thedestructible (kshara) and the indestructible (Akshara)are also characterised as ahara (unstable) and Sthira(stable) respectively.Sthira is also Akshara because it is beyond changeand above the mutations of place and time. Chara isthat which is connected with the five senses,compounded of the five elements and goes on changing.Our life is subjected to many troubles between thesetwo aspects of Sthira and Chara. A small illustration.In the villages, people use the grind stone. It consists oftwo round stones; the one at the bottom is stationarywhile the one at the top rotates. If we place some grainsbetween the stones, they get crushed to powder. Thegrains keep getting scattered and crushed between thestones. But the few grains that remain at the centre ofthe stones remain safe and do not get crushed. That safeplace may be compared to the sphere of God. Livingbeings that exist close to God will be free from alldanger. Therefore, in all our actions we should manifestthe Divine aspect and thereby proclaim through ourdeeds the joy of Divinity concealed in humanity.We should try to live without being affected byjoy and sorrow caused by birth and death of the body.No one weeps when he finds ice to be cold or when heis told that fire is hot. It is natural that ice is cold andfire is hot. In the same manner, death is natural for thebody that is born. Why should one weep over that? Weare becoming victims of sorrow by regarding a naturalphenomenon as unnatural. The cause for this isattachment. Infatuation stems from the instinct topossess. By developing fondness for the phenomenalworld, we are becoming unmindful of our Divinity.Krishna advised Dhananjaya, “Arjuna! You arebecoming a victim of abhimana and mamakara andfalling into a mood of dejection. You should not allowyour human nature to be affected by feebleness. Onewho wants to live in this world must be manly. When53 54Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
you undertake action in a spirit of dedication to the Lord,when you work with your body without anyconsideration of the fruits of your action, then you treadthe royal path.”That is why it is said that King Janaka could attainthe highest state by doing his daily work always in aspirit of dedication. We should cultivate the spirit ofsurrender, saying, “I am Thine.” There is an aptillustration. In the Bhagavatha, the gopikas from thebeginning used to tell Krishna, “We belong to You.”This is the characteristic feature of true devotion andsurrender. Therefore, Krishna protected them at all timeswherever they were. On the other hand, the people ofDwaraka regarded Krishna as their possession. “Krishnais our brother, our aunt’s son, our uncle’s son, our cousin,our nephew,” they thought. Such relationships cloudedtheir attitude towards Krishna. This feeling that Krishnabelonged to them made them feel that the Pandavastriumphed because of Krishna, who belonged to theYadava clan, and that, therefore, the credit should go tothe Yadavas. Thus, they developed ahamkara also; andthis marked the beginning of their destruction takingthe shape of a catastrophe (pralaya) and wiping out theentire race itself. On the other hand, the gopikas werealways safe and happy because they were devoid of ego,possessiveness and pride.In Arjuna’s case, however, the Lord Himself claimedhim as His own. How fortunate Arjuna was! Krishnaand Arjuna were described as nara (man) and Narayana.Krishna showed Arjuna as the ideal man and the modelrepresentative and through Arjuna as His medium, Hecommunicated to mankind the sacred message.Though we are enveloped by Divinity, we becomevictims of sorrow by cultivating attachment to worldlyphenomena. The ash conceals the fire from which itarises. The moss covers the water from which it is born.The cataract that is formed in the eye blinds the vision.The dirt that gathers on the mirror makes the mirrorgive a blurred image. In the same manner, ignorancewhich had its origin in Divinity ultimately shrouds oursacred knowledge. The evil tendencies in us areresponsible for this. When we banish these eviltendencies and thoughts, it will be possible for us tobehold Krishna, the Lord.It is only when we remove the evil propensitiesin our mind and visualise Divinity that we can liveaccording to Easwara dharma. A person desiring to liveaccording to Easwara dharma should purify his mind.When the head is stuffed with evil tendencies, when theears listen to evil words, when the eyes peep at evilscenes on the sly, when the mind is wavering anddeceptive, dharma cannot come anywhere near you.Students and Teachers! It is proper that you should feel that you belong toSwami, instead of feeling that Swami is yours. If you55 56Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
undertake the journey of life in this spirit of surrender,you will be greatly blessed. You shall enhance the sacrednature of our country by such an attitude. You canpropagate the spirit and the message of the Gita if youpreserve in your heads this one line, “He is the Fatherand the Lord of the Universe.” You should strengthen yourfaith in the Lord who rules over the universe and promptsall your actions. This faith left a strong impact on Arjuna’sheart and he acted according to the Divine ordination.Arjuna said, “I will act according to YourCommand. Pardon me for having posed so manyquestions knowingly or unknowingly. I have misusedprecious time, feeling proud of my intelligence, ego andphysical prowess.” Strength of body, strength of mind,and strength of learning are of no avail without thestrength derived from God. Without divine strength, allthese are feeble.Do not feel proud of your youthful vigour andbeauty. All your freshness and lustre shall fade awaylike the beauty of a flower which blossoms at dawn andfades by dusk. The stories of your petty achievementsflash like lightning and then vanish, leaving behind utterdarkness. We should not forget our divine destiny andbe enticed by evanescent pleasures. Every student mustmake sincere attempts to understand and implement thespirit of the Gita. They should preserve in their heartsthe sacred and blissful Atma Thathwa, which is glorifiedby the Bhagavad Gita.
The Word Of God
Blind are they who lack faith in God,for, man sees the Divine with the eyes offaith. God may not exist for the faithlessone, but for us HE IS.Embodiments of the Divine Atma!
God and His Word are inextricablyinterrelated. The devotion of an individualis open to suspicion if he has love for God but does notpay heed to His Word. Desire for God but neglect ofHis Iinjunctions cannot be the true characteristic ofdevotion. It would be impossible, indeed, to achieveanything in this world without faith in the Almighty.The benefit we derive from our faith is proportionate toits intensity.God is the aggregate of all individual jivas; VirataSwarupa (Cosmic Form), that of all individual bodies;57 58
8Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
and Hiranyagarbha (Cosmic Mind), that of all individualminds. Thus, God and man are essentially identical.Individuals who have recognised such great truths anddivinity of man find statements that God does not exist,ridiculous. Only foolish people who do not recognise thesignificance of these profound verities disbelieve in God.Today, people are trying to forget the EffulgentForm of Pure Divine Consciousness which permeatesthe entire creation and forms its basis. In trying to denyGod, who is the basis for the universe, man is denyinghis own existence. When we closely inquire into thenature of atheism and the meaning of the word naastika,we see that the word naasti is comprised of the parts,namely, “na” and “asti”. “Na” is denial and “asti” meansexistence. In the word naasti, the part asti affirms theexistence of God, whereas “na” denies it. Thus, the wordnaasti only denies something that already exists.Similarly, atheists say “God is nowhere.” On closescrutiny, we find that first there is an affirmation in the“nowhere.” Thus, untruth follows only as feeblerefutation of truth that exists.The intimate relationship that exists between Godand the jiva is indescribable. However, falling a victimto his own ego, man arrogates unto himself the authorityfor his actions. But, in reality, it is only God who decideswhat action is to be performed by whom, at what time,at what place, under what circumstances, and with whatdegree of success.Unaware of God’s Omniscience, man does nothesitate even to commit sin. Nevertheless, since he ispart of God, there is nothing that he can do—whateverbe the time and the place of the deed—that escapes thenotice of God. Just as a human being knows immediatelythe movement of a small ant crawling on his toes, Godwhose body is this universe, is instantly aware of eventhe smallest of deeds performed by man.In every human being, there is an inner divineforce that goads him into right action. There is alsopresent in him the opposing force that lures him intoevil deeds. Resolutions to refrain from committing sinare often short-lived. More often than not, the man whovows to speak the truth always is forced bycircumstances to utter lies. Similarly, however much aman may determine not to hurt others, he might withoutconscious deliberation, at some time or the other, inflictinjury upon another. This is a universal phenomenon.While several kinds of righteous strength are present inman, there is also present in him a mightier, malevolentforce that compels him to do wrong actions. A typicalexample is that of a man deciding to fast on a Saturdayas part of his worship of Lord Venkateswara butsuccumbing to the temptation of a cup of coffee and afew iddlis before noon that very day.Krishna taught Arjuna, “Desire and anger, bornof rajas are the greatest enemies of man. They stifle hisinnate goodness. Out of the three basic traits in man,59 60Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
the rajasic and the thamasic traits oppose his interests.Kama or desire, derived from Rajas, knows no satiation,even as a raging fire does not. It shakes man’s innerpoise and leads him astray. It creates a breach in man’sheart and enters therein. After its entry, anger and theattendant vices join the invasion and steal thejnanarathna (jewel of wisdom) kept therein.”“Desire makes man forget his real nature andreduces him to the status of a beast. It robs him of allhis virtues and jeopardises his honour and reputation.”“Arjuna! This battle is not an accidentalhappening. You have yourself been making preparationsfor it for several months. Even during the year of yourincognito existence, you were aware that a satisfactoryagreement with the Kauravas was impossible; andseeing no way to peace, you had corresponded withfriends and relations seeking help and assistance in thewar. You had even tried to prevent Me from going toDhritharashtra to negotiate for peace and had maintainedthat war was inevitable”.“Your sudden decision not to fight, clearlyindicates that some powerful force is shaking yourconfidence and making you alter your prior decision.This force obviously is desire. Turn this desireGodward and perform actions as offerings to God. Itis futile to waste time by pondering over the matterany further. Realise the immanence of God and performyour duty.”Control of the senses is very essential for man.Giving free play to them, just because they belong toyou, is foolishness. Although it be your own horse, ifyou do not hold the reins tight while riding, you willmeet with disaster. Similarly, you may say, “I have givenmoney and purchased this car, it is registered in my nameand it is my car”, but if you do not apply the brakeswhen necessary, even though it is your own car, it willlead you to danger. Sense control is thus imperative forall human beings and not just for yogis and sanyasins.By letting himself to be enslaved by his senses, man isdegrading himself. The royal road to perfection consistsof controlling one’s senses, praying to the Almighty andfinally merging in Him.Krishna told Arjuna, “Although I have no desireand am not bound by karma, I undertake work. I haveentered this battle and become your charioteer notbecause I do not have horses of my own to look after,but because I have vowed to restore dharma. Arise,Arjuna! For the peace and prosperity of the world, theclash of arms and the shower of arrows are inevitable.”Many people today insinuatingly aver that theMahabharatha war in which Krishna Himself took part,had wrought destruction and killed forty lakhs of people.However, they forget that Krishna’s motive behindhaving the wicked Kauravas annihilated is like thedoctor’s motive in performing surgery to remove amalignant tumour from a patient’s limbs. Lord Krishna61 62Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
played the role of the Supreme Doctor with His deardevotee Arjuna as the compounder, and performed thesurgery of the Mahabharatha War to remove the Kauravacancer for the well-being of the world at large.It is inevitable in creation that a few be hurt inthe process of conferring benefit on the many. Inundertaking selfless activity for the welfare of all, nosin can accrue. It is necessary for us to understand theinner meaning of God’s actions if we are to appreciatetheir true significance and relevance. For thisunderstanding, inner vision is essential. Just as for atree its roots, which are not visible outside, form thebasis, so too the inner vision forms the basis (adhara)for the external vision which it supports (adheya).The ways of God are inscrutable as well asinexplicable. Only one who has ascended to His levelcan comprehend the Lord’s Designs. God’s nature isInfinite and beyond the limitations of a particularindividual, society or nation. To understand God’snature, man has to develop universality of outlook andcultivate the all-embracing concept of expansive love.He has to perform all actions as offerings to God andfor His pleasure. It is my hope that you will all followthe Words of God and live ideal lives.
The Inner Dialogue
What we aver as existent, does not exist;what we proclaim as non-existent, doesexist. There is only one Divinity that existsfor all. This world does not exist. All ofyou should realise this truth.Embodiments of Love!
We should not regard the Bhagavad Gita asmerely a dialogue between Krishna andArjuna. It is an endless dialogue between the humanand the Divine in the hearts of all human beings. Just asArjuna listened to Krishna’s V oice with an unwaveringmind, every human being must listen to the words anddeclarations springing from the depths of his heart in aspirit of sincerity. If this spirit of attention is improved,it is possible for man to reach Godhead. A danava(demon) can undoubtedly become a manava or man63 64
9Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
and man can become God, through such discipline. Thisis the unexcelled glory of the Gita. The influence andthe sanctity of the Gita can be understood not by theordinary human consciousness but by the Divine levelsof man’s being.Gita is a kalpatharu or wish-fulfilling tree, whichwas planted by Krishna and nourished by Vyasa. TheUpanishads are the seeds of the tree. Knowledge ofBrahman is the sprout. The Sastras are the branchesand Love of Easwara and surrender are the fragrantflowers. The Bliss of the Atma is its fruit. Every humanbeing must take shelter under this tree and seek to attainfulfilment of the purpose of life—Infinite Beatitude.The advent of an Avatar and His actions provideinspiring ideals for the emergence of divine human beings.We should endeavour to bring about Avatharana or“descent” of the Divine principle in our hearts. This is themost sacred yoga, described as jnana yoga.  Jnana yogaserves as the royal road leading man to his sublime goal.“As you are my devotee and friend,” Krishnaaddressed Arjuna, “you deserve to receive the gift ofthis wisdom, which I am imparting to you out ofaffection.” In this context, we must pay attention to thetwo epithets, “devotee” and “friend”. There is no higherstate than that of a devotee; why then did Krishna usethe epithet “friend”? If we consider the status of a friendas the highest, why should Krishna have employed theepithet “devotee”?Humility and obedience are the qualities of adevotee. Excessive humility that often goes withdevotion might act as a barrier in forging the spirit ofintimacy with God which is so vital for attaining AtmaJnana or Supreme Wisdom. On the other hand, closefriendship and excessive familiarity alone might makea person take undue liberties. For these reasons, Krishnareferred to Arjuna as both “devotee” and “friend” orone in whom friendship is enriched by humility anddevotion is tempered by intimacy. As Arjuna was botha devotee as well as a friend of the Lord, he was themost deserving recipient of the Bhagavad Gita.“You deserve to be initiated into this yoga, OArjuna,” said Krishna. “At first, I taught it to the Sunwho taught it to Manu, who in turn enlightenedIkshvaku. In this manner, through the experiences ofthe sages, all kings came to know about it, Arjuna! Thiswisdom is eclipsed today and therefore, through you, Idesire to communicate this yoga to the world again.”These words of Krishna’s bewildered Arjuna. Heasked, “Krishna, you are my contemporary; how andwhere could you get the opportunity to teach this yogato the Sun who taught it to Manu of yore? I am unableto believe this. Please clarify my doubts.”At the time of the war, Arjuna was eighty-fouryears old and Krishna was eighty-six, the difference intheir ages being only two years. Then how was itpossible during those two years for Krishna to have65 66Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
taught the Gita to the Sun, Arjuna queried. Krishnasmiled and replied, “Arjuna, I am unborn; I am infinite;I am omniscient and omnipresent. I have neitherbeginning nor end. You, too, are above birth and death,and have taken several bodies. There may be birth anddeath for the body, but you are above them. Because ofyour external vision, you are ignoring this aspect. Ifyou turn your attention to the Atmic Reality, you will beable to recognise your immortal nature.”Whenever injustice and unrighteousness raisetheir hoods in the world, the Lord comes down as anAvatar. The word Avatar means descent. It is not comingdown from the peak of a mountain or the top storey of abuilding. It is a descent from the state of the Atma tothe state of the body. A little illustration clarifies thispoint. An ICS officer may be well-versed in manybranches of learning. But when he teaches his little son,he begins to write upon the slate the letters A, B, C, Dand the boy learns them. Why should such a highlyeducated ICS officer come down to the level of teachingthe alphabet? It is for the sake of teaching his ignorantson that the officer is forced to descend to the boy’slevel. It does not mean that the officer knows only theletters of the alphabet.Similarly, when a child cries, its mother bendslow and picks it up. The child crying on the floor cannotreach up to the arms of the mother. If the mother thinksit an act of condescension to bend, then she will notundertake to pick up the child. By bending out of lovefor the child, the mother does not lower her own status.In the same manner, out of His love and affectionfor mankind, the Lord descends to the human level inorder to elevate men to Godhood. Such a descent doesnot in any way diminish Divinity.Because the Lord takes a human form, we findthat He exhibits human consciousness along with Divineconsciousness. Ordinary people cannot grasp the Divineaspects of an Avatar. God appears to be an ordinaryhuman being to the limited intelligence of lay peoplebecause of the coexistence of the divine and humanaspects of consciousness exhibited by Him. Man’sperception is limited to the level of human con-sciousness. Therefore, human comprehension isrestricted by the limits of human consciousness. Butthe sages who were Divine human beings were able tocomprehend Divinity and recognise that all objectsmanifest Divinity. They recognised the Formless Godin the visible form, because they had imbued themselveswith divine consciousness. Thus, according to theirlevels, different people regard an Avatar as a merehuman being or the Cosmic Reality.“O Arjuna! Promoted by your humanconsciousness, you may erroneously consider Me anordinary man. I am teaching you this wisdom in order toremove this illusion created by your human consciousnessand to strengthen your Divine consciousness.”67 68Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
For one who desires to attain the divine heightsof the Supreme Being, karma and wisdom are like thetwo wings of a bird. Many jnanis put a stop to theiractions thinking that they have reached the highest state.In the state of nirvikalpa samadhi, it is not possible todo anything. This may be described as the natural stateof vairagya (detachment). But some people feel proudof their wisdom and discard all activity. This kind ofvairagya proceeds from sloth, thamas, and is the resultof vanity. This pseudo-detachment, born out ofindolence, can never be traced to wisdom.“In fact, the wise never desist from action, in orderto be a model for others. If the wise do not act, therewill be none to guide the ignorant”, Krishna observed.It is not desirable to give undue prominence towork, too. Wisdom is the final reward for the blossomingof our mind through action. If we go on harping onduality, when can we achieve peace? From duality, wemust progress to qualified non-duality and finally tocomplete non-duality. Wisdom cannot be derived bymere acquaintance with many books. It cannot beacquired by learning the Sastras and philosophy. Realwisdom lies in the vision of non-duality. (Adwaithadarsanam jnanam). The elders say that real wisdom liesin the recognition of Divinity everywhere.Stuffing the brain with bookish knowledge doesnot lead to the purification of the mind. Wisdom doesnot mean mere prattle. It must be put into practice andauthenticated by our actions. Real wisdom should bereflected in the joy with which we work. Can all thegreen birds speak like parrots? Can all the wormscrawling on flowers hum like bees? Can the ass wearingtiger’s skin ever become a tiger? Can a swine, grown toelephantine proportions, ever become an elephant?Though the he-buffalo has two horns, can they ever havethe value of the tusks of an elephant? In the samemanner, those who memorise the Sastras, theUpanishads, the Vedas, the Ithihasas, and the Puranas,those propagating them without practice, can never beregarded as wise persons.Krishna told Arjuna, “I am present behind allphenomena. I am the spirit present in you as well as inall the soldiers who have gathered here for battle. Whenyou regard yourself as distinct and different from Me,you can not properly understand the aspect of unity.”In this context, the common statement, “I and youare one” is incorrect. I am I and You are You—always.In fact, I and You become “We”. “We and we are one”is a more correct statement, because you and I arepresent in we. Wisdom resides in every heart like aneffulgent beam of light. In the modern age, it is describedas super consciousness. Our consciousness is thewakeful state. The dream state is called subconsiousnessand the state of deep sleep is unconsciousness. Beyondthese, there is the Turiya or the fourth state, that of superconsciousness. If we follow the super consciousness in69 70Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
us, we shall be obeying the teachings of Krishna toArjuna. A little example illustrates the existence of thesuper consciousness in man.A thief entered a house at night and stole manyobjects. The next morning he was arrested by the police.In the wakeful state, during the day, the thief denied hisoffence in order to defend himself and escapepunishment. Though it was a lie told in self-defenceduring the wakeful state, the super consciousness withinhim continued to tell him that on the previous night hehad entered a certain house, stole several objects andkept them at a certain place. This truth continued tohaunt him.In the same manner, though every human beingmay be guilty of concealing falsehood and sin, thoughmany lies may be told for the sake of escaping worldlycensure, deep down within him he is aware of the sinshe has committed, the lies he has told and the harm hehas caused to others. The area from which such innerpromptings of truth generate is the abode of Krishna.So, in the heart of every man, there is a continuingdialogue, a perennial argument between the human andthe divine.I often say that you should not remain forever inthe stage of idol worship. You may worship a picture asGod, but not God as a picture. Carrying on your enquiry,you should strive to manifest the divinity latent in youand realise that the super consciousness in you is yourreal Master. You must follow that Master, face the Devilof the evil tendencies in you, fight them to the end andfinish the game of life with success.The education that students secure today is nottrue education; it is only a bread-winning formula. AsKrishna said, spiritual education is the highesteducation. Just as all rivers flow into the ocean, theirdestination, all branches of learning—scientific,medical, cultural, religious—also coalesce into spiritualeducation, which is their goal. In this context,Thyagaraja said, “O, mind! Why are you worried to findso many different rivers in the ocean at Dhanushkoti?If we bathe in the ocean, we earn the merit of bathing inall the rivers.”I hope that you will pursue the path of spiritualeducation and with pure hearts and selfless actions, workfor the welfare of the world.71 72Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Re-ligion: The Spiritual Reunion
Selfless love is the source of happiness,truth, peace, sacrifice, endurance and allother higher values of life. There is nosecurity and safety without prema, theabsolute, unalloyed form of love. O bravesons of Bharath, remember that love is morefundamental than all other moral values!
The different kinds of lives and livingorganisms are infinite in number.Nevertheless, reality has three main aspects, namely,the empirical reality, the illusory reality and the absolutereality. These three categories of human existencecorrespond to three levels of consciousness viz., jagrataor the consciousness of wakefulness, swapna or thesubconsiousness of dreams, and sushupti or theunconsciousness of deep slumber. Waves of water aremore real than the surf on the seashore. Similarly, thebasic substance of water is more real than waves.Likewise, spiritual life is more real than mundane life;mundane life is more fundamental and more real thanthe dreams of the subconscious mind. Transparency,sweetness and liquidity are the natural properties ofwater. The same qualities are, to some extent, impartedto the waves of water and the surf on the shore.Sath-chith-ananda is kutastha. Sath-chith-anandarepresents the integrated reality of truth, consciousnessand bliss. Kutastha is the immutable and immortalreality. Sath-chith-ananda is the omnipresent realityreflected in the subconsciousness of dreams, consciousactivities of the mundane world and super consciousexperiences of spirituality. Surf comes from waves andwaves come from water. Likewise, consciousnessfollows subconsciousness and subconsciousness followssuper consciousness. Kutastha, in this context, refers tothe unchanging, immutable and eternal principle ofspirituality. Who is this unchanging, immutable andimmobile being? This is the quintessential principle ofEaswara, a personified and concretised abstraction, theknowledge of which can be acquired only byapprehending the reality of the Atma. “Nahi jnanenasadrusam pavitramiha vidyate,” said Krishna. Nothingas sacred as jnana is known.Jnana or spiritual wisdom, enables the jivatma,or the individual soul, to merge with the Paramatma or73 74
10Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
the cosmic soul. Every individual must try and recognisethe oneness of the Atma and the Paramatma. This is thefull essence of the spirituality expounded by Krishna.You may master any number of skills and talents. But ifyou cannot comprehend the unity of the Atma and theParamatma, you will end up as a hopeless nihilist.What is the good of acquiring all sorts ofknowledge?Who can alter the line of destiny on man’sbrow?“If you fill your head with all sorts of evil ideas,you will be robbed of your discrimination andintelligence.” The Telugu poet Vemana has thuscomposed a number of couplets and quatrains whichsuccinctly summarise a whole system of philosophy anda complete code of morality.“Why do you load your stupid pate with all kindsof learned lumber? Why do you kill yourself with toomuch learning? Try and understand that eternal truthwhich will make you immortal.”“You may learn all arts and sciences. You maycall yourself a versatile genius and an all-knowingpolymath. But still you will only be a learned fool ifyou do not know your Self.”“A mean-minded man without moral scruplesmay read but he can never give up his meanness.”“You may read all the books in the world. Youcan only become a hair-splitting and pettifogging pundit.With the aid of books you can never acquire spiritualwisdom and integrated knowledge. Such bookishlearning may enable you to eke out your livelihood. Butbooks can never reveal to you a vision of your owndivine Atma.”Stricken by poverty, once Narada had to face anumber of difficulties. He became a victim of acutemental depression. He had mastered all the sixty-fourarts of antiquity. But he had no peace of mind. At last,he went to Sanatkumara, who diagnosed Narada’sailment and prescribed for him the path to self-realisation. In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna reveals toArjuna the esoteric but simple path to self-realisationfor the attainment of abiding peace and everlasting bliss.Sanatkumara initiated Narada into the spiritualexperience of identifying the individual Atma with theuniversal Paramatma. This is the most sublime mantrafor spiritual liberation. The immediate, intimate andintuitive apprehension of the immanent effulgence ofdivinity pervading the microcosm and the macrocosmis the highest liberating experience.“The microcosm and the macrocosm are suffusedwith the same creative energy of Paramatma. Thismystical energy is known to the wise. Shut the doors ofoutward perception and look inwards. Transcend thebarriers of thought. Travel along the mountain path of75 76Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
life and reach the peak and listen to the primordial soundof the Pranava. Come out of the dark night of the souland divine grace will descend on you.”The star-studded firmament is boundless. Evenwith the naked eye we can see innumerable stars. Thereis every reason to believe that the uncharted and unseenuniverse consists of millions of invisible galaxies. Evenwith the aid of the most powerful instruments, modernman has not been able to explore the universe in itsentirety. The limited human mind can never becomeomniscient. Easwara is the only omniscient Being. Evenif you know everything in the world, you will be ignorantif you have not tried to apprehend the essence ofEaswara.What you know is very little. What you do notknow is enormous. It is impossible to know everything.Instead of trying to know everything, it is better to knowthat, by knowing which, everything else will be known.Krishna is the divine exponent of this perennialphilosophy of life and the science of the selfincorporated in the Bhagavad Gita. Yoga or the scienceof the self is the foundation of Indian culture. Thedissolution of the dichotomy between jivatma andParamatma, generated by karmic causes, is the essenceof Indian culture. Indian culture and Indian philosophyare essentially religious.The word “religion” contains the prefix “re.” “Re”means doing something again. The other part of the wordconnotes “unifying”. Religion may be thus interpretedas reunion, the renunciation of two entities separatedby time or the restoration of their original organic unity.jivatma and Paramatma have lost their fundamentaloneness. Karmic factors have created a duality betweenthe Atma and Brahman. The restoration of the primalunity of Atma and Paramatma through self-realisationis the primary function of religion.This process of reunification of Atma withParamatma is an arduous sadhana (Spiritual practice).An analogy might be useful here. The water in the seaevaporates on account of the sun’s heat, forming clouds.These clouds float in the sky until they are againcondensed into water drops by cool winds. The vastocean consists of an infinite quantity of water. A smallvolume of water becomes a cloud and comes down asrain. This rain water becomes a stream. A number ofstreams mingle together to become a large river whichflows down mountains and through valleys. Finally, theriver reunites with the ocean. Similarly, we are alienatedfrom Easwara, the repository of illimitable grace. Wehave gone through many incarnations and the recurringcycles of births and deaths. The journey of the embodiedsoul follows a similar pattern until it merges with theuniversal soul.We are proud of our knowledge, our heritage andour culture. Nevertheless, we behave in an unbecomingmanner. Even animals have a sense of decency and77 78Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
decorum. There are different varnas (social groups) inthe world. These varnas are based on individual andsocial attributes. We cannot transcend our attributes. Itis only Easwara who transcends all human attributes.All varnas are based on differences in attributes.Each group has its specific attributes which arecollectively designated as swadharma. Swadharma isnot free from desires. It has its own specific aims andobjectives. They include peace and prosperity in thisworld and the delights of heaven. Thus, all ritualsprescribed by the various varnas are performed for thefulfilment of earthly ambitions and heavenly hopes.Dharma based on varnas involves an element ofselfishness. It is not Easwara sharma, which is absolutefreedom from selfish desires. You can realise the Atmaonly when you give up all selfish dharmas and followEaswara dharma. Selfishness is a beastly quality. Evenhumanitarianism should be made divine. Love taintedwith selfishness is death. The essence of Easwaradharma is selfless love. Cultivate the quality ofunbounded, selfless love. It is only then that real spiritualwisdom will dawn on you. The cultivation of selflesslove is not an easy thing. Indeed, selfishness also isessential in the beginning. Selfishness is perhaps adegenerated and depraved form of self-love. Withoutswartha or self-centred love, you cannot have pararthaor expansive love. Selfless love is an extended form ofselfishness. But you cannot grow spiritually if you arelimited to your self. Humanitarianism is an extendedand sublimated form of self-love. You may be born inselfishness, but you should not die in selfishness.When you are born, you are not born withgarlands and necklaces. You have no pearls or diamonds.You have no golden ornaments. But around your neckhangs the garland of your past karma and acquiredsamskaras (inborn impulses). And when you die, youdo not take anything with you except the consequencesof your good and evil actions. You are always deckedwith the invisible garland of your inexorable karma,which pursues and burdens you. This burden of karmacan be lightened by God’s grace and your ownrealisation of the oneness of your soul with the universalsoul. And karma can be destroyed by karma alone.The Bhagavad Gita is a treasure chest of sublimeteachings of perennial spiritual value. Young studentsmust ruminate and contemplate upon them and practisethem. We must bring about a spiritual renaissance inBharath. Lack of integrity and morality is the bane ofthe modern world. Man does not live by bread alone.We must always remember that money comes and goes,but morality comes and grows. I hope you will followat least a few of the noble teachings of the Gita andfollow the path of morality and integrity. I concludeMy discourse with blessings to all of you.79 80Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Jnana Yajna
Love is the Form of Brahman; Brahman isLove Divine.The merger of human love with DivineLove brings about Cosmic Order.One who is full of love attains Adwaitha.Embodiments of Love!
An individual seeking to realise Divinity mustpossess the primary prerequisite ofchittasuddhi or purity of heart. Even as poisonouscreatures like snakes and scorpions do not enter a cleanand well-lit room, desire, anger, envy and hatred do notenter a mind which possesses purity and wisdom.The removal of ignorance is not an impossibletask as would be the case in an attempt to wash a pieceof charcoal pure white with milk. One who seeks todispel the darkness of ignorance must necessarily acquirejnana (spiritual wisdom). Just as a lamp is needed todrive away darkness, jnana or wisdom is the onlyantidote for ignorance. Nascence is like the encrustationon a copper vessel which can be washed off; it is likethe husk covering the grain of rice that can be removedby the process of threshing.Arjuna, who was ridden by doubt and hesitation,was unable to recognise his own real nature. Neitherwas he, stricken by despondency, able to act inaccordance with the commands of Krishna. Krishna,therefore, infusing courage and confidence in him,instructed him on the sacred yoga of spiritual wisdom—jnana yoga. Krishna said, “Arjuna, all actions mustultimately find their fulfilment in jnana and must,therefore, be performed with meticulous care.” Manyperform yajnas and yagas for the acquisition of jnana;and some of these like the ashwamedha yaga and therajasuya yaga are too expensive and elaborate for thecommon man. People also perform yagas for securingtemporal results. These proceed from guna dharma andnot from samajika dharma or Easwara dharma.Jnana can be considered in many ways. It isconsidered as a yajna and even thapas, or austerity,through which people endeavour to attain the Divine.Jnana yajna can be performed by all irrespective ofcaste, creed, religion or sect. Whosoever performsactions as offerings to God, for His pleasure and without81 82
11Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
any desire whatsoever for the fruits thereof, performsjnana yajna. Krishna says, “Those who cognise Brahmain all actions, verily perform jnana yajna.”Krishna kindled in Arjuna the flame of jnana. Tolight a lamp, a container, oil, wick and fire are necessary.But, most essentially, there should be someone to lightit. Similarly, for lighting the fire of jnana in an individual,he should possess in him the container of vairagya(detachment), the oil of bhakthi (devotion), the wick ofindriya nigraha (sense control) and the fire of Atmavichara (self-enquiry). “In you are present these essentialqualities and so I shall kindle the flame of jnana in you,”said Krishna to Arjuna.Explaining the reason why caste distinctions havebeen made, Krishna said, “I have created the four varnasto promote swadharma, samajika dharma, vishwadharma, and Easwara dharma and to establish thempermanently in this world so that, in turn, the flame ofjnana will burn bright forever.” The four varnas are thebrahmins, the kshatriyas, the vaisyas, and the sudras.Passages in the Purusha Sukta describe the differentvarnas as parts of the Lord’s body. The brahmins, whoregard the Vedas and Sastras as perennial and abidingtruths and as the pathways along which humanity mustprogress, are described as the face of Brahma. Thekshatriyas, kings, who sacrifice their bodies for the sakeof the country and utilise their physical prowess for thedefence of the country’s cultural and territorial integrity,are described as the shoulders. The wealthy vaisyas, whoengage themselves in charity, distributing their wealthto all and sundry, have been described as the thighs.The feet are the sudras, who engage themselves incultivation and maintaining the regular supply of grainfor food.Each organ of the body works in unison with therest of the body while discharging faithfully its ownassigned function. Should something happen to anylimb, the danger is shared by the other organs who comeforward to mitigate the pain of the affected part. A smallexample illustrates this. While a person is walking alonga path, a thorn is noticed by the eyes. On account of theinternal communication system between the eye, whichis on the face, and the foot, which is at the bottom, thethorn is avoided by the foot. If the thorn pricks the soleof the foot, the eye shares the pain and sheds tearssympathetically.In the same manner, the different castes shouldwork in co-ordination with each other and share thejoys and sorrows of each other. This spirit of mutuallove and unity is essential for the promotion andprotection of dharma in society. In a body, the sameheart animates the head, the shoulders, the thighs andthe feet and the same blood flows through all of them.Thus, there is no room for distinctions and differencesamong the four. Likewise the brahmins, the kshatriyas,the vaisyas, and the sudras must remember that they83 84Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
are all motivated by the same Divine life-force and mustnot allow caste difference and discrimination to arise.However, through the centuries, the inner significancehas been forgotten and the caste system has been madea basis for sectarian distinctions and communaldisharmony.Wisdom has been likened to a boat which cantake man across the turbulent waters of samsara orworldly existence. It has also been described as the firewhich burns all illusions, impurities and idiosyncrasiesof human nature. In this connection, let us examine theconnection between the fire and our food. The smokedepends on the fire, the cloud depends on the smoke,the rain depends on the cloud, the crop depends on therain, and the food depends on the crop we harvest.Further, the attitude and qualities of our mind areconditioned by the food we consume.Let us consider wisdom as a sword, too. Desire,anger, passion, greed, pride, and envy take roots andgrow like mighty trees in our hearts, destroying ourinnate humanity. Wisdom is the sword with which wemust cut off these trees and live a quiet and happy life.Thus, in the fourth chapter of the Gita, Krishnaexplained the genesis of the four varnas and describedjnana yoga. He emphasised that no other yajna need beperformed if jnana yajna is undertaken. He exhortedArjuna to dedicate his actions to the Lord and realisethrough them, the unity of mankind. Yajna is thededication of all the powers man is endowed with, tothe supreme Lord. It can be performed by all—men,women, children, aged people, the rich and the poor.Whoever performs actions in a spirit of dedication tothe Lord, performs jnana yajna. To perform this, moneyand materials are not necessary. Virtue is the primerequisite, the heart is the altar, thoughts are the offerings,and delight is the ultimate fruit. One must undertakeactions in this spirit for the attainment of SupremeDelight, the delight of Life, the delight of the Spirit andthe delight that is Divine. Jnana yajna is the performanceof action, discarding the spirit of attachment and ego.Trying to live with self-realisation is the essence of jnanayajna.“Who are you? Whence have you come? Whitherdo you go?” We are in a pitiable plight, harping on“mine” and “thine” and not knowing the answers tothese questions. Where were you before your birth?Where would you be after death? Who are yourchildren? Who are your friends? Man has none to callhis own. All these relationships arise from selfishattachments and do not indicate any permanent bond.“Recognise this truth”, Krishna told Arjuna. “Do notentertain the attitude of weakness and illusion,proceeding from ignorance. Do not become feeble-hearted by calling these people your uncles, gurus,friends and sires.” Emphasising further, Krishna said,“O Arjuna! You are not the killer and they are not killed.These bodies resemble mere vestments. None feels sorry85 86Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
to throw away old and soiled garments. All these bodiesare like worn-out dispensable garments.”Arjuna had a doubt. “It may be proper to comparethe bodies of people who are eighty, ninety or a hundredyears old to disposable garments; how is it proper tocompare the bodies of those who are five or ten yearsold to clothes which have served their purpose? Krishnaanswered Arjuna, “You do not have the authority todecide which is old and which is new. Suchdiscrimination has not yet developed in you.” I amgiving one small illustration. Ten years ago youpurchased a piece of cloth, kept it somewhere and forgotabout it. When you happen to open the almirah now,that cloth attracts your attention. At once you take it toa tailor and have a coat made out of it. When you put onthis new coat, you feel happy that you are donning it.But when you bend forward the coat gets torn. You feelsorry that your new coat is torn. Though the coat is new,the cloth is of old stock. Likewise, the bodies of a youngperson may appear as new and fresh, but may be of oldstock belonging to some previous births. Just as thegarment is the cloak for the body, the body is the vestureof the spirit. Krishna thus compared the body to agarment which gets soiled and worn-out, drops off andis reduced to ashes. “Death is the dress of life.” At thetime of death, we cast off one dress and don another.No one laments when he is told that fire is hot or ice iscold. It is quite a natural phenomenon. Similarly, it isnatural for the body that is born, to die. To lament overit, is sheer ignorance. The knowledge of the Self isessential to exterminate this ignorance. It is the duty ofevery individual to acquire this self-knowledge, torecognise the true destination of life and to strive tomerge in the sacredness of Divinity. Thus, Krishnapreached to Arjuna the sublime wisdom and the sanctityof jnana yajna. Thereby, Krishna exhorted Arjuna toproceed and fight on the battlefield.“O, Arjuna! Do not feel that you are fighting yourrelations and friends. Consider that you are fighting yourown vile tendencies. These enter your nature like friendsand then torment you like foes. Therefore, with thesupport of good qualities, you should fight against yourevil qualities. Continuing to think of Me always, carryon the fight,” Krishna advised.87 88Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
“Sraddhavan Labhate Jnanam”
You might have read many books. Youmight have studied all the Sastras in theirentirety. You might have mastered the mostdifficult subjects. You will naturally feelproud of your profound knowledge of allthe branches of learning. Bu, all yourimmense erudition will be useless if youdo not bring your palms together toworship Paramatma. Your learning will beof no use if you have no devotion. O man!Your worldly education is an exercise intotal futility.Embodiments of Love!
Adhyatmika dharma, or the dharma ofspirituality, has become static and stagnant.It should be revived, galvanised, and given a newdynamism. Our young students should play a pivotalrole in the renaissance of the perennial philosophy ofspirituality.From the point of view of Indian spirituality, wedo not go from falsehood to truth or from unreality toreality. Truth cannot be derived or deduced fromfalsehood. Spirituality is the hierarchy of reality. Wehave to ascend from a lower level of reality to a higherlevel of reality. Absolute truth is the highest level ofspiritual reality.Indians have inherited the dharma of spiritualityfrom times immemorial. But it is not confined to ourcountry only. It is universal, eclectic, and catholic. Allhuman beings have the right to imbibe from this fountainof spirituality. It is our misfortune that we have notrecognised our own spiritual heritage. Spirituality is notthe monopoly of any particular country. It is like thewind which cannot be confined to a particular place.Let the winds of spirituality blow all over the world.The common man is enslaved by his gunas orattributes. He should transcend the gunas and transformhimself into a divine being. He should undergo aspiritual metamorphosis, as it were. The spiritualisationor divinisation of man is the ultimate goal of the Gita.We can revive and revitalise the eternal verities andvalues of our ancient culture by establishing acompletely sanctified society. Human society has alwaysbeen a conglomeration of various classes. The word89 90
12Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
“society” has become a misnomer. A true society is acommunity of selfless individuals. An ideal society musthave a scale of values and a code of morality whichshould be applicable to all individuals. There is no scopefor the efflorescence of dharma in a society dominatedby absolute selfishness and predatory competition. Asociety contaminated by adharma or immorality willcorrupt the entire country.Man is not an island unto himself. A gregariouscreature, he lives as an integral part of society. He cannotalso exist without Easwara. A spiritualised world anda divinised society should be established for thetransformation of man into a divine being.Krishna exhorted Arjuna to strive for theestablishment of a theocentric world. “People havedifferent aims and aspirations. They follow differentpaths for winning My Grace. I guide them along theirchosen paths and fulfil their wishes and lead them totheir different goals in life”, said Krishna revealing HisDivinity to Arjuna.There are three words which connote obeisancein varying degrees, namely, paata, nipaata, andpranipaata. Paata means falling down. Nipaata meansa slight fall. Pranipaata means a total fall. In otherwords, paata signifies the paying of obeisance bybowing down, nipaata indicates the touching of theLotus Feet of the Lord with one’s head, and pranipaataconnotes complete prostration at the Lord’s Feet—Sashtanga namaskaram. This is symbolic ritualexemplifying saranagati thathwa, the essence of totalself-surrender. This indicates the annihilation of the ego.Obliteration of all traces of egoism is the aim of pranipaata.The vision of the inner Atma will not be revealedto the spiritual aspirant as long as his ego continues toexist. It is only when egoism is given up that the innersignificance of dharma will be comprehended in itstotality.Sraddha is earnestness, perseverance,determination, and steadfastness. Sraddha alone is notenough. Sraddha should be strengthened by nissamsayaor absence of doubt or scepticism. Sraddha andnissamsaya are the two banks of the stream of life. Inother words, spiritual advancement cannot be achievedwithout persistence and faith.Ganga, Yamuna and Saraswathi are the threesacred rivers of our country. They have their source inthe Himalayas and flow down to join the vast ocean.They are swift-flowing rivers with strong embankments.If they have no embankments, they will devastate theentire country. A river must have banks to restrict itsflowing water. A man’s life is like a stream, whose twobanks are Sraddha and Nissamsaya. Flowing betweenthese two banks of sraddha and nissamsaya, a man’slife stream mingles with the vast ocean of anugraha orDivine Grace. Perseverance and faith constitute the life-breath of man. Humanity cannot exist even for a moment91 92Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
without perseverance and faith. They are the two wheelsof the chariot of a man’s life which should proceedtowards the unfathomable ocean of God’s BoundlessGrace.God is worshipped by four kinds of devotees;aartha, arthaarthi, jijnasu, and jnani. God loves all ofthem. He grants them boons appropriate to their thoughtsand attributes.An aartha prays to God in times of distress. Heprays for relief from the difficulties, troubles, trials andtribulations of the world. God gives him mundanehappiness by removing his sorrow and sickness. Withthe cessation of his sadness, the relation between theaartha and God also comes to an end.An arthaarthi is a devotee who prays to God forpower, pelf, and prosperity. He becomes an egoist assoon as his wishes are fulfilled. If his ambitions are notfulfilled, he blames God for His indifference to thewelfare of mankind. When an arthaarthi’s prayers arenot answered, he becomes an angry agnostic.A jijnasu wants to understand the enigma of Godand to solve the riddle of the universe. He is an enquirer,an explorer and an investigator. His aim is to unravelthe mystery of existence with the aid of his limitedintellect. This is a painful intellectual endeavourforedoomed to failure. When all his efforts fail he alsobecomes a disinterested man filled with indifference andapathy. But if a jijnasu remains undaunted by failuresand persists in his enquiries with a single-track mind,he will also win God’s Boundless Grace.A jnani is the only individual who has reachedthe summit of spirituality. He has attained the acme ofwisdom. He alone can reach and know God. It doesnot, however, mean that the others cannot know God.They, too, can realise God if they dedicate all theiractions to God in a spirit of self-abnegation. Killing ofthe lower self is more important than memorising allthe scriptures.This is the easiest path to God-realisation. Everyact should be treated as a sacrament. Meditation, yoga,and rites and rituals are no longer essential to the jnani.His life and his actions are dedicated to God in completeself-surrender. He remains unattached to the fruits ofhis actions.A guru is a spiritual preceptor. He transmitswisdom to his disciple. His duty ends here. It is thedisciple’s duty to receive and respond to his master’sspiritual wisdom. He must put into practice what he haslearnt. A guru is like a guidepost on the highway. Heshows the path to the disciple. A signpost indicates theroad to be followed but does not indicate anything aboutthe ups and downs and the pitfalls on the road. It is thetraveller’s duty to beware of all pitfalls and obstacleson the road. Similarly, a guru is only a guide. Thedisciple has to find for himself all the obstacles on the93 94Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
mountain path of spirituality. He must personallyexperience all the vicissitudes of the spiritual life.Failure to experience the inner self is the mainreason for not understanding the true significance ofthe Gita and its relevance to everyday life. There arevery few people who have had a really authenticexperience. The pancha bhuthas, or the five elements,the pancha kosas, or the five sheaths, and the panchapranas, or the five life-breaths should be regarded assacred manifestations of God.“Nimitta maatram bhava savyasachi. Arjuna, youare only instrumental in the propagation of My Message.You are just an instrument in My Hands,” proclaimedKrishna to Arjuna.Even swadharma is tainted with the gunas. Man’slife is motivated by the instinct of self-satisfaction. Butself-satisfaction is a concomitant of spiritualdissatisfaction. Man always thinks of his selfish interestsin whatever he does. This self-satisfaction involves theembodied soul or the ego. That is why it is necessary totranscend or kill the lower self.The four varnas or castes are based on the gunasor the primordial attributes of prakruthi or nature. Inthe human body, the head, the shoulders, the thighs andthe feet depend on one another. The head stands for thebrahmin, the shoulders for the kshatriya, the thighs forthe vaisya, and the feet for the sudra.A Vedic pundit has three sons. The first son is afarmer, the second son a soldier, and third son amerchant. Thus, in the same family, the vocations ofthe father and his three sons are determined by theirattributes and actions. All of them belong to the Vedicscholar’s family. They live together and depend on oneanother. In the same manner, people of all castes mustlive together harmoniously discharging their respectiveduties. They must all work together for the welfare andprosperity of the country. The essence of the messageof the Gita is the coexistence of all castes in a spirit ofharmony and mutual welfare.Why do you touch the feet of elders? You do notdo namaskar to their face or shoulders. It is obviousthat the feet are very sacred. By touching the feet ofholy men, you can attain Paramatma. It is a mistake toextol the head and denigrate the feet.The human mind is activated into a dynamicequilibrium by the three gunas of sathwa, rajas, andthamas (equanimity, energy, and inertia). These gunasare the motivating forces whose source is Easwara whois not only transcendental but also immanent andubiquitous.95 96Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Karma Yoga
Man has but the right to perform action;to ask for the fruits thereof he has none.God alone can dispense the fruits of man’ sactions.Embodiments of the Divine Atma!
Everyday from morning till night you spendyour life in merely earning the means of yourlivelihood. What great happiness have you attained byemploying your skill and education in only filling yourstomach, forgetting the Lotus-eyed Lord? O, man!Ponder over this with deep regard.Embodiments of Love!From times immemorial, Bharath, by its spiritualpower, has been conferring permanent peace andhappiness on all mankind. Lokah samastha sukhinobhavantu or “may the whole world be happy” has beenthe goal of the sacred dharma of Bharath. In order toprotect and preserve this ideal, the kings, the sages, thesaints and scholars as also the various women of yoresacrificed their all and led lives worthy of emulation.Sacrifice (tyaga) is the essence of spiritual life.All men must necessarily have tyaga. Although one maynot be willing to make sacrifices, nature shall force himto do so. It behoves man, therefore, to undertakesacrifice even before he is so compelled.Lord Krishna stresses in the Bhagavad Gita thatabsolute purity of the heart is an essential requisite fortreading the path of sacrifice. What is sacrifice? Whatis it that one must give up? Is it the transient wealth onehas? Does sacrifice mean the giving up of one’s wifeand children? Nay, these are but matters that relate tothe environment conditioning man’s external life.Sacrifice means giving up one’s desires (kama),anger (krodha) and greed or extreme miserliness (lobha).Man generally identifies himself with the anatma (non-Atma) without realising his true nature. The reflectionof the sky in a pot of water disappears the moment youpour out the water. Likewise, when you recognise thetemporal nature of all that is non-Atma and attribute theirephemeral existence to worldly desires (water) and givethem up, you get closer to the Atma. Unless you sacrificedesire, anger and greed or miserliness, you cannot attainDivinity.97 98
13Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Desire impels you to go against the establishedcode of social behaviour even at the cost of losing yourhonour and reputation. It makes you get immersed inselfishness and disregard your duty to society and God.It raises its ugly hood in every aspect of your life andturns you into a demon.Anger destroys your intelligence and warps yourjudgement. The angry man forfeits success in all hisendeavours and invites societal censure. He bringsdishonour to himself, to his friends and relations deserthim. He is led to sin and thereby ruins his life.Lobha or extreme miserliness does not let anyonebe happy. A miser neither enjoys himself nor allowsothers to utilise his wealth. For everything he takes aretrogressive step, fearing loss of his property ordiminution in his wealth. There is a small story toillustrate this. There were two brothers by names Miserand Greater Miser. True to their names, they were soniggardly that they did not even feed themselvesproperly. On occasions, when they prayed to God tofurther their worldly interests, they would not evenproffer naivedya, (sacred offering to God). They wouldmerely let Him have a cursory glance at it and eat it upthemselves within moments. The reason for this greathurry, in not allowing the offering to remain at the altarfor more than a few seconds was the fear that if thesugar candy offered as naivedya was kept any longer,some ants might partake of it in small quantities andthereby deprive them of valuable granules of precioussugar!One day, news came that one of their near relationshad died. The elder brother, Greater Miser, decided tooffer condolences to the bereaved family in person, andtherefore set out early next morning by foot. He did notstart immediately on the same day by bus or train, astravel by these means of transport would entail aninsufferable burden by way of travel fares!After his elder brother had gone, Miser put outthe lamp and placed it on a windowsill, only to be stungby a vicious scorpion. While the younger brother wassuffering thus, Greater Miser had put some two milesbehind him. Suddenly, he became thoughtful andhastened back to the house. On being asked by Miserthe reason for his unscheduled return, Greater Miserreplied, “O, brother! I was worried that you may nothave put out the lamp after I left. I have, therefore, comeback to remind you.” To this, Miser in spite of hisexcruciating pain, said ruefully “Alas! brother, yourdesire to avoid wastage of oil is indeed appreciable, butwhat a pity, how much your sandals would have wornout by this unnecessary return of yours!” Greater Miserthen replied, “My dear Miser, do not worry. I walkedbarefoot with my sandals in my hands.” Such is the banewrought by lobha.Thus, by desire, anger and greed, man’s devotionand wisdom diminish and his actions get tainted.99 100Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Therefore, Krishna enjoined Arjuna to be free from thesevices, overcome illusion, develop inner vision andspiritual wisdom, and follow the path of karma sanyasayoga (the renunciation of the fruits of one’s actions).In karma sanyasa yoga, we have three words,karma, sanyasa, and yoga. Karma means action; sanyasameans renunciation of worldly taints (vasanas) anddesires, and rising above attachment and hatred; andyoga means union with the Divine.“O, Arjuna,” Krishna said, “this aspect of sanyasais lacking in you. You are still swayed by attachmentand ego.” None can desist from action. Man iscontinually engaged in action. Therefore, renunciationof action (karma sanyasa) is neither realistic norpractical.“Instead, while performing action, transform itinto worship. Dedicate all your actions to God andperform them for His pleasure. Such actions will placeyou on the path of bhakthi (devotion).”Thus, Krishna initiated Arjuna into the secret ofkarma yoga. Karma yoga should become natural to man.Whatever be the act performed, it should elevate andennoble the doer. It is not enough if one merely listensto something noble; one must take it to his heart andruminate over it.Once, a sage brought three dolls to the court of aking and asked for the best doll to be identified. A cleverminister passed a thin wire through one ear of each ofthe dolls. The wire came out of the other ear in the caseof the first doll and through the mouth in the case of thesecond. In the case of the third doll, however, the wirewent deep inside.Explaining the significance, the minister held thatthe third doll was the best. It represented the man whounderstood and retained the true meaning of whateverhe heard and put it into practice. The second doll stoodfor the mere prattler who did not put anything he heardinto actual practice, while the first signified the worstamong men—he who simply let what he heard throughone ear out from the other.Students should listen to the sacred message ofthe Gita and imbibe it in their hearts. Recognising thetruth that motiveless action performed for the pleasureof God (karma yoga) is higher than giving up of allactivity, they should serve society in a selfless mannerwithout an eye for reward. Develop love for all so thatgreed does not seize you into a state of godlessness.Also desire and anger should be controlled to themaximum possible extent.101 102Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Buddhi Yoga
The tree of prakruthi (nature) falls and thebranches of desires wither away only whenthe mind, the root, is destroyed.Embodiments of the Divine Atma!
Man may be compared to a machine with theintellect, the mind, the senses and the bodyas its different components. Just as the various parts ofthe body work in perfect co-ordination with one anotherto keep the physical mechanism of the body in order,the various faculties in man should work in harmonywith one another to ensure that the Atmic Radiance isreflected in their functioning and that man’s life is fullof Divine Light and Joy.In big factories, the workers in all cadresdischarge their duties properly by obeying theinstructions of their immediate superior officers. Sucha process is conducive to the efficient running of theorganisation. Elaborating on this theme while dealingwith karma yoga and karma sanyasa yoga, theGitacharya addressed Arjuna and said, “The sensescontrol the body and the mind controls the senses. Themind, in turn, is controlled by the intellect. Being closestto the Atma, buddhi (intellect) best reflects the attributesof the Atma. The influence of the Atma directly fallsupon the buddhi and therefore, the buddhi functions asthe presiding faculty in man.”The mind generates sankalpa (thought), which ischecked and allowed to remain by the intelligence inevery human being, the intelligence alone has the powerto make decisions and to discriminate between goodand bad. Individuals, often, get upset and troubled bythe desires that arise in their minds. However, if theyfollow the dictates of their intelligence, their minds getlulled into submission and their actions result inhappiness. Here is a small illustration.In this gathering, there may be a person whothinks, “Swami’s discourse may go on for another halfan hour. If I catch a bus after the discourse is over, Imight miss the second show of a movie. So it may bebetter to get up now and go.” This is the prompting ofthe mind. But then, the intellect comes on the scene andcounsels. “No, no. Don’t leave. An opportunity to listento Swami’s discourse dealing with profound truthsrelating to the Atma and the spiritual life will not come103 104
14Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
to you again—it is a rare blessing and should not besquandered away. Stay on and listen to Swami.” Themind, then, follows the decision of the intellect. It mustbe so if life’s purpose is to be fulfilled.Buddhi is directly influenced by the Atma.Therefore, if the mind follows the buddhi, it will be ableto lead the senses along the right path. So, Krishnaadvised Arjuna not to follow the mind, which, left toitself, is prone to succumbing to the pulls of sensorypleasures, but instead, to subjugate it to the intellect.For going about in a chariot, it is the charioteerwho has the most important role to play. Neither thehorses that draw the chariot nor even the owner who isseated therein is competent to ensure a safe journey. Itis the charioteer alone who can do it. If he is notaccomplished, the horses will run berserk and drag thechariot hither and thither. Therefore, the charioteer mustbe competent enough and experienced to do his jobproperly. Krishna said, “Arjuna! Your body is a chariotand your senses are the horses; your mind acts as thereins and your intellect is the driver. If you let yourintellect guide your life’s journey, you will reach yourultimate destination safely.”Arjuna emerged victorious in the battle becausehis charioteer was Krishna, the source of all intellect.To install Krishna as our charioteer is the most sacredand felicitous means by which we can attain the goal oflife. If, however, we have an inept person as thecharioteer (as Karna’s charioteer Salya was), we willget discouraged every minute of our lives and eventuallylose the battle we wage against our inner foes.It is only when the mind follows the buddhi thatinner vision is developed. Inner vision leads to theexperience of the Bliss of the Atma. External vision,however, subjects man to untold suffering.Krishna told Arjuna that in this world of objectswhich we see with our external vision, we perceive twoqualities, namely “kshayasila” (destructibility) and“dukhamisrama” (presence of sorrow). This can beexplained by an example. We see a child growing into aman and are happy that he is developing physically,failing to note, however, that the life-span of the childis simultaneously getting reduced. This gradual ebbingout of the life within man as he keeps growing isattributable to “kshayasila”. Similarly, we see a budblossoming into a flower and enjoy its fragrance withoutrecognising the fact that in a few hours the flower willfade away. So also, the food that we cook today may bedelicious and wholesome if eaten today, but if it is keptfor the morrow, it would decompose or go stale. Thefruit we eat today may be fresh, sweet, and delightful tothe palate, but the very next day, it will become wastematter and will be looked upon with disgust.Thus, destructibility or impermanence is aninherent characteristic of the material world. So also,worldly objects and relations bring about sorrow along105 106Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
with joy. The same object may be the source of joy aswell as the cause of sorrow. The shadow of sorrowhaunts the experience of joy. One may feel happy whenhe receives the news of the birth of a son but feelsmiserable when he receives the news of the death of thesame son.Krishna said to Arjuna, “The joy which you seekand the self-realisation which you aim at, are both withinyou. They cannot be found in the external world. Youare as foolish as a person who begs for food on thestreet even though there are sweets and other delicatedishes in his own home. You think that this world andits objects confer happiness on you. This is an illusioncreated by your mind. It is only when you follow theintelligence that you will be able to enjoy Atmananda”.Real happiness lies within you. A smallillustration. Putting its thumb in the mouth and suckingit, the baby imagines that something sweet is flowingfrom the thumb, although, in reality, the sweetness comesfrom the saliva in its mouth. Let us take another case. Astreet-dog snatches an old, dry bone but finds it very hardto break. Out of its anxiety and hunger, the dog goes onbiting the bone with all its strength. Suddenly, the bonebreaks and a piece of it pierces the dog’s gum. As a result,blood begins to flow in the dog’s mouth. The foolish dogkeeps biting the bone and thinks that it is enjoying theblood flowing from the bone, while actually it is gettingthe blood from its own gum and not from the bone.We eat different sweets made of different kindsof flour. Sweetness, however, comes from the sugar andnot from the flour. Yet, we say that the laddu or theMysore pak is sweet. In the same manner, although thesweet beatitude of the Atma is within us, we erroneouslyattribute the sweetness to the fleeting objects found inthe world. Nara (man) must pursue the path that takeshim to Narayana (God). We must aim at becomingPashupati (Lord Siva) but should not revert to the lifeof an animal (pashu). One who follows his intelligencecan become Pashupati, while one who follows his mindbecomes a pashu. It is natural for the mind to promptand provoke, but we must not translate them into actionhastily. We should discriminate with our intellect andimplement its dictates.The intellect is described as the embodimentof God. Krishna says in the Vibhuthi Yoga that He is theintellect inherent in all men. In daily life, whensomeone commits a mistake, we scold him as one devoidof intellect. When we come across a good man, weremark, “He is one having intellect.” Buddhi(intellect) develops the divine Nature, which iswithin us. Therefore, it is necessary for man to followthe intellect which offers permanent, supremedelight and which continues from birth to birth,displaying divine attributes. The mind is destructible,but the intellect cannot be destroyed. The intellect guidesand leads man to the Atma. We should follow the intellectwhich seeks the eternal delight of the Atma, and not the107 108Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
mind which hankers after the pleasures of the senses.In general, people of this age follow the mind andonly a very rare person follows the intellect. Therefore,Krishna, foreseeing the trends of the Kali Yuga, desiredto teach buddhi yoga to all mankind through Arjuna. Ihope that everyone will follow the sacred and inspiringwords of Krishna to Arjuna.
Dhyana Yoga
How can he, who surrenders to the internalenemies ever vanquish the external foes?Man becomes blessed when he cognises theTruth.
The mind derives its Sanskrit name manasbecause it is continually engaged in theprocess of manana or thinking. Impulses are generatedin the mind. Very often, however, the mind is led astrayby conflicting impulses that are generated in it. The ficklenature of the mind acts as an impediment to man’sspiritual progress; therefore, it is imperative that everyspiritual aspirant gains control over his mind if he is todrench himself in the delight of his soul.The mind travels faster than even the wind. Justas we apply brakes to halt a fast-moving vehicle, wehave to curb the flow of our thoughts.109 110
15Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Arjuna prayed to Krishna to teach him the art ofmind control, in answer to which Krishna elaboratedon the subject. The mind is strong and mighty. It carrieswith it the accumulated tendencies of innumerable birthsand therefore, tries to gain dominance over the soul.But with such a mind, running amuck with desires, it isimpossible for man to attain Divinity.The mind is like a bee. Though small in size, abee can bore its way through thick wood or even througha human body as it did in the case of Karna. However,such a bee, when it sits on the lotus to suck the sweethoney contained therein, gets caught within the delicatepetals of the flower as they close around it and finds itimpossible to escape. Similarly, our attempt to conquerthe mind is bound to prove futile unless it is led to theLotus-like-form of the Lord, wherein it gets eternallytrapped.The sixth chapter of the Gita is entitledAtmasamyama Yoga or the yoga of controlling the Atma.This is a misnomer in as much as it is neither necessarynor possible to control the immaculate, eternalembodiment of the Truth—the Atma. The word Atma inthis chapter of the Gita has been used to denote the mind.In the Atmasamyama Yoga, the art of mind control isdealt with in elaborate detail. Dhyana is mentioned hereas the principal means to achieve control over the mind.In the Atmasamyama Yoga, Krishna emphasisesthe need for maintaining absolute cleanliness at the placewhere meditation is practised. It is not your house orthe forest that is to be kept clean, but the immediatesurroundings of the place where you perform meditationthat should be kept clean. The jiva dwells in the bodywhilst the Lord resides in the heart. Therefore, asmeditation is not so much performed in external environsas it is within the heart—it being an internal process—it is more vital to rid the heart of all impurities and renderit a fit abode for God. In our daily lives, when we haveto sit somewhere, we choose a clean place and coverthe ground with a handkerchief or a newspaper. Suchbeing the care we take in cleaning a place to sit in forourselves, the need for keeping the heart clean to seatthe Lord therein and to achieve the purpose of meditation,is all the more important. The necessity for man to cleansehis heart arises because of the taints of thamas and rajasthat have been associated with him over several births.There are three states relating to the mind:soonyathwa (emptiness), anekagrata (simultaneouspulls of multiple thoughts), and ekagrata (one-pointedness). These three states are referable to and arisefrom the three gunas in man. While thamo guna(indolence) brings about a blankness in the mind, rajoguna (the quality inducing animated action) provokesthe mind into wandering hither and thither. Sathwa guna(the quality that promotes the sacred aspects of humanlife) stills the mind into one-pointed contemplation.Thus, it is only those who cultivate sathwa guna thatcan undertake meditation with ease.111 112Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
When we think of meditation, three things areinvolved, First, there is the person who meditates, thedhyata; secondly, there is the object of meditationdhyeya; and thirdly, there is the process of meditationitself, dhyana. In true meditation, all these three shouldmerge. The person who is meditating should identifyhimself totally with the object of meditation and shouldbe unaware of even the fact that he is meditating. Whenhe is meditating, his attention should be so rivetted tothe dhyeya that he loses his own identity and forgetshis involvement in the action (dhyana), too.Meditation is often misunderstood to be the sameas concentration. Concentration is essential for ordinarysensory perceptions and it is something that we haveand utilise while performing the most ordinary androutine acts. For example, we concentrate when we reada book, write a letter, drive a car or eat our food.Concentration comes naturally to us in the process ofperceiving through the five senses and no particularexertion or special practice is required for it. It isincorrect, therefore, to equate concentration withmeditation at which only the spiritual adepts excel.Meditation is a process which obtains at a muchhigher plane than human sensory perception. Being amental process that involves seeing through the senses,concentration may be regarded as being below or withinthe realms of the senses, while meditation is beyond orabove the world of the senses. If meditation were aseasy as concentration, the great rishis of the past wouldnot have practised various austerities and subjectedthemselves to innumerable difficulties in the deep forests.Unfortunately today, however, by the influenceof Kali, meditation which is the sacred means ofattaining union with God, is being considered analternative for aspirin to cure a headache! What a slightit is for Indian culture!For one who desires to practise dhyana ormeditation, it is advisable that jyothi (light) is taken asthe dhyeya or object of meditation and not a form ofDivinity such as that of Rama, Krishna, or Easwara; forthese forms, too, are subject to change and ultimatelyperish. Jyothi or light does not perish or change.Moreover, a flame can kindle a million others withoutgetting extinguished and is therefore inexhaustible.In this process of meditation on light, theprogression must be from restlessness to tranquillity andfrom tranquillity to divine Effulgence. One should sitcross-legged and erect to ensure an easy flow of thedivine force from the mooladhara chakra to thesahasrara chakra through the sushumna nadi. Theaspirant should fix his gaze on the gentle flame andgradually close his eyes, mentally transferring orabsorbing the flame into his heart, as it were.The lotus of the spiritual heart should then beimagined as blossoming in effulgent beauty dispelling113 114Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
with its radiance the dark forces of life. One should thenimagine that out of the heart so illumined, rays of lightproceed gradually to all parts of the body, suffusingeverything with light and imbuing it with sacrednessand purity all over. As the light has reached the hands,the individual ought not to do any wrongful acts; sincethe flame shines in his eyes, he cannot look atundesirable sights. So, also, since the jyothi haspermeated his ears, he should not listen to evil talk. Hisfeet, too, since they have been filled with light, shouldnot tread upon unholy paths. Thus, this type ofmeditation ennobles man and helps him scale greatspiritual heights very steadily.If we keep the mind busy in this manner with thetask of carrying light to all parts of the body, it will notwander and will remain steady. The whole process takesabout twenty to thirty minutes to complete. This kind ofmeditation should not be regarded as an exercise infantasy. No doubt, in the beginning, imagination will beinvolved; but, by constant practice, it will be transformedinto a powerful thought wave, creating an indelibleimpression on the heart leading to union with God.The meditation should not end with the individualvisualising the light in himself. He should see it in hisfriends and relatives and even in his enemies. He shouldsee the whole of creation bathed in the resplendent lightof Divinity. This would make him live a life full of loveand happiness.If you so desire, you may in the initial stages,picture the form of God which is dear to you, within theflame on which you meditate; you must, however, realisethat the form has got to dissolve in the light, sooner orlater. You must not try to confine Divinity to any oneparticular form; you must see God in His all-pervasiveform, as the One who resides in the hearts of all Divinebeings.Some believe that only Rama, Krishna, and SaiBaba are God. This can only be attributed to sheerignorance. You are also God. In order to make yourealise that all beings are Divine, that all areembodiments of the Supreme Being, God comes as anAvatar. I have assumed this Form to make you all realiseyour innate Divinity. Recognising this purpose, to fulfilwhich Avatars come, you should take to the spirituallife with ardour and zest.There are people who feign themselves divinelyinebriated and give the impression that they are on theverge of the transcendental state of samadhi. But themoment an ant or a mosquito settles on their bodies,they are led into an instinctive act of killing the poorinsect! There are others who sit peacefully in meditationfor a minute and then immediately shout at their servantsfor the smallest of lapses! This should not be the attitudeof one who desires to meditate sincerely. RamanaMaharshi was once questioned as to how long a personshould perform dhyana every day. He smiled and replied115 116Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
that one should perform meditation till he forgets thathe is doing so.We should perform dhyana in an unostentatiousmanner unobserved by others. Fish are sold in heaps atthe fish market, but diamonds are carefully preservedat the jeweller’s shop and displayed only to worthycustomers. Likewise, if we sit for meditation at all placesindiscriminately, inviting public attention, we would bereducing dhyana to cheap exhibitionism.Krishna told Arjuna that one should be alonewhile meditating. The body should not touch the earthor another body. This is because contact with the earthmakes the individual lose the divine current generatedin him during meditation.Meditation will be more meaningful if desires arecurtailed. Less luggage, more comfort make travel apleasure; fewer desires make the journey of life easierand happier.
“Anoraneeyan Mahato Maheeyan”
Smaller than the smallest and bigger thanthe biggest, the All-pervasive Brahmanremains the Eternal Witness of all.Brahman is Atma. Atma is Brahman.Embodiments of Love!
The universe is without beginning and in itdwell an infinitude of jivas (living beings).Among these jivas, man is the most exalted being. Fromtimes immemorial, men have been striving to know God.Some have maintained that God exists, while othershave denied His existence. But neither the theists northe atheists have been able to adduce proof for theirrival contentions.Several Indians say that God is Siva—the Oneastride Nandi (Bull) or that He is Vishnu—the One withGaruda (Eagle) as His vahana or vehicle. Others declare117 118
16Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
that these are false statements, and swearing by the Bible,proclaim that God is light and that He resides in Heaven.Depending on the place, the time and theexperience of the individual concerned, there havedeveloped various conceptions of the Godhead. Out ofconcern for and seeing this predicament of man,Krishna has given in the Bhagavad Gita a very aptdescription of God: “Anoraneeyan Mahato Maheeyan,”that is to say, God exists everywhere and manifestsHimself as both the infinitesimal and the Infinite.Would it be possible for man to see God, who issmaller than even the smallest particle of an atom, orperceive the Transcendental Divinity that envelopes theentire cosmos and extends even beyond? The answercannot but be in the negative, for when man is unableto see even the air that surrounds him, he has no meansto perceive Divinity that is even more subtle. Neithercan man gauge the infinitude of the all-pervasiveBrahman that transcends the vast cosmic expanse withits myriad stars, each bigger than the sun and at greatdistances from the others.To teach man the truths relating to these twoaspects of Divinity—“Anoraneeyan MahatoMaheeyan”—which lie beyond the ken of his normalintellect, God appears on earth as an Avatar. In theKrishna Avatar, keeping Arjuna as the representativeof all mankind, Krishna taught these eternal truthsthrough the Bhagavad Gita. “Beyond the Universe,”Krishna said, “lies total darkness and beyond thisdarkness exists Truth.” This darkness consists of therajasic and the thamasic realms. Beyond the darknesslies the domain of sathwa guna—the domain of Truthand Light.“Truth is God” it is said; but to realise this truthwe must transcend the rajasic and the thamasic realms.Meditation is the means for attaining suchtranscendence.For meditation, Krishna lays down two importantinjunctions; a moderate diet and a regulated conduct oflife. “Yuktahara viharasya”, said Krishna. Here,yuktahara does not denote complete abstinence fromfood, as this would lead to physical emaciation andmental fatigue. The Buddha’s experience illustrates thisvery well. While doing penance, the Buddha had, inthe beginning, given up food for several days. Thisresulted in a dissipation of his physical and mentalenergies. Realising that a healthy body and a sound mindare necessary prerequisites for effective penance, hewent to a nearby village and partook of curds andappeased his hunger. From that day, he continued takingfood in small quantities every day. He was thereby ableto meditate with great ease and realise the Truth.Thus, food in the right quantities and of the propertype is necessary if an individual is to meditateeffectively. Excessive eating thatleads to drowsiness,should, however, be avoided. The correct thing would119 120Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
be to divide the stomach into four equal parts and filltwo parts with solid food and one part with liquid foodleaving the fourth part empty. Filling the stomach withsolid food completely promotes thamo guna, which ispositively an impediment to meditation.Sleeplessness is also detrimental to meditation.Lack of sleep promotes rajo guna and fills one withunhealthy thoughts and emotions.The food man partakes of these days is essentiallyrajasic and thamasic. This is the reason why there iscruelty and unrest in the minds of men. Their physicalhealth, too, is poor. Today, a boy of sixteen would havepassed through all the physical experiences that a manof sixty would have gone through. Such is the deplorablecondition of our youth. How then can they experiencethe bliss of dhyana (meditation)?It is imperative, therefore, for everyone tointrospect and find out how much of his time is beingspent in the mad race for fleeting material pleasuresand how much is devoted to the thought of God. Thehedonistic man of the present day can spare no time forthe contemplation of Divinity. The gates of Heaven shallbe open for him only if he can think of God now andthen. However, everyone seems to be totallypreoccupied with the thoughts of one’s children, friends,relations, money and material possessions. Man is thusdenying himself the bliss of spiritual experience,engaged as he is in the pursuit of the transient pleasuresof the world. Man must, therefore, divert his vision fromthe world of temporal joys to the Bliss of the Atmawithin.In the eight fold path of yoga suggested byPatanjali in his Yoga Sutras, the last three stages aredharana, dhyana, and samadhi. Dharana thus precedesdhyana. It denotes the fixation of the mind on the goalof dhyana and involves the preliminary preparationsnecessary for dhyana.One should adopt a comfortable posture fordhyana. The common practice is to sit, with the handsin chinmudra and with the legs crossed, on a woodenplank covered with a soft skin or cloth. These are all,however, part of dharana. Dhyana begins with theprocess of gradual identification with the Lord and leadsto Samadhi.Samadhi is the state in which dhyana attainsfulfilment. In this state, the individual rises beyond theobjective world of relative reality, the subjective identityof himself and even the very activity that he is engagedin (dhyana). Samadhi is not a state of unconsciousness;neither does it mean frisking about in emotionalexcitement. The word samadhi itself is indicative of itssignificance. Sama is equipoise; dhi is intelligence.Samadhi is that state of intellectual equipoise wherethe individual transcends the world of duality andexperiences the bliss of divine communion.The Lord incarnates as man to help man121 122Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
comprehend that which apparently cannot be understoodand to enable him to attain that which is seeminglyunattainable. By this, however, the Lord who is Infinite,Immutable and Immanent, does not suffer anydiminution. Neither is He, though embodied in a humanframe, influenced by the taints and blemishes thatnormally affect a human being.The sea is vast and unfathomable. However, toknow the taste of sea water, one need not drink the entireocean. It is enough if he has a few drops. Similarly, theone who understands, assimilates and experiences theLord in Human Form has understood, assimilated andexperienced the Immutable, the Imperishable and theFormless Brahman as well.To grasp the significance of the DivineIncarnation, it is imperative that we rise above the rajasicand thamasic gunas. Sathwa guna alone can lead usthrough the path of true devotion to the Lotus Feet ofthe Divine. To remove rajas and thamas and to promotesathwic nature, a favourable environment and sathsangaor the company of good men are essential.The mental makeup of a person can be judgedfrom the way in which he maintains his immediatesurroundings. For example, a person whose room is fullof pictures of his relations, friends and political leaderscan at once be understood to be one dominated by rajoguna. He is one who attaches undue importance tohuman relationships and adores worldly power and pelf,ignoring God. Similarly, if the room is full of ugly andobscene pictures, the individual is essentially thamasicin nature. Both these categories of men are unfit tofollow the sacred path of meditation. A third categoryof men who have pictures of God and holy men adorningthe walls of their rooms converting their rooms intoshrines, as it were, are the sathwic people, the peoplewho are rightfully qualified to undertake meditation.Pictures and people do leave indelible impressionsand exercise considerable influence on the minds of men.Once Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi went along withhis mother to witness a play on the life of Harischandra.The portrayal of Harischandra as the peerless practitionerof truth so influenced the young Mohandas Karamchandthat even as he was returning home, he had resolved tostand by truth all his life. This ideal stood as the beaconfor him throughout the rest of his life and by his steadfastadherence to truth, he came to be acknowledged as amahatma.Ramana Maharshi also conditioned his mind byobjective experience. Every night he used to look at aparticular star with one-pointed attention for severallong hours. This strengthened his dharana and equippedhim to undertake dhyana.Just as mental purity is a necessary preconditionfor meditation, mental tranquillity is also equallyessential. A restless mind impedes the processes of bothdharana and dhyana. The mind needs to be given rest123 124Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
through sleep. Sankaracharya compared sleep tosamadhi, though samadhi confers much greater joy andinner harmony. Sufficient sleep is needed by anindividual to keep his mind alert and poised formeditation.There are three direct roads to Godhead. The firstconsists in the performance of all actions in a spirit ofdedication to God for His pleasure. The second, in therenunciation of the desire for the fruits of action. Thethird, in the identification of oneself with God throughthe process of dhyana. Dedication of all actions to Godconfers wisdom on the doer. Renunciation of the desirefor the fruits of action bestows mental tranquillity.dhyana too ensures inner peace.Dhyana can be practised by all—the old, theyoung, the ignorant, the wise, the healthy and the weak.For those who do not possess the necessary physicaland mental abilities to do dhyana, the cultivation ofuniversal love would be as efficacious as dhyana. Allthese three paths, however, lead to the same goal.
Sathwic Food
The lambent light of the Atma shines witheternal effulgence. It has neither birth nordeath, nor beginning nor end. Nor can itbe destroyed. It is the immortal witness,the beholder of all space and time.Embodiments of Love!“
Na sreyo niyamam vina”, said Krishna toArjuna. An unregulated, unsystematic,undisciplined and disorderly life cannot experience joy,goodness or well-being. One who controls and regulatesthe actions of others is called Yama. One who controlshimself and regulates his own actions possesses thequality of samyama. Yama has no control over a personendowed with samyama. There should be discipline andregulation in life in accordance with self-imposedconstraints. These self-imposed constraints constitute125 126
17Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
the thapas of an individual. An unrestrained life is animmoral life. The wind and the sea and also the otherphenomena obey the universal laws of nature. The earthrotates round its own axis and revolves around the sunperiodically. These uniformities in the universe are thelaws ordained by God. They are obeyed by themacrocosm as well as the microcosm. The laws of natureordained by God are necessary for creating andsustaining the universe and for maintaining its dynamicequilibrium.Such self-imposed discipline is conducive to realsanthi—peace of mind, poise, equanimity, and stableequilibrium of the mind. Peace of mind is the mostdesirable thing in this world. It gives us physical andpsychical euphoria. In order to achieve this santhi, anaspirant must develop a thirst for jnana or spiritualwisdom. He must also acquire the qualities of love,sympathy and compassion, and do selfless service toothers. Santhi should not be regarded as a part-timevirtue to be cultivated only during dhyana or meditation.It is a constant state of inner tranquillity. It shouldbecome habitual and instinctive. Dhyana is alsouniversal and eclectic. It is not restricted by the barriersof space-time. It is not governed by the dogmas of anyparticular creed. Dhyana is a way of life for the totaldivinisation of man. Dhyana and santhi are inseparable.Dhyana promotes santhi and santhi intensifies dhyana.The quality of Divinity is not limited to the icon thatwe worship. Some people experience the most profoundpeace of mind as long as they are in meditation.But, the moment they come out of the meditative stateof mind, they exhibit their demoniac nature. It shouldnot be so. The divine attributes acquired duringmeditation should be cultivated and nurtured ineveryday life.Mere medication will not cure a sick man. Hemust also control his diet for quick recovery from illness.There is no single panacea for the great world of sorrow.Each individual has his own specific type of suffering.Nevertheless, meditation on God is an unfailing remedyfor human suffering if it is supplemented with thepractice of dharma and the strict observance of moralrestraints. We are all interdependent. We must learn toshare the joys and sorrows of other people. Apractitioner of meditation must pray for the welfare ofothers as sincerely as he prays for his own welfare.A spiritual aspirant need not live in monasticisolation. He should practise universal compassion,which is nothing but an intense desire for the welfareof the entire humanity. Food plays an important part inthe cultivation of universal compassion. Yesterday, Italked to you about the right type of food for spiritualaspirants. Today, I will deal with sathwic food, or thetype of food necessary for spiritual progress. Sathwicfood enables the sadhaka to apprehend the omnipresentreality of Divinity. He progresses through the four stagesof the life divine. These four phases of spiritual127 128Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
advancement are salokya, samipya, sarupya and sayujya.Salokya is entrance to the field of theocentric reality.Samipya is proximity to the fundamental spiritualsubstance of the universe. Sarupya is the assimilationof the form of the deity. Sayujya is liberation andultimate union with the Godhead.Sathwic food is conducive to the progressiveattainment of these four states of spirituality viz.,salokya, samipya, sarupya, and sayujya. Here, it isnecessary to examine the implications of the conceptof Sathwic food.Some people are under the mistaken impressionthat sathwic food should consist of only milk, yoghurt,sweets and fruits. They believe that they will becomesathwic by consuming large quantities of thesedelicacies. They are absolutely mistaken. Excessive andimmoderate consumption of milk and its productsawakens and aggravates the rajasic and thamasicqualities in man. A diet extra rich in milk, curds, andghee cannot be called sathwic, because it leads to thedevelopment of the passionate nature of man.In this context, I have to dilate on the nature ofhuman knowledge and the five gateways of perception.Man is endowed with the five sensory organs connectedwith the five faculties of sabda, sparsa, rupa, rasa, andgandha (sound, touch, sight, taste, and smell). Thepreservation and the development of these sensoryfaculties depend on the sathwic food taken through themouth. The type of sathwic food that we take isdetermined by the fancies of individual taste. We feelsatisfied when we take the right type of food throughour mouths. But we forget that we absorb an incorporealtype of food through the other sensory organs also. Thewholesome effect of sathwic food will be nullified ifwe listen to bad talk, indulge in bad talk, look at badthings, come into physical contact with bad things andsmell bad things. Mind and body are tainted,contaminated and polluted by evil. Thus, sathwic foodalone is not enough for the spiritual regeneration of man.We should not speak about evil. We must avoidcondemning others and praising ourselves. Self-adulation and self-glorification retard spiritualdevelopment. We must feed our sensory organs withwholesome food, wholesome sounds and wholesomesights. The tongue is meant to sing the glory of God.The ears are meant for feasting on the gloriousmanifestations of the divine.Each organ of perception must be provided withits proper spiritual sustenance. Thus, sathwic food doesnot mean the moderate consumption of milk, curds, ghee,and fruits alone but the enjoyment provided by noblethoughts, sacred sounds, holy sights and spiritualdiscussions as well. We must develop sathwic sight andspiritual vision. We must have darshan of the beauty ofnature and the divinity of icons in temple. We shouldavoid all distracting sights and sounds. We should notlook at anyone with an evil eye. Evil thoughts develop129 130Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
an evil eye. The eyes are the windows of the heart. Theheart should overflow with love and compassion.sathwic nature is developed by feeding the eyes withsathwic sights.The sense of smell is also equally important. Theolfactory sense should be satisfied with sweet smells.All obnoxious odours should be avoided. To create anatmosphere of holiness, sweet perfumes are used andfragrant incense sticks are burnt at the altars in temples.Foul smells destroy sanctity. The idea of holiness isalways associated with sweet scents and perfumes.The tactile sensation or the sense of touch shouldbe satisfied by coming into physical contact with thefeet of holy men. Contact with evil men must be avoided.Their contacts promote bad thoughts.Sathsanga or the company of the virtuous is ofsupreme importance. Sathsanga leads to non-attachment. Non-attachment induces equanimity which,in turn, leads to liberation during life.With the aid of Sathsanga, many things areachieved. We cultivate good habits and participate inpious activity. Sathsanga sanctifies the human body forbecoming a temple of God.Thus, a comprehensive and balanced Sathwic dietmust provide sathwic satisfaction to all the sensoryorgans of the human body. The sensations of sabda,sparsa, rupa, rasa, and gandha must be provided withsathwic satisfaction by means of sathwic discourse,sathwic company, sathwic sights, sathwic food, andsathwic perfumes. A comprehensive sathwic dietprovides sathwic gratification to all the sensory organs.Today, the idea of sathwic food has been restricted tofood consisting of fruits, milk and its products. We havealready seen that the immoderate consumption of suchfood has a deleterious effect on the human body.The spiritual technique of dhyana mentioned inthe Bhagavad Gita cannot be beneficial in the absenceof comprehensive sathwic food, which should feed theentire body with sathwic sights, sounds, smells andtactile sensations. Otherwise, it becomes a mere pose.Today, dhyana has degenerated into a fashionablepastime. The true meaning and significance of dhyanashould be clearly grasped in order to avoid the pitfallsand dangers inherent in its faulty practice. Restraints arenecessary for the welfare of human beings. Limited foodand sathwic food are essential for spiritual progress. Suchfood should give satisfaction to all the sensory organs.All rivers join the ocean. Likewise, the aim of allsadhana is the merging of the individual soul with theuniversal soul. God’s grace is like the unlimited ocean.The water vapour symbolises the sadhana (propitiation);the cloud is sathya (truth), and the raindrops are prema(love). They collect together to form the stream ofAnanda (Bliss), which joins the vast ocean of Anugraha(Divine Grace).131 132Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Knowledge obtained directly from Sastras andscriptures is like sea water. By exercising the faculty ofdiscrimination and by entering the meditative state ofmind, the pure water of wisdom can be distilled fromthe saline sea water of scriptural knowledge. Thisknowledge is humanised by experience and divinisedby selfless love.Bookish knowledge divorced from experienceleads to fanaticism and intellectual arrogance.Knowledge by acquaintance is always superior toknowledge by description. Practice is better thanprecept. We must live the scriptural injunctions ratherthan merely talk about them. Self-imposed discipline ismore effective than discipline enforced by some externalauthority.The quality and quantity of food that we takedetermine our thoughts and feelings. There is indeedan intimate connection between “food, head, and God”.Sathwic food is conducive to self-realisation, andliberation from the dualities and relativities of theworld.Rajasic food generates virulent thoughts. Byconsuming non-vegetarian food we develop brutalmentalities. Those who are practising meditation mustabstain from meat. We should also remember constantlythat ahimsa or non-violence is the supreme dharma. Itis sin to kill innocent animals for the sake of filling ourstomachs. We must remember that God dwells in allcreatures. “Isa vasyam idam sarvam” (All this ispervaded by God), says the Isa Upanishad. The truth ofthis aphorism can be experienced through meditation.“Udaranimittam bahukrita vesham”—for thesake of the stomach, men don different guises. Like thechameleon, they change their colours according to thedemands of the situation. They become opportunists andhypocrites. In the end, they try to justify theiropportunism and rationalise their hypocrisy. Theydelude themselves by this policy of expediency andtime-serving. Such people can never follow the path ofmeditation. It should not be supposed that the path ofmeditation is easy and artificial. If dhyana is easy, whyshould the great sages of our country have mortifiedthemselves for the attainment of moksha? Some moderntechniques of meditation claim to achieve nirvikalpasamadhi instantaneously. Dhyana is mistaken fortemporary freedom from worries. If this sort ofanaesthesia is needed, one can become tipsy by drinkingliquor. Dhyana is not a state of inebriety or amnesia.Dhyana is a state of complete identification with one’sdheya or object of meditation. It is a state of totalspiritual empathy. Today, many artificial and distortedmethods of meditation are being popularised. Studentsmust beware of them because they are all unprofitableand potentially dangerous.There are three gunas: sathwa, rajas, and thamas.There are three eyes: the two physical eyes and the133 134Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
invisible spiritual eye. There are three times: the past,the present and the future. And there are the three worlds.The unity of these triads is vouchsafed to the spiritualaspirant during his transcendental state of meditation.Then sin and sorrow are annihilated. Sath-Chith-Ananda(Existence-Consciousness-Bliss) is experienced throughmeditation and complete self-surrender. This is theessence of dhyana. Today, a number of rites and ritualsare being performed as a part of sadhana. These areonly aids to concentration. They are not of much use fortrue dhyana. Correct posture, the right type of food andthe right place are only aids to dharana or concentration.Sathwic food, sathsanga, etc., assist the sadhaka to someextent. They develop the habit of concentration. Ourefforts should not end here. Concentration should befollowed up by contemplation and meditation.There should be an element of reciprocity in allhuman and personal relations. Love, sympathy,compassion and affection are always mutual. Theycannot thrive in isolation. They atrophy and vanishwherever selfishness and jealousy manifest themselves.We must discharge our duties in a spirit of self-surrenderwithout consideration for wealth or recognition.Prema (love) is the greatest sadhana (spiritualactivity). Prema is not mere reciprocal love. It is anextended and sublimated form of self-love. It is theextension of love to humanity and to the entire creation.The essence of prema as a sadhana lies in the cultivationof humanitarianism, universal compassion and altruism.Nobody can become a saint or a sage overnight.We must start early, drive slowly and reach the goalsafely. Haste makes waste and waste creates worry. Atrue sadhaka must develop the qualities of patience andpersistence in order to reach the ultimate goal of spiritualenlightenment.135 136Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
The Four States Of Consciousness
Brahman is the One that defies positiveidentification and description; the One thatcan be indicated only by negations anddenials; the One that is Eternal andInfinite: Being Awareness Bliss Absolute.
The one all-pervasive Brahman permeates theentire universe of animate and inanimateobjects. This all-inclusive Brahman has assumed theaudible form of the primordial word AUM. There arefour inseparable elements in this Supreme Parabrahman.They are Viswa, Taijasa, Prajna, and Turiya.Jagrathavastha, the wakeful state is the state ofnormal consciousness and is concerned with the grossworld of matter. It brings empirical knowledge of thephenomenal world acquired through sensations andperceptions. It has several means of knowing. Theseconsist of the karmendriyas (the five organs of action),the jnanendriyas (the five organs of perception), the fivepranas (vital energies), manas (mind), buddhi (intellect),chitta (consciousness), and ahankara (ego). In thejagrathavastha these nineteen aspects of sensational orempirical knowledge are integrated. It is essentially thisknowledge which hankers after the pleasures of thematerial world. Swapnavastha, the dream state of consciousnesshas the subconscious faculty of recognising and gettingan inkling of the holy experience of divinity and sanctity.It is concerned with the subtler aspects of humanknowledge and experience. It carries with it subtlerimpressions of the experiences of the jagrathavastha.Prajna and turiyavastha assume differentcharacteristics. Prajnavastha is a transcendental stateof consciousness in which the dichotomy betweengrossness and subtlety disappears insuperconsciousness. It is pure prajna or consciousnessof Divinity. In prajnavastha, the differentiating anddiversifying faculties of the mind become inoperative.That is why it is said that prajnana is Brahman. To helpman reach this summit of Divinity, Krishna hasexpounded in the Bhagavad Gita the sadhana of dhyana,the path of meditation. In prajnavastha, all mundanedesires and dream-wishes are sublimated into the blissof spiritual experience. The lambent light of prajnanashines steadily in this state of higher consciousness.137 138
18Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
The turiyavastha is the highest state ofconsciousness in which the essential nature of the Atmais experienced. Santam (tranquillity), sivam (goodness)and sdwaitham (nonduality) are experienced by thesadhaka. The turiyavastha is a pure, tranquil and steadystate of superconsciousness in which all discriminatingand differentiating gunas (attributes) are transcended anddissolved in the eternal and absolute reality of Brahman.Omkar is the fusion of the three primal sounds,A, U, and M. These three letters represent respectivelythe jagrata, the swapna, and the sushupti states ofconsciousness. They also symbolise Brahma, Vishnu,and Maheshwara. This trinity represents the threepersonified realities corresponding to theaforementioned three states of consciousness. In agarland of beads, a string passes through them and holdsthem together. In a similar manner, Brahman passesthrough all jivas and makes them interdependent andinterrelated.Sakshatkara is the immediate, intimate, andunitive apprehension of the absolute, supreme, andintegral reality of Brahman. It is a mystical experiencebeyond mind, space and time. Dhyana is an aid tosakshatkara. The eye cannot see itself. Similarly, theAtma also cannot see itself. If a doll made of salt issunk into the sea for finding its depth, the doll getsdissolved in the water and becomes irrecoverable. In asimilar manner, the jivatma in search of the Paramatmaloses its individuality and identity. Brahman is anunfathomable ocean. A jiva thatgoes in search ofBrahman becomes one with Brahman. Atma andParamatma are ontologically identical and non-dual.They are only aspects of the highest state ofconsciousness.In dhyana, manas (mind), buddhi (intellect), andthe various indriyas (senses) are transcended by meansof self-control. All dualities, dichotomies, differences,and relativities disappear in the superconscious state ofdhyana. Dhyana is synonymous with the unitiveknowledge of the Godhead. It is a divyadarshana, avision of and a path to the Divine. It leads to Sath-chith-ananda or the integral reality of Existence-consciousness-bliss. It grants nityananda, or everlastingbliss and confers Atmananda or the blissof the Atma. It helps man attain paramananda orsupreme bliss, and adwaitananda, or the bliss of non-duality.Krishna said, “Ahamatma Gudakesa”. Krishnawho is Hrishikesa addressed Arjuna as Gudakesa.Hrishikesa is the Lord, the Master of all senses. Arjunais Gudakesa, the one who has acquired sense-control.Gudakesa is the disciple of Hrishikesa. The Lord of thesenses is the Supreme Guru and the one who hasacquired control of the senses is His sishya. Krishna isthe Supreme Guru and Arjuna is His sincere sishya.Arjuna is Narottama, the ideal human being; and Krishna139 140Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
is Purushottama, the Supreme Purusha or God. Today,there may be good gurus, but there are no sincere sishyas.This is the influence of Kali on human beings. Peopleremember and repeat the name of Krishna, but they donot put His teachings into practice.Once upon a time there was a noble guru. He hada disciple. One afternoon, the guru who had gonesomewhere, returned home in the hot sun. The disciplewas then performing the guru’ s worship. The guru hadarrived in the blazing heat of the sun. His bare feet werebeing scorched by the hot earth. He asked the discipleto open the door and let him in. The disciple, who wasreciting the ashtothara of his guru  said that he shouldnot be disturbed during the puja. He did not open thedoor until he had finished the puja. The poor guru hadto stand in the hot sun until the disciple had completedhis worship. We find many such foolish disciples today.What is the use of worshipping the guru but causinghim pain? There are many devotees who worshipKrishna without caring for His teachings.Every individual must recognise the truth thatthere is only one Parameswara for all. God may beconceived in many ways. Brahman may be either sagunaor nirguna. Saguna Brahman is Brahman with attributesand Nirguna Brahman is Brahman without attributes.There is no essential difference between the two, justas there is no substantial difference between a piece ofcloth and cotton. Nirguna Brahman is like the cotton,the basic substance, while Saguna Brahman is like thefabric, the derivative. Saguna Brahman and NirgunaBrahman are only two levels of Reality.A beam of light falling on a prism is refracted. Asa result of refraction, we see the different colours of thespectrum. The colours of the spectrum are different, butthe light is only one. Similarly there may be variousnames and forms of the ultimate Reality. Brahman isone and its manifestations are many.A sadhaka will have several types of experiencesduring meditation. When he is absorbed in Divinity helistens to many kinds of sounds. He develops a sort ofextrasensory perception. He listens to the sounds ofmusical instruments like the veena, mirdangam andflute. These sweet strains of music are symbolic of SakaraBrahman. They are the first results of dhyana. Duringthe preliminary stages of dhyana, all sensory organsbecome hypersensitive. This acute sensitivity enablesthe sadhaka to respond to extraordinary sights andsounds. In course of time, this faculty of hypersensitivityor extrasensory perception develops into the highestfaculty of listening to the V oice of Silence itself. Thereis sabda in nissabda (the V oice of Silence). It is theprimordial sound of Easwara’ s Pranava. The sadhakalistens to the repetition and reiteration of the Primal Voiceof Aum. He experiences the ineffable and inexplicablebliss of the turiya state of superconsciousness.During profound meditation, some sadhakas feel141 142Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
that their bodies have become very heavy and cannotmove freely. Some others experience a feeling ofextreme lightness and levitate upwards. Some sadhakashave a sensation of trembling and shivering. Thetenacious and steady-minded sadhaka will not beunnerved by these supernormal experiences. He willcontinue his sadhana unhampered by his fantasticexperiences.Ramakrishna Paramahamsa went through allthese stages of dhyana, from sakara to nirakara (fromforms to formlessness). During his spiritual evolution,the Divine Mother revealed Herself to him as Kali. Butthe Atma is formless. That is why the sadhaka is advisedto leave behind all forms and names and strive for theexperience of the Formless Brahman. The absoluteBrahman without form and attributes gives the highestspiritual ecstasy. The sadhaka is entranced andenraptured by the divine afflatus of Nirguna Brahman.He experiences perfect bliss. This superconscious stateof meditation transcends all dualities. It is a state ofunitive knowledge of the Brahman. It is everlasting andtranscends all attributes and feelings.A novice must start with meditation on SagunaBrahman. He must observe all restrictions. He shouldbe regular and punctual in his sadhana. A young saplingmust be protected from animals. A fence must be putaround it until it grows into a big tree. The fencebecomes unnecessary after it becomes a huge tree.Similarly, rules and regulations are necessary forbeginners in sadhana. An advanced sadhaka does notdepend on external props. He can go into a trancewhenever he likes. Meditation becomes spontaneousand habitual.Dhyana should be distinguished from dharana.Dharana is mere concentration. The first stage ofconcentration should be followed up by contemplationand absorption. This absorption leads to meditation.Dhyana is not the monopoly of any particular religion.It is a universal and pragmatic programme for gainingthe unitive knowledge of the Godhead.143 144Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Saranagati Thathwa
The quintessential teaching of all the Vedasand the scriptures is that man should feelhis identity with the One Atma that ispresent in all beings.
Arjuna! The one who sees Me in all and all inMe is dear to Me, whatever be his way oflife”, declared Krishna. “That person who worships Methrough all creatures merges in Me!” The Gitacharyacontinued and said, “There is a limit for dhyana, but notfor the benefits conferred by it, the siddhi. Dhyanaendows man with jnana or supreme wisdom.”Jnana is not mere intellectual gymnastics. It isnot a flight of imagination. Neither is it a mentalconcoction. It is a continual experience of the reality ofthe Atma. “Only one in a million makes an attempt torealise the Atma. Even among them only one in athousand understands the process of realising the Atma.Among the thousands of such people only one reachesMe. Those who have achieved self-realisation and mergedin Me are very few indeed,” said Krishna to Arjuna.Success in jnana yoga depends upon anindividual’s deservedness. In a running race, only onerunner comes first. Similarly, there may be thousandsof flowers on the branches of a tree, but very few becomefruits. People are of different sorts. There are the theists,the atheists, the agnostics, the slothful people, the yogis,the hedonists, the stoics, the cynics, the saints and thesinners. Each individual occupies a particular positionin the world in accordance with his samskaras or thepsychical and spiritual characteristics acquired duringprevious lives.Prakruthi consists of earth, water, fire, air, ether,mind, intellect and ego. Beyond this Prakruthi, however,there is a higher realm known as paraprakruthi.Every person must grasp the meanings ofPrakruthi and paraprakruthi. It is throughparaprakruthi that man becomes Divine. Prakruthibinds man to the world. Paraprakruthi divinizes him.Prakruthi is concrete, corporeal and tangible.Paraprakruti is abstract, incorporeal and intangible. TheImmanent Atma also is incorporeal and intangible. It issubsistent beyond mind, space and time. But it can beintuitively and mystically experienced by following thepath of Yoga.145 146
19
“Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
A vessel contains milk. You cannot see the butterseparately in the milk. Does it mean that the milk doesnot contain butter? Boil the milk and then curdle it.Churn the curds and the butter in it will come to thesurface. Thus, milk contains butter though it cannot beobtained without subjecting the milk to the process ofboiling, fermenting and churning. Similarly, sugarcanecontains sugar. But it has to be pressed and twisted inorder to squeeze the juice out of it. So also, there iswater in the deeper layers of the earth and oil in themustard seed. To get the water you have to dig a welland to get the oil you have to press and crush the mustardseed.Prakruthi is a vessel; sadhana is the churning-rod and jnana is the rope wound round the churning-rod of sadhana. Pull the rope of jnana and churnPrakruthi with the churning rod of sadhana and theDivinity that is latent in Prakruthi will show forth. Somepeople are too slothful to make an effort and go onarguing that God is non-existent. Every human heartcontains the wish-fulfilling tree (kalpatharu) of divinity.It has also the wish-fulfilling sacred cow (kama dhenu).Our karmas are solely responsible for all the badthat accrues to us and the merit we acquire. Sinful karmacan be destroyed by meritorious karma. Sins arenegative while merits are positive. A negative integerlike “-5” can be nullified only by adding “5” or a biggerpositive number. The negative effect of sinful activitiescan be neutralised only by the positive effect ofmeritorious actions.There are two methods of spiritual progress,namely, the vidhwamsaka marga or the destructive pathand the vidhayaka marga or the constructive path. Ifyou want to cultivate a field, you have to first pull outall the weeds and level the land. Then follow irrigation,ploughing and fertilising. This sort of work isdestructive. Sowing which is constructive and creativecomes next. Similarly, the human heart can yield thecrop of Ananda or divine Bliss only when all the evilthoughts in it are first weeded out and it is filled withpure love. Undesirable qualities such as hatred, negativecriticism, the habit of blaming others and finding faultwith them have to be given up. A cynic cannotappreciate goodness and nobility. It is his misfortune.It is only when the heart is purged of all vices that it canoverflow with love. The plant of prema can be nurturedonly in the field of the pure, immaculate heart. Theseprocesses of destruction are indispensable for spiritualadvancement. The purified sadhaka whose heart is fullof love and compassion, can traverse the path ofmeditation for gaining the unitive knowledge of theGodhead with ease and felicity.Wisdom lies in the practical application oftheoretical knowledge to life and its problems. You maymemorise all the seven hundred verses of the BhagavadGita, recite the Vedas or read the Puranas, but all these147 148Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
will be of no avail unless you put into practice the sacredteachings contained in them. The assiduous study of thescriptures will be a futile exercise if the truthspropounded in them are not translated into action.People make obeisance to the book of theBhagavad Gita. They place it to their eyes inreverential homage and worship it, carry it on theirheads and speak about it with evangelistic fervour!They adore the material book and its pages but not itscontent. The book is idolised, but the subject matter isneglected. So, also, theoretical study is emphasised,whereas its practical application is ignored. These areinexcusable vices.Divinity is embodied in all creatures and thisfundamental truth should be exemplified in practice byman. He must extend the field of his love until itencompasses the entire creation. It is only then that hewill deserve to be a worthy recipient of God’s love.For eighty-four years Krishna and Arjuna hadbeen playmates and friends. They had lived, played andsung together ever since their childhood, yet Krishnahad never expounded the Bhakthi Yoga, the Karma Yoga,or the Jnana Yoga to Arjuna till the time of the battle ofKurukshetra. The essence of the Bhagavad Gita wasexpounded by Krishna to Arjuna on the battlefield inthe midst of the clash of arms and din created by thewarring soldiers. What is the inner significance ofKrishna choosing the battlefield as the venue for makingthe grand spiritual annunciation of the Bhagavad Gita?Till the Kurukshetra battle was fought, Arjuna had beencompletely engrossed in the pursuit of worldly pleasuresand was preoccupied with mundane matters. He hadspent all his life in search of power, pelf and prestige,but, on the eve of the battle, he swooned and foundhimself thrown into a mood of despondency. To him,the world appeared to be a great vanity fair. He lostinterest in everything and experienced a profoundfeeling of emptiness, futility and despair. He felt that itwas a sin to fight against his kinsmen, friends, eldersand teachers. He felt like beating a retreat and goingaway from the battlefield. He was filled with agony andanguish and doubt and despair. Waging a war againsthis own cousins seemed to him the deadliest sin. Hedid not want the homicidal glory of this fratricidal war.“To fight or not to fight”—that was his problem. Findinghimself on the horns of this great dilemma, he said toKrishna, “I have lost my power of discrimination. Icannot distinguish good from evil. I am robbed of myreason and do not know what to do. I am facing a gravemoral and spiritual crisis. I surrender everything untoyou. Save me from this predicament.” Arjuna thusbecame a saranagata (one who has surrendered) andprostrated before Krishna. In this situation of completeself-surrender, Arjuna attained one-pointedness. Hequalified himself to receive Krishna’s gospel of life.Krishna apparently waited for this right moment toexpound the great Song Celestial.149 150Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Three qualifications are essential for listening tothis exposition of the Bhagavad Gita: surrender(saranagati), one-pointedness (ekagrata), and thesacrifice of worldly desires (vairagya). Saranagati istotal self-surrender wherein the devotee lays down hisbody, mind, heart and soul at the lotus feet of the DivineMaster. Ekagrata is one-pointedness of the mind whenthe devotee gives his undivided attention to the Lord’sannunciation. To be initiated into the esoteric spirit ofthe Bhagavad Gita, the saranagata must also possessthe qualities of selfless love and sacrifice.The importance of dhyana should also berecognised. Dhyana is an infallible aid to spiritualprogress. Freedom from the consequence of karma canbe attained through dhyana. This freedom enables thesadhaka to acquire santhi or inner tranquillity. Thesweetness of the experience of inner tranquillity isderived from the fruits of dhyana. The modern manseeks santhi, but he is treading the perilous path ofviolence and conceit. His mind is restless and his hearttumultuous. The reason for this can be traced to hisprarabdha karma or the accumulated karma of his pastlives. Prarabdha karma pursues man like the hound ofhell. The accumulated dead-weight of prarabdha karmacan be destroyed only by satkarma or good actions inthe present life. To remove obnoxious odours, perfumesare used. However, the bad smell is not really removed.It is only mitigated by the fragrance of the perfume. Inthe same manner, the deleterious effects of past karmascan be suppressed and neutralised by the wholesomeeffects of present satkarmas.Karma can be wiped out by karma alone. It isonly a diamond that can cut another diamond. A thorncan be pulled out only by using another thorn. The powerof dharana (concentration and determination) enablesthe sadhaka to banish all evil from his heart and enthronevirtue in its place. Dharana leads to dhyana. In otherwords, concentration leads to contemplation andassimilation and these, in turn, lead to meditation.151 152Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
The Practice Of Meditation
Man’ s life is like a bug-infested cot,His body is a den of diseases.How then can joy be his?Embodiments of the Divine Atma!
In our daily lives, we see that the same objectassumes different forms and names. The sameseed develops into the trunk, the branches, the twigs,the leaves, the flowers and the fruits of a tree withdistinct forms and names and displaying differentqualities. Similarly, the same gold takes the form ofvarious jewels and one flame brings into being aninfinite number of flames of several hues. In the verysame manner, the Primal Light of Paramatma is one,but it manifests itself as the Atma in all beings of theuniverse. It is essential that we discern this unity indiversity.Clay is moulded into a pot and gold is shapedinto a jewel. A lump of clay cannot become a pot withoutthe help of a potter. Neither can a piece of gold betransformed into a jewel without a goldsmith. Similarly,to make a train run there should be a driver; and for theautomatic traffic lights to operate, there has to be acontrolling device. So also, for this vast, complex andintricate universe, there should be someone who hascreated it and has been controlling it.Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect andego are the primal substances out of which the universeis made. Mud or clay is the basic substance out of whichthe pot is made and is, therefore, the material cause forthe pot. The potter without whose sankalpa (thought)and involvement the pot cannot arise, is its efficientcause. Similarly; prakruthi is the material cause for theuniverse and Brahman is its efficient cause. It is theWill of Brahman that has created the myriad facets ofthis dynamic universe with its multifarious forms andinnumerable objects. Yet, we must remember that it isBrahman that has manifested itself in all this infinitude.Krishna exhorted Arjuna to ignore the diversity in unityand discern the unity in diversity. We have tocomprehend the non-dual Atmic nature of this world ofmultiplicity.Dhyana enables man to cognise this unity anddiscern both the Immanence and the Transcendence ofBrahman. For meditation to be most effective, it should153 154
20Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
be performed at a fixed time and at a fixed place everyday, and according to a well-regulated procedure.Sometimes this routine may be upset, as, for example,when you have to go on a journey—it may not bepossible to perform meditation at the usual place oraccording to the normal procedure. Nevertheless, onemust ensure that at the usual appointed hour every day,the meditation is performed steadfastly. If the meditationis done at the correct time every day, the mind will takethe subtle body to the usual environs and make theindividual go through the prescribed regulationsinwardly, thereby cutting away any possible feelings ofalienation that could crop up at new places.The ideal time for engaging oneself in meditationis Brahma Muhurtham, that is, the period commencingat 3 a.m. and ending with 6 a.m. early in the morning.Brahma Muhurtham literally means the time ofBrahman. You must choose a fixed time for meditationduring the Brahma Muhurtham and meditate regularlyat the same time every day.Adopting a comfortable posture, you have to sitstraight so that the kundalini power is affordedunhampered movement. The kundalini power is presentin man in the mooladhara chakra as a divinely radiantpower. Its upward flow to the sahasrara chakra or thethousand-petalled lotus, through the intermediarycentres called the swadhishtana, manipura, anahata,visuddha, and ajna chakras corresponding respectivelyto the regions of the navel, stomach, heart, larynx, andthe bhrumadhya sthana or the region between theeyebrows, takes man to various levels of consciousnessand spiritual awakening.During meditation, the sadhaka should neithershut his eyes completely nor open them wide. He shouldgaze at the tip of his nose with half-closed eyes andconcentrate on the divine radiant power at the Ajnachakra. In this blissful mood, he has to keep his handsin the chinmudra, with the thumb and index fingerjoined at their ends and the other three fingers of boththe hands kept apart. The thumb represents Brahman.The forefinger represents the jiva. chinmudra is symbolicof the proximity of Brahman and the jiva. The jiva incombination with its gunas is conditioned by time. God,however, is beyond time and, therefore, all gunas vanishwhen the jiva and God become one.The purpose of dhyana is to unite the jiva withEaswara. The essence of triputi is the integral, unitivereality of jiva (man), Easwara (God) and lrakruthi(world). The divinity of the individual and the unity indiversity can be visualised by adopting the chinmudraduring meditation.This blissful experience can also be gained byrenouncing the desire for the fruits of karma. Nishkamakarma creates a special bond of love between the Creatorand the jiva. Let us suppose that we have engaged acoolie in our garden. He works perfunctorily from155 156Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
morning to evening, collects his wages and goes away.He never really worries himself about the garden. Atthe same time, a housewife toils throughout the day andthough she is not paid anything, she performs her dutieswith selfless devotion expecting nothing from herhusband. The coolie can never be dear to the master ofthe house as the housewife is. So, too, one who performsaction without desire for its results is alone dear to God.The body is born for the performance of karma.Kala (time) should be spent by man in the performanceof sacred acts. Time is divine, God is extolled as “KalaSwarupaya namaha.” Therefore, we must utilise timefor performing good karma without aspiring for thefruits thereof. The renunciation, however, must be total,not merely superficial.There was a gentleman who had renouncedeverything and became an ascetic. Once as he sat inmeditation on the banks of the river Ganges, a touristbus came to halt there. The ascetic heard the touristsspeaking in Kannada. He at once stopped his meditationand went towards them. “Where do you come from?”he asked them. They replied, “We come fromKarnataka.” The man felt very happy because Karnatakawas the state from which he hailed. He became veryfond of the tourists because they came from his ownstate and spoke his own language. He felt so glad thathe made further enquiries. He came to know that theyhad come from his own district, his own taluq, his ownvillage, and even his own street. They were, in fact, hisneighbours! He was swept by a wave of attachment andhe enquired about his father. He was informed that hisfather had died a few years earlier. Hearing this, theascetic, who thought that he had renounced allattachments, broke down with grief. All his asceticismwas useless. Dhyana is of no avail if attachment to bodyand kith and kin continues to linger. The physical bodyhas to be dedicated to the performance of nishkamakarma for the benefit of others.You have to try and experience in meditation theoneness of the Sarvatma (cosmic soul) and the ekatma(individual soul). Ekagrata (one-pointedness) for asingle moment does not amount to dhyana (meditation).Meditation is sustained concentration and identificationwith the dhyeya (the object of meditation). If you givefood to a dog continuously for ten days at a particulartime, it will come regularly and punctually every daythereafter. A dog’s loyalty is well known. Faith is veryimportant. In fact, viswasa (faith) is like our swasa (life-breath). In other words, faith is our elan vital. Lifewithout faith is living death.In the beginning, meditation may be easy andinteresting. The first few steps will be encouraging. Butwhen you begin to ascend the higher steps of thestairway of dhyana, unforeseen obstacles will crop up.However, one should not get disheartened by theseunexpected hurdles. They must be taken in their stride157 158Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
with courage and conviction. A person should notundertake the sadhana of dhyana without the strong willto do so.For the weak-minded persons there is an easieralternative, that of nishkama karma. They have to sowthe seeds of love in their hearts. They must radiate prema(divine, selfless love) and compassion. Pure lovepromotes peace and harmony among human beings.Selfless love puts jealousy and malice to flight. Whenthe heart is filled with love, there will be no room forhatred. When love is directed towards God it isspiritualized and sublimated into devotion. Man’s heartis like a “musical chair” on which only one can sit. Allowprema to occupy this chair and meditate on God.
Control Of The Mind
Bliss is the experience when the soul isknown;Anguish, if the Truth remains unknown.The Knower of God verily becomes HIM.Embodiments of the Divine Atma!
The kundalini sakthi lies dormant in themooladhara chakra beneath the navel inman. In order to awaken it, he should undertake dhyana.The awakened kundalini proceeds from the mooladharachakra to the sahasrara chakra (thousand-petalled lotus)through the swadishtana, manipura, anahata,vishuddha, and sjna chakras.The aspirant should sit in the padmasana withhis head, neck and spine in one straight line, as it were,to facilitate the smooth and unimpeded movement ofthe kundalini power. Some hold the view that while159 160
21Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
engaged in dhyana the gaze should be fixed at the pointbetween the two eyebrows. However, the Gita advisesus to fix upon the tip of the nose (nasagra) and tocontemplate upon the Lord who resides in our hearts.To experience the true delight of dhyana, the sadhakashould not shut his eyes completely, as this would inducehim to laya or sleep. They should be kept half-open asthis would help eradicate the rajasic and the thamasicgunas.It is often the experience of the one who is newlyinitiated into the path of dhyana, that he is not able toenjoy fully the bliss of dhyana for want of mentaltranquillity. His mind, as a result of the intimateassociation it has had with the external world, with allits fantasies and temptations, is unable to fix itselfsteadily on the object of meditation. The first imperativein dhyana, therefore, is the proper channelisation ofthoughts in the desired direction through mind control.“Practice makes man perfect.” To gain perfectioneven in the most ordinary and routine acts like walking,reading or writing constant practice is necessary. Theprocess of dhyana too, calls for steadfast and sincerepractice.The first step in controlling the mind consists inimpressing upon it the fact that the world is transientand that, consequently, the pleasures derived therein aremomentary. Sensory pleasures give no contentment. Themore the sensory desires are satisfied, the more theygrow in number and intensity, just as the fire increasesin fury as we feed it with more and more faggots.The mind has no independent identity of its own.It is a conglomeration of the desires that sprout fromthe impulses. A cloth is essentially a bundle of threads.Threads, in their turn are basically cotton. Similarly,desires arise from basic impulses and the mind isconstituted of these desires. Just as a piece of clothdisintegrates if threads in it are pulled apart, the mindtoo can be destroyed by the eradication of desires.The heart can be compared to the sky, the mind,to the moon, and the intellect, to the sun. The thoughtsthat are generated in the mind are like the clouds thatpass away. The cause for one’s happiness and misery orpleasure and pain lies in his thoughts. However, thesetwin ideas of happiness and misery or pleasure and painobtain relevance only in the world of dualities. Just asthe camera gives photographic impressions of theobjects upon which it is focused, the mind absorbs theimpressions of the objects it is directed at. The more itis directed towards the world of sensory pleasures, thefarther it takes man away from God. An episode in theRamayana clearly illustrates this.Sita, accompanying Lord Rama, went to the forestin an attitude of total renunciation of the world.However, she was enchanted by the golden deer in theforest and desired it. This desire separated her from LordRama and she had to languish in Lanka.161 162Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Sita is the divine daughter of Mother Earth. Sheknew fully well that the golden deer in the forest wasnot real. But she chose to play this drama to warn manof the dangers wrought by a mind that hankers afterworldly possessions.The seeker in his practice of dhyana, should not,therefore, be pulled by the fanciful vagaries of the mind.For the pursuit of dhyana, purity of heart is essential.Man should realise that the same Atma activates allcreatures. He should share the joys and sorrows of othersas if they are his own. When man develops this feelingof spiritual empathy, he becomes eligible to attainDivinity through the pursuit of dhyana.Man’s greatness is not revealed in the mightytasks that he undertakes ostentatiously. It is displayedrather in the little acts executed with absolute sincerityand largeness of heart. We must seek to sanctify everylittle work we perform with a sense of dedication toGod.What is the cause of man’s misery? Is sorrownatural to man or is it a mere artefact? Ignorance is theultimate cause of sorrow. Attachment arises fromignorance and leads to birth, which may be called theimmediate cause of sorrow. We must, therefore, striveto remove our ignorance and avoid sorrow. Sorrow isnot natural to man. Were it so, its elimination wouldhave led to the extinction of the human nature. The babybubbling over with joy in its cradle points to the factthat joy is natural to man. With the child playing happilyin its cradle, the mother nonchalantly carries on withthe household chores. But a sudden cry from the babymakes the mother give up her work and rush to it andsearch for an insect or an ant that could possibly havemade the baby cry.We never ask anyone why he is happy; on theother hand, we ask a troubled man the reason for hissorrow. Joy is indeed the natural state of man and sorrowis unnatural to him. Human life must radiate joy andhappiness; to think otherwise is the result of ignorance.We must recognise and proclaim the real nature ofhuman life and its innate divinity by observing certaindisciplinary regulations.Krishna taught the path of Truth to all mankindthrough Arjuna. “Arjuna” means purity and sanctity.There is a renowned place of pilgrimage namedSrisailam in Andhra Pradesh. A great shrine whereEaswara is worshipped as Mallikarjuna with His consortas Bhramaramba. If we grasp the inner significance ofthese two names, we shall be in a position to understandthe inner meaning of life. Mallika is jasmine andArjuna means pure and white. Parvathi, the mother ofthe world is compared to a bhramara or a dark bee. Thusthe Divine Mother, who is like the dark bee, enters theheart of Easwara, who resembles the pure and whitejasmine, and drinks the nectar of His love. The bee ofour mind must enter the flower of our heart and drink163 164Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
the nectar of the grace of Easwara installed therein.Often we refer to the “brotherhood of man” as anideal. But there are several brothers who quarrel amongthemselves and carry their litigation even up to theSupreme Court. To recognise the oneness of the Spiritis an even higher ideal than that of the brotherhood ofman. Therefore, seekers must strive to go beyond thelevel of brotherhood of man and realise throughexperience that the same Atma dwells in all creatures.
Akshara Brahman—The Universal God
Whom the Muslims call Allah,The Christians address as Jehovah,The Vaishnavites adore as Phullabjaksha(Lotus-eyed Vishnu),The Saivites worship as Sambhu,Whom people at all time regard withdevotion,He who bestows wealth and prosperity onallHe is our Saviour!Know that He is the one and onlyParamatma.Embodiments of love!
People give various forms and names to Godaccording to the type of devotion they165 166
22Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
practise. In modern times, however, a universal conceptof God acceptable to all religious traditions is necessary.The monistic concept of Divinity expounded to Arjunaby Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita harmonises theteachings of all religions and reconciles all traditions.Akshara means a letter. But etymologically,akshara means something that is imperishable. Aksharais the Form; Aumkara, its Name, and spirituality, its,content. It is a universally acceptable Form of Truth. Itsswabhava or intrinsic nature is not the interaction ofthe trigunas, or the three primordial attributes, but isDivya Prakruthi or Divine Nature from which emanatesthe entire universe. This monistic divine Atma manifestsmultiplicity in the world and this is the Gita concept ofGod. The monistic  Atma undergoes no change; it neitherincreases nor decreases. That is why it has beendesignated as akshara or the imperishable. It is anundecaying integral reality.Unity is the primal number. “One” contains allother numbers and all numbers can be derived from“one.” We have to recognise the inner significance ofthis fact. All other numbers are not different from “one”.They are only forms of “one”. For example, “four”contains four ones or 1 + 1 + 1 + 1=4. If you add 1 to 4,you get 5. In such arithmetical processes, numbers eitherincrease or decrease in their value. But number “1”remains an integral number without any change ormodification.While the phenomenal world is subject to changeand decay, the divine Reality is indestructible. Aksharasymbolises the indestructible divine Reality. All religioustraditions proclaim that God the manifestation ofakshara is eternal and people of all faiths accept thisidea. The so-called theological differences are not reallyfundamental. Aum is the primordial akshara and all theother letters are its derivatives. The divine letter Aumrepresents the Parabrahman. The comprehension of theessence of the Parabrahman is known as Brahma Vidyaor the knowledge of Brahman. That is why the eighthchapter of the Bhagavad Gita has been given the titleof Akshara Parabrahma Yoga.Secular knowledge is no doubt necessary forgetting on in life. The Bliss of spirituality cannot beachieved without the minimal necessities of life. Butsecular knowledge is not the be-all and end-all of humanexistence. Spiritual knowledge is, as a matter of fact,more important than material knowledge. All branchesof human knowledge are like rivers and spirituality islike the unfathomable and uncharted ocean. Just as therivers flow into the sea and merge in it, all secularknowledge fulfils itself in spiritual knowledge.The primordial nature of akshara transcends allattributes. It is nirguna or devoid of all attributes, and itis niranjana or devoid of attachment. Every akshara orletter in Bhagavad Gita proclaims the transcendental andimmanent reality of the Paramatma.167 168Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
“O, Ignorant fool! Chant the name Govinda. Yourknowledge of grammar will not help you in the hour ofdeath,” said the great philosopher-saint Sankara. All ourencyclopaedic knowledge and profound scholarshipcannot rescue us from the certainty of life and death.There was once a very learned pundit who hadmastered all the Vedas and the Sastras. He set out oneday for a neighbouring village. On the way, he had toboard a boat to cross a river. To pass the time, he beganasking the boatman some questions. “Can you tell thetime by looking at a watch?” was the first query. Thesimple boatman replied that he could not. At this, thearrogant pundit laughed derisively and told the poorman that a quarter of the latter’s life was as good aswasted in the river.The next enquiry was whether the boatman couldread a newspaper. When the boatman confessed hisilliteracy, the proud pundit mockingly told him that halfof his life was lost in the river. The scholar then askedthe boatman if he could sing a song. Upon giving theanswer in the negative for the third time, the simpleboatman was derogatorily told that three-fourths of hisprecious life was sunk in the river, as it were. Aftersome time, the sky was overcast with dark clouds and aterrific wind began to blow. A fierce storm havingbroken out, the boat was being tossed hither and thitherby the swirling waters of the river. The boatman thenasked the proud pundit, “Sir, can you swim? If you can’t,the whole of your life has been wasted.” The haplesspundit could not swim. All his pedantry and scholarshipfailed to come to his rescue at this hour of need and hewas swept away by the current. The unlettered boatmanwho could swim like a fish crossed the river and reachedthe other bank safely.Samsara Sagara is the ocean of life. For crossingthe ocean of life safely, a person should develop faithin Paramatma. Spiritual awareness alone will enableus to swim across the perilous ocean of life.A person may follow any religion he likes or joinany sect he likes. But all people, consciously orunconsciously, chant Aumkara. There may bedenominational differences and the modes of worshipmay change. Each religion has its own set of dogmas.Muslims may not approve of the Hindu mode ofworship. Similarly, Christians may condemn the Muslimmode of worship. But those are only superficialdifferences. Akshara or the divine letter that representsthe imperishable substance of the divine monistic Realityis indisputable. It is the immutable and indestructiblereality of Divine Omnipresence.The division of the Bhagavad Gita into variouschapters is only meant to suit our convenience. Theentire text has an inseparable and indivisible organicunity. All the chapters are interdependent. The humanbody consists of various limbs and organs but theycannot, however, have an independent and isolated169 170Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
existence. In the same way, the Omnipresent DivineReality of the Paramatma constitutes the central themeof all the chapters of the Gita and interconnects them.Just as there is divine nature behind thephenomenal nature, there is also the divine mind behindthe phenomenal mind. True spirituality lies in therecognition and apprehension of the Divinity underlyingthe phenomenal world of mind and matter.The universe can be regarded as an integralnumber. Just as the primal number “1” is an integralpart of all other conceivable numbers, divinity issubstantial to the world. Similarly, Aum is the primordialakshara from which all other sounds and letters haveemanated. We must ultimately recognise and experiencethe one monistic and non-dualistic reality behind thephenomenal multiplicity of forms and names. We mustgive up attachment to the mutable and perishablephysical body in order to appreciate and apprehend thespiritual unity in material diversity. We must try andmerge with the akshara or the undecaying reality ofBrahman. We must go from darkness to light and fromdeath to immortality.The deha or the physical body is only an upadhior instrument. It is the spirit within which is the sakthior the witness. Karma cannot cease as long asattachment to the decaying body continues. Attachmentto the body should be substituted by the realisation ofthe reality of the Atma. The deha or the physical bodycomposed of the five elements, namely, earth, fire, water,air and ether, and subject to disease, decay, and death,cannot cross the ocean of samsara. That is why one mustsurrender himself at the Lotus Feet of God and realisethat he is not the deha (the mortal body) but the dehi(the divine Atma inhabiting the deha), not the sarira(body) but the sariri (the divine Atma residing in thesarira).Why should you buy an ordinary cow when youhave with you the kama dhenu, the wish-fulfilling divinecow? Why should you grow fond of a fruit tree in yourorchard when you have found the kalpatharu, the wish-fulfilling divine tree? Having found the Bliss of the Atma,why should you crave for the inferior pleasures of thebody?The sky is reflected in the water in a vessel. Whenthe vessel breaks, the image of the sky merges with thelimitless sky. So also, with the disintegration of thephysical body, the Atma merges with the Paramatma.Krishna exhorted Arjuna to meditate on the ImmutableAkshara in order to experience the Omnipresent Realityof the Paramatma. Reminding Arjuna of his role in thedivine drama of the universe, Krishna told him that hewas only an instrument of the Divine Will. He pouredthe nectar of the Gita into Arjuna’s being and grantedhim immortality.171 172Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
 AUM—The Name Of God
Born in water and momentarily floatingon it, the water-bubble disappears into thewater; Nara (man), likewise, emerges fromNarayana (God) and merges back into Him.Embodiments of Love!
The concept of the indestructibility of theSupreme Being or the Akshara aspect ofReality is acceptable to all religions and creeds. Thebasis for the acceptance of God as the Eternal Beingand as the Cosmic Enrapturer is His indestructibility.Aksharathwa or indestructibility is the Form of God andfor this indestructible God, Aum is the name. Aum, theprimordial Word, contains the essence of all the Vedasand is the source of all the Sastras. It provides the basisfor the core of all religious teaching and eclecticknowledge.Aum is comprised of three syllables, “A”, “U”and “M”, each of which has profound connotations. Aumis the primordial Word, which gives life (chaitanya) toall other words. All the Vedas, the Upanishads, and thePuranas have extolled the Pranava (Aum) in manyways.It is not possible for anyone to fully cognise oreven describe the integral form of the sacred word Aum.It is an integral word that stands for the Divine. It isSabda Brahmamayi (the audible form of Brahman),Charachara Mayi (pervading the universe of theanimate and inanimate beings), Jyothir Mayi(resplendent, divine Light), Vaang Mayi (Speech), Nity-ananda Mayi (Eternal Delight), Paratpara Mayi(Transcendental), Maya Mayi (the mother of mayaitself—the creative consciousness of Brahman), and SriMayi (Auspiciousness). Aum, thus, has the foregoingeight Aishwaryas or divine treasures. It is divinelyprecious and should be recognised as the Name of God.This world is kshara, subject to decadence anddestruction. Nevertheless, in this world, which isdestructible, the Akshara Parabrahman or theindestructible, transcendental Brahman manifests Itself.Brahman permeates the world (kshara), but Brahmanis not subject to kshara (destruction).In the pot you have mud. But in the mud, pots donot exist. Pots are the result of a process of kalpana(creation) and therefore perish. Yet, mud exists in the173 174
23Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
pots. A bubble of water arises from water because of theprocess of kalpana and hence dissolves back.Nevertheless, in the water-bubble too, water is presentas the film that envelopes the air within. In a similarmanner, the Akshara manifests itself in the creation andis present in it along with kshara. Aum demonstratesthis.In the Ramayana, Lakshmana, Bharatha andSatrughna exhibit the qualities associated respectivelywith the three syllables “A”, “U” and “M” of Aum. Aumitself is personified in Rama. In the Bhagavad Gita,Krishna declares that He is the Pranava (Aum) in theVedas—“Pranavasya sarva Vedeshu”. Patanjali hasextolled the Pranava as being an apt name for God,“Tasya vachakah Pranavah”. In the Hindu religion,there is no mantra or Sastra that does not have Aum asits basis. We should, therefore, try to understand theprofound significance of the sacred Pranava, theprimordial word.Aum is a Name of God which can find universalacceptance. The Christians say Amen in their prayersevery day. It is only a different form of Aum. Aum hasuniversal relevance and applicability. It cuts across allbarriers of time, place, religion and culture, and can beuttered by all men.Life is a mighty river and desires constitute itswater. Thoughts are the innumerable little waves in thisriver. Aspirations are the crocodiles that abound in itand illusions are its whirlpools. Only a yogi can crosssuch a terrible river, as he alone has gained control overthe modifications of the mind, “yogah chitta vrittinirodhah”, as Patanjali says.The flow of water in an ordinary river mayincrease or decrease, but the river of life, with ever-multiplying desires as its water, knows no decrease. Itmay become so wide as to be a boundless expanse ofuncontrollable, turbulent waters. To cross such a river,therefore, a boat is absolutely necessary. Aum, the nameof God, is the boat that takes you across this river. Theancient rishis had crossed the turbulent river of life withthe help of the boat of Pranava, with ease. Pranava hasthe power to save the world from pralaya (great deluge).In our worldly affairs, we follow several paths tofulfil our desires. In experiencing the fulfilment of ourdesires, we invariably pass through three stages. Theyare priyam, modam, and pramodam. Here is anillustration. You hear that some delicious mangoes areavailable in the market. This news itself gives you asense of pleasant anticipation and makes your mouthwater. This pleasure is really the experience of priyam.It is illusory and is brought about primarily by thoughtor imagination. Then, you go to the market and buy amango. The act of purchasing the mango also gives yousome pleasure or happiness called modam; this too,however, is not lasting and cannot satisfy you. Youfinally eat the mango and experience the joy of175 176Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
satisfaction. This is the ultimate experience of happinessand is called pramodam.But even this pramodam is not a lastingexperience so long as the object desired is a worldlyobject. Man gets real and everlasting happiness only ifhe desires for God and treads the Godward-path. Whenthe mind is steadfastly centred on the Lord, priyam,modam and pramodam acquire a divine character andconfer the Bliss of Immortality on man.In philosophical parlance, desiring, acquiring theobject desired and enjoying the object acquired (priyam,modam, and pramodam) are also regarded as relating tothe three stages of sravana (listening), manana(ruminating in the mind over what has been heard), andnididhyasana (imprinting in the heart what has beenruminated upon). Merely listening to sacred words willnot help. It should be followed by recapitulation anddeep contemplation.Sravana may be compared to the act of cookingin the kitchen, manana, to that of bringing the food tothe dining room, and nididhyasana, to that of eating thefood and absorbing it in the human body. It is only whenyou eat the food that you get nourishment. So also, onlynididhyasana can help you attain jnana.It is only when you follow this threefold path ofsravana, manana, and nididhyasana do you understandthe nature of the three gunas (sathwa, rajas, and thamas),visualise the forms of the Holy Trinity (Brahma, Vishnu,and Maheshwara), and recognise the transience of thethree worlds, that you can get the eternal Bliss of theAtma.Remember that you should merge in God evenas the bubble of water merges in the water whence itcomes from, and chant the Pranava within yourepeatedly!177 178Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
 The Perennial Philosophy
People have lost the fear of sin. Wickednesshas become rampant. Devotion to God hasdisappeared. Indescribable vice hasbecome the order of the day. Evenanchorites have become engrossed inworldly avocations. It is high time that manthought of the Lord and sought thepathway to HIM.
Indian mysticism and the perennial philosophyof spirituality are based on the Bhagavad Gita,which enshrines the quintessence of all the Upanishads.In those ancient times when modern empirical sciencehad not yet blazed a new trail, Vedic pundits had gainedan insight into nature. They had developed thetremendous faculties of the mind and even acquiredcontrol over natural phenomena. With the aid of theirhigher spiritual powers, they were able to harness thematerial forces of nature. They exemplified the triumphof mind over matter. India has inherited this spiritualtradition of the great rishis and holy men of antiquity.Knowledge of the Vedas enabled our ancientpundits to do good and to ward off evil. Karma Kanda,the chapter on rituals, consists of mantras or spiritualincantations. The Brahmanas also constitute animportant part of the Vedas and deal with the correctprocedures for performing yajnas and yagas. Beingceremonial rites for acquiring mundane pleasures, suchceremonies, however, cannot offer Atmananda or thepure bliss of the Atma. They can only enhance sensoryenjoyment and provide epicurean pleasures which areintrinsically transient. The search for the pure abidingbliss of the Atma led the ancient rishis to the solitude offorests. There they performed thapas for enlightenmentand liberation. These sages have communicated thespiritual wisdom revealed to them through theUpanishads. These mystical revelations are known asthe Upanishads because they take one closer to theDivine.Many regard the Upanishads as the end-portionof the Vedas and therefore designate them collectivelyas the Vedanta, the essence and acme of Indianmysticism. There is an intimate relationship betweenjnana (wisdom) and vidya (education). Education canbecome an aid to wisdom. Education impartsinformation that is formally known as knowledge.179 180
24Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Wisdom is the spiritualization and sublimation of thisknowledge. Real education should not end with theacquisition of knowledge alone, but should transformit into wisdom. True education should lead to liberationfrom the world of sorrow. But, modern education has,instead, a paradoxical effect on the individual. It hasled to the accretion of sorrow and not its elimination.As modern education has advanced, sorrow also hasincreased. With the explosion of education, the totalityof misery in the world has increased enormously.Modern education is thus not conducive to redemptionfrom dukha or worldly sorrow. The cause for thismultiplication of human sorrow may be traced to man’slack of faith in the essential unity underlying thephenomenal multiplicity. Selfishness, the source ofhuman sorrow, is a concomitant of ahamkara or egoism.mamakara is extended egoism or selfishness extendedto kith and kin and to personal belongings. Thecombination of ahamkara and mamakara results in mohaor attachment to the evanescent objects of the world.Jnana or spiritual wisdom is an immediate andintimate experience of the absolute, eternal and divineReality. Truth is one. It becomes false and self-contradictory if it involves dichotomies and relativities.The universe is not composed of two ontologicallydistinct substances.“Aum iti ekaksharam Brahma,” “Sathyam,Jnanam, Anantam Brahma.” Akshara means theundecaying, undying and imperishable substance.Akshara is the Absolute Reality. Jnana or spiritualwisdom is Akshara. Anantam or infinitude is alsoAkshara. The primordial Akshara is immanent in allAksharas. A vision of the primordial Akshara isvouchsafed to one who has acquired spiritual insight orto one who is endowed with the eye of spiritual wisdom.The trinity of sathyam, jnanam, and anantam (truth,wisdom, and infinitude) should be visualised as anintegral and inseparable Reality. The essence of spiritualwisdom lies in apprehending and experiencing theoneness of the trinity of sathyam, jnanam, and anantam.This mystical experience can be acquired by cultivatingsamyama or equanimity. Samyama is synonymous withthe control of sensory organs.Control over sensory organs can be attained byconstant, steady and systematic practice. It is theprivilege of man alone to overcome his natural instinctsand change his habits. The tiger in a circus can be taughtmany kinds of feats. However, it is by nature acarnivorous animal and can never be changed into amild, herbivorous animal. The tiger wants meat when itis hungry. Can a tiger ever eat puries instead of meat? Itis an instinct of the tiger to eat flesh. You cannot thinkof a vegetarian tiger. Instinct cannot be changed. Youmay feed a cat with milk and curds, but at the very sightof a rat, it will pounce on it and gobble it up. A cat’sinstinct is to eat rats.181 182Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Man has the ability to learn new things and tochange himself. Unlike animals, he is endowed withinfinite capacity for learning and can transform himselfinto a better person. He can sublimate and refine hisinstincts and give up his vicious habits. He can achieveanything by his own effort.Nevertheless, today we find man’s inhumanity toman everywhere. He has lost his capacity for pure andselfless love. If an ant sees a lump of jaggery, it will noteat it up selfishly. It brings all other fellow ants and eatsthe lump of jaggery in their company. It selflessly sharesits food with others. An ant is instinctively unselfish.But man is selfish in all his activities. He seems to behabitually narrow-minded and selfish.We look down upon the crow with contempt.When it caws near our houses, we pelt it with stones.But a crow never eats alone. It is the most gregariousbird. When it comes across a heap of rice it invites allother crows and shares the rice with them. What havethe ants read? What university degrees do the crowspossess? Every human being must learn the lesson ofmutual love and co-operation from ants and crows.Man does not live by bread alone. He lives bythe Atma. Bhakthi (devotion) and prapatti (surrender),and not bhukti (greed) and yukti (deceit), should formthe basis for man’s life and lead to the blossoming ofspiritual wisdom in his heart.Saint Ramdas was a great devotee of Rama andhe composed thousands of verses in His adoration. Hewanted to know which of them really appealed to Rama.However, he had no way of knowing and so he gatheredthe leaves of his manuscript and dropped them into theriver Godavari. All but a few leaves, containing ahundred verses, sank in the water. Only a hundredappealed to Rama as they were composed with sincerityof feeling and one-pointed attention. They were thegreatest compositions of Ramdas. They werespontaneous creations of a heart inspired by sinceredevotion and absolute self-surrender. The verses whichsank into the water were those composed by him withpride and for pomp. Sincerity is the essential criterionof devotional poetry. Bhakthi or devotion to God is notenough, it must be coupled with purity of heart.Sense-control too is a necessity. To stop a runningtrain or a bus, the brake has to be applied. An enginedriver brings the train to a halt by pulling a small lever.The sensory organs of man work at a tremendous speed.The terrific agitation to which our sensory organs aresubjected can be tranquillised almost instantaneously byfilling our hearts and minds with compassion and wisdom.Every person must cultivate universal compassion anddevelop pure love. He must undertake activities whichare dear to the Lord, who is an ocean of compassion.Usually all parents excuse their prodigal sons whoutter lies and steal money at home. But if a servant stealsa petty thing, he is at once handed over to the police. If183 184Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
a son in a family turns out to be a thief, his parents try toreform him by means of affectionate advice and all sortsof inducements. Instead, severe punishment is metedout to a kleptomaniac servant because he happens to bean outsider to the family. In a similar manner, all of usbelong to God’s family. We have to love God like ourfather and establish an intimate bond of affection withHim. We must deserve his boundless love and infiniteGrace. We may commit sins knowingly or unknowingly,but if we love God wholeheartedly and surrenderourselves to Him, He will surely forgive us.Krishna advised Arjuna to follow the path ofselfless love, implicit devotion and total self-surrender.The unity of divinity must be recognised,comprehended and experienced. The essential unityunderlying the phenomenal diversity has to beperceived.Akshara is the imperishable reality. Jnana orspiritual wisdom is the essential nature of Akshara. Theindestructible form is the refection of Akshara. It is theperfect primordial sound Aum. The entire universe isvibrant with the sound of Aum. It is erroneous to imaginethat sound does not exist just because we cannot listento it. Sound is a concomitant of all vibrations. Ourhearing may not be sensitive enough to register thesubtle sounds produced by subtle vibrations. Allmovements are accompanied by vibrations andvibrations are accompanied by sound. Even the winkingof an eye causes subtle vibrations which produce subtlesounds.Aumkara is the primordial sound of Brahman. Itis the primal effulgence and the source of all knowledge.It is the ultimate, absolute and eternal Reality. Krishnaimparted the esoteric knowledge of Aumkara to Arjunawith great love and affection.During sandhyavandana, every sentence shouldbe preceded by the utterance of Aum. But some ignorantpeople utter Aum at the end of each sentence as a matterof practice. Aum is like a powerful engine which leadsall the compartments—incantations and invocations.India is the country which has led other countries alongthe path of spirituality. She is the land of the Avatars, ofthe Vedas, the Upanishads, and the Bhagavad Gita. TheVedas have prescribed various ceremonial rites andrituals for the welfare of humanity. India is a YogaBhumi, the land of yoga or communion with theGodhead. India is a Thyaga Bhumi, the land of supremeself-sacrifice. India is a Karma Bhumi, the countrydestined to lead other countries along the path ofspirituality. However, it is our sacred duty to see thatspiritual decadence and degeneration are not allowedto change this great country into a Roga Bhumi, a landof diseases.Thyaga is sacrifice. Indeed, life cannot existwithout thyaga. The inhalation of oxygen and theexhalation of carbon dioxide and blood circulation in185 186Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
various organs of the body symbolise sacrifice. Thus,sacrifice is indispensable for the physical well-being ofthe human body. Similarly, sacrifice is of paramountimportance for the spiritual well-being of man. Studentsshould have the spirit of sacrifice for their physical,mental and spiritual welfare. The value of yaga has beenemphasised by the Bhagavad Gita in the most vividmanner and in the most picturesque language.
The Voyage Of Death
When the thoughts in the mind are pure,Our actions are blessed with success.The fruits of our actions are tainted,If the mind is full of impure ideasEmbodiments of Divine Love!
The fruit of love grows in every tree of life.However, it is covered by lust, anger, envyand ego, making it difficult for us to taste the hiddensweetness. Only those who can peel off the outer skincan enjoy the sweet juice within, although anyone iseligible for such an experience. Untainted by selfishnessand fear, this fruit is above the distinctions of race, caste,religion and the stage of life (varna).The supreme Vedic wisdom is called rasa (juice)by the Upanishads. This highest spiritual wisdom haslove as its nature. To taste this love, one must rid oneself187 188
25Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
of lust, completely surrender himself to the Lord andexperience identity with Him. The experience of identitywith the Lord leaves no room for desires, while thefeeling of being separate from Him, engenders desires.Control of the senses is essential for the attainment ofDivinity. One may begin with ordinary love in thebeginning and achieve the sanctity of total surrenderthrough gradual and constant practice.Dhruva, who started his penance with the desirefor a kingdom, turned this desire into a longing forspiritual beatitude after he had been blessed with a visionof the Divine. However, the desire for sovereignty wasresponsible for his getting the vision of the Lord.Therefore, it is remarked that a man cannot develop ayearning for liberation without passing through theinitial stage of desire for worldly objects.The nature of Akshara and Aumkara asexpounded in Akshara Para Brahma Yoga, the eighthchapter of the Bhagavad Gita, should be understood.The phrase “Prana prayane prabhoh” compares life toa journey. Krishna taught Arjuna about the nature anddestination of this journey of life. The various journeysby car, bus, train or aeroplane undertaken by man indaily life are regulated by considerations of time. Butthe journey of prana or life has been going on ever sincecreation began and shall go on forever. Unlike otherjourneys, this journey can never be canceled or evenpostponed! It is inevitable for all men, be he prince orpeasant, messiah or mendicant. Forgetting that thisultimate journey is unavoidable for all those who comeinto this world with a body, man is foolishly arrogatingimmortality unto himself. Engrossed in the transientmatters of the world, he is becoming a victim of miseryand suffering.Childhood is spent with companions andplaythings; youth is thrown away in romance and dance;middle age is wasted in the pursuit of wealth and oldage is a sad tale of repentance and relentless attachments.Unable to discard evil habits and seek the path ofliberation, man wallows in the mire of worldliness andfritters away the precious gift of human life!To man, who is unable to recognise his innatedivinity and is forgetful of his real abode, the BhagavadGita preaches that divine bliss and perfect love can beattained through surrender and dedication. The absenceof trust consumes a man with anxiety and worry. Aperson on a tour of another region and staying in thehouse of a friend there, cannot be free to visit the sightsof that place if he lacks confidence in his host and doesnot leave his valuables in the latter’s custody. So also,by not reposing trust and faith in the Almighty who isour dearest friend, we are subjecting ourselves to endlessworry, difficulty and fear.The human body composed of the five elements,can drop off at any time and at any place. The wiseperson recognises the inevitable nature of death and189 190Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
knows the frail mortal body to be a mere water bubble.Swami Vivekananda used to remind his disciples of thisand tell them that the knowledge and awareness of deathenables man to understand the nature of truth. We oftensee that the goods wagons carry the word, “Return”along with the date on which they should be returned tothe workshop. The human body is like a goods wagonsent to this illusory world by the Creator. Though thedate of return is not marked on it, the body has to bereturned on some day or the other. Unable to grasp thistruth, we seek ephemeral pleasures and subject ourselvesto endless anguish.We are so engrossed in worldly affairs concerningthe present moment that we become mindless of ourfuture. One person is said to have remarked that he hasno time even for death! How foolish it is to think so,because death shall never spare anyone. Fascinated bythe world of the senses, man is not able to know thetruth of his own existence. Recognising the transitorynature of wealth, power and pomp, he should preparehimself for the ultimate journey. When we want to goto a cinema or for an evening walk, we get ready byputting some money in our pockets or putting on ourshoes. When we wish to visit a nearby town, we packour clothes in a bag. But what preparations are wemaking for the ultimate journey, the voyage of death?Death is certain. As long as we have this body wemust discharge our obligations in an exemplary manner.When a photographer is taking your picture he tells youto be ready at the time he clicks. If you are not posingcorrectly at that instant, the photograph taken will notbe a good one. However, the Lord is a photographer whotakes the photograph without cautioning us with the word,“Ready”. Therefore, for us to be photographed well in thefilm-plate of the Lord’s Heart, we should be ready always.Our body can be compared to a camera. Our mindis the lens and our heart is the film-plate in the camera.Our intelligence acts as the switch and our thoughtsprovide the flash. When all these synchronise properly,we attain the stage of perfect concentration. Control ofthe senses is essential for such concentration. Youth isthe best period of life to achieve control over the senses.If the senses are not mastered when one is young, theywill be irrepressible during old age.“The old monkey cannot move; its eyes havegrown dim; its face is wrinkled; its hair has turned grey”,saying thus, youngsters gather around old men anddance mockingly. Sense control must be practised whenthe mind and intelligence are in proper trim. By turningour vision inwards, we should prevent agitation andexcitement from entering our minds. With our spiritualstrength enhanced, we should be able to wanderfearlessly like a lion in the forest of life and undertakeservice activities. Instead, however, due to thecultivation of body-consciousness, we are becomingtimid and nervous like mere sheep.191 192Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Every young man should be like the heroicAbhimanyu who had exclaimed, “When I wish topounce like a lion on an elephant and tear the enemy topieces, is it proper for you stop me from going insteadof sending me with your blessings?”Students must plunge into the field of service andreform India. They must banish the rampant ignorance,unrest and injustice from their motherland. They mustspread the ideals of truth, righteousness, justice and love,and work for the happiness and prosperity of theirfellowmen. Where there is faith, there is love; wherethere is love, there is peace; where there is peace, thereis God and where there is God, there is Bliss. Thereforefaith is the basis for the experience of Bliss. Faith islike our Life-breath; it is impossible to live even for aminute in this world without faith.It is My hope that you will develop your self-confidence, strengthen your faith in Divinity anddischarge your daily duties in a spirit of absolutesurrender. Just as a torch light is superfluous to see themoon which can be visualised with the aid of its ownlight, God (the embodiment of love) is perceived onlythrough Love. Thus, in order to realise Him, we shouldenrich our hearts with Divine Love.
The Sovereign Knowledge
Can we say, “This is good” and “That isbad” when both this and that are God’ screation?Embodiments of the Divine Atma!
Among all the branches of knowledge,spiritual knowledge is unique. It is also themost esoteric of all secrets. Vyasa, who was a trikalajnani (one aware of the past, present, and future) wasthe first to codify spiritual knowledge and he was itsforemost exponent. It was he who defined and delineatedthe discipline of spirituality.Spiritual knowledge has been designated in theninth chapter of the Bhagavad Gita as the raja vidya(sovereign knowledge). This raja vidya is the mostinvaluable treasure of our ancient heritage. It has beenpreserved and nurtured for millennia by our great rishis.193 194
26Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
However, today, we are witness to a degradation of themoral and spiritual wealth of our country. In this landof spirituality, there is a poverty of spiritual thoughtand discrepancy in moral conduct. Like begging forcheap food outside when in the house itself there is anabundance of rich and tasty food, Indians, not realisingthe fund of spiritual wisdom available with them, arebeseeching the materially advanced countries for new-fangled ideas and ideologies. We are seeking to acquireand promote secular knowledge at the expense ofspiritual knowledge, just for the sake of eking out alivelihood.Sraddha (perseverance) is an essentialprecondition to the acquisition of spiritual knowledge.Nothing can be accomplished without perseverance,patience and tenacity of purpose. Students of the presentday forego food and sleep and cram guidebooks andnotes for the mere passing of their examinations. Thisway, they do display a fair amount of sraddha in theirsecular studies. But alas, as regards their spiritualprogress, they do not exhibit even an iota of sraddha.Spiritual knowledge is the elan vital of man. It isindispensable for attaining inner tranquillity and acomprehensive world view. While the gaining ofmastery over the sciences or the arts cannot determineour destiny, it is spiritual knowledge alone that can drawour fate line.Anasuya or the absence of envy, jealousy, andmalice is a prerequisite for gaining an intimate,immediate and personal experience of the omnipresentreality of Divinity. Every spiritual aspirant mustnecessarily cultivate the quality of anasuya. It is a divinecharacteristic which makes a man’s personality pure andpellucid.Asuya or chronic jealousy is the source of allmental and physical ailments in this world. In order toacquire mental equipoise and inner tranquillity, manshould make his heart pure by purging his mind of thispsychological mania called jealousy. Man must firsthumanise himself before attempting to divinize himself.To feel jealous of others, even in trivial matters,suppresses the humanitarian instincts of a person. Men,today, waste all their time and energy in blaming otherswithout realising that to search for and find faults inothers is the most grievous and ghastly sin. Arjuna wascompletely free from the deadly qualities of envy,jealousy, and malice. That is why he acquired theappellation of Anasuya and deserved the nectarinemessage of the Bhagavad Gita from Krishna.The ninth chapter of the Bhagavad Gita is ofparamount importance. It deals with the raja vidya(sovereign knowledge) and raja guhya (sovereignsecret). It is concerned with occult experience and theesoteric mysteries of the human soul. This chapter is inthe middle of the Gita text and is like a beautiful bouquet195 196Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
that links the two halves of a gorgeous garland of fragrantflowers that the various other chapters in the BhagavadGita are. And in this central chapter is contained thesupreme knowledge of the Atma.Bhutabhrit means the bearer, supporter andsustainer of the myriad of living creatures. Bhutasthahimplies that He dwells in all creatures. In other words,God is the Creator, Sustainer, and Redeemer of allcreatures and dwells in them all.The adheya (supported) cannot exist without theAadhara (supporter). All mundane pleasures constitutethe aadheya. The essential substance of the Atma is theaadhara. That is to say, all experiences, both mundaneand spiritual, are regulated by the Atma.Laymen glibly talk about the mind withoutknowing what exactly the form and shape of mind is.People say that they are feeling happy. But what is theform of happiness? They also talk of Ananda or bliss.What is the perceptible evidence for bliss? Words likemind, happiness and bliss are abstractions which do nothave existence in space and time. Nevertheless, theysubsist in a special sense. Though they do not exist inform, none can deny the fact that they are real individualexperiences. In a similar manner, all spiritual experiencesare incommunicable, non-demonstrable and subjective.We may read in the newspaper that a certain kinghas died in a foreign country. As such, we have nopersonal knowledge of the king’s death. Neither havewe seen his dead body. The news of his death has beentelegraphically transmitted to us. Nonetheless, webelieve in the news. But, at the same time, we doubtand deny the personal testimony of great rishis, whogained the sublime experience of the Self throughvigorous austerities and penance. A person withdiscrimination and an open mind should not deny orcondemn the self-certifying validity of the profound andmystical experiences of the great maharishis.Spiritual knowledge can be acquired by everyindividual. “Where there is a will, there is a way.” Thefirst step on the path of spirituality is the acquisition ofanasuya or freedom from envy, jealousy, malice, andcovetousness. Asuya or jealousy should be completelyrooted out of the human heart and sraddha orperseverance should be cultivated instead. The Atmashould be visualised through meditation. The sincereand persistent sadhaka will then certainly have spiritualexperiences and mystical revelations.We may want to prepare delicious “sambar”. Forthis purpose, we may make use of fresh vegetables, gooddal and clean tamarind. Like Nala or Bhima, the cookmay be an expert. But if the brass vessel used for cookingis not properly silvered or coated with tin, all the “sambar”cooked in it, is bound to be spoiled. Similarly, thoughthere are nine modes of worship, unless the devoteehas a pure heart, none of them will be effective. Of what197 198Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
use is all the counting and telling of beads if the heart istainted with envy, jealousy and malice?Egoism and divinity are incompatible. An egoistcan never aspire for the life divine. Ego should becompletely annihilated in order to progress along thepath of spirituality. However, self-confidence, asdifferent from ego, is of supreme importance in spiritualprogress. A man who has no faith in himself cannothave faith in God. Self-confidence and faith in God arealways found in juxtaposition. They complement eachother.Faith is a cardinal virtue and faith in God is aprop in life. Though God dwells in everybody, unlessone has faith in God, he cannot become divine. Somepeople might say that they will believe only after theyexperience. But that is like putting the cart before thehorse. In spirituality, faith always precedes experience.“Vidya without sraddha is futile”, said SwamiVivekananda. Sraddha (perseverance coupled with thecapacity to take pains) is absolutely indispensable foradhyatma vidya (the science of the Self). Young menand women of the present day do have an abundance ofsraddha. But, unfortunately, all their sraddha is divertedto dramas, novels, cinemas, radio, television, cricketand horse racing. This misplaced sraddha has resultedin their physical debilitation and mental corruption, withthe result that they have not only lost faith in God butin themselves too.Spirituality is an activity. It is an activity of theAtma. Just as a man cannot say that he will jump intothe water only after he has learned swimming, he cannotsay that he will plunge himself into the depths ofspiritual experience only after he has fullycomprehended spirituality.Consider the example of earth’s rotation aboutits own axis and its revolution around the sun. The sun,all of us know, is stationary and it is the earth thatrevolves round it. The so-called sunrise and sunset areeffected by this revolution of the earth rather than bythe movement of the sun. This is scientifically proved.Nevertheless, the scientists also do talk in the languageof the layman in daily life and speak about sunrise andsunset concealing the truth which they know. Similarly,the language of words is gloriously inconsistent toexpress and explain the great truths of spirituality. Thelanguage of experience is the only means to comprehendspirituality.The scientists have discovered that the earth hasthe power to attract things to itself and based on thishave enunciated the “law of gravity”. However, this doesnot mean that the earth did not have the gravitationalforce of attraction before the scientists discovered it.Moreover, the force of gravity is imperceptible. We maysee a flower dropping from the branch of a tree andfalling to the ground, but we cannot perceive the forceof gravity that has caused the flower to reach the earth199 200Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
after disengaging itself from the tree. Similarly, empiricalaffirmation cannot grant evidential validity to spiritualexperience. Neither can man perceive, with his fivesenses, the subtle forces of spirituality that divinize him.If a magnet is to attract a piece of iron, the lattershould be free from impurities and rust. If a rusted pieceof iron is not attracted by a magnet, the magnet is not tobe found fault with. Similarly, if the Atma is coveredwith the impurities of the mind, it will not be attractedto the Paramatma.If you look at the world through coloured glasses,it will assume the colour of the glasses. The colourbelongs to the glasses and not to the world. To a patientwho is suffering from malaria even a sweet “laddu”tastes bitter. The fault lies with the patient and not withthe “laddu”. Thus, a self-deluded individual cannot graspthe ultimate absolute and eternal Reality of the Atma.There is electricity in matter. But it does notmanifest itself everywhere. Its effect is seen when anelectric bulb is connected in the circuit. So also, God isimmanent and omnipresent. He is everywhere, but Hispresence is manifested only in a pure heart. The ninthchapter of the Bhagavad Gita emphasises the need forpurity of heart for the realisation of God.Divinity is permanent while human life isimpermanent. We see around us many creatures that areborn, grow up, live for some time and perish. This way,we are aware of the sequence of birth, growth, decayand death. Nevertheless, we delude ourselves and liveconsidering ourselves immoral beings. This is a sign ofignorance and spiritual bankruptcy.One night, Janaka Maharaja had a dream in whichhe dreamt that he had lost his kingdom and become abeggar. He was going around the streets of his city andbegging for alms. The pangs of hunger made him cry.Some kind-hearted person gave him a morsel of food,but to his great misfortune, even that morsel slippeddown from his palm. Just then the horror-stricken kingwoke up from his dream. He found himself again in hisroyal palace. The king asked himself, “Which is real—dream world or the conscious world?” The queen whowas observing him was also perplexed. They decidedto consult the great sage, Vasishta. The sage said, “OKing! Both are real in one sense. But there is also anotherpoint of view. You became a beggar in the dream worldand you are king in the conscious world. You exist inboth the worlds. While they are both unreal, you aloneare real. You are the absolute reality of the dreamingstate as well as the conscious state.”Ekam Sath—the One is Real. Truth is one and itsmanifestations are many. This is the central doctrine ofthe Bhagavad Gita.201 202Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
The Nature Of Prakruthi
Just as water is needed to make a pot outof dry mud, the combination of Siva andSakthi is necessary for the creation to comeinto being.Embodiments of the Divine Atma!
Purusha and prakruthi are the two eternalentities involved in creation. Purusha, themasculine entity, is imperishable and permanent;prakruthi, the feminine entity, is perishable andimpermanent. While Purusha is the eternal reality ofDivinity or the Cosmic Witness, prakruthi or primalmatter, is given a motherly connotation. Thus Prakruthiis also referred to as Bhu Matha (mother earth), LokaMatha (mother of the world), Jagan Matha (mother ofcreation), and Vishwa Matha (mother of the universe).Likewise, Prana Natha (Lord of life), Loka Natha (Lordof the world), Jagan Natha (Lord of the creation), andVishwa Natha (Lord of the universe) are the variousnames given to the masculine entity—Purusha.In order to understand prakruthi, we must knowthe essence of femininity. Stri in Sanskrit means woman.This word stri consists of “Sa” which stands for sathwaguna (purity); “ta” which stands for thamo guna (inertia)and “ra” which stands for rajo guna (activity). Theessence of femininity, thus, is the conglomeration ofthese three gunas: the sathwic, the rajasic, and thethamasic.Politeness, humility and forbearance are sathwicqualities; shyness, fear, and indolence are thamasicqualities; and aggressiveness, wilfulness, and envy arerajasic qualities. Generally, sathwic and thamasicqualities are found to be predominant in women.Abala or lack of strength is believed tocharacterise women. They are considered to be timidand capable of performing only the household chores.They are disqualified from performing yajnas and yagasexcept when they do so along with their husbands.However, the converse is also true. For instance,a householder in the grihasthashrama (period ofdomestic life) who is supposed to perform several yajnasand yagas cannot do so in the absence of his wife. Rama,in the absence of Sita, had to make a golden idol of thelatter, as her substitute, when he undertook the203 204
27Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
performance of the sswamedha yaga. Similarly, SathyaHarischandra was permitted to gift away his kingdomto Viswamitra only when the former’s consort,Chandramati, was physically present by his side. Thus,the characteristic of weakness (abala) attributed towomen is equally applicable in the case of men. Menand women are both the conglomeration of theirgunas—sathwa, rajas and thamas—and are subject tothe universal laws of prakruthi (nature). Viewed fromthe point of view of creation, both are essentiallyfeminine in their attributes. All creatures suffer fromsome weakness or the other. When in distress, both menand women cry. Joy and sorrow are common to both. Itis improper then to say that women are weak and menare strong. Moreover, history is replete with instances whenwomen have proved their heroism and valour. Anasuyamade Brahma, Vishnu and Maheswara little babes andlulled them to sleep in a cradle. Sumati caused the sunnot to rise in order to ward off the curse on her husbandthat he would die at daybreak. Savitri vanquished Yama,the Lord of death and resurrected her dead husbandSathyavan. Madalasa proved her spiritual status andintellectual genius by imparting spiritual knowledge toher sons; and Sulabha defeated Yajnavalkya inphilosophical disputation. How then can we call womenabalas or weak beings? In fact, the Upanishads, theRamayana, and the Mahabharatha have portrayedwomen as sabalas or those endowed with strength andcourage.The world is a stage in which every individual isan actor. However, the forms and names of the actorschange according to the environment, conditions andcircumstances. The Bhagavad Gita proclaims that thedivine essence of the Atma is the same, although formsand names may vary.“Ekam Sath viprah bahudhavadanti”—the Onebecomes the many. Unity ramifies itself into diversity.The vessel containing water may be made of brass,copper, silver, gold or any other metal, but the sun’sreflection is seen in the water with equal brilliance.Similarly, the same divinity is embodied in all creatures.Prakruthi or nature is the vestment of Purusha,the primary principle. The bounties of nature should beenjoyed only with the benediction of Paramatma. Themiserable fate of Ravana who carried Sita away to theextreme displeasure of Rama, is well known. Peoplewith limitless desires cannot recognise the essence ofthe Atma. Man can gain an insight into the nature ofthe Atma only when he burns his desires in the fire ofwisdom.There are four Ashramas or periods in life—brahmacharya (life as a celibate), grihastha (life as ahouseholder), vanaprastha (life as a recluse), andsanyasa (life as an ascetic). There are also four goals in205 206Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
life—dharma (righteous living), artha (material well-being), kama (achievement of desires), and moksha(ultimate liberation). These four can be grouped in pairs.While artha and kama thrive in modern times, dharmaand moksha have almost disappeared. Modern mancraves for wealth and sensual pleasures and neglectsrighteousness and salvation. Since dharma and mokshaare like the feet and the head of a body, man today seemsto be existing without these two essential organs. Thesefour values of life should instead be grouped as dharma-artha and kama-moksha. In other words, wealth shouldbe acquired for the sake of righteous living, and manshould aspire only for liberation. Only such a judiciouscombination of these four goals shall enable man to findfulfilment in life.In grihasthasrama, the householder is engagedin the pursuit of wealth and fame. In this stage ofdomestic life, the lady of the house should play the roleof the “Goddess of Wealth” by being the custodian ofher husband’s earnings, and as women are acknowledgedto do, spend the money judiciously and wisely.People who look down upon women and holdthem in contempt fail to appreciate their nobility. “Menmight have learnt much and seen much, yet they are theservants of their wives”, said Thyagaraja. Vice-chancellors who control thousands of students andpolice officials who protect the public are often foundbeing afraid of their wives at home! Every individualhas to submit to prakruthi, the feminine aspect of theuniverse. Sakthi is the essence of feminine energy, whichman cannot afford to ignore. The Bhagavad Gita hasrepeatedly stressed the element of femininity in theuniverse.“Sarvajiva namaskaram Kesavam pratigaccha-thi”—obeisance to all creatures is obeisance to God.“Sarvajiva tiraskaram Kesavam pratigacchathi”—contempt of all creatures is contempt of God. Ourscriptures repeatedly affirm that God dwells in everybeing and that He can be realised here and now. He iswithin the reach of all. Prakruthi is like a kshetra orfield and Paramatma is the kshetrajna or the Lord ofthe field. Kshetrajna contains in Himself the kshetra. Iffrom the word kshetrajna we remove the word kshetra,the syllable jna remains. Jna stands for jnana or wisdom.Thus, a person who is a part of prakruthi becomes itsmaster by acquiring jnana and cognises the eternalreality of the Purusha. He realises that the universe is acombination of the kshara (destructible) and the Akshara(indestructible). He sees the indestructible as immanenteven in the destructible world. He develops ananyabhakthi or one-pointed devotion. He transcends the man-made barriers of caste, creed and religion. He becomesdear to God.207 208Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Ananya Bhakthi
From the moment you wake up in themorning till the time you go to sleep at night,your time is spent in eating and drinkingalone. Your efforts are directed only towardsmundane gains. Forgetful of the Lotus-eyed Lord, what joy can you get in life?
Santhi or peace is a divine attribute. It is thesweet delight of the Atma. It is the prizedpossession of the Paramahamsa or the one who hasattained the summit of immaculate discrimination. Peacecannot reign in the malice-ridden hearts of selfishpeople. It can be attained only by those who, withpatience, perseverance and forbearance follow thesacred path of spirituality.Effort is required for achieving results both inthe world of mundane affairs and in the spiritual realm.Sadhana or steady, systematic, and sustained effort alonecan confer peace of mind and inner tranquillity.However, the path of sadhana does present obstacles tothe seeker who will have to overcome them by hisperseverance. Na sukhaat labhyate sukham—pleasurecannot be the source for further pleasure. There is nojoy without sorrow, no pleasure without pain, and nogain without loss. Therefore, abiding joy and everlastingbliss, conferred by the absolute peace and tranquillityof the mind, can be attained only through sincere andpainstaking sadhana.“Ask and ye shall be given; seek and ye shall find;knock and it shall be opened”, says the Bible. Thesewords contain the eclectic essence of all religions.People who claim today that they are asking, seekingand knocking at the door must realise that they aremerely asking nature, seeking ephemeral pleasures andknocking at the gates of hell. Such being the case, theycannot expect God to answer, find the path of mokshaor have the gates of Heaven opened for them. How canParamatma be expected to answer the prayer addressedto Prakruthi?Ananyaschintayantomaam yejanah paryupasateTesham nityabhiyukthanaam yogakshemamvahamyaham.I bear the burden of the welfare and well-beingof those who worship Me, and Me alone, with steadfastdevotion and are attached to Me at all times.209 210
28Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Thus has the concept of ananya bhakthi been fullyand vividly explained in the Bhagavad Gita by Krishna.Ananya bhakthi is one-pointed devotion to God,involving total surrender. One should not fragment hismind and offer just one bit of it to God. The mind in itsentirety must be immersed in the Almighty. Once,Uddhava advised the gopis thus, “Ignorant as you areof the Sastras, the Puranas, and the Vedas, you shouldfollow the path of the adepts in yoga to attain communionwith God.” Niraja, one of the gopikas, answered, “Wehave only one mind, not many; that mind has gone awayto Mathura along with Krishna. Devoid of a mind, weare unable to understand you!”A person with a fragmented mind cannot attainananya bhakthi. A disintegrated mind is an obstacle tospiritual progress. Concentration on God with afragmented mind is an exercise in futility. Single-mindeddevotion is the easiest path to salvation. In fact, the ananyabhaktha becomes a jivanmukta (one liberated during life).Understanding the essence of prakruthi enablesone to understand the meaning and mystery of life. Lifehas seven supreme values namely, keerthi (reputation),sampada (prosperity), vaak (eloquence), buddhi sakthi(power of discrimination), medha sakthi (suprasensoryintelligence), dhairya (courage), and sahana(forbearance). In order to imbibe the essence of divinity,man should gain mastery over the powers associatedwith these values of life.The doer of virtuous deeds commands respect andreputation. Thus, one should engage himself in theperformance of action that will benefit all. God’s Graceis the greatest wealth. To consider the amassing ofmoney, gold or other material objects as symbols ofwealth and social prestige is incorrect. The goal of life,instead, should be the acquisition of the divine wealthof God’s Grace.Real eloquence consists in the exercise of restraintover speech. Excessive talking, use of abusive andobscene language and losing of one’s temper whilespeaking are some of the blunders that the tongue isbound to commit if it is engaged in constant chatter.The tongue is really meant for chanting the variousdivinely potent names of the Lord like Govinda,Damodara, and Madhava.Of the five sensory organs, the tongue is the mostimportant. It has a dual role to play, unlike the eye, theear, the nose and the skin, which have only the singlefunctions of seeing, hearing, smelling, and touchingrespectively. The tongue has not only the capacity totaste but also the power of speech. The tongue hastremendous alertness and forbearance as is shown byits survival in the midst of thirty-six sharp teeth whichmay inadvertently bite it at any time. Besides, it displaysenormous self-respect and does not leave its abode, themouth, even under the most difficult circumstances! Thewound caused by a slip of the foot may be healed by211 212Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
medication; on the other hand, the damage caused by aslip of the tongue may be irreparable. That is why thetongue must be carefully controlled at all times.Aum Bhur Bhuva SuvahTat Savitur VarenyamBhargo Devasya DheemahiDhiyo Yo Nah Prachodhayat.So runs the sacred Gayatri Manthra, aninvocation addressed to the Sun for the improvementof the faculty of buddhi or intellect. The darkness ofignorance is dispelled by the incandescence of thebuddhi which shines its light like the glorious sun.“Among the faculties, I am the buddhi”, proclaimsKrishna in the Vibhuthi Yoga of the Bhagavad Gita.Medha sakthi, which is also essential for thespiritual regeneration of man, should be carefullydistinguished from buddhi sakthi. Buddhi is the powerof discrimination exercised over the sensations andperceptions pertaining to the five sensory organs ofsight, hearing, touch, taste, and smell. Medha sakthi isassociated with suprasensory experiences, extrasensoryperceptions, intuition and spirituality. It transcends thesensations and perceptions provided by the phenomenalworld.Man should be courageous. Lack of courage leadsto doubts, despair, dejection and depression. A personwith a faultless and blemishless character shall neverbehave like a frightened, trembling sheep. Therefore,developing intellectual integrity and strength ofconviction, man should proceed ahead and conquer theevils and temptations of the world.Forbearance, the paragon of virtues, makes a manremain unruffled by the vicissitudes of life. Neitherelated by a happy turn of events nor dejected on theoccurrence of a tragedy, a man with fortitude isunperturbed by the ups and downs in the endless dramaof life. Such a person endowed with inner tranquillityand peace of mind is the sthithaprajna portrayed in theBhagavad Gita.In the Buddha’s times, there was a particularvillage headman who despised the holy man and histeachings. Once, he heard that Buddha and his discipleswere coming to his village. The tyrannical headmanordered all the villagers to shut the doors of their housesand refrain from giving alms to them. While the villagersfollowed his order, the headman himself stood near theentrance to his own house. Arriving with his followers,Buddha went to the headman’s house to ask for alms—“Bhavati bhikshaam dehi”, he said. The latter lost histemper and hurled abuse upon abuse at Buddha in themost uncivil language. Just as he was about to hit thesage, Buddha smiled and said, “I have a doubt. Supposeyou give me alms thatI do not accept. What will you dothen!” The haughty headman answered, “I will take themback.” Hearing this, Buddha asked in the most polite213 214Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
manner, “You have offered me insult and calumny. I donot accept them; you must, therefore, take them back.”The headman became silent and hung his head in shameand remorse.A little forbearance and patience on our part willmake the abusive epithets of our enemies boomerangon themselves just as a registered letter goes back to itssender if it is returned unaccepted by the addressee.The aforementioned seven qualities are essentialfor the development of ananya bhakthi and must becultivated by all sadhakas. Krishna told Arjuna, “I amin you and you are in Me. I will be in your vision andyou will be in My vision if the barriers between us arebroken and spiritual proximity attained. The essence ofananya bhakthi is the discovery of your self in Myselfand Myself in yourself. You and I are One.”Isavasyam idam sarvam—all this is inhabited byGod. Every person is a sanctuary of the divine Atma.Therefore, if you hurt others, you will hurt Easwara whoresides in them.
Work, Worship And Wisdom
If there were no clouds in man’ s life, itwould be difficult to discern the true valueof light. So too, there can be nothingextraordinary about happiness which doesnot arise out of genuine exertion.Without sathya (truth), dharma(righteousness), santhi (peace), and prema(love), the education that one would haveacquired would be meaningless. Charitywould bring no merit and the results of allgood deeds would verily become naught ifman lacks these few virtues. Even so, noheavenly good would accrue to those whowield power in the world, yet lack thesecardinal virtues. sathya, dharma, santhi,and prema are the four foundation wallson which the edifice of the grand mansion215 216
29Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
of Sanathana Dharma (Eternal, UniversalReligion) stands. What else can I makeknown unto you, O assembly of good andgentle persons!Embodiments of Love!
Knowledge of Brahman is denied unto themwho discard the intellect and are enamouredof ephemeral knowledge. To the man who stands onthe shores of the sea and observes the stultifying externalmanifestations, the waves alone appear. Only the daringexpert diver who can search the seabed finds theprecious pearls lying there. The Bhagavad Gita declaresthat knowledge of Brahman is attained only by theperson who seeks the Atma in the innermost recessesof his subtle being.The human body is affected by the impuritiesconnected with the three humours present in the body(vata or wind, pitta or bilious humour, and sleshma orphlegm). So also, the subtle body represented by themind is tainted by mala or impure, evil thoughts andtendencies; vikshepa or projection of the unreal as thereal, and avarana or concealment of the real. As a resultof this threefold impurity of the mind, man is unableto attain divine knowledge. So long as his mind hasthese taints, he cannot gain the knowledge of theAtma.Mala can be got rid of by means of sacred work,while vikshepa can be removed by worship and avaranaby wisdom. The Gita teaches us that by good and sacredwork we can purify our hearts; that by worship we canattain one-pointedness of the mind and that by wisdomwe can remove the veil of ignorance and attain unionwith God. Thus by work, worship and wisdom, mancan become divine. However, according to the Gita, allthese three, that is to say, purification of the mind, one-pointedness of the mind and unitive knowledge of theGodhead, can also be attained by the practice of Yoga.Yoga also means samathva or equal-mindedness(Samathvam yogamuchyathe). Having regard to theenvironment in which the ordinary man is placed andto his duties, both secular and spiritual, samathva hasbeen found applicable in five different ways. We,accordingly, cognise samathva in relation to prakruthior nature, samaja or society, jnana or knowledge, karmaor action, and upasana or worship. Prakruthikasamathva is equanimity in relation to prakruthi or thevarious natural phenomena. In cold seasons, warmthgives us comfort, while in hot seasons coolness givesus joy. This way both heat and cold, at one time or theother, give us happiness. Neither subjects us to misery.At times, however, due to the varying intensities of heatand cold, we might be put to some inconvenience. Butthen these are only subjective and superficialexperiences rather than universally applicable realities.Essentially, both heat and cold give us happiness.In the same manner, pleasure and pain also bring217 218Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
happiness to us. Without pain, one cannot appreciatethe true value of pleasure. It is only in the light of sorrowthat joy assumes greater prominence. Thus, pleasure andpain or happiness and misery should be looked uponwith an unruffled mind and with the same sense ofdetachment.It is very necessary for us to develop prakruthikasamathva. This is specially so for students who tend tobe impulsive and let success and failure influence themeasily and profoundly. To be impulsive is a sign ofhuman weakness. Everyone should recognise the truththat pleasure is but an interval between two pains andface the trials and tribulations of the world in a calmand collected manner. The alternating experiences ofpleasure and pain actually prod us on along the path ofrighteousness.Samajika samathva or the equanimity which man,as an integral part of society, should possess comes next.Society too subjects man to the dual experiences of joyand sorrow. For instance, both praise and blame cometo man from the society in which he lives. Praise andblame are like the two faces of the same coin and theyalways haunt each other. We should be perturbed byneither. We should regard both adulation and censureas stepping stones to progress.When a well is being dug, the earth that isremoved from the pit forms a mound by the side. Themud in the mound is the same mud that was in the pit.Praise and calumny are like the mound and the pit andare essentially of the same origin. Realising this, themind should be trained to develop equanimity in termsof man’s relationship with and existence in society.Jnana samathva is the third type of equanimitywhich we should try to promote in us. This basicallyconsists in recognising the identity of the Atma thatpermeates all beings, irrespective of caste, colour orcreed. Religions may be different, but all of them leadman to the same goal—God. Garments may be different,but the fabric is the same. Ornaments may be various,but the gold is the same. Cows may be of different hues,but the milk is one. The electric bulbs may have varyingwattage, sizes and colours, but the electricity that lightsthem all is the same. Similarly, the jivas and the animalsare myriad and multiple, but the life-force in all of themis essentially the same. The realisation of this unitiveaspect of creation is jnana samathva.The performance of right and sacred actions in adetached manner, without being ruffled by theirconsequences, either good or bad, is the spirit of karmasamathva or equanimity in action. And bhakthi samathva(equanimity in devotion) consists in the realisation ofthe truth that Easwara pervades the entire universe andthat He is everything, the refuge for all. Twameva sarvammama deva deva is the cry of the person endowed withequanimity in devotion.It is only when his bhakthi (devotion) is constant,219 220Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
enduring and unwavering that the devotee can attainbhakthi samathva. The flow of love for God shouldalways remain the same and be steady. Krishna declaredin the Bhagavad Gita:Ananyaschintayantomaam yejanah paryupasateTesham nityabhiyuktanaam yogakshemamvahamyaham.“I shall look after the material welfare and thespiritual well-being of those who worship Me throughone-pointed devotion and are ever attached to Me.”This ananya bhakthi or one-pointed devotioncomes as a result of the five kinds of samathva(equanimity). Samathva should be steadfastlymaintained and promoted at all times, at all places andin all climes.The word manava (man) has three letters: “ma”,which stands for ignorance; “na”, which stands for thenegation of the ignorance, and “va”, which refers to thepower to attain divine knowledge. If man is to deservehis name, he should be free from ignorance.The Bhagavad Gita contains the sacred lore ofthe spirit. Krishna gave unto mankind, through Arjuna,the core of the Gita message on the battlefield at 10:30a.m. on the Karthika Bahula Amavasya day. This wasthe day on which the great Mahabharatha war wascommenced. Ten days later, when Bhishma fell in battle,Sanjaya was informing Dhritharashtra of the proceedingson the battlefield. Dhritharashtra asked Sanjaya:Dharmakshetre Kurukshetre samavetayuyut-savaha Mamakah Pandavaschaiva kimakurvataSanjaya.“Gathered on the holy plain of Kurukshetra, OSanjaya, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu do?”This was on the Margasira Suddha Ekadasi day.Some consider this day as the Gitajayanti or the day onwhich Krishna vouchsafed the message of the Gita toArjuna. But this was the day on which Sanjaya narratedthe story of the battle to Dhritharashtra. The Gita wasactually given by Krishna to Arjuna on the KarthikaBahula Amavasya day.Why did Krishna choose the Amavasya day forthe commencement of the battle and so for the teachingof the Gita? Normally, nothing auspicious is done onan Amavasya day. However, such examples of Krishna’sdivinely enigmatic ways are there in the other episodesof His life, too. His birth on an Ashtami day itself is acase in point. Krishna was born on July 20, 3227 BC,during the early morning at 3 a.m. The battle ofMahabharatha took place in the year 3141 BC, whenKrishna was 86 years old. In these 5119 years that havepassed since the Mahabharatha war, the Gita messagehas spread to every nook and corner of the world.Students of the present day conveniently forget221 222Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
the injunction to engage in ananya chinta (constantremembrance) but crave for yoga kshema. The Lordassures you that He will look after your yoga andkshema. Yoga is the prapti (obtaining) of theunattainable and the Lord should confer it on you; whilekshema is the experiencing of something that isrightfully your due. Here is an illustration for this. Whilereading a book, you keep a five-rupee note in it and astime passes, you forget about it. However, on a laterdate, you are in need of five rupees and so ask for itfrom a friend who has come to visit you. The friendaccidentally picks up the book, comes across the fiverupees in it and hands it over to you. The money isactually yours and the friend has only given you whatis really your own. In the same way, joy is within youthough you are unaware of it. The sadguru is the friendwho helps you unearth this treasure of happiness that islying hidden in your own heart.“Duty without love is deplorable. Duty with loveis desirable. Love without duty is Divine.” Duty impliesforce or compulsion while love is spontaneous andexpresses itself without external promptings. All thejapa, dhyana, and the deeds of merit you perform willbe futile if you do not cultivate universal and selflesslove.Even if you offer only a leaf (patram), a flower(pushpam), a fruit (phalam), or a drop of water (thoyam)to God in the true spirit of devotion and surrender, theresults will be infinitely good.You have been listening to the teachings of theGita for about a month now. No purpose, however, willbe served by mere listening. Sravana (listening) shouldbe followed by manana (recapitulation) and nididhy-asana (assimilation).223 224Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Vibhuthi Yoga And Practical Life
Who makes the sun rise and set regularly,and race across the sky everyday?Who makes the stars that spangle the skyat night vanish by day?Who makes the Wind-god sustain, withoutrespite for a moment, billions of lives theworld over?Who has made the bubbling brook thatgurgles along its winding course forever?Why then should there be man-madebarriers of caste, creed and wealth?Worship Him, the Lord of the Universe, towhose command all are bound.Do not deny the Lord just because you donot see Him. Your ignorance denies youthe vision of God even as daylight rendersthe stars invisible to you.Embodiments of Love!For many millennia, the Bhagavad Gita hasbeen propagating the high ideals of the lifedivine. It is a peerless spiritual text that has broughtgreat fame to Bharath. It has been the special privilegeof Bharath to have received the Bhagavad Gita. TheGita is a unique scriptural poem, unsurpassed inmetaphysical content by the texts of any other country.Unfortunately today, however, there is a growingmiscomprehension of the message of the Gita. Somesay that the Gita teaches the path of action or karmamarga. Others aver that it proclaims the path of devotionor bhakthi marga alone. And quite a few hold that theGita expatiates on the path of wisdom or jnana margaalone. Thus, depending on their own subjectiveexperiences and powers of understanding, differentpeople have been developing varying ideologies basedon the teachings of the Gita.The Gita observes no distinctions on the basis ofcaste, creed, community, or nationality or between menand women. It is an eclectic and catholic scripture,transcending all man-made barriers, and is of universalrelevance. It reveals the importance of one’s own dharmaor duty (swadharma) to all those who study it in a spiritof adoration.“Dharmakshetre kurukshetre....” So runs the firstverse of the Gita. The first word of the first line is225 226
30Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Dharma. The last word of the last verse of the Gita ismama (Yatra Yogeshwarah Krishna....Dhruva nitir matirmama). The fusion of mama and dharma is mamadharma, which means one’s own dharma or swadharma.Thus, the Bhagavad Gita teaches each individual theprinciples of his own dharma.The articulator of the Gita is Krishna. Krishna,however, is also the person who heard the Gita and wroteit. This statement may be surprising to you. “Was it notArjuna who heard the Gita? How could Arjuna beKrishna? Was it not Vyasa who wrote the Gita? Howcould Vyasa be Krishna?” it might be asked. Theanswers to these questions have been very simply givenby Krishna Himself!“Pandavanam Dhananjayah” or “among thePandavas I am Arjuna”, said Krishna in the tenth chapterof the Gita, the chapter titled Vibhuthi Yoga.Furthermore, among the nine names which Arjuna has,the epithet Jayakrishna equates him with Krishna (God).Since Krishna was firmly established in Arjuna’s heartand since there was total spiritual empathy betweenthem, it is absolutely correct to say that Krishna was notonly the articulator of the Gita but also the person whoheard it.In the same manner, Krishna has identifiedHimself with Vyasa. “Among the munis, I am Vyasa”,said Krishna. Not only this: the Lord dwells in the heartsof the sages. It would, therefore, be quite correct to saythat Krishna Himself wrote the Gita. We are reminded,in this context, of the words of Potana, the poet, by whichhe declares that the Bhagavatha, which he had writtenin Telugu, was composed by Ramachandra, the Lord.Potana was so devoid of the ego that he became themedium of divine poetic afflatus.In the chapter Vibhuthi Yoga, Krishna proclaimsHis identity with the best and the most exalted of all thesentient and the insentient beings in creation. It is nodoubt true that Krishna is omnipresent, that He pervadesthe whole universe. Nevertheless, He identifies Himselfonly with the best, the foremost and the highest ofvarious beings, both animate and inanimate. “I am theHimalayas among the mountains, the Ganges amongthe rivers, Vasudeva among the Yadavas, the peepul treeamong the trees, the lion among the beasts, the cowamong cattle, Prahlada among the demons, the king-cobra among snakes, and Garuda among the birds”,Krishna declared, for He is the integral incarnation ofsuperlative excellence and perfection.Krishna declares that He is the prana or life-forcein all beings. The head is of great importance for man,and the body comes next. But body and head are notenough for man as there must be prana, the elan vital,to keep the body and the head functioning. Thus, Krishnasays, “I am the prana in all jivas.” He is the prana forthe physical body just as mumukshatva or desire forliberation is the prana or life-force for all spiritual227 228Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
endeavours of which nityanitya pariseelana(differentiating the real from the unreal) is comparableto the head, and sama (tolerance), dama (endurance)and other virtues, to the human body.Krishna also states in the Vibhuthi Yoga that Heis Light (Jyothi), Prosperity (Aishwarya), Courage(Dhairya), and Bliss (Ananda). The divine utterancesof Krishna should inspire students to perform rightactions in their daily lives. God manifests Himself asdivine effulgence and we must, therefore, make anoptimum use of the Divine light of wisdom. On thephysical plane too, we must ensure that the body is kepthealthy by well-illuminated and clean surroundings.Aiswarya is also a divine Vibhuthi (attribute ofthe Lord). Therefore, you should try to uphold the divinenature of aiswarya by spending your money and wealthproperly, and for the promotion of dharma(righteousness). Misuse of money is an evil and it leadsto sin. If the students of today are developing evilthoughts and habits, it is because they have too muchmoney to spend. You should be careful in your spendingand must curtail your expenditure. If you require tenrupees to meet your needs, ask for only nine rupees fromyour parents. On the other hand, if you ask for fiftyrupees, you will be spending only ten rupees rightfullyand you squander away the other forty rupees, ruiningyourself. You should regard money as being as preciousas blood and use it with prudence. It is only when youspend money properly and for the promotion of dharmathat it can be regarded as aiswarya, or divine Vibhuthi—otherwise, it could only be considered as the devil’s gift!Courage or dhairya is also a divine Vibhuthi. Truecourage is the dhairya that comes from the practice ofdharma (right action) and as a benediction from God.All other forms of courage, such as the courage whichis based on physical prowess or intellectual strength,are of no avail. Physical and mental strength, economicpower and public influence are like passing clouds.The body is meant to enable man to performsacred actions and spend his time in such a manner thatTime, the ultimate destroyer, is itself destroyed by him.This transition to the deathless state is brought aboutby spiritual evolution. Just as the minerals became thetree, the trees gave rise to animate life, and the loweranimals evolved into man, man too should evolve furtherand become God.Mukti or liberation is the attainment andexperience of pure, unalloyed and absolute Bliss. Someignorant people think that mukti is attained only afterdeath or in some future life. This simplistic viewinvolves a gross misconception of mukti. Mukti reallymeans freedom from bondage and implies an ascentfrom a lower state to a higher state. It is the result of aprocess of transcendental evolution by which the humanbecomes the Divine. Your mother liberates you from229 230Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
the pangs of hunger by giving you food, and your doctorliberates you from the agony of disease with somemedicine. These, however, cannot be examples of trueliberation. Food and medicine are palliatives that onlytemporarily relieve you of pain. True liberation isattained when you merge with the Almighty andexperience absolute Bliss.Will the snake die if you keep beating the anthill?Will the vices in man die if the body is punished? Doesone become the knower of the Self merely by giving upfood and water? How can the science of the Self beknown unless you know yourself? Therefore, first tryto realise who you are. You must know from where youhave come and whither you are going. When you writea letter, you put on the envelope the “from address” andthe “to address” and only then drop it in the mailbox.But, if the envelope does not have these addresses, thereis every likelihood of the letter finding its way to thewastepaper basket in the post office. Your life is like apostal envelope and you must know the name of thesender as well as that of the addressee; otherwise, itwill be lost in the dustbin of worldliness.Thus, you must know where you have come from,what you are and where you are going. In other words,you should comprehend your divine antecedents, yourdivine nature and your divine destiny. You must striveto get back to the spiritual haven from which you havecome. You have come from the Atma, you are essentiallythe Atma, and you must realise your identity with theAtma. Dedicate your faculties for the realisation of thesublime truth of your divinity.Man should realise that his relationships with hisfamily and friends and all his worldly attachments, areprimarily based on the physical body. A man and hiswife are strangers before they got married. Therelationship between a husband and his wife does notexist prior to their marriage. Similarly no filial lovecould be there between a baby and its mother beforethe birth of the baby. It is only after the baby is bornthat the relationship between the child and the motherarises. All mundane bonds are ephemeral. The Atma thatyou really are knows no parents or other relations. Torealise the truth that you are the Atma, you must acquirespiritual knowledge (Adhyatmika Vidya).Secular knowledge is no doubt necessary to ekeout one’s living, but spiritual knowledge is essential ifthe purpose of life is to be fulfilled. Spiritual knowledgeis comparable to the infinite ocean, whilst the variousbranches of secular knowledge are like the rivers whichultimately merge in it. Spirituality enables an individualto harmonise the separate elements of his psyche intoan integrated experience of the immanent Divinity.Secular knowledge, on the contrary, has brought aboutthe dehumanisation and the fragmentation of the humanpersonality.Here is a small illustration. Ten students specialise231 232Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
in different branches of medicine. One of them becomesan ophthalmologist and another, a cardiologist. A thirdbecomes an ENT specialist. Like this, they becomespecialists in ten different fields. They acquire so muchexpertise in their respective fields that they cannot seea patient as a harmonious, integral personality and areunable to look after his general well-being. Each of themperforms an operation by which the patient is cured ofthe ailment which falls within the ambit of his ownlimited knowledge. None of them can ensure, byhimself, total health for the patient. All theirspecialisation is directed merely for their own individualprosperity. The vivisection of the human body into manyparts for the purpose of medical attention is designedto promote the selfish interests of a few.We have to recognise the divine macrocosmicprinciple which governs and regulates all microcosmicentities in the universe. When you see a piece of clothin its entirety you can know that it is, say, a handkerchief.But if only portions of the piece of cloth are exposed toyour gaze, how will you be able to identify it and knowthat it is a handkerchief? Thus, the prevailing tendencytowards specialisation in modern education is leadingto the atomisation of the human psyche.“Why should you study and stuff your mind withall sorts of useless knowledge and then die in ignoranceto be born again and again? Acquire that knowledgewhich will make you immortal”, said Vemana. You maybe well-versed in worldly knowledge, but withoutknowledge of the Self, you will remain an ignoramus.Man searches in the world outside but fails to find histrue self therein, just as a person who looks for somearticle in a room is unable to see himself. Seek within,realise the Self, which resides there, and then experiencethe Bliss of God.Bliss or Ananda is a divine Vibhuthi. That is whyit is said, “happiness is union with God.” Your truenature is bliss. Know this and be cheerful always. Themind that is morose harbours nothing but malice andjealousy. Divinity cannot reside in such unholy minds.Cheerfulness is the first sign of spirituality. Therefore,strive to be happy always. Live in contentment and withcheer and thereby qualify yourself for the experienceof Divinity which is Bliss supreme.Sound or sabda is also a Vibhuthi. Divinity isdescribed as “Sabda Brahma mayi” or as beingimmanent in sound. Use the faculty of your speech in amanner that is becoming of your divine status. Speakgently and softly. Do not let your tongue indulge in eviltalk or revile others and misuse the God-given gift ofspeech.Embodiments of love, students!You have been here for a month now and haveimbibed the high ideals of Indian culture and spirituality.It is My hope that you will carry their message with233 234Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
you and live as examples for your brethren everywhere.By vidya (education), you get vinaya (humility).Humility confers on you the deservedness by which youacquire wealth. Wealth you must put to use for thepromotion of dharma, and that would lead to bothmaterial prosperity and spiritual upliftment.Students!It is indeed a misfortune that education these daysis making the youth unfit for rendering selfless serviceto their motherland. Modern education is merelychurning out useless degrees which only operate asbegging-bowls in the job-market. Make your lifemeaningful by acquiring spiritual knowledge.Remember your great ancient heritage and revereyour parents as the embodiments of God. Your motherand father are God for you. Do not cause them anguishnow, for your children will surely cause you pain inyour later life, as for everything in this world there is areaction and a reflection. For the sacrifices theyundertake for you and for your own future well-being,love your parents and serve them with devotion. Begood, do good and see good—that is the way to God!
“Sathyam Vada Dharmam Chara”
The trees give shelter to all, irrespective of casteand creed, and proclaim that all men are equal.The plants teach us not to be overfond of thebody; and the birds, that are content with thefood they get for the day, tell us not to worryabout the morrow. In their death, too, the birdsgive us a lesson about the transience of theworld. Mother Nature exhorts us to discardattachment to ourselves and our earthlypossessions. Verily, Nature is the school whereman, taught by the greatest sadguru, God, canacquire divine wisdom.Embodiments of Love!
Economic and social welfare programmespromote material well-being and are nodoubt necessary in this world. For the spiritual well-being and divinization of man, however, character and235 236
31Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
morality are of paramount importance. Spirituality isthe life-breath for all human beings. Indian culture hasbeen based on spirituality and ethical values. Torecognise the great significance of our ancient cultureand hoary traditions and adapt them to meet the needsof the present age, is our primary duty. Indian cultureand traditions have stood the test of time. These time-honoured traditions bring great felicity in our practicallife.A system of education that does not take intocognizance the high ideals of spirituality and our ancientculture cannot really promote social harmony. It isprecisely because of the conspicuous absence of spiritualand moral values in our present-day education that weare witness to social turmoil and the degeneration ofthe human personality. Modern man has masteredscience and technology, but has thereby become theservant of mammon. He gloats over his apparent successin harnessing nuclear energy, yet, he lives as a moraldwarf.Culture is the life-blood of a community. It is thebackbone of a country. The rishis of yore, who attainedfreedom from selfishness and rose above worldlydesires, illuminating society with the lambent light oftheir spirituality, bear testimony to the sanctity of ourculture. Our culture has been giving us sacred norms ofbehaviour that are best honoured by being put intopractice in our daily lives.The sacred relationship between the guru(teacher) and the sishya (pupil) has been idealised inBharath as in no other country. It has come down to usover the aeons as a cherished tradition. The words ofthe preceptor, at the time the pupils left the gurukulam(school in which sishyas live with their guru, servinghim and learning from him) for their homes, were vibrantwith meaning. “Worship your mother and father as God.Regard your teacher as God and receive your guest asGod Himself”, (Mathru Devo bhavah, Pithru Devobhavah, Acharya Devo bhavah, Athithi Devo bhavah),the guru would say.“Sathyam vada, Dharmam chara” (speak the truthand practise dharma). This is also one of the importantaphorisms enunciated by the ancient gurus of India. Itemphasises the importance of sathya and dharma.Sathya is the eternal, absolute and unchanging truth.Dharma is often translated as righteousness, but it ismuch more than that. Dharma is a power-packed termepitomising an entire philosophy and a way of life. It isthe summum bonum of Indian ethics. A sishya or disciple,is one who has grasped the content of sathya and dharmaby constant sadhana or spiritual practice. Sathya anddharma sum up the code of conduct and scale of valuesexplicated in the immortal scriptures of India.If you want to grow paddy, you have to take agood deal of trouble. You have to plough the land andenrich it with manure and fertilisers. You have to use237 238Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
good seeds for sowing. You must put up a fence aroundyour land to protect the plants from men and cattle. Youshould also remove the weeds periodically and irrigatethe land properly. You must take all these steps to growpaddy. But, for growing grass you need not make anyspecial effort. Harmful weeds grow by themselves. In asimilar manner, adharma or unrighteousness grows likepoisonous weeds without any special effort. But thedelicate plant of dharma or righteousness should becarefully tended and looked after for its survival amongthe wild and poisonous weeds of adharma orunrighteousness.Special sadhana and concentrated efforts areessential for the establishment and protection of dharma.We should constantly remind ourselves of the sacredstatement: “Dharmo rakshati rakshitah” (Dharmaprotects those who protect dharma). We should, however,also bear in mind a corollary of the foregoing statement:“Dharma eva hatohanti” (Dharma destroys those whotry to destroy dharma). Thus, dharma is not only ametaphysical concept, but also a powerful moral forceto be reckoned with. One who deviates from the path ofdharma will have to pay a price for it in the long run.Dharma protects the world (Dharayateetidharmaha). Dharma is permanent and everlasting. Thesun rises and sets causing day and night, we say. But inreality, the sun neither rises nor sets. The sun is alwaysthere, eternally effulgent. Similarly, dharma is eternal,immutable and imperishable. In the sloka “Yada yadahidharmasya glanir bhavati Bharata...”, the word glaniis used in relation to dharma. Glani means attenuation,atrophy and decline. Dharma is never really subject toglani or decline. It is only the practice of dharma thatsuffers from glani. Bhagavan emerges as an Avatar forthe revival of the practice of dharma and not for theprotection, because it is eternal and absolute. It is onlythe practice of dharma that needs a renaissance.The Ramayana proclaims, “‘Ramo vigrahavandharmah” (Rama is the embodiment of dharma). AsGod Himself is dharma, the dereliction of dharma istantamount to the neglect of God. We often worshipGod through a picture or an idol. Some may worship atree as God. There are, however, some atheists,agnostics, rationalists and humanists, who adore dharmaitself and treat it on a par with God. Such people cannotbe regarded as atheists for their apparent atheism isreally theism in disguise. Dharma is their God, and theyworship dharma as God, who, in fact, is an embodimentof dharma. This deification of dharma is itself theism.On the other hand, there are many who pray to God butignore dharma in practice. Such people are not reallyGod-fearing theists.There are many people in this world who professto be theists, devotees, yogis and ascetics. But, it isdoubtful how many of them have really understood thefact that dharma is the essence of divinity. A large239 240Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
number of pious people go on a pilgrimage to visit sacredplaces and bathe in holy rivers. There is no use of goingon pilgrimages, however, if character does not improve.Instead of wasting time and money in visiting holyplaces, people should try and purify their minds andapprehend the divinity that exists in humanity. The youthshould also constantly remember that physical strength,money and popularity do not last forever. Strength ofcharacter is always superior to the power of pelf whichis the most ephemeral thing in the world.Vishwamitra did penance and acquiredstupendous powers. Blinded by the powers of hisausterities, Vishwamitra challenged Vasishta andsuffered defeat and humiliation. The Kauravas who wereterribly proud of their power and wealth, waged a waragainst the righteous Pandavas but were annihilatedcompletely. Their dynasty came to an ignominious end,because they followed the path of adharma and foughtagainst the virtuous Pandavas. Ravana also had acquiredprodigious powers by doing penance. He, however,became tyrannical and immoral and ultimately destroyedhimself. The Ramayana, the Mahabharatha, and theBhagavatha contain stories of great heroes who died intragic circumstances on account of their immoralbehaviour and unrighteous conduct.That is why every individual must grasp themeaning of dharma and follow the path of dharma.During youth, when a person is physically strong andmentally alert, he should conquer the six vices of kama(desire), krodha (anger), lobha (avarice), moha(attachment), mada (pride) and matsarya (envy). Aboveall, a young person should acquire self-confidence. Faithcreates love. Love creates tolerance and compassion,and God reveals Himself to those with tolerance andcompassion. Thus, faith in yourself is of primaryimportance. Students should be full of love andcompassion, and thereby acquire great moral andspiritual strength.The ideal of dharma should inspire students toparticipate in social service activities. They shouldbecome the harbingers of the renaissance of dharma inthe modern world. They should put an end to the unrest insociety and re-establish the dharmic order. This tremendousprogramme of moral rearmament should be regardedas a Yajna. It is a crusade against evil and injustice.Young students who have assembled here are likecars damaged in the accidents of life. During this monththese damaged cars have been properly serviced andfitted with suitable spare parts. They have also beennewly painted. They will now go back to their placesinvigorated with noble ideals and sacred ideas. Theyshould be guided in all their future activities by the threeD’s of “Devotion, Duty, and Discipline”.The cataract in a person’s eyes does not come fromthe outside. It is a growth from the inside. A red-hotpiece of burning wood or coal is covered by a layer of241 242Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
embers. This layer of ashes does not come from theoutside. The embers are produced by the burning wooditself. The moss growing in water covers the surface.The sun changes the water on earth into water vapour,which rises up into the sky forming clouds. Thus, theclouds formed by the sun cover the sun. Likewise, theignorance which arises in man’s mind clouds hisdiscrimination and leads him to grief. The cataract inthe eyes will have to be removed by a surgicaloperation. Wisdom is the surgical instrument thatremoves the malignant growth of ignorance. Theweapon of wisdom enables the sadhaka to conquerignorance and attain enlightenment. The attainmentof spiritual enlightenment by the instrument of wisdomis known as Vibhaga Yoga, which is facilitated byconstant practice and ceremonial ritual. Studentsshould try and put into practice at least a few of theimmortal aphorisms of the Bhagavad Gita, though theymay not be able to follow the elaborate ritualism ofthe scriptures.Selfishness is like a balloon filled with air. If youpuncture the balloon, the air inside will combine withthe air outside. When the ego is deflated, altruistic lovetakes its place. Love all and cultivate universalcompassion. Love of oneself should evolve into divinelove, which is the highest form of love. We shouldascend from a lower state of love to a higher state oflove, just as we ascend from a lower level of truth to ahigher level of truth. It is only through altruism that youcan achieve divinity.The help rendered by us to others as well as theharm done to us by others should be completelyforgotten. Do not brood over the injuries inflicted onyou. At the same time, do not expect either recognitionor reward for services rendered by you. If you expectgood results for your actions, you will have to beprepared for bad results also.Clay and water are created by God. A potter usesclay and water for making pots. You are of divine originand have inherited your personality, the totality of yourphysical, mental, emotional and spiritual characteristicsfrom your father and mother. They are responsible foryour birth and nurture. Therefore, adore them, makethem happy and implicitly carry out their wishes. Theylove you regardless of your successes and failures inlife. They love you in spite of your faults and foibles.Parental love is the purest and the most unselfish formof love. There is sanctity and purity in the love lavishedby parents on their children.Students should follow the example of a fish inwater. A fish purifies water by removing all theimpurities in it. Students should be active in society.They should not escape from social duties or civicobligations and should become responsible citizens.They must purge society of all its evils and become thearchitects of a new social order.243 244Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979 Summer Showers In Brindavan 1979
Young people should co-operate with one anotherin all noble endeavours. They should form associationsfor the promotion of social justice. You have livedtogether and taken part in social service programmesfor nearly thirty days. This assembly of youngsters muststrengthen these personal relations and renew themperiodically. This congregation is not a fortuitousconcourse of students. They have gathered here as aresult of the merit acquired during their past lives. It istheir great fortune that they should all have cometogether to take part in this Summer Course. With thehope that they will put into practice at least a few of theideals they have been taught here, I bless them all fortheir material and spiritual well-being.245 244